                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                     GRADUAL PORTFOLIO ADJUSTMENT:
          IMPLICATIONS FOR GLOBAL EQUITY PORTFOLIOS AND RETURNS

                                       Philippe Bacchetta
                                       Eric van Wincoop

                                      Working Paper 23363
                              http://www.nber.org/papers/w23363


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     April 2017




Eric van Wincoop gratefully acknowledges financial support from the Bankard Fund for Political
Economy and the Hong Kong Institute for Monetary Research. Philippe Bacchetta thanks the
Swiss National Science Foundation. We thank Jessica Leutert and Fang Liu for research
assistance and seminar participants at the University of Lausanne for useful comments. The views
expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National
Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2017 by Philippe Bacchetta and Eric van Wincoop. All rights reserved. Short sections of text,
not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Gradual Portfolio Adjustment: Implications for Global Equity Portfolios and Returns
Philippe Bacchetta and Eric van Wincoop
NBER Working Paper No. 23363
April 2017
JEL No. F30,F41,G11,G12

                                         ABSTRACT

Modern open economy macro models assume the continuous adjustment of international portfolio
allocation. We introduce gradual portfolio adjustment into a global equity market model. Our
approach differs from related literature in two key dimensions. First, the time interval between
portfolio decisions is stochastic rather than fixed, leading to a smoother response to shocks.
Second, rather than only considering asset returns, we also use data on portfolio shares to
confront the model to the data. Conditional on reasonable risk aversion, we find that the data is
consistent with infrequent portfolio decisions, with a frequency of at most once in 15 months on
average.

Philippe Bacchetta
Faculty of Business and Economics
University of Lausanne
Intranef 523
CH-1015 Lausanne
Switzerland
philippe.bacchetta@unil.ch

Eric van Wincoop
Department of Economics
University of Virginia
P.O. Box 400182
Charlottesville, VA 22904-4182
and NBER
vanwincoop@virginia.edu




A technical appendix is available at http://www.nber.org/data-appendix/w23363
1       Introduction
Expected return differentials have been at the center of open economy macro mod-
els at least since Mundell-Fleming, where cross-border capital flows are driven by
interest rate differentials. There is a variety of evidence that return differentials
play a critical role in global capital flows. A well-known example is the “carry
trade” that is based on interest differentials.1 The Mundell-Fleming model was
succeeded by portfolio balance models, where portfolios (stocks) rather than flows
depend on return differentials. Modern open economy macro models are more mi-
cro founded but share the feature of portfolio balance models in that it is portfolios
rather than changes in portfolios (portfolio flows) that depend on return differen-
tials. This has several implications. The immediate response of portfolios of all
investors to any return differential implies that in equilibrium return differentials
are often very small.2 Moreover, financial shocks, such as portfolio shifts resulting
from changes in risk, risk-aversion, liquidity trade, hedging or FX intervention,
have little effect on capital flows and asset prices. Due to the sensitivity of portfo-
lios to expected returns in these models, a portfolio shift towards a country’s assets
causes a very small (third-order) drop in its expected excess return that reverses
the flows and generates equilibrium.3
    It is difficult to reconcile the behavior of international portfolio positions and
asset prices with these modern open economy models. First, expected return dif-
ferentials are not zero or close to zero. The forward discount puzzle is probably
the best known example of this. Second, there is suggestive evidence of gradual
international portfolio adjustment in the form of autocorrelated portfolio flows and
    1
     Another well-documented example is capital flows to emerging markets associated with
changes in interest rates in creditor countries. See for example Calvo et al. (1996). Bruno
and Shin (2015) document the effect of interest rates on international banking flows. Didier and
Lowenkron (2012) show that net capital flows associated with expected returns in a model with
portfolio choice are significantly correlated with actual net capital flows.
   2
     In some cases uncovered interest rate parity is assumed outright or follows from linearization
methods. Many models though do not adopt such approximations and put portfolio choice at
the center. Examples are Devereux and Sutherland (2007, 2010), Didier and Lowenkron (2012),
Evans and Hnatkovska (2014), Hnatkovska (2010), Kraay and Ventura (2000) and Tille and van
Wincoop (2010, 2014).
   3
     Tille and van Wincoop (2014) show that first-order changes in portfolio shares are associated
with third-order changes in expected returns. This is because expected returns are divided by
second order moments (e.g. the variance of the excess return) in optimal portfolios.


                                                1
a positive linkage of flows with lagged returns (e.g., see Bohn and Tesar (1996),
Calderon et al. (2003) and Froot et al. (2001)).4 Third, financial shocks such as
those listed above do affect capital flows and asset prices. Gourio et al. (2014)
show that time-varying risk affects capital flows. Blanchard et al. (2016) pro-
vide evidence that large foreign exchange intervention has a significant effect on
exchange rates.5 Warnock and Warnock (2009) document the significant effect of
capital inflows on U.S. interest rates.
    Gabaix and Maggiori (2015) have brought expected return differentials back
to the forefront in a model where all financial flows are intermediated by global
financiers with limited risk-bearing capacity. This has the same effect as making
agents more risk-averse, which weakens the portfolio response to changes in ex-
pected returns. Larger expected return differentials are then needed to generate
equilibrium in asset markets. Gabaix and Maggiori (2015) show that such a model
implies predictable deviations from uncovered interest rate parity and a significant
impact of exogenous portfolio flows and FX intervention on exchange rates and
the macro economy in general.
    In this paper we take a different route, which aligns more closely with the orig-
inal Mundell-Fleming model. We consider the role of gradual portfolio adjustment
to changes in expected returns in the context of a two-country model. Like high
risk aversion, it weakens the immediate portfolio response to shocks and gives rise
to larger equilibrium expected return differentials as markets are thinner. There
is well-known evidence of infrequent portfolio adjustment by households.6 It is
also consistent with some of the open economy evidence on portfolio flows and
returns mentioned above. But to date no systematic analysis of gradual portfolio
adjustment in an open economy context has been conducted.
   4
      Bohn and Tesar (1996) conclude “we suspect that investors may adjust their portfolios to new
information gradually over time, resulting in both autocorrelated net purchases and a positive
linkage with lagged returns. A full explanation for U.S. international investment behavior must
account for the slow adjustment in the foreign portfolio over time, as well as the bias toward
domestic equity.”
    5
      See also the discussion in Gabaix and Maggiori (2015), who argue that the recent large FX
interventions in Switzerland and Israel have been effective and that evidence of a weaker impact
of FX intervention in the earlier literature is due to the small size of the interventions.
    6
      See for example Ameriks and Zeldes (2004), Bilias et al. (2010), Brunnermeier and Nagel
(2008) and Mitchell et al. (2006). See Duffie (2010) for a broad range of evidence motivating
models of infrequent portfolio adjustment.



                                                2
    Our approach differs from the related literature on infrequent portfolio adjust-
ment in two key respects.7 First, we use both international portfolio and asset
return data to evaluate a model with gradual portfolio adjustment. Second, we
model the gradual portfolio adjustment in the form of a probability of changing
the portfolio rather than staggered adjustment at fixed intervals.
    The literature on infrequent portfolio adjustment often does not explicitly esti-
mate or calibrate models to confront to data. Papers that do focus mostly on asset
prices. Examples are Bacchetta and van Wincoop (2010), Bougasslovsky (2016),
Chien et al. (2012) and Hendershott et al. (2013). Bacchetta and van Wincoop
(2010) study the forward discount puzzle (predictability of exchange rates by in-
terest differentials). Bogousslavsky (2015) considers predictability patterns in the
time-series and cross-section of stock returns. Chien et al. (2012) focus on the
counter-cyclicality of the Sharpe ratio. Hendershott et al. (2013) consider stock
price behavior and analyze deviations from efficient prices.8 To date asset prices
and portfolios have not been used jointly to evaluate models of gradual portfolio
adjustment.
    Analysis of international portfolio data has been made possible by the develop-
ment of a data set by Bertaut and Tryon (2007) and Bertaut and Judson (2014) of
monthly bilateral equity claims and liabilities of the United States. Together with
stock market capitalization data it allows us to compute the portfolio share of US
investors in the rest of the world and the portfolio share of the rest of the world in
the US. The portfolio data is consistent with the U.S. Treasury annual benchmark
surveys. The data are considered to be of good quality and have recently been
used by Curcuru et al. (2008, 2010) and Curcuru et al. (2011) to analyze return
differentials and the relationship between portfolio reallocations and past returns.
    The second difference with respect to related literature on infrequent portfolio
adjustment is in the way we model such behavior. We assume that investors
have a probability p of adjusting their portfolio each period. The assumption of
a Poisson distribution has been used in numerous contexts, such as Blanchard-
   7
     For recent contributions, see Abel et. al (2007), Bogousslavsky (2016), Chien et al. (2012),
Duffie (2010), Greenwood et al. (2015), Hendershott et al. (2013), Mitchell et al. (2007)
and Vayanos and Woolley (2012). Earlier papers examine the impact of infrequent portfolio
adjustments taking the process of asset returns as exogenous, e.g. see Lynch (1996) or Gabaix
and Laibson (2002).
   8
     Hendershott et al. (2013) also consider the implications of their model for the equity trading
volume and individual’s net trades.


                                                3
Yaari perpetual youth models or Calvo price-setting models, but is new to the
literature on portfolio adjustment. The standard assumption is that agents adjust
their portfolios in a staggered way every T periods. In empirical applications
this has the drawback that it generates a significant discontinuity in the impulse
response to shocks that happens T periods after the shock. This occurs because
the initial group of infrequent traders who change their portfolio at the time of the
shock will change their portfolio again T periods later, with predictable certainty.
The anticipation of this by other traders significantly affects the equilibrium. The
constant probability setup that we adopt here implies more smoothness as the
agents who change their portfolio at the time of a shock will change their portfolio
again at varying dates in the future.
    We show that this framework generates intuitive portfolios. Optimal portfolio
shares depend on expected future excess returns, with the weight on future ex-
pected returns declining at the rate β(1 − p), where β is the time discount rate.
Less frequent portfolio changes (lower p) therefore imply a longer investment hori-
zon that gives more weight to expected returns further into the future. Portfolio
shares are then less sensitive to short term expected excess returns. At any time a
fraction 1 − p of the agents does not change their portfolio at all and those that do
have a longer horizon and therefore respond less to short term expected returns.
    The model that we develop focuses on the global equity market. There are
two types of investors: frequent traders who change their portfolio each period
and infrequent traders who change their portfolio each period with a probability
p. We focus on relative equity prices, which affect the excess return, and on the
average portfolio share allocated to US equity. The model is driven by three types
of shocks: dividend shocks, wealth/supply shocks and financial shocks. The lat-
ter are exogenous portfolio shifts that are unrelated to expected returns. Some
parameters are calibrated, but parameters about which we have little direct ob-
servable information are estimated. We use the Simulated Method of Moments for
estimation, including 15 moments involving the excess return, average portfolio
share, relative earnings and the relative wealth/supply shock.
    The remainder of the paper is organized as follows. In Section 2 we develop
a partial equilibrium model of portfolio choice when portfolio decisions are infre-
quent. In Section 3 we embed this in a general equilibrium model for the global
equity market. Section 4 describes the quantitative approach. The results are
presented in Section 5. Section 6 concludes.

                                         4
2       Portfolio Choice under Infrequent Adjustment
In this section, we present a partial equilibrium portfolio choice problem with
infrequent portfolio adjustment. This will be embedded in a general equilibrium
model for the equity market in the next section. To provide a better perspective
about the approach that we adopt, we start by making some general remarks
about modeling portfolio choice in an open economy DSGE setting with incomplete
markets.


2.1     Portfolio Choice under Incomplete Markets
Even in the absence of infrequent portfolio adjustment, solving DSGE models with
portfolio choice is not trivial. Under incomplete markets, there are three possible
approaches. The first is to write down all the first order conditions and solve
the model through a global solution method, like value function iteration on a
discretized state space. This is not the approach that we will follow here. One
drawback is that it is a bit of a black box approach in that there are no closed
form solutions of portfolios as a function of expected returns, which will be key to
our model. In addition, even under continuous portfolio adjustment, this approach
is numerically very challenging.9 The problem is that very small changes in state
variables that imply tiny asset prices changes can induce very large portfolio shifts.
The sensitivity of portfolios to expected returns emphasized in the introduction
therefore also poses numerical challenges.
    The second approach is the one specifically developed for open economy DSGE
models with portfolio choice by Devereux and Sutherland (2007, 2010) and Tille
and van Wincoop (2010). It extends local approximation methods to models with
portfolio choice. A drawback here is that one needs to go to very high orders, at
least the third-order component of equations and variables, to get at the features
that we are interested in. This requires at least cubic Taylor expansions. The
reason is that many shocks, including two out of the three shocks in our model,
do not have a first-order effect on asset prices and portfolio shares. Third-order
is generally very small in models with continuous portfolio adjustment. It could
be of non-trivial size in a model with gradual portfolio adjustment, but cubic
    9
    See for example Krusell and Smith (1997) for the difficulties of this approach in a closed
economy setting with continuous portfolio adjustment.



                                              5
approximations of all equations significantly complicates the analysis and even
more so under gradual portfolio adjustment.10
    The approach that we take here involves first computing an explicit portfo-
lio expression by substituting the log-linearized intertemporal budget constraint
into the first-order conditions for optimal portfolio choice. This is similar to the
method in Campbell and Viceira (2002) to solve partial equilibrium portfolio prob-
lems. This in turn is influenced by the approach developed in Campbell (1993),
though portfolios are not explicit in the latter. This gives a portfolio expression
in which optimal portfolio shares are linear in expected future returns, which can
be combined with linearized equations for the rest of the model to solve for the
equilibrium.11
    When applying this approach to a framework where agents adjust their port-
folios gradually, we will abstract from decisions other than portfolio choice. While
preferably one would simultaneously solve for optimal portfolio allocation and opti-
mal consumption, we will simply assume that agents consume a constant fraction
ζ of their wealth each period. Solving simultaneously for optimal consumption
and portfolios creates additional challenges that would deflect from our focus on
gradual portfolio adjustment. One would need to combine infrequent portfolio
decisions with either frequent or infrequent consumption decisions. In addition,
it would be necessary to separate risk-aversion from intertemporal elasticity of
substitution (Epstein-Zin). Finally, to linearize there would need to exist a deter-
ministic steady state for wealth and consumption, which requires features such as
finite lives (positive probability of death) or Uzawa preferences.


2.2     Assumptions Regarding Infrequent Portfolio Choice
We will assume that there are two assets, a Home asset and a Foreign asset with
returns of RH,t+1 and RF,t+1 from time t to t + 1. Agents need to choose the
  10
     It gets even more complicated in that the method shows that we need to combine the fourth-
order component of the difference across countries in portfolio Euler equations with the third-
order component of other equations in order to solve for the second-order component of the
difference across countries in portfolio shares together with the third-order component of other
variables. This requires taking a fourth-order Taylor expansion of the portfolio Euler equations,
which is quite messy.
  11
     Importantly, linear does not mean first-order as expected returns are divided by the variance
of the excess return.


                                                6
portfolio share to allocate to these assets. Some of the agents are “infrequent
traders” who make a new portfolio allocation decision with a probability p each
period.12 Others, the “frequent traders,” choose the optimal portfolio allocation
each period.
    Analogous to Keynesian models with infrequent price setting by firms, one also
needs to make an ancillary assumption about how agents allocate their portfolio at
times when they do not make a new portfolio decision. In the case of price setting
by firms, such assumptions range from holding the price constant, to holding the
relative price constant (full indexation), to partial indexation, to following a price
schedule until the next price setting decision.13 Analogously, for portfolio choice
one could consider holding the portfolio share constant (rebalancing) until the
next portfolio decision, not rebalancing by simply re-investing the returns in the
two assets, partial rebalancing, or following a portfolio allocation schedule until
the next portfolio decision. These are only some of the possibilities. Here we
will assume that agents hold their portfolio share constant until the next portfolio
decision and leave an exploration of alternatives for future work.
    We should also clarify that the terminology of infrequent versus frequent traders
does not refer to the frequency of trading itself, but rather to the frequency of
making new portfolio allocation decisions. Since we assume a constant portfolio
share between portfolio decisions, even the infrequent traders will generally trade
to rebalance their portfolio.


2.3     Wealth Accumulation
Consider Home agent j, whose time t portfolio share allocated to the Home asset
            j
is denoted zHt . The agent earns a portfolio return of
                         pHj    j                 j
                        Rt+1 = zHt RH,t+1 + (1 − zHt )RF,t+1 e−τHt                          (1)
  12
     The basic motive behind infrequent trading is the presence of information processing costs,
that we do not model explicitly. Abel et al. (2013) propose microfoundations for infrequent
portfolio decisions and show that time-dependent decisions are optimal when fixed transactions
costs are small. In our model, transactions costs are zero.
  13
     In Mankiw and Reis (2002), firms adjust their pricing plans infrequently due to random
arrival of information. This implies a gradual response to shocks as in our framework. On the
other hand, firms’ prices may change every period.




                                               7
We introduce a fee τHt on the Foreign return. This is a commonly adopted feature
to introduce portfolio home bias.14
    Allowing τHt to be time varying generates exogenous portfolio shifts, which we
will refer to as financial shocks. Per unit of wealth invested, the fee is TH,t+1 =
      j
(1−zHt  )RF,t+1 (1−e−τHt ). We assume that the fee is paid to a broker, but returned
to investors. Per unit of wealth invested, the agent therefore receives a return of
                  pHj    pHj             j                 j
                R̂t+1 = Rt+1 + TH,t+1 = zHt RH,t+1 + (1 − zHt )RF,t+1                  (2)

as if the fee did not exist. But from the perspective of portfolio choice we assume
that the investor takes the credit TH,t+1 as given, not under its control, for example
because it is based on an average of agents with the same portfolio. The fee
therefore affects the optimal portfolio, but not wealth accumulation. We assume
that the fee τHt applies to all Home investors that make a new portfolio decision
at time t and remains the same until agents choose a new portfolio.
    Financial wealth changes because of portfolio returns, non-asset income and
                                                                     j
consumption. Denote the wealth of this agent in period t as WHt        . This is after
portfolio returns and non-asset income, but before consumption. As discussed
above, we assume that agents consume a fraction ζ of their wealth each period.
                                   j
The agent then invests (1 − ζ)WHt     at the end of period t and wealth accumulates
according to
                                                    
                     j                  pHj              j
                   WH,t+1 = (1 − ζ) Rt+1    + TH,t+1 WHt   + GH,t+1                (3)

where GH,t+1 is non-asset income, which is the same for all Home agents and follows
a given stochastic process.
    Analogously, for a Foreign agent j we have
                      pF j
                     Rt+1  = zFj t RH,t+1 e−τF t + (1 − zFj t )RF,t+1                  (4)
                                                          
                     WF,t+1 = (1 − ζ) Rt+1 + TF,t+1 WFj t + GF,t+1
                       j                     pF j
                                                                                       (5)

The portfolio share zFj t refers to the share by the Foreign agent j allocated to the
Home asset and TF,t+1 is the reimbursement of the fee per unit of wealth, such
      pF j
that Rt+1  + TF,t+1 = zFj t RH,t+1 + (1 − zFj t )RF,t+1 .
  14
    Examples are Tille and van Wincoop (2010, 2014), Coeurdacier (2009), Coeurdacier et.al.
(2014) and Martin and Rey (2004).


                                            8
2.4    Optimal Portfolio Infrequent Traders
We will now consider the optimal portfolio choice of a Home agent j who makes a
new portfolio decision at time t. The agent is an infrequent trader and therefore
                                              j
takes into account that the portfolio share zHt  will remain constant until the next
time a portfolio decision is made. To save notation, we will omit the j superscript
as the portfolio problem will be identical for all Home infrequent traders choosing
a new portfolio. We will add a tilde to indicate that it is a new portfolio, so
 j
zHt = z̃Ht for all Home infrequent traders that choose a new portfolio at time t.
    The agent chooses her portfolio to maximize
                                     ∞         1−γ
                                     X        CH,t+s
                                              s
                                         β Et                                     (6)
                                     s=1
                                              1−γ
where CHt is consumption of the Home agent at time t. Since agents consume a
constant fraction of wealth, CH,t+s = ζWH,t+s . The agent therefore maximizes
                                     ∞                 1−γ
                                     X                WH,t+s
                                           β s Et                                 (7)
                                     s=1
                                                      1−γ

subject to (5).
   The agent faces uncertainty about future portfolio returns, non-asset income,
and the time of the next portfolio decision. The probability that the agent chooses
the next portfolio at time t + i is pi = p(1 − p)i−1 . We can then write
                        s−1                             s−1
                                                              !
                1−γ
                        X                               X           1−γ
           Et WH,t+s  =     pi Et WH,t+s (i)1−γ + 1 −       pm Et ŴH,t+s       (8)
                        i=1                                        m=1

Here the expectations on the right hand side only depend on portfolio returns
and non-asset income. WH,t+s (i) denotes wealth at t + s conditional on the next
portfolio change taking place at t + i < t + s. This means that the portfolio share
z̃Ht is held constant until t + i. ŴH,t+s denotes wealth at t + s conditional on the
next portfolio change taking place at t + s or later. In that case the portfolio share
z̃Ht remains constant until at least t + s.
    The first-order condition for the optimal portfolio z̃Ht is then
                      ∞ X
                        s−1
                      X                                    ∂WH,t+s (i)
                                pi β s Et WH,t+s (i)−γ                 +
                      s=1 i=1
                                                             ∂ z̃Ht
                       ∞           s−1
                                              !
                      X            X                       −γ      ∂ ŴH,t+s
                              1−         pm       β s Et ŴH,t+s             =0   (9)
                      s=1          m=1
                                                                     ∂ z̃Ht

                                                  9
   We have
                               ∂WH,t+s (i)   ∂WH,t+i ∂WH,t+s
                                           =                                                       (10)
                                 ∂ z̃Ht       ∂ z̃Ht ∂WH,t+i
where
           ∂WH,t+s                pH
                   = (1 − ζ)s−i R̂t+i,t+s                                                          (11)
           ∂WH,t+i
                      i
           ∂WH,t+i X                                            pH
                   =     (1 − ζ)i−j+1 (RH,t+j − RF,t+j e−τHt )R̂t+j,t+i WH,t+j−1                   (12)
            ∂ z̃Ht   j=1

        pH
                 = sj=i+1 R̂t+j
                             pH
                    Q
Here R̂t+i,t+s                  is the cumulative portfolio return from t + i to t + s.
∂ ŴH,t+s /∂ z̃Ht is equal to ∂WH,t+i /∂ z̃Ht for i = s.
    The next steps are similar to Campbell (1993) and involve a significant amount
of algebra that we leave for the Technical Appendix. After substituting the expres-
sions in the last three equations into the first-order condition (9), we write the first
order condition in terms of expectations of the exponential of terms involving log
portfolio returns and log wealth at future dates. We then substitute expressions
for log-linearized portfolio returns and wealth. Assuming normality of log returns,
we then compute the expectation. We finally linearize the resulting exponential
expression. In what follows the excess return is equal to

                                   ert+1 = rH,t+1 − rF,t+1                                         (13)

where rH,t+1 is the log of the Home return RH,t+1 and rF,t+1 is the log Foreign
return.
   Leaving the algebraic details to the Technical Appendix, we obtain the following
optimal portfolio z̃Ht :
                                        ∞
                                    1 X
                     z̃Ht   = 0.5 +       [β(1 − p)]s−1 Et ert+s + hiHt                            (14)
                                    D s=1

where
        ∞
                              "                                                                #
        X                                                   X
   D=         [β(1 − p)]s−1 γ̃vart (ert+s ) + 2(γ̃ − 1)           θs−i covt (ert+s , ert+i )       (15)
        s=1                                                 i<s

and
                                                1 − βθ
                                       γ̃ = θ           γ                                          (16)
                                                1 − βθ2
and θ = (1 − ζ)R̄ < 1, with R̄ the steady state of asset returns.

                                                10
    The optimal portfolio has two components. The first and most important part
depends on future expected excess returns. A lower p implies less frequent portfolio
decisions are therefore a longer effective horizon. The expected length of time until
the next portfolio decision is 1/p. The optimal portfolio depends on expectations
of all future excess returns, with the weight declining at the rate β(1 − p). A
lower value of p therefore leads to a higher weight on expected excess returns
further into the future. As usual with optimal portfolios, the response to changes
in expected returns is lower the higher the rate of risk aversion and the higher the
risk associated with future excess returns. This is captured by the denominator D
of the optimal portfolio. The adjusted risk-aversion parameter γ̃ differs from γ as
a result of non-asset income.
    The second part of the optimal portfolio is hiHt . This is the part of the portfolio
that does not depend on expectations of future excess returns. The full expression
for hiHt is lengthy and reported in Appendix B. It is made up of three types of terms,
capturing a hedge against future non-asset income GH,t+1 , a hedge against changes
in future portfolio returns (changing investment opportunity set) and the cost τHt
of investing abroad. We will refer to this as the hedge term of the portfolio, even
though the part involving τHt is not technically a hedge. The optimal portfolio of
Foreign infrequent traders z̃F t is the same, except for a different hedge term hiF t .15
    There is a close analogy between this optimal portfolio of infrequent traders
and the optimal price under Calvo price setting. The latter assumes that there
is a probability p of firms setting a new price each period. The expression for
the optimal price (e.g. page 45 of Gali (2008)) depends on a weighted average of
future marginal costs, with the weight declining at the same rate β(1 − p) as in
the optimal portfolio expression (14). In the portfolio expression, the expected
marginal cost at future dates is replaced by expected excess returns, scaled by D,
and the markup is replaced by the hedge term.
    This way of modeling infrequent traders is new to the literature. It is usually
assumed that infrequent traders make a new portfolio decision every T periods.16
In that case the optimal portfolio of infrequent traders that make a new portfolio
  15
     To make expected returns different for Home and Foreign investors, we would have to intro-
duce information asymmetries, as in Albuquerque et al (2007, 2009), Brennan and Cao (1997)
and Tille and van Wincoop (2014). We abstract from that here.
  16
     See for example Duffie (2010), Bacchetta and van Wincoop (2010), Lynch (1996) and Gabaix
an Laibson (2001) and other references listed in footnote 5.



                                              11
decision depends on the expected excess return over the next T periods. Drawing
again on the analogy to price setting, this is like Taylor price setting, where firms
choose a new optimal price every T periods. We initially experimented with a
similar framework here. But it has an important drawback in quantitative imple-
mentation. There is a significant discontinuity in the impulse response to shocks
that happens T periods after the shock. This occurs because the initial group of
infrequent traders that change their portfolio at the time of the shock will change
their portfolio again T periods later, with predictable certainty. Other traders
know this, which significantly affects their behavior as well. The Calvo-type setup
that we adopt here implies more smoothness as the agents that change their port-
folio at the time of a shock will change their portfolio again at varying dates in
the future.


2.5    Frequent Traders
For frequent traders the optimal portfolio can be obtained by letting p → 1, which
gives
                           f             Et ert+1
                          zHt = 0.5 +                 + hfHt                      (17)
                                      γ̃vart (ert+1 )
The portfolio share chosen by the frequent traders only depends on the expected
excess return over the next period. The hedge term hfHt again captures terms
unrelated to the expected excess return. The optimal portfolio share zFf t for Foreign
frequent traders is the same, again with a different hedge term hfF t .


2.6    Average Portfolio Share
When integrating this model of portfolio choice into a general equilibrium model
in the next section, the average portfolio share allocated to the Home asset will be
a key variable. Define zHt and zF t as the average portfolio share allocated to the
Home asset by respectively Home and Foreign agents and ztA = 0.5(zHt + zF t ) as
the average across all agents.
    We assume that a fraction f of agents are frequent traders, so that
                                       f             in
                              zHt = f zHt + (1 − f )zHt                          (18)

where the average portfolio share of the infrequent traders evolves according to
                              in           in
                             zHt = (1 − p)zH,t−1 + pz̃Ht                         (19)

                                         12
Analogously, for the Foreign country

                                 zF t = f zFf t + (1 − f )zFint                   (20)
                                                 in
                                 zFint = (1 − p)zF,t−1 + pz̃F t                   (21)

    Putting all results of this section together, we obtain the following expression
for the average portfolio share ztA :

                                          Et ert+1
                     ztA = 0.5 + f                     + (1 − f )zt + nt          (22)
                                       γ̃vart (ert+1 )

where                                           ∞
                                      p X
                   zt ≡ (1 − p)zt−1 +       [β(1 − p)]s−1 Et ert+s                (23)
                                      D s=1
and                                                 ∞
                                                    X
                       nt ≡   f hA,f
                                 t     + (1 − f )         (1 − p)i phA,in
                                                                     t−i          (24)
                                                    i=0

Here zt is the component of the average portfolio share of infrequent traders that
is associated with expected returns and hA,f
                                         t   and hA,in
                                                  t    are the average of the Home
and Foreign hedge terms of respectively frequent and infrequent traders.
    The average hedge terms, derived in the Technical Appendix and discussed in
Appendix B, are
                                                   0.5
                                hA,in
                                 t    =                       τtD
                                           D(1 − β(1 − p))
                                               0.5
                                hA,f
                                 t      =                 τtD
                                          γ̃vart (ert+1 )

where τtD = τHt − τF t . An increase in τtD implies a relative portfolio shift from the
Foreign asset to the Home asset. We interpret nt as exogenous portfolio shifts and
its innovations as financial shocks. While we have modeled them here through τtD ,
this was mainly a matter of convenience. We interpret these portfolio shifts more
broadly as resulting from such factors as time varying risk, noise trade (expecta-
tional errors), liquidity trade, time varying risk-aversion, time-varying risk-bearing
capacity (Gabaix and Maggiori (2015)) or changes in other investment opportuni-
ties.




                                              13
2.7    Impact of Infrequent Portfolio Choice
Equation (22) captures the key features of our model of gradual portfolio adjust-
ment. It impacts the way the average portfolio share depends on expected future
returns. There are at least four interrelated ways that gradual portfolio adjustment
(f < 1) leads to a fundamentally different response to expected excess returns than
in a model where all agents choose an optimal portfolio at all times (f = 1).
     First, infrequent traders who change their portfolio have a longer horizon than
frequent traders and therefore base their portfolio decision on expected returns
much further into the future: zt depends on ∞                  s−1
                                               P
                                                 s=1 [β(1 − p)]    Et ert+s rather than
on Et ert+1 . Second, and related to the first point, infrequent traders are much
less responsive to expected excess returns in the near future than frequent traders.
This is because the denominator D of the portfolio of infrequent traders is much
larger than that of frequent traders. Third, only a fraction p of infrequent traders
make a portfolio decision at any point in time. This further weakens the portfolio
response to changes in expected returns. This can be seen in the expression for zt ,
where the expected portfolio returns are multiplied by the fraction p that make a
new portfolio decision.
     Finally, in addition to a weaker portfolio response to expected returns in the
near future, there is also a more gradual portfolio response. As can be seen in (23),
the average portfolio share of infrequent traders has significant persistence. Past
portfolio decisions affect the average portfolio share of infrequent traders today.
Even if expected future returns today were entirely uncorrelated with expected
future returns yesterday, so that the portfolio of frequent traders is iid, zt would
still have an autocorrelation of 1 − p.


3     Global Equity Market Model
We now integrate the portfolio choice framework from the previous section into a
general equilibrium market of the global equity market.




                                          14
3.1       Assets and Equilibrium
Home and Foreign equity prices and dividends at time t are Qi,t and Di,t . The
return on equity of country i is
                                            Di,t+1 + Qi,t+1
                                 Ri,t+1 =                                                (25)
                                                  Qi,t
       The asset supply Kit (i = H, F ) evolves according to

                                Ki,t+1 = (1 − ψ)Kit + Iit                                (26)

where ψ is the rate of depreciation. We take investment Iit exogenous: Iit = Ie  ¯ uit ,
where I¯ is steady state investment and uit is stochastic with mean zero.
   There is a continuum of agents on the interval [0,1] in both countries, including
both frequent and infrequent traders. The market equilibrium conditions are
                             Z 1              Z 1
                                  j    j
                 QHt KHt =       zHt WHt dj +     zFj t WFj t dj                  (27)
                              0                0
                             Z 1                      Z 1
                                       j
                                          j
                                                              1 − zFj t WFj t dj
                                                                       
                 QF t KF t =      1 − zHt WHt dj +                                (28)
                                0                         0


3.2       Linearization
We log-linearize the model, which requires first computing the steady state. Denote
                                  j
the steady state portfolio share zHt of all Home agents as z̄. It is equal to 0.5 plus
the steady state of the hedge term. We can set the steady state of τHt to get any
z̄.17 By symmetry, the steady state of the portfolio share zFj t of Foreign agents is
1 − z̄. Denoting steady state variables with a bar, steady state values Q̄, R̄, K̄ and
W̄ can be derived from (3), (25), (26) and (27):
                                                  D̄
                                      R̄ = 1 +                                           (29)
                                                  Q̄
                                           ¯
                                      K̄ = I/ψ                                           (30)
                                                 Ḡ
                                      W̄ =                                               (31)
                                            1 − (1 − ζ)R̄
                                      Q̄K̄ = W̄                                          (32)

      ¯ D̄ and Ḡ are given.
where I,
  17
     A technicality is that the steady state cost of investment abroad may have to be slightly
different for frequent traders to deliver the same steady state portfolio share z̄.


                                             15
    We can now log-linearize the model around these steady state values. We keep
the portfolio shares in levels, while for all other variables lower case letters refer to
logs. Below all variables are in deviation from their steady state. Denoting zHt =
R1 j             R1 j
   z
 0 Ht
      dj, w Ht =  0
                    wHt dj and analogous for the Foreign country, the (aggregated)
wealth accumulation and market clearing conditions become

                wH,t+1 = θwHt + θ (z̄rH,t+1 + (1 − z̄)rF,t+1 ) + (1 − θ)gH,t+1                 (33)
                wF,t+1 = θwF t + θ ((1 − z̄)rH,t+1 + z̄rF,t+1 ) + (1 − θ)gF,t+1                (34)
                kHt + qHt = zHt + zF t + z̄wHt + (1 − z̄)wF t                                  (35)
                kF t + qF t = −zHt − zF t + (1 − z̄)wHt + z̄wF t                               (36)

where θ = (1 − ζ)R̄ < 1.18
    We can take the sum and the difference of these equations across countries.
When we take the sum, we can compute the average equity price and average
wealth. Portfolio allocation does not affect these variables other than through
steady state portfolios. We will focus on the difference of the equations across
countries, which depends on the portfolio shares in deviation from steady state
that is critical to our analysis. Denoting the difference between the Home and
Foreign variables with a superscript D, we then have
                           D
                          wt+1 = θwtD + θ(2z̄ − 1)ert+1 + (1 − θ)gt+1
                                                                  D
                                                                                               (37)
                          ktD + qtD = 4ztA + (2z̄ − 1)wtD                                      (38)
        A
where zt+1   = 0.5(zH,t + zF,t ) and an expression for the excess return ert+1 =
rH,t+1 − rF,t+1 can be derived by log-linearizing Home and Foreign returns:
                                              D
                              ert+1 = (1 − δ)qt+1 − qtD + δdD
                                                            t+1                                (39)

where δ = D̄/(Q̄ + D̄) = (R̄ − 1)/R̄.
  Given the exogenous investment specification, we also have
                                                 D
                                   ktD = (1 − ψ)kt−1 + ψuD
                                                         t                                     (40)

In what follows we will set ψ = 1 − θ. This simplifies the model and is a reasonable
approximation.19 Define w̃tD = wtD − ktD /(2z̄ − 1). This combines relative wealth
  18
                                                                                    
     Using (29)-(32), in steady state θ = (1 − ζ)Ḡ + (1 − ζ)D̄K̄ / Ḡ + (1 − ζ)D̄K̄ < 1.
  19
     Our estimate of θ for monthly data, discussed in Section 4.2, is 0.99, so that ψ = 1 − θ = 0.01
implies an annual depreciation rate of 12%, which accords well with the 10% that is generally
used in calibration.


                                                16
and relative asset supply. Also define aD             D    D
                                        t = (1 − θ)(gt − ut /(2z̄ − 1)), which
combines relative wealth shocks (through non-asset income) with relative supply
shocks. Then we can write the system as
                           D
                         w̃t+1 = θw̃tD + θ(2z̄ − 1)ert+1 + aD
                                                            t+1               (41)
                         qtD   =   4ztA   + (2z̄ −   1)w̃tD                   (42)


3.3    Shocks
The model will be driven by three types of shocks: dividend shocks, wealth/supply
shocks and financial shocks. Dividend shocks apply to relative dividends dD    t =
                                                         D
dHt − dF t . Wealth/supply shocks apply to the variable at , while financial shocks
apply to the exogenous portfolio shifter nt . We assume that they all follow an
AR(2) process:
                            dD     d D      d D       d
                             t = ρ1 dt−1 + ρ2 dt−2 + εt                        (43)
                               aD    a D       a D       a
                                t = ρ1 at−1 + ρ2 at−2 + εt                    (44)
                               nt = ρ1 nt−1 + ρ2 nt−2 + εnt                   (45)
The innovations are all normally distributed with mean 0 and variance respectively
σd2 , σa2 and σn2 .


3.4    Model Summary
It is useful to summarize the full set of equations that make up the model:

                     qtD = 4ztA + (2z̄ − 1)w̃tD                               (46)
                     w̃tD = θw̃t−1
                                D
                                   + θ(2z̄ − 1)ert + aD t                     (47)
                                E  er
                                  t t+1
                     ztA = f                 + (1 − f )zt + nt                (48)
                             γ̃vart (ert+1 )
                                               ∞
                                            p X
                     zt = (1 − p)zt−1 +          [β(1 − p)]s−1 Et ert+s       (49)
                                           D s=1
                                     D
                     ert+1 = (1 − δ)qt+1 − qtD + δdD
                                                   t+1                        (50)
                     dD    d D       d D       d
                      t = ρ1 dt−1 + ρ2 dt−2 + εt                              (51)
                     aD    a D       a D       a
                      t = ρ1 at−1 + ρ2 at−2 + εt                              (52)
                     nt = ρ1 nt−1 + ρ2 nt−2 +        εnt                      (53)

with D as in (15).

                                              17
3.5     Solution
Details regarding the solution can be found in the Technical Appendix. For given
variances and covariances in the denominator of the portfolio expressions, we have
a system of linear equations that can be solved with standard linear solution meth-
ods. We only need to truncate the infinite sum in (49). We truncate at the horizon
T , so that
                                          T
                                       p X
                    zt = (1 − p)zt−1 +       [β(1 − p)]s−1 Et ert+s            (54)
                                       D s=1
In practice we set T = 60 months, so 5 years. Setting it longer does not affect the
results.
    While the variances and covariances that enter D, and in the portfolio of the
frequent traders, are endogenous, we at first set all covariances in D equal to 0 and
set the variance of excess returns equal to 0.0262 . We then solve the model. We use
this model solution when estimating the parameters with the Simulated Method
of Moments, discussed in Section 4.3. When we have our parameter estimates, we
compute the corresponding second moments that enter the portfolio expressions.
We then slightly rescale f and γ̃ such that f /[γ̃vart (ert+1 )] and (1 − f )/D remain
exactly the same as based on the estimated f and γ̃ with the exogenously imposed
second moments. The Technical Appendix discusses the details of the rescaling.
By keeping these two ratios unchanged, the solution remains unchanged.20 When
the rescaled value of γ̃ reaches an upper bound that we have set, we simply impose
that the rescaled value γ̃ must be equal to this upper bound.
    We find numerically that in the case where all traders are frequent traders
there is either one unique equilibrium or there are 3 equilibria. As described
above, the model can be solved for a given variance of the excess return, which
then maps into a new variance of the excess return implied by the solution. One
can check for multiple equilibria by inspecting this mapping. Intuitively, when
the variance of the excess return is low (high), portfolios respond more (less) to
expected returns, leading to a smaller (larger) asset price response to financial
  20
     As described in the Technical Appendix, one can also follow an iterative procedure for a
given set of parameters. One can solve the model for given second moments, then compute the
implied second moments, then solve the model for this new set of second moments, and repeat
this until the second moments no longer change. This gives exactly the same results, but is far
more computationally intensive.



                                              18
shocks to clear markets, justifying the low (high) variance.21 We do not find
multiple equilibria in the estimated model with infrequent traders. The difference
is that infrequent traders always have a more muted portfolio response as only a
limited fraction of these agents make a new portfolio decision and they have longer
horizons. Even for frequent traders though, the presence of multiple equilibria does
not pose a problem as the estimation will search for the solution where the variance
of the excess return is close to that in the data.


3.6     Impulse Responses
Before getting into the details of the data and calibration/estimation of parameters,
it is useful to get a better understanding of how the model works by considering
the impulse responses. Figure 1 shows impulse responses for positive dividend and
wealth shocks in three cases.22 These cases are based on parameter estimates that
will be discussed in the next two sections. We refer to these cases as IN, FRH
and FRL. Case IN, labeled infrequent traders in Figure 1, is one where almost
all traders are infrequent traders (f = 0.004) who change their portfolio quite
infrequently (p = 0.01) and have a risk aversion of γ̃ = 13.9. In cases FRL and
FRH all traders are frequent traders (f = 1). In case FRL the rate of risk aversion
is relatively low (γ̃ = 10), while in case FRH the rate of risk aversion is very high
(γ̃ = 485).
    In all cases the direction of the change in q D and z A at the time of the shock is
the same. A positive dividend shock increases the expected excess return on the
Home asset, which raises the average portfolio share z A and the relative price q D .
A positive relative Home wealth shock raises the relative demand for Home equity,
which raises the relative price q D . The higher relative price reduces the expected
excess return on the Home asset, which lowers z A . What differs across the three
cases is the magnitude of the immediate response and the subsequent dynamics.
    There are two key distinctions between the three cases. First, portfolios are
  21
      McCafferty and Driskill (1980) argue that such multiple equilibria are a general feature of
rational expectations models where behavior depends on a forecast variance. It also occurs in
portfolio models with limited participation, such as Pagano (1989), Allen and Gale (1994) and
Jeanne and Rose (2002), where a high variance leads agents to exit the market, making portfolios
less responsive to prices and generating a high variance.
   22
      We will discuss the impulse response to financial shocks in Section 5 as it is an unobserved
variable for which the estimated process is different for each parameterization.


                                               19
                                         Figure 1: Impulse Responses*

                                                              Dividend Shocks
                     qD                                                   zA
 0.018                                           0.003
                                                                                                0.001        Expected Excess Return
 0.016       frequent traders, low ߛ෤ (FRL)
                                                0.0025                                         0.0008
 0.014

 0.012                                           0.002
                                                                                               0.0006
  0.01
             infrequent traders (IN)            0.0015
 0.008
                                                                                               0.0004
 0.006                                           0.001
 0.004       frequent traders, high ߛ෤ (FRH)                                                   0.0002
                                                0.0005
 0.002

     0                                               0                                             0
         0     20    40        60   80    100             0     20   40        60   80   100             0     20    40    60    80        100




                                                         Wealth/Supply Shocks
                                                 0.001
                                                                          zA                   0.0003        Expected Excess Return
  0.01                    qD
                                                0.0005
 0.008                                                                                         0.0001

                                                      0
                                                          0     20   40        60   80   100             0      20    40    60        80     100
 0.006                                                                                         -0.0001
                                                -0.0005

 0.004
                                                 -0.001                                        -0.0003

 0.002
                                                -0.0015
                                                                                               -0.0005

    0                                            -0.002
         0    20     40        60   80   100
                                                                                               -0.0007


                                ߛ෤                       ߛ෤         ߛ෤                    ߛ෤
     ߛ
     ෤
*Infrequent traders (IN): p = 0.01, f = 0.004, γ̃ = 13.9; frequent traders, low γ̃ (FRL): f = 1, γ̃ =
10; frequent traders, high γ̃ (FRH): f = 1, γ̃ = 485. Others parameters as in Tables 1-3.


much more sensitive to expected returns in the FRL case than in the FRH and
IN cases. In the FRH case all agents respond right away to a change in expected
returns, but they all take limited positions because of the very high risk aversion. In
the IN case only a limited fraction of agents respond to a change in expected returns
and even those agents have a limited response because of longer horizons. While for
different reasons, both in the FRH and IN cases the immediate portfolio response
will be significantly more muted than in the FRL case. The second difference
is in the subsequent dynamics. In the IN case portfolios respond gradually to a
shock, while in the FRL and FRH cases portfolios respond immediately and then
gradually return to steady state.
    These distinctions are evident in Figure 1. First consider the immediate re-
sponse at the time of the shock. For both dividend and wealth shocks, z A changes
much more in the FRL case than in the FRH and IN cases. The weaker portfolio
response also translates into a much smaller change in the relative price q D under


                                                                          20
dividend shocks in the FRH and IN cases than in the FRL case. The exact op-
posite happens under wealth shocks. A positive relative Home wealth shock leads
to an excess demand for the Home asset. In the FRL case, where portfolios are
very sensitive to expected returns, a very small increase in q D leads to a significant
portfolio response that clears the market. The weak portfolio response in the FRH
and IN cases implies that the expected excess return, and therefore q D , needs to
rise much more to clear the market.
    With regards to the dynamics subsequent to the shock, the response is quite
different with infrequent traders (IN) than frequent traders (FRH, FRL). In the
case of infrequent traders the portfolio share z A continues to change for quite some
time in the same direction as the initial change after the shock. This is because
agents gradually adjust portfolios in response to expected return changes. This
happens even though expected future excess returns are slowly falling (in absolute
value). By contrast, in the two cases with frequent traders the average portfolio
share moves in the direction opposite to its initial change, gradually returning to
its steady state due to expected excess returns that are declining in absolute value.
    For dividend shocks the continued increase in the average portfolio share z A in
the IN case also implies a continued increases in q D for a significant length of time.
This is consistent with the phenomenon known as post earnings announcement
drift, where equity prices continue to drift in the same direction as the initial
change after an earnings announcement.23 By contrast, in the cases with only
frequent traders the relative equity price gradually falls after the initial increase.
With wealth shocks the relative price q D declines in all three cases subsequent to
the initial increase, but much faster in the case of infrequent traders who continue
to reallocate their portfolios away from the Home asset after the shock.
    The chart on the right hand side shows the expected excess return, which
changes much more in the case of infrequent traders than in both cases with fre-
quent traders. The case of the dividend shock has a close analogy to the forward
discount puzzle, which considers another income component of asset returns (inter-
est differentials). As Bacchetta and van Wincoop (2010) have shown, the forward
discount puzzle can be explained by gradual portfolio adjustment. A rise in the in-
terest rate of one currency leads to a gradual portfolio shift towards that currency,
which leads to continued appreciation and a positive excess return. Analogously,
 23
      See Hong and Stein (1999) and references therein.



                                               21
here the higher relative Home dividend implies a gradual shift to Home equity,
which continues to raise the relative price of Home equity and therefore gives rise
to a high expected excess return on Home equity. This is not arbitraged away as
only a small subset of agents makes new portfolio decisions and they are responsive
to expected returns over longer horizons. The same phenomenon also explains the
much larger change in the expected excess return under wealth shocks. This is
an important way that the IN case sets itself apart from both the FRL and FRH
cases.


4      Quantitative Analysis
We now turn to the quantitative analysis. We first discuss the data. After that we
describe the calibration of a subset of parameters and the estimation of the remain-
ing parameters with the Simulated Method of Moments. The estimation minimizes
the distance between 15 data moments and corresponding model moments.


4.1     Data
Details regarding data construction and data sources are discussed in Appendix
A. We use four series to confront the model to the data: ztA , ert , dD      D
                                                                      t and at . The
sample consists of 230 months from November 1995 to December 2014. The Home
country is the US and the Foreign country is the rest of the world (ROW).
   Portfolio data are obtained from Bertaut and Tryon (2007) and Bertaut and
Judson (2014).24 We compute ztA = (zHt + zF t )/2, where zHt = US external claims
on ROW/(US market capitalization - US external liabilities + US external claims
on ROW) and zF t = ROW external claims on US/(ROW market capitalization -
US external claims + ROW external claims on US). Market capitalization data are
from MSCI.25 We also compute z̄ as the mean of the average domestic portfolio
share (zHt + (1 − zF t ))/2. We find that z̄ = 0.7634.
   The data for dD t and ert are obtained from MSCI. Return data for the US and
the aggregate of the other countries are based on the total return index. We use the
  24
     Bertaut and Tryon (2007) and Bertaut and Judson (2014) correct TIC data to adjust for
various biases. This data is used in several other studies, e.g., Curcuru et al. (2011).
  25
     The MSCI market capitalization data is for an aggregate of 44 foreign countries, including
21 developed and 23 emerging market economies.



                                              22
difference in log earnings to compute dDt . We use earnings rather than dividends
as dividends do not include share repurchases, which have become a preferred
method of shareholder payments. One drawback of earnings is that the MSCI
only provides the 12-month trailing average rather than the monthly earnings.
Firms do not report monthly earnings. Moreover, even if we did have monthly or
quarterly earnings, it would have a significant seasonal component and would be
very volatile. Our measure is reasonable if payouts (dividends and repurchases)
keep up with the 12-month trailing average of earnings. One comforting finding
is that dD computed this way based on relative earnings has a correlation of 0.81
with the same series computed based on relative dividends, which is quite large in
light of the absence of repurchases from dividends.26
    Finally, from (46)-(47) we have
                                            D
                           qtD − 4ztA − θ(qt−1     A
                                               − 4zt−1 )
                    aD
                     t =                                 − θ(2z̄ − 1)ert                    (55)
                                      2z̄ − 1
We can therefore compute aD                     D    A
                            t from the data on qt , zt and ert . This does require
an estimate of θ, which we discuss below.


4.2     Calibrated Parameters
We estimate the parameters p, f , γ̃ and the parameters associated with the finan-
cial shock process nt . All other parameters are calibrated and reported in Table
1. For the dividend process there are three parameters, ρd1 , ρd2 and σd . It is well-
known that estimation of these parameters through a simple regression leads to
small sample bias. We therefore produce 10,000 simulations of the AR(2) pro-
cess of dDt over 230 months and choose the parameters of the process such that
the average variance and first and second-order autocovariance of dD   t match the
corresponding moments in the data.
    In order to compute aD we first need an estimate of θ. For this we use an
orthogonality condition based on the wealth accumulation equation (47). Since it
is a bit technical, we leave a discussion of our estimate of θ = 0.99 to Appendix
C. We find that aD is essentially i.i.d., with an autocorrelation of only 0.02. We
therefore set ρa1 = ρa2 = 0 and set σa equal to the standard deviation of aDt .
  26
    They also have comparable standard deviations, 0.22 for relative log earnings versus 0.17 for
relative log dividends.



                                               23
                     Table 1: Calibrated Parameters


   Parameter                    Description
   ρd1 = 0.90706                autoregressive coefficient dividend process
   ρd2 = 0.089257               autoregressive coefficient dividend process
   σd = 0.045377                standard deviation dividend innovations
   ρa1 = 0                      autoregressive coefficient aD
                                                            t
   ρa2 = 0                      autoregressive coefficient aD
                                                            t
   σa = 0.014                   standard deviation wealth shock (aD t )
   R̄ − 1 = 0.01/3              steady state rate of return
   β = 1/R̄ = 0.9967            time discount rate
   δ = (R̄ − 1)/R̄ = 0.0033     steady state ratio of dividend/(price+dividend)
   z̄ = 0.7634                  steady state fraction invested domestically
   θ = 0.99                     persistence parameter in wealth accumulation


    We set R̄ − 1 = 0.01/3, which implies an annualized return of 4%. δ is equal
to (R̄ − 1)/R̄. We set β = 1/R̄. We have already discussed z̄ above.


4.3    Estimation
When estimating the remaining parameters with the Simulated Method of Mo-
ments, we minimize
                                    0
                  mdata − mmodel (ν) Σ−1 mdata − mmodel (ν)
                                                           
                                                                              (56)

Here mdata is a vector of data moments and mmodel (ν) are the corresponding mo-
ments in the model as a function of the vector ν of model parameters. Σ−1 is a
weighting matrix, where Σ corresponds to the variance of the vector of moments.
The average model moments and the variance of the moments are computed based
on 1000 simulations of the model over 230 months for which we have data. We
adopt the common practice of only using the diagonal elements of the weighting
matrix as the full matrix can lead to finite sample bias (e.g. Altonji and Segal
(1996)). The objective function is therefore
                          M                         2
                          X   mdata (i) − mmodel (i)
                                                                              (57)
                          i=1
                                         Σ0.5
                                          ii



                                         24
where M is the number of moments. We therefore minimize the sum of the squared
t-values of the moments. We obtain parameter estimates for a given weighting
matrix, then use these parameter estimates to compute a new weighting matrix.
We iterate a couple of times this way until the weighting matrix and parameter
estimates no longer change. Under the null that the model is correct, the objective
function has a χ2 distribution with degrees of freedom equal to the number of
moments minus the number of estimated prameters.
    The variance covariance matrix of parameter estimates is given by
                         "         0                #−1
                            ∂mmodel           ∂mmodel
                                            
                       1                 −1
                                       Σ                                       (58)
                       S      ∂ν                ∂ν

where S is the sample length and the derivatives ∂mmodel /∂ν are evaluated at the
estimated parameter vector ν̂.


4.4    Data Moments
We use 15 data moments for the estimation, which are shown in the first column of
Table 2. We include the standard deviations of the excess return and the average
portfolio share, as well as the change in the average portfolio share. We also
consider the standard deviation of the expected excess return. Since the expected
excess return is unobservable, we compute an estimate of it through a regression
of the excess return on three lags of the excess return and three lags of portfolio
                        A       A
share changes: ert−i , zt−i  − zt−i−1 , for i = 1, 2, 3.
    We include the autocorrelation of these same variables as well as the autocor-
relation of the excess return over 3 quarters, ert,t+3 and the portfolio share change
over 3 quarters, ztA − zt−3
                        A
                            . Note that the average portfolio share is very persistent,
with an autocorrelation of 0.976. Both excess returns and changes in portfolio
shares are also positively autocorrelated.
    The final set of moments is a set of contemporaneous correlations. We focus
on the contemporaneous correlations between endogenous variables and observable
shocks. The endogenous variables are the excess return ert and the change ztA −zt−1 A

in the average portfolio share. The observable shocks are the wealth/supply shocks
aD                         D     D
 t and dividend shocks dt −dt−1 . We also consider the correlation between the two
endogenous variables. One could include correlations between levels of variables
as well, such as dD           D      A         D
                    t and qt or zt and dt . But since these levels tend to drift


                                          25
during the sample, these correlations vary significantly across simulations and are
therefore not very helpful for estimation purposes.


5     Results
5.1    Two Key Findings
It is useful to start by summarizing the key overall results first.

Result 1 With an unconstrained rate of risk aversion, the model cannot be re-
jected, no matter the frequency of portfolio changes p. Estimates of risk aversion
become extremely large as we raise p above small levels.

Result 2 When constraining risk aversion to reasonable levels, the model is not
rejected only when p < p̄ with p̄ small. In that case most traders are infrequent
traders and the frequency of portfolio adjustment is low.

     In the remainder of this section we will document these results and explain
what drives these findings.
     Figure 2 documents both results. The top two charts and bottom left chart
show respectively the value of the objective function, estimate of γ̃ and estimate
of f when we vary p from 0 to 1, for each value of p re-estimating all the other
parameters (γ̃, f , ρ1 , ρ2 and σn ). Remarkably, the objective function varies very
little with p. The objective function has a χ2 distribution with 10 degrees of
freedom (upper left panel). At the 5 percent significance level we cannot reject
the model when the objective function is less than 18.3, which is the case for all
values of p from 0 to 1. No conclusion can therefore be drawn about the frequency
of portfolio changes, which is Result 1.
     The chart in the upper right of Figure 2 provides insight into what is going on.
When p is small, most traders are infrequent traders as estimates of f are small
(bottom left chart). As we raise p, at some point the estimate of f drops to 0, but
this makes little difference as the infrequent traders become like frequent traders
when they change portfolios very frequently. The key point is that the estimate
of γ̃ rises monotonically as we raise p and reaches the astronomical number of 485
when p = 1. This is the same case as f = 1. As we will discuss further below, the
data is telling us that the portfolio response to expected returns must be weak. As

                                         26
                                                        Figure 2: Impact of Varying p*

   40
                   Objective function                                                     500
                                                                                                                       ෥
                                                                                                           Estimate of ࢽ
   35
                                                                                          400
   30

   25
                                                                                          300

   20

                                                                                          200
    15

   10
                                                                                          100
    5

    0                                                                                       0
         0   0.1    0.2    0.3   0.4     0.5      0.6    0.7   0.8   0.9   1                    0   0.1   0.2    0.3    0.4     0.5    0.6    0.7   0.8   0.9   1
                                             p                                                                                    p


   0.2                                                                                    80                                ෥ ൑50
                                                                                                    Objective function when ࢽ
                   Estimate of f
  0.16
                                                                                          60


  0.12

                                                                                          40
  0.08


                                                                                          20
                                                                                                                                               5% confidence level
  0.04



     0                                                                                     0
         0    0.1    0.2     0.3       0.4       0.5    0.6    0.7   0.8   0.9   1              0   0.1    0.2    0.3     0.4         0.5    0.6    0.7   0.8   0.9   1
                                                 p                                                                                    p

                                                                                                                                               ߛ෤
*The top two charts and bottom left chart show the objective function, estimate of γ̃, and
estimate of f when varying p from 0 to 1 while ߛ෤ ൑
                                                  re-estimating all the other parameters. The
bottom right chart shows the objective function when varying p, while re-estimating the other
parameters under the constraint γ̃ ≤ 50. The 5 percent confidence level is the value of the
objective function below which we cannot reject the model.


we have seen in Section 3.6, this can happen either through infrequent portfolio
adjustment (low p) or through a high risk aversion γ̃.
    The results in Figure 2 suggests that the data is not able to distinguish between
weakening the portfolio response by raising γ̃ and lowering p. They are essentially
substitutes. As we raise p from 0 to 1, making portfolios more responsive to
expected returns, the estimate of γ̃ rises, making portfolios less responsive. This is
not to say that the response to shocks is very similar in cases with low p and γ̃ as
in cases with high p and γ̃. We saw in the impulse responses in Figure 1 that the
dynamic response to dividend and wealth shocks is remarkably different in the IN


                                                                                     27
case (mostly infrequent traders with low p) to the FRH case (only frequent traders
with high risk aversion). The estimation is nonetheless unable to separate the IN
case from the FRH case. The reasons for this will be further explored in Section
5.3. But before we do so, we first discuss Result 2.
    The bottom right chart of Figure 2 shows the objective function when we
restrict γ̃ to be no larger than 50. This becomes binding when p > 0.03, as can
be seen from the upper right chart. When p = 0.01, risk aversion γ̃ is estimated
to be 13.9, but then quickly rises as p rises. The bottom right chart shows that
restricting γ̃ to be no larger than 50 leads to a sharp rise in the objective function
the moment this becomes binding. The chart also shows the level of the objective
function where we are unable to reject the model at a 5 percent significance level.
This will be the case as long as p < 0.065, with the upper bound representing an
expected length between portfolio changes of 15 months. As we increase p further,
without raising γ̃ further, portfolios become too responsive to expected returns to
be consistent with the data. The features of the data that lead to this are discussed
below. First though we need to make some comments on the logic of restricting
risk aversion.
    The adjusted risk-aversion parameter γ̃ differs from the curvature γ of the
utility function, but connects more closely to estimates of risk aversion in the
literature based on portfolio data and the price individuals are willing to pay to
avoid risky gambles. Most estimates of risk aversion are less than 10, and tend
to be closer to 1 than 10. Mehra and Prescott (1985) famously showed that such
risk-aversion parameters are insufficient to match the observed equity premium.27
Mehra (2003) finds that risk-aversion just below 50 is needed to match the equity
premium. Kocherlakota (2001) finds that a risk-aversion of 18 is sufficient. While
such higher rates of risk aversion are inconsistent with a lot of micro studies, Kandel
and Stambaugh (1991) argue that these are often based on very large risky bets.
For smaller risky bets as a fraction of an investor’s wealth, a higher rate of risk
aversion of 30 implies more reasonable bets. To accommodate such considerations,
we allow for a risk-aversion γ̃ up to 50. Clearly though, extreme risk-aversion of
485 that we estimate when there are only frequent traders is well beyond anything
that is reasonable.
  27
    Our model has no implications for the equity premium as we have focused on differences of
the equations (33)-(36), which allow us to solve the expected equity return of the Home country
relative to the Foreign country as opposed the expected excess return of equity over bonds.


                                              28
   As long as we are willing to constrain risk aversion to such “reasonable” levels,
the conclusion is that the data implies values of p no larger than 0.065. This is
Result 2.


5.2     Model Moments
We will now further explore what features of the data give rise to Result 2 by
considering the 15 model moments used to estimate model parameters. In Table 2
we report the model moments for two values of p less than 0.065: p = 0.01 and p =
0.04. The objective function is a bit lower for p = 0.01 than p = 0.04 (respectively
12.8 and 15.5), but we cannot reject the model in either case.28 p = 0.01 implies
an average length of 8 years between portfolio adjustments, while p = 0.04 implies
a more plausible average period of 2 years between portfolio changes.29
    Table 2 reports both data and model moments, as well as the t-value, which
is the difference between the model moment and the data moment divided by the
standard deviation of the model moment. For p = 0.01 the t-value is always less
than 2, so that all model moments are consistent with the data. For p = 0.04, only
two moments have t-values just slightly above 2. Clearly, the fit of the model is
very strong in both cases.
    Table 3 reports results when there are only frequent traders (p = 1 or f = 1).
Results are reported for three levels of risk aversion: γ̃ = 10, γ̃ = 50 and γ̃ = 485.
The latter is the level of risk aversion we estimate without imposing constraints of
γ̃. The objective function is respectively 184, 70.7 and 16.5 in these three cases. As
discussed above, only for extreme risk aversion are we unable to reject the model
with only frequent traders.
    Table 3 identifies the moments that lead to the weak performance of the model
with frequent traders only for reasonable rates of risk aversion. The standard
deviation of the change in the portfolio share, ztA − zt−1
                                                        A
                                                            is too high relative to the
  28
      When we estimate p without any constraint we find implausible values of both p and γ̃ very
close to 0, which is why we do not report these. As can be seen from the upper left chart of
Figure 2, the objective function is just a little bit higher for extremely low values of p.
   29
      This is the same frequency of price changes that Bacchetta and van Wincoop (2010) use
to explain the forward discount puzzle, though they assume a constant rather than stochastic
time interval between portfolio changes for individual agents. They argue that this frequency
is reasonable based on both direct evidence of the frequency of portfolio changes and evidence
based on portfolio Euler equations, which fit better with 1-3 year horizons.


                                              29
Table 2: Data and Model Moments with Gradual Portfolio Adjust-
ment


                                                     p = 0.01             p = 0.04
                                    DATA           Model t-value        Model t-value
     STANDARD DEVIATIONS
     ert                            0.0271 0.0263    0.65 0.0262                     0.66
       A
     zt                             0.0261 0.0254    0.09 0.0285                     0.23
       A     A
     zt − zt−1                      0.0045 0.0046    0.17 0.0046                     0.35
     Et ert+1 − estimate            0.0067 0.0058    0.54 0.0062                     0.31
     AUTOCORRELATIONS
     ert                             0.086   0.143   0.81   0.161                    1.07
     ert,t+3                         0.191   0.092   1.05   0.091                    1.07
     ztA                             0.976   0.978   0.18   0.982                    0.43
       A     A
     zt − zt−1                       0.155   0.161   0.09   0.182                    0.39
       A     A
     zt − zt−3                       0.059   0.110   0.53   0.112                    0.56
     Et ert+1 − estimate             0.231   0.289   0.23   0.308                    0.34
     CONTEMPORANEOUS CORRELATIONS
     corr(aD t , ert )               0.401   0.295   1.89   0.274                    2.21
             D A       A
     corr(at , zt − zt−1 )           0.024 -0.094    1.90 -0.116                     2.24
             D       D
     corr(dt − dt−1 , ert )          0.177   0.146   0.50   0.163                    0.21
     corr(dD         D   A    A
             t − dt−1 , zt − zt−1 )  0.248   0.146   1.60   0.163                    1.34
                  A    A
     corr(ert , zt − zt−1 )          0.922   0.922   0.02   0.922                    0.03
     Objective                                       12.8                            15.5
     Parameter Estimates                              s.e.                            s.e.
     γ̃                                       13.9   1.73      50
     ρ1                                     1.6180  0.071 1.6606                    0.017
     ρ2                                    -0.6182  0.072 -0.6611                   0.017
     σn                                     0.0029 0.0004 0.0029                   0.0001
     f                                      0.0039 0.0014 0.0146                   0.0006

*The Table shows results for 2 cases: (i) p = 0.01, (ii) p = 0.04. The estimated parameters of γ̃ ≤ 50,
the noise process (ρ1 , ρ2 , and σn ) and f , and standard errors, are at the bottom of the table. The table
reports the average model moments over 1000 simulations (under Model) and the t-value of each moment.
The latter is the difference between the average model moment and data moment, divided by the standard
deviation of the model moment based on the 1000 simulations. The objective function is shown right below
the moments, which corresponds to the sum of the squared t-values of the moments.
                                              30
                 Table 3: Data and Model Moments when p = 1


                                                   γ̃ = 10                γ̃ = 50                 γ̃ = 485
                              DATA               Model t-value          Model t-value           Model t-value
 STANDARD DEVIATIONS
 ert                          0.0271 0.0313    2.68 0.0286                            1.01      0.0263         0.62
   A
 zt                           0.0261 0.0275    0.21 0.0235                            0.47      0.0241         0.33
   A     A
 zt − zt−1                    0.0045 0.0059    4.80 0.0053                            2.92      0.0046         0.21
 Et ert+1 − estimate          0.0067 0.0057    0.51 0.0055                            0.64      0.0053         0.79
 AUTOCORRELATIONS
 ert                           0.086   0.056   0.38    0.069                          0.22       0.085         0.01
 ert,t+3                       0.191   0.123   0.56    0.148                          0.34       0.177         0.12
   A
 zt                            0.976   0.973   0.24    0.970                          0.39       0.979         0.24
   A     A
 zt − zt−1                     0.155   0.054   1.33    0.068                          1.11       0.096         0.75
         A
 ztA − zt−3                    0.059   0.119   0.49    0.147                          0.69       0.197         1.16
 Et ert+1 − estimate           0.231   0.185   0.15    0.229                          0.01       0.294         0.20
 CONTEMPORANEOUS CORRELATIONS
 corr(aD t , ert )             0.401   0.035   6.01    0.112                          4.83       0.297        1.86
         D A       A
 corr(at , zt − zt−1 )         0.024 -0.277    5.15   -0.237                          4.35      -0.093        1.85
 corr(dD         D
         t − dt−1 , ert )      0.177   0.514   6.95    0.357                          3.19       0.104        1.16
         D       D   A    A
 corr(dt − dt−1 , zt − zt−1 )  0.248   0.491   4.84    0.345                          1.68       0.103        2.25
              A    A
 corr(ert , zt − zt−1 )        0.922   0.949   4.08    0.937                          1.81       0.921        0.09
 Objective                                    184.0                                   70.7                    16.5
 Parameter Estimates                            s.e.                                   s.e.                    s.e.
 γ̃                                       10              50                                484.6             13.9
 ρ1                                   1.9741  0.002 1.9707                          0.001 1.9409             0.004
 ρ2                                  -0.9790  0.002 -0.9759                         0.001 -0.9448            0.004
 σn                                   0.0140 0.0001 0.00377                        0.0002 0.00086          0.00002

*The Table assumes p = 1 and reports results for 3 cases: (i) γ̃ = 10, (ii) γ̃ = 50 and (iii) γ̃ estimated without
restriction. The estimated parameters of the noise process (ρ1 , ρ2 and σn ) and γ̃, and standard errors, are
at the bottom of the table. The table reports the average model moments over 1000 simulations (under
Model) and the t-value of each moment. The latter is the difference between the average model moment and
data moment, divided by the standard deviation of the model moment based on the 1000 simulations. The
objective function is shown right below the moments, which corresponds to the sum of the squared t-values
of the moments.


                                                 31
data, while the contemporaneous correlations are even more inconsistent with the
data. To understand this, it is useful to go back to the impulse responses in Figure
1. The case of infrequent traders (IN) corresponds to the parameterization with
p = 0.01 in Table 2. The two cases with only frequent traders, FRH and FRL,
correspond to respectively the case of γ̃ = 485 and γ̃ = 10 in Table 3.
     In the FRL case, the immediate portfolio response to both dividend and wealth
shocks is very large. Although there are also financial shocks, which we will discuss
below, this contributes to the finding that ztA − zt−1A
                                                          is too volatile. Next consider
the contemporaneous correlations. The first four of them relate to the contem-
poraneous correlation between dividend and wealth changes on the one hand and
the excess return and change in average portfolio share on the other hand. This
relates closely to the contemporaneous response of q D and z A to dividend and
wealth shocks reported in Figure 1.
     First consider wealth shocks aDt . A positive relative Home wealth shock implies
an increased relative demand for the Home assets and therefore a rise in qtD and
ert . This leads to a positive correlation between aD   t and ert , which is 0.4 in the
data. But in the FRL case there is a sharp drop in the average portfolio share z A
as the increase in q D lowers the expected excess return. This significantly dampens
the rise in q D , leading to a correlation between the excess return and the wealth
shock that is much lower than in the data. The sharp drop in z A also leads to
a strongly counterfactual negative correlation between the change in z A and the
wealth shock. The model performs better when the portfolio response is much
weaker, either due to infrequent traders with low p or a very large γ̃. This is also
illustrated in Figure 1, where we see that in the IN and FRH cases q D rises much
more and z A drops much less in response to the shock.
     The next two contemporaneous correlations are between the change in the
log dividend dD         D                       A     A
                  t − dt−1 and respectively zt − zt−1 and ert . As we see in the
impulse responses in Figure 1, in the FRL case where portfolios are very sensitive
to expected returns both the average portfolio share and the relative price are very
responsive to changes in dividends. This is because higher Home dividends, which
are persistent, imply a higher expected return on Home equity that leads to a large
portfolio shift to Home equity. The correlation between the change in dividends
and both the excess return and portfolio share change are higher in the model than
in the data. This problem is again resolved by weakening the portfolio response
to expected returns, either through a low p or high γ̃, as can be seen in Figure 1.

                                          32
    So far we have not discussed the financial shocks. Figure 3 reports the impulse
response to financial shocks (increase in nt ) for the same three parameter combina-
tions as for dividend and wealth shocks in Figure 1: p = 0.01 (IN), f = 1, γ̃ = 10
(FRL) and f = 1, γ̃ = 485 (FRH). A key difference with the dividend and wealth
shocks is that the financial shocks cannot be directly measured. The parameters
of the AR(2) process for nt , reported in Tables 2 and 3, are such that the model
moments fit the data as well as possible. In all three cases the financial shock is
therefore different, while wealth and dividend shocks are always the same.

                   Figure 3: Impulse Response, Financial Shocks*


                          qD                           0.008                     zA
                                                       0.006
  0.03


                                                       0.004
  0.02
                           infrequent traders (IN)
                                                       0.002
  0.01

                                                          0
     0                                                         0   20      40         60   80   100
         0    20     40    60     80     100
                                                      -0.002
 -0.01

                                                      -0.004
 -0.02




                                                         0.2
             Expected Excess Return                                     Financial Shock nt
 0.004
                                                        0.15
 0.003
                                                         0.1
 0.002
                                                        0.05
 0.001
                                                           0
                                                               0   20       40        60   80   100
    0
         0    20     40    60     80    100
                                                       -0.05
-0.001
                                                        -0.1
-0.002




*Infrequent traders (IN): p = 0.01, f = 0.004, γ̃ = 13.9; frequent traders, low γ̃ (FRL): f = 1, γ̃ =
10; frequent traders, high γ̃ (FRH): f = 1, γ̃ = 485. Others parameters as in Tables 1-3.


   The bottom right chart in Figure 3 shows nt over time in response to a one
standard deviation financial shock. The magnitude of the financial shock in the

                                                 33
FRL case is massive compared to the IN and FRH cases. The reason for this is
that financial shocks have very little effect when portfolios are very sensitive to
expected returns. A small change in the asset price that leads to a small change
in the expected excess return can generate a very large portfolio shift that clears
markets in response to the exogenous portfolio shift nt . As a result the financial
shock needs to be made extremely big in order to make it matter.
    In the FRL case the increase in nt peaks at 0.16 after just a one standard
deviation financial innovation in a particular month. This translates into a change
in the average allocation to Home equity from 0.5 to 0.66 with a one standard
deviation shock and 0.82 with a two standard deviation shock. Such massive shocks
are highly implausible. The same is the case as well when γ̃ = 50. This further
reinforces that the model with frequent traders and plausible risk aversion is not
a good description of the data. For reasonable levels of risk aversion the model is
only consistent with the data when agents change their portfolios infrequently.


5.3    Infrequent Trading versus Frequent Trading with Ex-
       treme Risk Aversion
A remaining question is why it is so hard to distinguish the IN and FRH cases.
Even if we set aside the extreme risk aversion of 485 in the FRH case, should we
not be able to separate the IN and FRH cases based on features of the data? If
we look at the impulse response to the observed dividend and wealth shocks in
Figure 1, we see that the instantaneous response of q D and z A is quite similar in
the IN and FRH cases. It is for this reason that the contemporaneous correlations
in the FRH case (last two columns of Table 3) and IN case (p = 0.01 in Table 2)
are similar, both consistent with the data. But we also see in Figure 1 that the
subsequent dynamics is quite different.
    This difference in dynamics subsequent to the shock can be captured by various
correlations that measure predictability. These are correlations between variables
at time t and excess returns or portfolio share changes over the next 1, 3 and 12
months. We report the results for these correlations in Table 4. The variables at
time t include the change in the relative dividend dD        D                D
                                                        t − dt−1 , the level dt of the
relative dividend, the wealth shock aD                                   A     A
                                       t , the portfolio share change zt − zt−1 and
the excess return ert . Results are reported for both the IN case (p = 0.01) and the
FRH case (f = 1, γ̃ = 485).

                                         34
              Table 4: Correlations Capturing Predictability


                                                  p = 0.01      p = 1, γ̃ = 485
                                       DATA Model t-value Model t-value
      ONE-MONTH FORWARD CORRELATIONS
      corr(dD        D      A
             t − dt−1 , zt+1 − zt )
                                    A
                                       -0.059 0.027       1.29 0.000        0.88
             D       D
      corr(dt − dt−1 , ert+1 )         -0.036 0.030       0.99 0.003        0.59
             D A            A
      corr(dt , zt+1 − zt )            -0.027 0.030       0.84 -0.006       0.26
             D
      corr(dt , ert+1 )                -0.001 0.044       0.72 0.022        0.29
             D A            A
      corr(at , zt+1 − zt )            -0.105 -0.019      1.34 -0.001       1.61
             D
      corr(at , ert+1 )                -0.088 -0.025      0.98 -0.008       1.24
             A      A
      corr(zt − zt−1 , ert+1 )          0.127 0.163       0.50 0.093        0.43
                  A         A
      corr(ert , zt+1 − zt )            0.100 0.162       0.87 0.099        0.01
      THREE-MONTH FORWARD CORRELATIONS
      corr(dD        D      A
             t − dt−1 , zt+3 − zt )
                                    A
                                       -0.046 0.036       1.32 -0.002       0.72
             D       D
      corr(dt − dt−1 , ert,t+3 )       -0.056 0.040       1.55 0.003        0.96
             D A            A
      corr(dt , zt+3 − zt )            -0.032 0.036       0.67 -0.009       0.18
      corr(dDt , ert,t+3 )              0.011 0.058       0.49 0.034        0.19
             D A            A
      corr(at , zt+3 − zt )             0.002 -0.025      0.39 0.001        0.01
             D
      corr(at , ert,t+3 )               0.050 -0.035      1.27 -0.010       0.89
                    A
      corr(ztA − zt−1   , ert,t+3 )     0.120 0.141       0.30 0.132        0.14
                  A         A
      corr(ert , zt+3 − zt )            0.097 0.142       0.64 0.144        0.56
      12-MONTH FORWARD CORRELATIONS
      corr(dD        D      A
             t − dt−1 , zt+12 − zt )
                                     A
                                       -0.076 0.050       2.03 -0.000       1.21
             D       D
      corr(dt − dt−1 , ert,t+12 )      -0.023 0.058       1.32 0.008        0.51
      corr(dD     A
             t , zt+12 − zt )
                             A
                                        0.010 0.012       0.02 -0.012       0.11
             D
      corr(dt , ert,t+12 )              0.053 0.045       0.05 0.048        0.03
             D A             A
      corr(at , zt+12 − zt )            0.005 -0.029      0.49 0.003        0.03
      corr(aDt , ert,t+12 )             0.103 -0.048      2.20 -0.016       1.73
             A      A
      corr(zt − zt−1 , ert,t+12 )       0.031 0.010       0.30 0.115        0.96
                  A          A
      corr(ert , zt+12 − zt )           0.049 0.023       0.37 0.147        1.08

*The Table shows results for one-month, 3-month and 12-month predictive correlations in two cases: (i)
p = 0.01 (Table 2), (ii) p = 1 and γ̃ = 485 (Table 3). T-values are computed analogously to Tables 2 and 3.



                                              35
     The key takeaway from Table 4 is that for both the IN and FRH case the
model is consistent with the data. Almost all t-values are less than 2. Correlations
capturing the predictability of excess returns and portfolio shares therefore provide
little guidance. The moments vary significantly across model simulations. For
example, the correlation between the relative dividend dD          t and the subsequent
excess return ert+1 is 0.044 in the infrequent trading model, but the 95 percent
confidence interval in the model is [-0.08,0.17]. This is consistent with the data
moment of -0.001, but if the model is correct the data moment could also have
been a substantial positive number.
     There are two reasons for this result. The first is the large role of the unobserved
financial shocks. A comparison of the scales in Figures 1 and 3 shows that financial
shocks have an immediate impact on q D and z A that is 3-10 times larger as for
dividend and wealth shocks. The dominant role of the unobserved financial shocks
makes it harder to observe predictability of excess returns and portfolio changes.
The role of these shocks can be determined by removing them in the model. We
find that financial shocks increase the standard deviation of the model moments
across simulations. Even more important, they significantly reduce the size of the
correlations in Table 4, sometimes by a factor 3 or 4.
     The second factor that plays a role in making predictability harder to identify
is associated with the magnitude of the dividends shocks. This relates to the point
above as it would be easier to identify predictability the larger the dividend shocks
relative to financial shocks. One can draw a comparison to the foreign exchange
market, where Bacchetta and van Wincoop (2010) find that a model with gradual
portfolio adjustment is consistent with excess return predictability in the data.
In the foreign exchange market exchange rate fluctuations are also dominated by
financial shocks and the standard deviation of quarterly excess returns is similar
to the quarterly excess returns in our data for equity.30 However, the volatility of
the income component of the excess return is much higher in the foreign exchange
market. The interest differential is about three times as volatile as the income
component of the excess return in the equity market, δdD       t .
     With a higher standard deviation of dividends σd , the correlations in the data in
Table 4 would likely have been higher and it might have been easier to separate the
IN and FRH cases. As an experiment we triple σd to make the income component
  30
    See also Itskhoki and Mukhin (2017) for the importance of financial shocks for exchange rate
determination.


                                              36
equally volatile as in the foreign exchange market. We find that the correlations
between dD t and the subsequent excess return and portfolio share change rise sig-
nificantly in the IN case. Both correlations also increase relative to the FRH case,
where correlations with subsequent portfolio share changes actually become more
negative.31


6      Conclusion
Even though there is a growing body of evidence consistent with gradual portfolio
adjustment, modern open economy macro models assume the exact opposite: the
continuous adjustment of international portfolio allocation by all investors. This
paper introduces gradual portfolio adjustment to an open economy model of the
equity market and confronts it with data on international portfolio shares and
equity prices.
    Apart from a focus on open economy aspects, we have contributed along two
dimensions to the literature on gradual portfolio adjustment. First, we have de-
veloped a theory of infrequent portfolio adjustment where the timing of portfolio
changes is stochastic, following a Poisson distribution instead of taking place at
predictable intervals of constant length. This leads to a smoother response of en-
dogenous variables to shocks than in models where the length of time between
portfolio decisions is fixed. Second, we have used both asset price data and portfo-
lio data to evaluate the implications of the model empirically. This contrasts with
work to date that has focused mostly on data features involving asset prices only.
It is natural to consider evidence on portfolios since after all this is a theory of
gradual portfolio adjustment.
    Our findings can be summarized with two key results. Conditional on a rea-
sonable rate of risk aversion, we find that the data is consistent with infrequent
portfolio decisions, with an average frequency of at most once in 15 months. We
find that the model where all agents adjust portfolios continuously, when combined
with plausible rates of risk aversion, leads to an excessive response of portfolios
to expected returns that generates inconsistencies with the data. At the same
time we are unable to distinguish the model with infrequent portfolio decisions
  31
    Another factor that may play a role in predictability is that there are larger measurement
errors associated with dDt than with the interest differential. We have also used relative dividends
instead of relative earnings for dD
                                  t , but this does not improve predictability.


                                                37
from one where all agents choose an optimal portfolio at all times and the rate
of risk aversion is extremely large, well above what is plausible. The latter also
leads to a weak portfolio response to expected returns. While these imply different
dynamics with different predictability of excess returns and portfolios shares, the
relatively large role of unobserved financial shocks makes it hard to separate them
empirically.
    Looking to future work, several directions should be considered. First, on the
modeling front we have made the assumption that agents hold portfolio shares
constant when they do not make a new portfolio decision. This implies complete
rebalancing. We need to consider the implications under the alternative of not
rebalancing at all, as well as partial rebalancing. In addition, instead of assum-
ing a constant consumption/wealth ratio it would be attractive to model the joint
consumption and portfolio decision, even though this will generate additional com-
putational challenges. Second, on the empirical front we need to consider extending
the approach to other markets where both asset returns and portfolio shares are
available. While we have discussed a two-country model for the global equity mar-
ket (US versus rest of world), one could consider a multi-country model, using
data on portfolio shares allocated to individual foreign countries. The Bertaut and
Tryon (2007) and Bertaut and Judson (2014) data are also available for the bond
market, which is another natural application. The framework can be applied to
closed economy setting as well, for example considering the portfolio allocation
between stocks and bonds within the United States.




                                        38
Appendix
Appendix A. Data Description

   Using MSCI data notation, the precise data definition for excess returns is:

              ert = ln (msci us TRt /msci us TRt−1 )
                      − ln (msci acwi exus TRt /msci acwi exus TRt−1 )

where msci us TR is ”MSCI US Total Return Index” and msci acwi exus TR is
”MSCI ACWI ex US Total Return Index” (ACWI stands for ”All Country World”).
    dD
     t is computed as relative earnings and earnings are derived by dividing the
price index (PI) by the price earnings ratio (PER):

   dD
    t = ln (msci us PI/msci us PER)- ln (msci acwi us PI/msci acwi us PER)


   For portfolio shares, we use:
                                    US external claims on ROW
   zHt =
            US market capitalization-US external liabilities + US external claims on ROW
                                     ROW external claims on US
   zF t   =
            ROW market capitalization - US external claims + ROW external claims on US
US market capitalization: msci us MV; ROW market capitalization: msci acwi exus MV.
US external claims on ROW : us stk est pos derived bertaut tryon claims thru2011.csv
and bertaut judson positions claims 2015.csv.
ROW external claims on US: ftot stk est pos derived from ticdata.liabilities.ftot.txt
and bertaut judson positions liabs 2015.csv. Both are for all countries, item 69995.
We use all countries for ROW rather than using bilateral data for the 44 countries
in MSCI data. Bilateral country data may be biased because it does not always
capture the true destination or source country (e.g., portfolios with financial cen-
ters).



Appendix B. Hedge Terms Optimal Portfolio

   For a variable x, define
                                            i
                                            X
                                x̃t,t+i =         θ1−j xt+j                  (59)
                                            j=1


                                            39
As shown in the Technical Appendix, where we derive the optimal portfolio of
infrequent traders, the hedge term for Home infrequent investors is
                                                1 − βθ NHt
                                       hin
                                        Ht =                                                (60)
                                                  βθ    D
where
                             ∞ X
                             X s−1
                                                                      pH
               NHt = −                 (βθ)s pi γθs−i cov(er
                                                          ˜ t,t+i , r̃t+i,t+s )
                             s=1 i=1
                   ∞ X
                     s−1
                   X                      1−θ s
               −             (βθ)s pi γ      θ cov(er
                                                   ˜ t,t+i , g̃H,t,t+s )
                   s=1 i=1
                                           θ
                    ∞ Xs−1                        i
                   X
                                  s  1−θ X
               +             (βθ) pi        cov(g̃H,t,t+j−1 , ert+j )
                   s=1   i=1
                                      θ j=1
                   ∞ X
                   X s−1
                                                      pH
               +             (βθ)s pi cov(er
                                          ˜ t,t+i , r̂t+i,t+s )
                   s=1 i=1
                    ∞                  s−1
                                                  !
                   X                   X                   1−θ s
               −         (βθ)s   1−          pm        γ      θ cov(er
                                                                    ˜ t,t+s , g̃H,t,t+s )
                   s=1                 m=1
                                                            θ
                    ∞                  s−1
                                                  !              s
                   X
                             s
                                       X               1−θ X
               +         (βθ)    1−          pm               cov(g̃H,t,t+j−1 , ert+j )
                   s=1                 m=1
                                                        θ j=1
                   ∞ X
                   X s−1 X
                         i
               +                  (βθ)s pi θ1−j τHt
                   s=1 i=1 j=1
                   ∞ X
                     s                                s−1
                                                                 !
                   X                                  X
               +             (βθ)s θ1−j      1−             pm       τHt                    (61)
                   s=1 j=1                            m=1

The terms involve a hedge against future portfolio returns and non-asset income,
as well as fee τHt of investing abroad.
   For Foreign investors the hedge term is the same, with NHt replaced by NF t .
Superscripts and subscripts H are placed with F and τHt is replaced with −τF t .
The average hedge term hA,int   = (hin      in
                                     Ht + hF t )/2 is much simpler as all terms other
than those involving the fees τHt and τF t drop out. The reason for this is that when
we add up the Home and Foreign hedge terms, the covariances in all cases can be
written as a covariance between the excess return and the average of variables
across countries. This covariance is zero as the Home and Foreign returns by
symmetry have the same covariance with variables that are an average across

                                                      40
countries. As shown in the Technical Appendix, we have
                                            0.5
                             hA,in
                              t    =                   τtD                         (62)
                                       D(1 − β(1 − p))

Analogously, for frequent traders
                                             0.5
                               hA,f
                                t   =                  τD                          (63)
                                        γ̃vart (ert+1 ) t




Appendix C. Estimate of θ

   It is useful to repeat (47) here:

                          w̃tD = θw̃t−1
                                    D
                                        + θ(2z̄ − 1)ert + aD
                                                           t                       (64)

We find that aD t is essentially iid for any reasonable value of θ. One could then set
θ from (64) by using that cov(aD        D
                                   t , wt−1 ) = 0. But in finite samples this covariance
is not zero. We therefore proceed as follows. We first write ert = η1 aD        1
                                                                          t + et , where
e1t is by construction orthogonal to aD                        1      D      2
                                         t . We then write et = η2 wt−1 + et , where et
                                                                                       2

                                       D
is by construction orthogonal to wt−1     . This implies

                                  w̃tD = ξ1 w̃t−1
                                              D
                                                  + et                             (65)

where ξ1 = θ + θ(2z̄ − 1)η2 and et = θ(2z̄ − 1)e2t + (1 + θ(2z̄ − 1)η1 )aD   t . By
                                   D
construction et is orthogonal to wt−1 . For a range of values of θ we then simulate
(65) 1000 times, using the standard deviations of e2t and aD   t , and compute the
                 D    D
average of cov(at , wt−1 ). We set θ such that this average covariance corresponds
to the actual covariance. This gives θ = 0.988, which we round to 0.99.




                                           41
References
 [1] Abel, Andrew B., Janice C. Eberly and Stavros Panageas (2007), “Optimal
     Inattention in the Stock Market,” American Economic Review Papers and
     Proceedings, May 2007, 244-249.

 [2] Abel, Andrew B. , Janice C. Eberly, and Stavros Panageas (2013), “Optimal
     Inattention to the Stock Market with Information Costs and Transactions
     Costs,” Econometrica 81, No. 4, 1455–1481.

 [3] Albuquerque, Rui, Gregory H. Bauer and Martin Schneider (2009), “Global
     Private Information in International Equity Markets,” Journal of Financial
     Economics 94(1), 18-46.

 [4] Albuquerque, Rui, Gregory H. Bauer and Martin Schneider (2007), “Inter-
     national Equity Flows and Returns: A Quantitative Equilibrium Approach,”
     Review of Economic Studies 74(1), 1-30.

 [5] Allen, Franklin and Douglas Gale (1994), “Limited Market Participation and
     Volatility of Asset Prices,” American Economic Review 84, 933-955.

 [6] Altonji, Joseph G. and Lewis M. Segal (1996), “Small-Sample Bias in GMM
     Estimation of Covariance Structures,” Journal of Business and Economic
     Statistics 14 (3), 353-366.

 [7] Ameriks, John and Stephen Zeldes (2004), “How do Household Portfolio
     Shares vary with Age,” working paper.

 [8] Bacchetta, Philippe and Eric van Wincoop (2010), “Infrequent Portfolio De-
     cisions: A Solution to the Forward Discount Puzzle,” American Economic
     Review 100, 837-869.

 [9] Bertaut, Carol C. and Ruth Judson (2014), “Estimating U.S. Cross-Border
     Securities Positions: New Data and New Methods,” Board of Governors of
     the Federal Reserve System (U.S.), International Finance Discussion Paper
     1113.

[10] Bertaut, Carol C. and Ralph W. Tryon (2007), “Monthly Estimates of U.S.
     Cross-Border Securities Positions, ” Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve
     System (U.S.), International Finance Discussion Paper 910.

                                        42
[11] Bilias, Yannis, Dimitris Georgarakos and Michael Haliassos (2010), “Port-
     folio Inertia and Stock Market Fluctuations” Journal of Money, Credit and
     Banking 42: 715-742.

[12] Blanchard, Olivier, Irineu de Carvalho Filho, and Gustavo Adler (2015), “Can
     Sterilized Foreign Exchange Intervention Stem Exchange Rate Pressures from
     the Global Financial Cycle?,”IMF Working Paper 2015-159.

[13] Bogousslavsky, Vincent (2016), “Infrequent Rebalancing, Return Autocorre-
     lation, and Seasonality,” Journal of Finance LXXI (6), 2967-3006.

[14] Bohn, Henning and Linda L. Tesar (1996), “U.S. Equity Investment in Foreign
     Markets: Portfolio Rebalancing or Return Chasing?” American Economic
     Review 86, 77-81.

[15] Brennan, Michael J. and H. Henry Cao (1997), “International Portfolio In-
     vestment Flows,” The Journal of Finance 52, 1851-1880.

[16] Brunnermeier, Markus and Stefan Nagel (2008), “Do Wealth Fluctuations
     Generate Time-Varying Risk-Aversion? Micro-Evidence on Individuals’ Asset
     Allocation,” American Economic Review 98, 713-736.

[17] Bruno, Valentina and Hyun Song Shin (2015), “Capital flows and the risk-
     taking channel of monetary policy,” Journal of Monetary Economics 71, 119-
     132.

[18] Calderon, Cesar, Norman Loayza and Luis Serven (2003), “Do capital flows
     respond to risk and return? ,” Policy, Research working paper series, no. WPS
     3059. Washington, DC: World Bank.

[19] Calvo, Guillermo, Leonardo Leiderman, and Carmen Reinhart (1996), “In-
     flows of Capital to Developing Countries in the 1990s,” Journal of Economic
     Perspectives 10(2),123-139.

[20] Campbell, John Y. (1993), “Intertemporal Asset Pricing without Consump-
     tion Data,” American Economic Review 83(3): 487-512.

[21] Viceira, Luis M., and John Y. Campbell (2002), “Strategic Asset Allocation:
     Portfolio Choice for Long-Term Investors,” Oxford University Press.


                                       43
[22] Chien, Yili, Harold Cole, and Hanno Lustig (2012), “Is the Volatility of the
     Market Price of Risk Due to Intermittent Portfolio Rebalancing,” American
     Economic Review 102, 2859-2896.

[23] Coeurdacier, Nicolas (2009), “Do Trade Costs in Goods Markets lead to Home
     Bias in Equities?,” Journal of International Economics 77, 86-100.

[24] Coeurdacier, Nicolas, Stephane Guibaud and Harjoat Bhamra (2014), “A
     Dynamic Equilibrium of Imperfectly Integrated Financial Markets,” Journal
     of Economic Theory 54, 490-542.

[25] Curcuru, Stephanie E., Tomas Dvorak, Francis E. Warnock (2008), “Cross-
     Border Return Differentials,” Quarterly Journal of Economics 123(4), 1495-
     1530.

[26] Curcuru, Stephanie E., Tomas Dvorak, Francis E. Warnock (2010), “Decom-
     posing the U.S. External Returns Differential,” Journal of International Eco-
     nomics 80(1), 22-32.

[27] Curcuru, Stephanie E., Charles P. Thomas, Francis E. Warnock and Jon
     Wongswan (2011), “US International Equity Investment and Past and
     Prospective Returns,” American Economic Review 101, 3440-3455.

[28] Devereux, Michael B. and Alan Sutherland (2010), “Country Portfolio Dy-
     namics,” Journal of Economic Dynamics and Control, 34, 1325-1342.

[29] Devereux, Michael B. and Alan Sutherland (2007), “Monetary Policy and
     Portfolio Choice in an Open Economy Macro Model,” Journal of the European
     Economic Association 5, 491-499.

[30] Didier, Tatiana and Alexandre Lowenkron (2012), “The Current Account as
     a Dynamic Portfolio Choice Problem,” Journal of The Japanese and Interna-
     tional Economies 26, 518-541.

[31] Duffie, Darrell (2010), “Asset Price Dynamics with Slow-Moving Capital,”
     Journal of Finance LXV, 1237-1267.

[32] Evans, Martin D.D. and Hnatkovska, Viktoria V. (2014), “International Capi-
     tal Flows, Returns and World Financial Integration,” Journal of International
     Economics 92(1), 14-33.

                                       44
[33] Froot, Kenneth A., Paul G.J. O’Connell, Mark S. Seasholes (2001), “The
     Portfolio Flows of International Investors,” Journal of Financial Economics
     59, 151-193.

[34] Gabaix, Xavier and David Laibson (2002), “The 6D Bias and the Equity
     Premium Puzzle,”in Ben Bernanke and Kenneth Rogoff, eds, NBER Macroe-
     conomics Annual, 16, 257-312.

[35] Gabaix, Xavier and Matteo Maggiori (2015), “International Liquidity and
     Exchange Rate Dynamics,” Quarterly Journal of Economics 130(3), 1369-
     1420.

[36] Gali, Jordi (2008), Monetary Policy, Inflation, and the Business Cycle: An In-
     troduction to the New Keynesian Framework and Its Applications, Princeton
     University Press.

[37] Gourio, Francois, Michael Siemer and Adrien Verdelhan (2014), “Uncertainty
     and International Capital Flows,” mimeo.

[38] Greenwood, Robin, Samuel G. Hanson, and Gordon Y. Liao (2015), “Price
     Dynamics in Partially Segmented Markets,” mimeo.

[39] Hendershott, Terrence, Sunny X. Li, Albert J. Mankfeld, Mark S. Seasholes
     (2013), “Asset Price Dynamics with Limited Attention,” mimeo.

[40] Hnatkovska, Viktoria V. (2010), “Home Bias and High Turnover: Dynamic
     Portfolio Choice with Incomplete Markets,” Journal of International Eco-
     nomics 80(1), 113-128.

[41] Hong, Harrison and Jeremy C. Stein (1999), “A United Theory of Underre-
     action, Momentum Trading and Overreaction in Asset Markets,” Journal of
     Finance 54(6), 2143-2184.

[42] Itskhoki, Oleg and Dmitry Mukhin (2017), “Exchange Rate Disconnect in
     General Equilibrium,” working paper, Princeton University.

[43] Jeanne, Olivier and Andrew K. Rose (2002), “Noise Trading and Exchange
     Rate Regimes,” Quarterly Journal of Economics 117, 537-569.



                                        45
[44] Kandel, Shmuel and Robert Stambaugh (1990), “Asset Returns and Intertem-
     poral Preferences,” Journal of Monetary Economics 1991, 27(1), 39-71.

[45] Kocherlakota, Narayana R. (1996), “The Equity Premium: It’s Still a Puzzle,”
     Journal of Economic Literature 34, 42-71.

[46] Kraay, Aart and Jaume Ventura (2000), “Current Accounts in Debtor Coun-
     tries and Creditor Countries,” Quarterly Journal of Economics 115 (4): 1137-
     1166.

[47] Krussel, Per and Anthony A. Smith (1997), “Income and Wealth Hetero-
     geneity, Portfolio Choice, and Equilibrium Asset Returns,” Macroeconomic
     Dynamics 1(2), 387-422.

[48] Lynch, Anthony W. (1996), “Decision Frequency and Synchronization Across
     Agents: Implications for Aggregate Consumption and Equity Return,” The
     Journal of Finance 51(4), 1479-1497.

[49] Mankiw, N. Gregory and Ricardo Reis (2002), “Sticky Information versus
     Sticky Prices: A Proposal to Replace the New Keynesian Phillips Curve,”
     Quarterly Journal of Economics 117, 1295-1328

[50] Martin, Philippe and Helene Rey (2004), “Financial Super-Markets: Size Mat-
     ters for Asset Trade,” Journal of International Economics 64, 335-361.

[51] McCafferty, Stephen and Robert Driskill (1980), “Problems of Existence and
     Uniqueness in Nonlinear Rational Expectations Models,” Econometrica 48,
     1313-1317

[52] Mehra, Rajnish (2003), “The Equity Premium: Why is it a Puzzle?,” Finan-
     cial Analyst Journal, January/February, 54-69.

[53] Mehra, Rajnish and Edward C. Prescott (1985), “The Equity Premium: A
     Puzzle,” Journal of Monetary Economics 15(2), 145-61.

[54] Mitchell, Olivia S., Gary R. Mottola, Stephen P. Utkus and Takeshi Yam-
     aguchi (2006), “The Inattentive Participant: Portfolio Trading Behavior in
     401(k) plans,” working paper.



                                       46
[55] Pagano, Marco (1989), “Endogenous Market Thinness and Stock Price
     Volatility,” Review of Economic Studies 56, 269-288.

[56] Tille, Cédric and Eric van Wincoop (2010), “International Capital Flows,”
     Journal of International Economics 80(2), 157-175.

[57] Tille, Cédric and Eric van Wincoop (2014), “International Capital Flows
     under Dispersed Private Information,” Journal of International Economics
     93(1), 31-49.

[58] Vayanos, Dimitri and Paul Woolley (2012), “An Institutional Theory of Mo-
     mentum and Reversal,” Review of Financial Studies 6, 1087-1145.

[59] Warnock, Francis E. and Veronica Cacdac Warnock (2009), “International
     Capital Flows and U.S. Interest Rates,” Journal of International Money and
     Finance 28, 903-919.




                                      47
