NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

INFANT MORTALITY AND THE REPEAL OF FEDERAL PROHIBITION
David S. Jacks
Krishna Pendakur
Hitoshi Shigeoka
Working Paper 23372
http://www.nber.org/papers/w23372

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
April 2017

We are grateful to Tony Chernis, Jarone Gittens, Ian Preston, and especially Mengchun Ouyang for
excellent research assistance. We also especially thank Marcella Alsan, Arthur Lewbel, Chris Meissner,
and Chris Muris for comments and Price Fishback for providing us with the infant mortality data. We
appreciate feedback from the 2017 Asian Meeting of the Econometric˛Society, the 2017 Economic
History Association Annual Meetings, the 2017 European Historical Economics Society Conference,
the 2017 NBER DAE Summer Institute as well as seminars at˛Boston College, Chinese University
of Hong Kong, Harvard, Montréal, New South Wales, Northwestern, Queen’s, Stanford, Sydney, UC
Berkeley, and UC Davis. Finally, we gratefully˛acknowledge research support from Simon Fraser
University and the Social Sciences and Humanities Research Council of Canada. Jacks: Simon Fraser
University and NBER (djacks@sfu.ca); Pendakur: Simon Fraser University (pendakur@sfu.ca); Shigeoka:
Simon Fraser University and NBER (hitoshi_shigeoka@sfu.ca).. The views expressed herein are those
of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peerreviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2017 by David S. Jacks, Krishna Pendakur, and Hitoshi Shigeoka. All rights reserved. Short sections
of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Infant Mortality and the Repeal of Federal Prohibition
David S. Jacks, Krishna Pendakur, and Hitoshi Shigeoka
NBER Working Paper No. 23372
April 2017, Revised July 2018
JEL No. H73,I18,J1,N3
ABSTRACT
Exploiting new data on county-level variation in alcohol prohibition from 1933 to 1939, we investigate
whether the repeal of federal prohibition increased infant mortality, both in counties that repealed and
in their neighboring counties. Using a binomial fixed-effects model, we find that repeal is associated
with a 4.0% increase in infant mortality rates in counties that chose wet status via local option elections
or state-wide legislation and with a 4.7% increase in neighboring dry counties, suggesting a role for
cross-border policy externalities. Cumulatively, these estimates imply 26,960 infant deaths that could
potentially be attributed to the repeal of federal prohibition.

David S. Jacks
Department of Economics
Simon Fraser University
8888 University Drive
Burnaby, BC V5A 1S6
CANADA
and NBER
dsjacks@gmail.com
Krishna Pendakur
Department of Economics
Simon Fraser University
8888 University Drive
Burnaby, BC V5A 1S6
Canada
pendakur@sfu.ca

Hitoshi Shigeoka
Department of Economics
Simon Fraser University
8888 University Drive, WMC 4653
Barnaby, BC V5A 1S6
CANADA
and NBER
hitoshi_shigeoka@sfu.ca

1. Introduction
As is very well known, the United States from 1920 to 1933 embarked on one of the most
ambitious policy interventions in the history of the modern nation state. Federal prohibition laws
on the production, sale, and transportation of alcohol induced massive changes in the economic
and social fabric of the then 48 states. And while contemporary prohibition movements gained
traction across the world, nowhere were the impulses, proclivities, and traditions of such a large
population subdued for so long. Naturally, given the scale of this intervention, prohibition has
alternately been described as America’s “noblest experiment” and its most ominous foray into
social engineering.
Understanding the effects of federal prohibition is important with respect to a very
sizeable historical literature on this topic (see Kyvig, 2000 and Okrent, 2010 among many
others). And while this literature has advanced our understanding of the rise and fall of the
prohibition movement as the confluence of specific political and social forces, there is
surprisingly little research in assessing the economic and social outcomes of federal prohibition
in the United States. In large part, this reflects a misunderstanding of the nature of prohibition. It
was not in fact a monolithic policy change with national restrictions on alcohol “turning off”
precisely in 1933. Instead, there was ample geographic and temporal heterogeneity in restrictions
on alcohol after federal prohibition due to the decentralized nature of American government and
the political concessions necessary to bring about repeal. In particular, the chief compromise for
achieving the repeal of federal prohibition was in allowing for local option elections whereby
local preferences determine whether a county, municipality, or even ward allows the sale of
alcohol (Kyvig, 2000).
Exploiting a newly constructed dataset on county- and year-level variation in prohibition
status, this paper asks two questions: what were the effects of the repeal of federal prohibition—
and thereby, potential alcohol consumption—on infant mortality? And were there any significant
externalities from the individual policy choices of counties and states on their neighbors? Our
focus on infant mortality stems from the fact that it is not only a key determinant of life
expectancy but also a rough indicator of population health. What is more, infant mortality is an
acute, rather than a chronic, outcome of alcohol consumption, making identification a slightly
easier, but still challenging task. There is a substantial literature in understanding the drivers of
2

infant mortality in a historical context (cf. Alsan and Goldin, 2015; Clay, Lewis, and Severnini,
2016; Cutler and Miller, 2005; Fishback, Haines, and Kantor, 2001, 2007; Moehling and
Thomasson, 2014). However, to our knowledge, this is the only study that considers the effects
of the repeal of federal prohibition on infant mortality or—for that matter—any other outcome
variable.
An important methodological contribution of the paper comes in explicitly recognizing
the possibility of policy externalities across county borders. Thus, after repeal of federal
prohibition, it is not only an individual county’s choice of prohibition status which matters but
also the prohibition status of its neighbors. In this manner, we distinguish among counties which
allow for the sale of alcohol within their borders (“wet” counties), counties which chose to
continue with alcohol prohibition and found themselves with neighbors which do the same
(“bone dry” counties), and—critically—counties which chose to continue with alcohol
prohibition but find themselves with a wet neighbor (“dryish” counties).
A further methodological contribution is to take the count nature of the data seriously in
our empirical model, potentially improving on existing methods (see, e.g., Cameron and Trivedi
2013a, 2013b). Nearly all of the literature in economics on the causes of infant death uses OLS
to explain variation in infant mortality rates with variation in covariates (c.f., Anand and
Bärnighausen, 2004; Baird, Friedman, and Schady, 2011). However, if the numbers of births are
low, the observed infant mortality rates become discrete. For example, with ten births, only
infant mortality rates of [0.0, 0.1, 0.2,…., 1.0] can be observed. Generally, for low numbers of
births, the distribution of these rates is bounded, discrete, and skewed and depends on the
number of births. To deal with all this, we implement a binomial fixed-effect model. It has at
least three advantages over the standard practice of OLS estimation: it models the discreteness of
deaths given births; it can accommodate the observation of zero deaths in a county-year but
cannot predict negative deaths; and it automatically accounts for heteroskedasticity induced by
variation in the number of births across county-years.
For our baseline results, we follow the spirit of the empirical approach laid out in a recent
paper by Dube, Lester, and Reich (2010). In particular, we consider triads of counties, defined as
sets of three nearby counties wherein one county is bone dry, one county becomes dryish, and
one county is wet. These transitions are observed within each triad in our panel of data from
3

1933 to 1939. Each triad can be thought of as providing an estimate of the treatment effects of
dryish and wet status wherein only a nearby county is used as a control. In comparison with an
estimation strategy using all US counties, our baseline results use only a subset of counties that
are geographically close to a dryish county, so that there is a priori less unobserved
heterogeneity. Further, because variation within each triad identifies our treatment effects, we
allow for the possibility that each triad follows a different time trend rather than having a
common nation-wide time trend. That is, only within-triad variation over time is used to identify
treatment effects.
Using this approach, we find that counties which became wet via local option elections or
via state-wide legislation saw baseline infant mortality increase by 4.0%, or 2.40 additional
infant deaths per 1000 live births in 1934. Allowing for potential policy externalities from
neighboring counties turns out to be important as well: we find that dryish status raised baseline
infant mortality by 4.7%, or 2.82 additional infant deaths per 1000 live births in 1934.1 Putting
these estimates into context, from 1934 to 1939, the nation-wide infant mortality rate for the US
dropped from 60.0 per thousand live births to 50.2 per thousand in 1939, or by 16.33%. Thus, the
repeal of federal prohibition can be thought of as having reversed the generalized decline in
infant mortality rates in this period by 24.50 to 28.78% for the treated counties in our sample.2
Put differently, when we apply these estimates to all the counties in the US from 1934 to 1939, a
back-of-the-envelope calculation suggests an excess of 26,960 infant deaths that could
potentially be attributed to the repeal of federal prohibition.3
Our paper is broadly related to a literature which focuses on assessing the effects of statelevel measures prior to federal prohibition on variables such as adult heights and weights (Evans
et al., 2016), the incidence of cirrhosis (Dills and Miron, 2004), and homicide rates (Bodenhorn,
2016). However, we are alone in studying the effects of federal prohibition’s repeal and do so in
the context of county- as opposed to state-level variation in prohibition laws. Here, we argue that
1

We note that while both estimates are statistically different from zero at the conventional level, they are not
statistically distinguishable from one other.
2
These figures are simply calculated as the ratio of the 4.0 to 4.7% increase in infant mortality rates for all
treated counties to the 16.33% decline in the infant mortality rate for the entire US over the same period.
3
There were 1,113,635 live births in dryish counties from 1934 to 1939 which translates into an excess of
3,140 infant deaths in the same period. Also, there were 9,925,144 live births in wet counties from 1934 to
1939 which translates into an excess of 23,820 infant deaths in the same period. Cumulatively, the number of
infant deaths which could potentially be attributed to the repeal of federal prohibition is 26,960.

4

a priori county-level information is likely more meaningful, and below, we also consider how
such variation may result from variation in county-level alcohol consumption preferences that
are themselves causal drivers of infant mortality. Likewise, our paper is related to recent work by
García-Jimeno (2016) which considers the effects of federal prohibition on city-level crime
during the period from 1920 to 1933. There, local enforcement of federal prohibition laws not
only generates extra-judicial homicides and other forms of crime but also responds endogenously
to perceptions of its efficacy in the immediate past. Thus, our paper shares at least one element
with his work, namely an appreciation of the potential divergence between de facto and de jure
prohibition status, both during and after federal prohibition.
Apart from historical interest, understanding the effects of federal prohibition is
important with respect to contemporary policy issues related to alcohol and the control of illicit
substances. First, this particular historical setting has unique advantages in estimating the effect
of restrictions on alcohol on infant mortality. The US Surgeon General’s initial warning about
the risks associated with alcohol consumption during pregnancy was only issued in 1981. That is,
the general public at the time had little knowledge of the potential negative effects of alcohol
consumption during pregnancy on child development. Thus, our estimates are arguably not
confounded by differences in avoidance behaviors—both avoiding conception and avoiding
drinking—by mothers of different socioeconomic status (Nilsson, 2017).
Second, recent studies on the effects of alcohol restrictions have predominately focused
on relatively small differences in variables such as the minimum drinking age or the availability
of beer as opposed to spirits (Barreca and Page, 2015; Carpenter and Dobkin, 2009; Nilsson,
2017). However, little is known about the effects of more stark policy changes where the relative
price of alcohol is more dramatically altered. We note that the scope for policy interventions is
still large: although information about the risks associated with alcohol consumption during
pregnancy is now widely understood in the US, over 50% of women of childbearing age drink
while over 10% of women continue to drink during pregnancy (Tan et al., 2015).
Finally, our paper speaks to a related literature in public economics which considers
differential taxation across state borders in the presence of competition in local markets and its
effects on firm pass-through and, thereby, consumer prices for items like alcohol and cigarettes
(cf. Doyle and Samphantharak, 2008; Harding, Leibtag, and Lovenheim, 2012; Lovenheim,
5

2008). This is particularly true if we conceive of prohibition and its repeal as having vitally
affected the price—but not necessarily the availability—of alcohol. However, to our knowledge,
few papers in this literature have addressed the issue of policy externalities, or how one
location’s policy choice affects outcomes in another, which this paper so strongly emphasizes.
Lovenheim and Slemrod (2010) is a notable exception in that it finds that one state’s reduction in
the minimum legal drinking age could lead to a substantial increase in teenage traffic fatalities in
neighboring states. Likewise, Johansson, Pekkarinen, and Verho (2014) find higher rates of
workplace absenteeism in Sweden after a cut in Finnish alcohol taxes. What differentiates our
work in this respect is the focus on an entire country (the United States) at the lowest level of
geographic aggregation possible (counties) for a more dramatic change in alcohol policy (the
repeal of federal prohibition).
Thus, this paper provides at least one valuable history lesson for the present-day debate
on legalization of illicit substances, in particular, the recent spate of state-level legislation related
to marijuana (cf. Dills, Gofford, and Miron, 2017; Hansen, Miller, and Weber, 2018; Hao and
Cowen, 2017). A key insight of our paper is that infant mortality in this period was not only
driven by any individual county’s choice of prohibition status but also by what its neighbors’
choice of prohibition status was. That is, a county or state’s choice to go wet and allow for the
sale of alcohol in its borders strongly affected infant mortality in neighboring counties which
chose to remain dry. It is telling that in every historical discussion on the relative merits and
demerits of county-level repeal known to us, none make reference to the possibility of one
county’s choice affecting another. Likewise, the debate on the relative merits and demerits of
state-level legalization of marijuana has failed to adequately address the possibility of crossjurisdictional externalities such as the one documented in this paper.
The rest of the paper proceeds as follows. Section 2 lays out the historical context and the
relationship between infant mortality and the repeal of federal prohibition. It also provides a
simple framework for thinking about local alcohol consumption, counties’ choice of whether or
not to allow for alcohol sales, and the effects of doing so. Section 3 introduces the underlying
data while Section 4 introduces our empirical model. Section 5 presents our results on infant
mortality for a sample of triads of nearby counties. Section 6 concludes by considering caveats to
our study and avenues for future research.
6

2. Context
In this section, we lay out the historical context surrounding the rise and fall of federal
prohibition, highlighting those institutional features of its repeal which are most bearing for our
analysis. Then, we lay out a simple framework for how preferences for alcohol consumption at
the local level likely determine both prohibition status and the size of the related treatment
effects.
2.1 Historical background
On a rising tide of an anti-alcohol movement led by rural Protestants and urban
progressives, the US Senate proposed a constitutional amendment to affect a federal prohibition
on alcohol on December 18, 1917. With the approval of 36 states by January 16, 1919, the 18th
amendment was, thereby, ratified with the country becoming dry on January 17, 1920. This
entailed a near-complete prohibition on the production, sale, and transportation of alcohol. But
by no means did this entail the complete unavailability of alcohol as the individual consumption
and possession of alcohol was not explicitly prohibited, allowing for wide differences in
enforcement and legislation along these lines at the city, county, and state level. Rather,
prohibition is best thought as having substantially increased the price of alcohol (Cook, 2007).
Surprisingly large effects on quantities were forthcoming. In 1934, the first year of
repeal, apparent per capita alcohol consumption was 37% of its pre-prohibition peak, an effect
which persisted until 1973 (LaVallee and Yi, 2011). However, initial wide-spread support for
federal prohibition was eroded throughout the 1920s in the wake of concerns over the new reach
of the federal government, doubts over prohibition’s efficacy, and perceptions of rising criminal
activity (Okrent, 2010).
Turning to its demise, the proverbial nail in the coffin for federal prohibition arose from
the fiscal straits of the Great Depression. Prior to 1920, 15% of government revenues came from
alcohol with the federal government alone collecting nearly $500 million in 1919, or nearly $7
billion in 2015 dollars (Blocker, 2006). Thus, starved of other sources of funding, various levels
of government increasingly viewed the sale of alcohol as a potential source of revenue. The
opening salvo in repealing federal prohibition came on March 22, 1933, when Franklin
Roosevelt amended the Volstead Act (or National Prohibition Act), allowing for the resumption
7

of low-alcohol beer consumption and production (Okrent, 2010). From there, popular and
political support for prohibition quickly eroded, and the 18th Amendment was repealed on
December 5, 1933, with ratification of the 21st Amendment to the US Constitution.
However, the process of repeal was decidedly—and deliberately—not uniform. The chief
compromise for achieving ratification of the 21st Amendment was in allowing for local option
elections to determine liquor laws deemed appropriate for local conditions (Kyvig, 2000). These
elections give the electorate the right to vote on liquor control by referendum. That is, local
preferences determine whether a county or municipality prohibits the sale of alcohol. At the
same time, many states opted out from local option elections entirely while others allowed for
referenda to be held at the state-, county-, city-, or even ward-level. The transition from
prohibition was, in many instances, very rapid: by 1935, 2,120 counties became wet in some
form while 991 counties stayed dry (Strumpf and Oberholzer-Gee, 2002).4
With respect to infant mortality, we draw on a large body of work which explores its
causes in a historical context (cf. Alsan and Goldin, 2015; Clay, Lewis, and Severnini, 2016;
Cutler and Miller, 2005; Fishback, Haines, and Kantor, 2001, 2007; Moehling and Thomasson,
2014). However, this work has little to say about the mechanisms by which the repeal of federal
prohibition could have influenced infant mortality. Instead, we turn to a substantial medical
literature linking maternal alcohol consumption to both compromised infant immune systems
and reduced birth weight—two key determinants of subsequent infant death (cf. Mills et al.,
1984; and Olegård et al., 1979; Strandberg-Larsen et al., 2009). Unfortunately, we lack any
information of maternal alcohol consumption at the individual or aggregate level for this period.5
Having no other more plausible prior, our proposed causal mechanism for this paper runs from
the repeal of federal prohibition to potential maternal alcohol consumption and from there to
infant mortality.

4

More precisely, of the 2,120 counties that became wet in some form, 341 counties were of mixed status—that
is, a wet county with at least one dry municipality or vice-versa. In what follows, we treat mixed counties as
equivalent to wet counties as our main results are unchanged when making this distinction (results available
upon request) and are omitted here for expositional purposes.
5
To our knowledge, other proxies for alcohol consumption like the number of retail outlets for alcohol, retail
sales of alcohol, or tax revenues from alcohol sales are not systematically available at the county level.
Likewise, average birth weight and the general health of newborns was not recorded for this period.

8

Here, we note a few things. First, although women were long among the most vocal
proponents of prohibition, we also know that federal prohibition itself lead to more wide-spread
alcohol consumption on the part of females as prohibition served to move the place of alcohol
consumption from heavily male-dominated saloons to more evenly mixed clubs, homes, and
speakeasies (Rose, 1996). This has led some to characterize federal prohibition as having
domesticized and, thereby, feminized drinking over the period from 1910 to 1930 (Murdock,
1998). Second, another unintended consequence of federal prohibition was a dramatic change
from the consumption of beer toward potentially more harmful spirits as beer with a low alcoholto-volume ratio was also a low value-to-volume product (Warburton, 1932). Third, our argument
does not hinge on potential maternal alcohol consumption for all women, rather only on potential
maternal alcohol consumption for some women as it is generally thought that a small number of
problem drinkers drive the contemporary results linking infant mortality to maternal alcohol
consumption (Strandberg-Larsen et al., 2009). Finally, we readily acknowledge that other forces
may have been at work such as potential paternal alcohol consumption and its effects on
domestic violence, postpartum household budgets, and/or prenatal investment. We necessarily
leave this task for future work, citing a lack of relevant data at the present.
2.2 A simple framework for analysis
Here, we provide a simple framework demonstrating how the distribution of the
willingness-to-pay (WTP) for alcohol within a county might simultaneously determine whether
or not a county goes wet and the treatment effect of that choice (please refer to Appendix A for
more detail).
We motivate the framework as follows. For individuals, assume that consuming alcohol
(at a potentially dangerous level) is a binary decision. They do so if their WTP for alcohol
exceeds the prevailing price of alcohol. We assume that each county can be characterized by its
distribution of individual WTP for alcohol and that this distribution differs by county. To
simplify, we also assume that the distribution of WTP is symmetric and unimodal so that the
median voter is at the top (mode) of the density function. One such distribution, shown in Figure
1a, depicts the distribution of WTP in a county where people generally have a high WTP. Under
federal prohibition, alcohol sales are illegal, making it difficult to purchase and, thereby,
9

expensive.6 The effective price of purchasing and consuming alcohol includes the wedges
associated with this difficulty and illegality and is denoted in Figure 1a by the line labeled “dry
price”. The area to the right of the dry price gives the fraction of the population of the county that
consumes alcohol when the county’s de jure status is dry. For this county, where generally
people have a high WTP, a large fraction of people consume alcohol even though it is prohibited.
The price of purchasing and consuming alcohol is lower when a county becomes wet as
the sale of alcohol may be done more easily and openly. The “wet price” is shown by the vertical
line to the left of the dry price. The treatment effect of this price change is to switch people
whose WTP lies between the wet price and the dry price from non-consumers into consumers of
alcohol. In Figure 1a, the treatment effect of a county changing its prohibition status—that is, the
average treatment effect on the treated (ATT) of becoming wet—is equal to the shaded area
under the curve between the wet and dry prices. Thus, we see that for this county where the WTP
is generally high, the magnitude of the treatment effect is small because many people were
already consuming alcohol prior to repeal.
Consider whether or not this county will choose to become wet. Any individual whose
WTP exceeds the wet price will gain from the reduction in the cost of alcohol from the dry to
wet price. The WTP distribution shown in Figure 1a has the feature that its median (located at
the top of the curve) is to the right of the wet price, so the majority of people would prefer that
their county become wet. In a strict majority-rule setting, this county would presumably choose
wet status (or, more generally, it would have a higher probability of choosing wet status).
Likewise, if we consider a county where the distribution of WTP was shifted to the right, so that
people liked alcohol even more, all these features would be amplified. The level of alcohol
consumption under prohibition would be higher, the treatment effect of becoming wet would be
smaller, and the probability of becoming wet would be higher. Thus, we have that the
distribution of WTP determines both the probability of treatment and the treatment effect.
If WTP distributions—that is, preferences—vary across counties but are fixed over
relatively short periods of time (as in our sample), then the inclusion of county fixed-effects
would account for all the drivers of both the probability of treatment and the treatment effect.

6

Again, Cook (2007) among others is clear that prohibition never entailed a lack of availability of alcohol in
affected counties, rather it is best thought of as having raised the price of alcohol by roughly a factor of five.

10

Therefore, the inclusion of county fixed effects would provide us with “selection-onobservables” (or, in other words, exogeneity of treatment). Furthermore, since the distribution of
WTP differs across counties, we would have heterogeneous treatment effects. Taken together,
this implies that fixed-effect models could obtain unbiased estimates of the average treatment
effect on the treated for those counties choosing wet status.
Now, consider a county where generally people have a low WTP as shown in Figure 1b.
In this county, only a small fraction of the density lies to the right of the dry price, so that only a
small fraction of people chooses to consume alcohol under federal prohibition. The treatment
effect of becoming wet, given by the region under the curve between the wet and dry prices, is
quite large. However, unlike the county shown in Figure 1a, the median individual in this county
has a WTP lower than the wet price. That is, the majority of people in this county have nothing
to gain from their county becoming wet as they are non-consumers, regardless of their county’s
de jure prohibition status. Therefore, in a strict majoritarian setting, this county would
presumably choose to retain dry status (or, more generally, it would have a lower probability of
becoming wet than the county depicted in Figure 1a).
Finally, consider a county that chooses to stay dry but which has a wet neighbor. Thus, it
could face a change in the price of alcohol even though it did not choose to become wet itself,
but instead, became dryish due to the choice of its neighbor. As in wet counties, the “dryish
price” in Figure 1b is less than the dry price because alcohol may now be legally purchased in
the neighboring county. But there are two frictions that make the dryish price strictly larger than
the wet price: (1) the driving distance (or other transportation cost) to the neighboring county
line reduces the effective magnitude of the price drop; and (2) the prospect of enforcement of
local prohibition within the county likely also reduces the effective magnitude of the price drop.
In Figure 1b, the treatment effect of staying dry but having a neighbor which became
wet—that is, the average treatment effect on the treated (ATT) of becoming dryish—is equal to
the shaded area under the curve between the dryish and dry prices. Here, the treatment is a
smaller price change than going all the way to the wet price.7 Again, with the inclusion of county
fixed effects in our empirical model, we should be able to obtain unbiased estimates of the ATT
7

This indicates that the dryish treatment is a smaller treatment than the treatment that would obtain if a county
that wished to stay dry was forced to go wet. In other words, our dryish estimate then serves as a conservative
estimate of the hypothetical treatment of becoming wet in a county that would otherwise choose to stay dry.

11

of the dryish treatment. Finally, by comparing the size of the shaded areas between Figure 1a and
Figure 1b, we see that the ATT for becoming wet could plausibly be smaller than the ATT for
becoming dryish.
There are several lessons that we draw from this framework that will be important for
understanding our empirical results: (1) the distribution of WTP varies across counties and
determines whether or not a county goes wet as well as the treatment effect of that choice—that
is, we will have heterogeneous treatment effects; (2) if the WTP distributions—or in other words,
the underlying preferences of individuals—within counties are invariant over relatively short
periods of time (as in our sample), then the inclusion of county fixed effects in the empirical
model is sufficient to obtain unbiased estimates of the ATT of becoming dryish or wet;8 and (3)
the ATT for becoming wet could plausibly be smaller than the ATT for becoming dryish.
3. Data
Our data are drawn from three main sources: annual, county-level infant deaths and live
births have been extracted from the Vital Statistics of the United States; annual, indicators of
county-level prohibition status have been constructed from Strumpf and Oberholzer (2002) and
contemporary sources; and other county-level covariates are available from the US Census.
3.1 Infant mortality
Annual counts of infant deaths and live births from 1933 to 1939 for the 3,000+ counties
of the continental United States are available from Fishback et al. (2011). The choice of a start
date in 1933 is predicated by the fact that mortality statistics for Texas, with its 254 counties,
only begins in this year. The choice of an end date in 1939 is predicated by the fact that the vast
majority of changes in prohibition status had occurred by 1938. We also wish to avoid any
confounding effects of the mobilization effort for World War II. We do, however, extend the
sample in robustness exercises below. Figure 2 depicts infant mortality rates by prohibition status
for every year and for all US counties from 1934 to 1939, weighted by the number of births in a

8

In Section 4 below, we more fully consider the potential bias induced by omitted variables that are correlated
with both treatment and infant mortality as well as the means at our disposal to deal with this issue.

12

county. Over this period, nation-wide infant mortality rate dropped from 60.0 per thousand live
births in 1934 to 50.2 per thousand in 1939.
3.2 County-level prohibition status
Ideally, we would like county-level information on alcohol consumption, particularly for
pregnant women or, at least, women of child-bearing age. Of course, this type of data is not
available before, especially during, or even after prohibition. Another possibility would be to rely
on other legal restrictions on alcohol, yet liquor laws in the United States appear in stunningly
diverse forms: among other things, individual counties and states continue to limit the maximum
alcohol content of specific types of beverages sold within their borders, specify whether alcohol
can be sold for off- or on-premise consumption for specific types of establishments, and/or place
restrictions on the day and time of alcohol sales (so-called “blue laws”).
Instead, we rely on the sharpest distinction in prohibition status possible: dry versus wet.
That is, we seek to compare outcomes for those counties for which no sales of alcohol are
permitted (dry) to those for which at least some sales are permitted (wet). Again, we also make
the critical distinction in between those counties which are dry and have no wet neighbors (bone
dry) versus those counties which are dry and have at least one wet neighbor (dryish). Thereby,
we decompose all dry counties into either bone dry or dryish counties, respectively.
To achieve this goal, we build on previous data collection efforts. Our starting point is in
reconstructing the prohibition status of counties in 1935 and 1940, depicted in the maps of
Strumpf and Oberholzer (2002). We then supplement these with new sources to fill in the gaps
(Culver and Thomas, 1940; The Distilled Spirits Council, 1935, 1941; Harrison, 1938; Thomas
and Culver, 1940). For a small number of counties, it was required to use LexisNexis to establish
the year in which there was a change in their prohibition status. Thus, we make a significant
contribution with respect to data by reconstructing the prohibition status of all continental US
counties for the critical post-repeal period from 1934 to 1939.9
Figure 3 depicts the proportion of all US counties by prohibition status for the longer
period from 1930 to 1942. We assume all counties are bone dry from 1930 to 1933 (in our results

9

In a larger project on the contemporaneous and long-run effects of prohibition, we have reconstructed the
status of all continental US counties from 1885 to 1984.

13

below, we partially relax this assumption by excluding those counties on the Canadian or
Mexican border in 1933). By 1939, this proportion had dropped from 100% to slightly below
15%. Likewise, we observe the proportion of wet counties rising from 0% in 1933 to slightly
above 70% in 1939 and the proportion of dryish counties rising from 0% to slightly above 15%
in 1939. Thereafter, there is very little aggregate change in prohibition status throughout the
1940s. Given that the vast majority of changes in prohibition status occurred by 1938, we
estimate our empirical model for the period from 1933 to 1939 as it represents the minimal
dataset for identifying the effects of repeal. That is, adding years prior to 1933 and after 1939
adds very little by way of variation in our independent variable of interest, namely individual
counties’ prohibition status. This relatively short panel is also beneficial in that we believe that
preferences for alcohol are unlikely to have changed very much over such a short period of time
as discussed in Section 2.2 above.
Figure 4 depicts the spatial distribution of prohibition status by year for all US counties
from 1933 to 1939. There, it is clear that by 1935 the remaining hold-out states for prohibition
were along the central axis of the US (Kansas, North Dakota, and Oklahoma) along with large
parts of the Southeast (Alabama, Georgia, Mississippi, and Tennessee). This constellation
changed considerably by 1937 with Alabama and North Dakota jettisoning state-wide
prohibitions and allowing for local option. This along with the steady change in prohibition
status at the county level for Georgia, Tennessee, and Texas in later years makes for ample
variation.
3.3 Additional covariates
In determining a valid specification relating infant mortality rates to changes in
prohibition status, Figure 2 suggests a potentially large role for time-invariant county
characteristics. Thus, we include county fixed effects in all of our specifications. There is also a
large historical literature delineating variables that shaped support for prohibition and which may
be useful as further controls in explaining variation in infant mortality rates. This literature points
to strong preferences for dry status before and during the period of repeal among Baptists and
Methodists, the native-born, rural inhabitants, and women (Okrent, 2010). To this list, we also
include information at the county level on the proportion of blacks, the number of the number of
14

hospital beds and medical institutions per 1000 childbearing age women, per capita New Deal
spending, per capita retail sales as a proxy for income, and the unemployment rate as previous
research has indicated that these variables influenced infant mortality in this period (Fishback,
Haines, and Kantor, 2001, 2007).10 Table 1 provides the definition and sources of our control
variables.
3.4. Sample selection
In an influential paper, Dube, Lester, and Reich (2010, hereafter DLR) propose the use of
county-pairs that straddle state borders to assess the effects of changes in state-level minimum
wage laws in the United States. As in much of the earlier literature, their approach exploits
variation in the level of minimum wages induced by differential state legislation. However, in
comparison with a standard difference-in-difference approach relying on regressions with county
and time fixed effects, their approach offers two innovations. First, they use only neighboring
counties as controls, arguing that these neighbor counties provide a better control than the entire
collection of untreated counties. Second, because each county-pair provides identifying variation
for the treatment effect, they allow for the possibility that each county-pair follows a different
time trend rather than having one nation-wide time trend. This means that, in contrast to a
national level regression with time and county fixed effects, they use only within county-pair
variation to identify treatment effects.
For our baseline analysis, we follow the spirit of the DLR approach by using triads of
geographically proximate counties, which are constructed in the following way. We first identify
the 715 ever-dryish counties that became dryish sometime from 1934 to 1939. We retain only the
698 ever-dryish counties that progressed “monotonically” from bone dry to dryish or from bone
dry to dryish to wet from 1933 to 1939. This excludes counties that alternate between bone dry
and dryish status, for example. These ever-dryish counties form the center of each triad.
For each of these 698 ever-dryish counties, we consider the year in which that county
became dryish and find the wet county whose county seat is nearest to that of the ever-dryish
county. This county is the wet partner in the triad. For the dry partner in the triad, we again
10

We use these variables strictly as controls. They would not make good instruments for IV regression
analysis because they all plausibly have direct effects on infant mortality and so would not satisfy the
exclusion restriction.

15

consider the year in which the ever-dryish county became dryish and find the bone dry county
whose county seat is nearest to that of the ever-dryish county.11 Of the 698 triads so constructed,
we retain the 683 triads where both the dry partner and the wet partner progress
“monotonically”. That is, the wet partner stays wet and the dry partner stays bone dry or goes
from bone dry to dryish, from bone dry to dryish to wet, or from bone dry to wet during 1933 to
1939. This excludes triads with counties that alternate between bone dry and wet status, for
example.
To summarize, each triad is comprised of three nearby counties: one county that is treated
with dryish status in the center of the triad (ever-dryish); one nearby county that is treated with
wet status (wet partner); and one nearby bone dry county that acts as the control county (dry
partner). Our data set is constructed by observing the three members of each triad from 1933 to
1939, resulting in 14,343 observations. These triads have time-invariant members, but their
members may be overlapping. That is, one county may be a member of two or more triads. For
any county that shows up in k triads, we would see that county’s data replicated k times. As in
DLR, we achieve valid inference—that is, correct standard errors—in the presence of repeated
observations of county-year data by clustering at the county level (see Dube, Lester, and Reich,
2010 and Cameron and Miller, 2015).
An advantage of only using triads comprised of geographically proximate counties is that
such counties make good controls: they are likely to be similar in both their observed and
unobserved characteristics. In comparison to using the full sample of all US counties, there is
much less heterogeneity—both observed and unobserved—when we focus only on triads of
nearby counties. This intuition is borne out in an examination of the pre-trends in our triads as
discussed below. A second advantage of this approach is that we can allow for triad-specific
time-trends in the analysis. Here, only variation within triads is used to identify the treatment
effects. The basic idea is that we can use multiple observations of treated counties to aggregate

11

We note that in 32 cases the wet partner is not an adjacent county. Although each ever-dryish county by
definition has a wet neighboring county in their first dryish year, a non-neighboring wet county may actually
have a closer county seat. Likewise, in 203 cases the dry partner is not an adjacent county. However, while the
estimates become less precise due to the smaller sample size, our results are robust to excluding these triads
from the sample (results available upon request).

16

treatment effects, imposing a common trend assumption within triads but not imposing a
common trend assumption across triads.12
However, a disadvantage of only using triads is that we lose power in comparison to an
approach that uses data from all US counties as we lose all counties that are not proximate to an
ever-dryish county. Indeed, our 683 triads cover only 1,301 counties of the 3,043 counties in the
US at that time. Most of our reported estimates will be based on models following the approach
wherein we use data on this subset of US counties and include county fixed-effects and triadyear fixed-effects. However, in Appendix C, we pursue a more traditional approach by
expanding our analysis to include all US counties and incorporate only county and year fixedeffects for completeness. There, we find qualitatively similar results.
Our econometric strategy is analogous to difference-in-difference estimation. The key
assumption in difference-in-difference estimation is a common-trends assumption that treated
counties would have followed the same time trend as untreated counties had they not been
treated. Under this assumption, the difference in the rates of change between treated and
untreated counties equals the true treatment effect. One way to gauge the validity of this
assumption is to compare the time trend before any treatments occur (that is, the “pre-trend”) for
counties that are eventually treated with the pre-trend of counties that are never treated.
Figure 5a tracks infant mortality rates (weighted by the number of births in a county) for
the period from 1928 to 1933 for our sample of triads of nearby counties. Here, we use only the
counties where we observe vital statistics back to 1928, which leaves out, for example, Texas.
We consider pre-trends back only to 1928 because the number of states reporting vital statistics
drops drastically before that. We employ the three non-exclusive categories of ever-dryish, dry
partner, and wet partner. Thus, the composition of counties is held constant in Figure 5a.
A general decline in infant mortality rates is evident throughout this period for all three
county types, and the general ordering of counties by type is preserved when considering all
years between 1928 and 1933: infant mortality rates are highest for wet partner and lowest for
dry partner with dryish counties in between. In between these years, dry partner, ever dryish,
and wet partner exhibit highly similar pre-trends.
12

As in DLR, we do not impose the restriction that group of triads (in their case, county-pairs) with
overlapping members have identical time-trends across triads (county-pairs). Instead, the model allows these
time trends to be the same, but does not impose it.

17

Another means of validating our approach of using triads of nearby counties comes in
considering the pre-trends for all US counties. Figure 5b tracks infant mortality rates (weighted
by the number of births in a county) for the period from 1928 to 1933 as before but with one
requisite adjustment to the definition of groups. Bone dry are dry counties which are surrounded
by other dry counties throughout this period. Ever dryish are the counties which became dryish at
any time from 1933 to 1939. Wet are the counties which allow for alcohol sales within their
borders. It is clear that, unlike in Figure 5a, the common trend assumption does not seem to hold
for all US counties.
Table 2 reports sample means for our sample of triads of nearby counties and for three
non-exclusive groups: ever-dryish counties, their dry partners, and their wet partners (the same
classification scheme as in Figure 5a). Specifically, we report the mean of the infant mortality
rate in 1933 (both in levels and logs) along with the means of our proposed county-level control
variables in or around 1933, all weighted by the number of births. Most of these are timeinvariant, and their values from around 1930 are reported except for retail sales (a proxy for
income), the number of medical institutions per capita, and the number of hospital beds per
capita, which are available for each county-year. While it is reassuring that the common-trends
assumption seems to hold for our sample of triads of nearby counties, we nonetheless include
interactions of all county-level, time-invariant control variables in Table 2 with linear time trends
in all specifications as in Acemoglu, Autor, and Lyle (2004) and Hoynes and Schanzenbach
(2010) to control for potential differences in trends across counties which may be correlated with
counties’ prohibition status.
4. Econometric model
The data generating process (DGP) we have in mind is one where the alcohol prohibition
status (the “treatment”) influences the probability of infant death for each birth (the “response”).
Thus, each birth is a Bernoulli random variable whose probability of death depends on the
treatment and other covariates. However, we do not observe each birth individually. Instead, we
observe the sum of births and the sum of deaths in each county-year. The econometric model

18

corresponding to this DGP and data environment is the binomial model.13 We, therefore,
estimate the effect of treatment on the probability of infant death via maximum likelihood
estimation of the binomial model.
To our knowledge, ours is the first paper in the literature on infant mortality that has used
the binomial model. Standard practice in this literature is to estimate treatment effects on infant
mortality rates by ordinary least squares, that is, to regress the (possibly logged) infant mortality
rate on prohibition status and other covariates. Our approach, which takes the DGP seriously and
estimates its corresponding model, has at least three advantages over the standard practice of
OLS estimation: it models the discreteness of deaths given births; it can accommodate the
observation of zero deaths in a county-year but cannot predict negative deaths; and it
automatically accounts for heteroskedasticity induced by variation in the number of births across
county-years. We first present the econometric model and then briefly discuss each of these
advantages.
Our response variable is the number of infant deaths, D, in a county-year. Given the
number of births, B, the infant mortality rate, I, is given by I=D/B. Our treatment variables are
county-year level indicators of whether or not a county is itself wet, W, and of whether or not a
county has at least one neighboring county that is wet, N. These are coded to be mutually
exclusive by giving priority to W; for example, a county that is wet and has a wet neighbor has
W=1 and N=0. The excluded category is a bone dry county that has no wet neighboring counties
and is itself not wet, thus, having W=N=0. In our sample of triads of nearby counties, all
counties start in 1933 with W=N=0. At some point, the wet partner switches to W=1, and in that
same year, the dryish county switches to N=1. The dry partner has W=N=0 through the year of
the switch and possibly thereafter as well.
For all prohibition treatment and response variables, we have panel data on counties
c=1,…, C, time periods t=1,…, T, and triads s=1,…, S. Our baseline model is a balanced panel
of counties, years, and triads. That is, each triad has observations for each of its three counties
from 1933 to 1939. Our source on infant mortality, the Vital Statistics of the United States,
reports the number of infant deaths in the year after birth while births occur roughly nine months
13

The word “binomial” appears in the names of many distributions. To be clear, our binomial model,
described formally in equations (1) and (2), is not a binomial logistic distribution or a negative binomial
distribution.

19

after conception. Thus, most infant deaths caused by the relaxation of alcohol prohibition would
occur in the years following the change in legal status and not during that year. For most
counties, we do not have the exact date when changes in prohibition status occurred.
Consequently, we set Wcst and Ncst equal to one in all the years following the change in legal
status and equal to zero in the year of and all years preceding the change in legal status. We
additionally include variables allowing for partial treatment effects in the year of change in legal
status. The regressors Wcst* and Ncst* are equal to one in the year of the legal change and equal to
zero in all other years. Let Pcst be the vector of prohibition status variables [Wcst, Ncst, Wcst*, Ncst*].
Assume that each birth bicst, for i=1,…, Bcst, in county c in triad s in time period t is an
independent Bernoulli trial with a probability !cst that the birth results in an infant death. There
are a total of Bcst births in a given county-year, and our measured outcome is the total number of
infant deaths Dcst in that county-year. The Bernoulli structure of infant deaths implies that the
probability mass function of the number of infant deaths, Dcst, given the number of births, Bcst,
follows the binomial distribution, denoted Bin(Dcst,Bcst, ! cst), and given by
"#$%('()* , #()* , !()* ) = 3

./01 !

/01 !(./01 43/01 )!

(!()* )3/01 (1 − !()* )./0143/01

[1]

The probability !cst is our object of interest, and it depends on our prohibition status
variables, Pcst, and other covariates. We condition the probability on a vector of observed timevarying control variables, Xcst. These include both the time-invariant county-characteristics
interacted with time trends and the time-varying controls reported in Table 2. Additionally, there
may be unobserved characteristics of counties which could both cause a county to remain dry
and influence its infant mortality. Thus, we include county-fixed effects, denoted "c. Standard
difference-in-difference approaches would include time dummies (for all but the first year) in
addition to the above county fixed effects and covariates. However, to allow for a potentially
different time trend in each triad, we include triad-specific time dummies #st for each triad s in
each time period t (for all but the first year).
Since probabilities lie in between zero and one, and since for infant mortality, the
probability cannot be exactly equal to zero, we specify the probabilities as given by the logit
function:
>?@(A

/01
!()* = ! (7()* , 8()* ; :, ;, <, =) = HC>?@(A

BCD/01 ECF/ CG01 )

/01 BCD/01 ECF/ CG01 )

[2]
20

Note that since we have a full vector of county dummies "c, there is no intercept term inside the
exponential function.
As noted above, the “industry standard” for modeling infant mortality would be to use
OLS, regressing the infant-mortality rate in a county-year, Icst, or its natural logarithm, ln(Icst), on
treatment variables, county and year fixed-effects, and other time-varying control variables. The
first advantage of our approach is that it directly models the discreteness of the outcome variable,
infant death. In our data, the aggregate infant mortality rate is roughly 5%. Further, we observe
many counties with small populations with small numbers of births and, therefore, very small
numbers of infant deaths. For example, in our data, the 10th percentile of births across all countyyears is 98 and the median of births is 343. Correspondingly, the 10th percentile and median of
infant deaths are 4 and 18, respectively.
The discreteness of our data is very sharp when the number of births is low. Consider a
county at the 10th percentile with 98 births. Given that the infant mortality rate is roughly 5% in
our sample, we would expect roughly 5 infant deaths. But they would be distributed over the
natural numbers {0, 1, 2,…, 98}, rather than over the unbounded continuum. Further, this
distribution would be asymmetric: it would center on 5, but would be truncated below by 0 and
above by 98.
The second and related advantage of our approach is that it does not predict negative
values for deaths and can accommodate observations with zero infant deaths. Since infant death
is already a low incidence phenomenon, linear regression of the infant mortality rate on
covariates could easily yield predicted values for the infant mortality rate of less than zero. In
contrast, in the binomial model, the prediction is a probability mass function that is bounded
from below at zero. Horrace and Oaxaca (2006) note that if the OLS estimator predicts below
zero as would be the case if any covariate included linearly had infinite support, then it is
inconsistent. This problem is not solved, for example, by using logged infant mortality rates
because in that case, county-years with zero infant deaths have to be dropped or scaled by adding
an arbitrary constant to these observations. Both of these strategies induce inconsistency in the
estimator. In contrast, incorporation of zero observations is natural in the binomial model: the
probability of zero infant deaths in a county-year with Bcst births is equal to (1 $ !cst)Bcst. Further,

21

these issues are also relevant to our data environment as we observe 353 county-years in the
nation-wide sample with zero infant deaths.
The third advantage of using the binomial distribution for modeling infant mortality is
that because it models the entire probability mass function of infant deaths given the number of
births, it automatically takes the heteroskedasticity implied by the DGP into account. This is
analogous to the efficiency gain from using weighted least squares in comparison to OLS when
faced with grouped data (see Appendix B for more detail). The point is that higher moments of
the infant death distribution are actually informative to estimation of the infant death probability.
We estimate the model by maximum likelihood. The MLE for this fixed-effect binomial
model is given by
max

B,E,L,G01 ,F/

∑V*UH ∑T(UH ln #$% PQ'()* , #()* , !(7()* , 8()* ; :, ;, !, <)* , =( )RS

[3]

where ! is given by [2] as above. Note also that this estimator does not include the observed
infant mortality rate, Icst. Instead, it maximizes the likelihood of the observed data given the
probability of observing each possible value of Dcst for a given Bcst when the probability of death
for each birth is !cst.
Machado (2004) shows that the common parameters % and & in the model given by
equations [1] and [2] are identified: there is only one solution for those parameters given the joint
distribution of births, infant deaths, and covariates implied by the DGP. However, the MLE
defined by equation [3] for the fixed effects binomial model suffers from an incidental
parameters problem that induces bias when one or more of the indices (in our case, c, s, and t)
does not go to infinity, but rather is fixed and small. In our case, both T and S, the number of
time periods and the number of counties in a triad, are fixed and small (at seven years and three
counties per triad, respectively). Generally, this bias is of order 1/T or 1/S, and in Monte Carlo
experiments, Machado (2004) finds that the incidental parameters bias in the MLE is small for T
> 4. Hahn and Newey (2004) provide an analytical bias-correction for general nonlinear fixed
effects models. Estimates that incorporate these corrections are still biased, but only of order 1/T2
or 1/S2. Here, this bias correction may be written explicitly in terms of observed variables and is
straightforward to compute. In the main text of this paper, we present only bias-corrected MLEs.

22

Consistent with Machado’s observation that this bias is small, none of our bias corrections
exceed 1% of the uncorrected MLE.14
Another consideration is the potential bias induced if we omit variables that are
correlated with both the treatment and infant mortality. Such omitted variables bias is a natural
worry because, as described in section 2.2, we believe that the choice to become wet is related to
the county-level distribution of preferences for alcohol consumption. However, to the extent that
such preferences are fixed over time, the inclusion of county fixed effects fully accounts for such
preference variation. Further, to the extent that over-time change in preferences is common
across the nearby counties in each triad, the inclusion of triad-year fixed effects fully accounts
for such preference variation. Finally, as noted above, we include the interaction of all countylevel time-invariant county characteristics with time trends among the regressors. Since these
regressors are known to influence the timing of becoming wet, their interaction with time trends
should pick up a substantial fraction of any county-level, time-varying factors that are correlated
with the treatment.
Throughout our empirical work, we focus on the estimate of the parameters % which
multiply the treatment regressors Pcst. The marginal effect of changing prohibition status Pcst on
the probability of infant mortality is equal to %!cst (1 $ !cst). In the case where infant mortality
rates are low (for example, they average around 5% in our sample), this is approximately equal
to %!cst. Thus, we can interpret the estimated treatment effect (%) as approximately equal to the
semi-elasticity of the probability of infant death with respect to treatment.
Another model where estimated coefficients are approximately equal to the semielasticity of the probability of infant death with respect to treatment is the regression of the
logged infant mortality rate, ln(Icst), on Pcst and other regressors. As stated before, this type of
linear regression estimator is very common in the literature on infant mortality. Consequently,
we present results from this type of regression for comparability with previous research in
Appendix B. There, we find that while WLS estimates are similar in magnitude to our ML

14

An alternative strategy is to use the Poisson fixed effects model where the exposure variable is births. This
model does not suffer from an incidental parameters problem. This model and our model are asymptotically
equivalent if the number of deaths converges to a constant as the number of births goes to infinity, a perhaps
somewhat implausible restriction. Nonetheless, we estimated the Poisson fixed effects model and found highly
similar results (results available on request).

23

estimates, OLS estimates are noticeably larger than ours. What is more, we find that both OLS
and WLS have substantially larger standard errors than the MLE.
Finally, estimated standard errors are clustered at the county level.15,16 These standard
errors are robust both to the fact that we replicate observations of data where counties are present
in multiple triads and to possible serial correlation in the dependence of infant mortality on
treatment and covariates.
5. Results
We now turn to our estimates of the effects of repeal on infant mortality. We are
particularly interested in the effect of one county’s decision to go wet on infant mortality within
its own borders and on infant mortality in neighboring counties. Thus, we relate variation in
infant mortality on a county-level basis to variation in dryish and wet status along with a large
set of control variables detailed in section 3.
Table 3 report our results via MLE as outlined above. The leftmost columns of Table 3
show estimates including only wet variables as treatment regressors. Importantly, dryish counties
are here pooled with the control group. Columns (1) through (3) explain variation in infant
mortality rates as a function of county and triad-year fixed effects (all columns) and the baseline
covariates from Table 2, New Deal spending (columns 2 and 3), and hospital beds/medical
institutions (column 3) along with a variable indicating whether a particular county switched to
wet status in a given year (wet in initial year or Wct* as in section 4) and an additional variable
indicating whether a particular county had previously switched to wet status (wet in subsequent
years or Wct as in section 4). Regardless of the specification used, the coefficients attached to
these indicators are small in magnitude and imprecisely estimated. However, this specification
15

DLR additionally allow for state-level clustering because all of their variation comes from state-level policy
changes. Our results hold if we use state-level clustering instead (results available upon request). DLR also
allow for overlapping state-border-pair clustering, again, for the fact that their policy variation is exclusively
state-level. Finally, as described below, we use a binomial fixed effects model estimated by maximum
likelihood. In this context, county-level clustering allows for possible correlations in the scores of the loglikelihood function (analogous to linear combinations of regressors and error terms in linear regression
models) within counties across years.
16
Clustering at the county-level means that we allow for correlations across years within counties. Technically,
these are correlations between the scores of the log-likelihood function across observations for a given triad or
county. They are analogous to correlations of residuals across observations within groups that are accounted
for in OLS regression with clustered standard errors.

24

by ignoring potential cross-border policy externalities serves to mask the effects on infant
mortality of both a county becoming wet and a county becoming dryish.
Accordingly, columns (4) through (6) of Table 3 separate bone dry and dryish counties.
What is critical here is that the control group between the two sets of columns varies: for
columns (1) through (3), the control group is all dry counties—that is, both bone dry and dryish
counties—while for columns (4) through (6), the control group is only bone dry counties. Here,
the coefficients attached to dryish in subsequent years are consistently positive and statistically
significant at conventional levels across all specifications in columns (4) through (6). Thus, we
interpret the estimate in column (6) as representing the effect of one county’s (or state’s)
decision to go wet on its neighboring dry counties which corresponds to a 4.7% increase in infant
mortality for those counties affected.
In a related fashion, the decision to separate bone dry and dryish counties also has an
important implication on the coefficient associated with wet status. In particular, it becomes
larger in magnitude and statistically significant. Previously, in columns (1) through (3) our
control group—that is, all dry counties—were contaminated by the presence of dryish counties.
By separating out dryish counties, the coefficient on wet in subsequent years becomes larger
relative to the new control group of bone dry counties. The results in column (6) suggests that the
effect of one county going wet corresponds to a 4.0% increase in infant mortality for those
counties affected. In what follows, we take our results in column (6) as our preferred
specification.
As was seen before, Section 2.2 suggests why the estimated ATT for becoming wet could
plausibly be smaller than the ATT for becoming dryish. At the same time, we do not emphasize
this difference in magnitude as the coefficients are not different from one another in terms of
statistical significance: for the results in column (6), the p-value of the test where the null
hypothesis is equality of coefficients across dryish in subsequent years and wet in subsequent
years is equal to 0.543. Thus, we fail to reject the null hypothesis that these two coefficients are
equal to one another at conventional levels.
Summarizing, our estimates suggest that counties which chose wet status via local option
elections or state-wide legislation saw infant mortality increase by 4.0%, or 2.40 additional infant
deaths per 1000 live births in 1934. Allowing for potential policy externalities from neighboring
25

counties turns out to be very important as well: we find that dryish status raised baseline infant
mortality by 4.7%, or 2.82 additional infant deaths per 1000 live births in 1934. There were
1,113,635 live births in dryish counties from 1934 to 1939 which translates into an excess of
3,140 infant deaths in the same period. Also, there were 9,925,144 live births in wet counties
from 1934 to 1939 which translates into an excess of 23,820 infant deaths in the same period.
Cumulatively, the number of infant deaths which could potentially be attributed to the repeal of
federal prohibition is 26,960.
These results highlight two of the main arguments of this paper. First, the distinction
between bone dry and dryish counties turns out to be an important one, both in terms of
estimation and interpretation. This finding suggests that cross-border policy externalities are
likely important, both in contemporary and historical settings. Second, for whatever benefits the
repeal of federal prohibition conferred in terms of consumer welfare, diminished expenditure on
law enforcement, and/or freedom of choice, it also came at the cost of increasing baseline infant
mortality rates in both dryish and wet counties. Naturally, there were other associated costs
which remain unexplored in this paper, but which should be added to any reckoning of repeal’s
legacy.
In what follows, we subject these results to a series of robustness checks. Critically, the
results in Table 3 on the causal effects of repeal appear to be robust across all specifications
considered.
What about the role of unobservables in driving the estimated effects of wet status?
Naturally, there may still be lingering concerns over the exogeneity of wet status. Even
though we have included county fixed effects and a battery of county-level controls interacted
with time trends in columns (1) through (6) of Table 4, the possibility remains that other timevarying unobservables are driving both a county’s incidence of infant death and its prohibition
status. To this end, we make a distinction in between those counties which went wet through
state legislation (wet state) and those which went wet through local option (wet county). The
reason for doing so is that the former changes in prohibition status are arguably more exogenous
than the latter from the perspective of individual counties. That is, a county’s inhabitants could
have strong preferences for remaining dry but find themselves residing in a state with strong
26

preferences for becoming wet. Thus, such wet counties may be thought of as rough analogs to
their dryish counterparts. Column (1) of Table 4 makes this distinction for wet with our baseline
controls. Column (2) incorporates per capita New Deal spending by county. Column (3) does the
same but controls for differential access to hospital beds and medical institutions.
Very little changes as it relates to our previous results on dryish. However, some
interesting results emerge. In particular, the coefficients for wet state in subsequent years are, for
the most part, statistically significant and virtually indistinguishable in magnitude from dryish in
subsequent years. As for dryish county in subsequent years and wet county in subsequent years,
we see a high degree of comparability with our previous results. This is especially true for our
preferred specification in column (3).
Are the estimated effects robust to other specifications?
Table 5 incorporates other specifications to further establish the robustness of the dryish
and wet effects. Specifically, column (1) replicates our preferred results from column (6) in
Table 3 for ease of comparison, and further checks on this specification are incorporated in turn.
First, linear trends interacted with our county controls may be obscuring important variation on a
year-by-year basis which may be correlated with our dryish and wet indicator variables.
Therefore, it may be appropriate to incorporate more flexibility into our specification and include
our county controls interacted with year fixed effects. However, if anything, the results of this
exercise reported in column (2) suggest the contrary: the coefficients on dryish in subsequent
years and wet in subsequent years remain virtually unchanged.
Column (3) excludes counties which border Canada or Mexico to account for potential
cross-board smuggling with materially the same results. Similar results are obtained when we
exclude all coastal counties. Visual inspection of Figure 4 reveals why: relatively few of the
geographically proximate counties in our sample of triads are affected by these restrictions.
In our preferred specification, we are unable to control for county-level, time-varying
unobservables through the use of county and triad-year fixed effects. Of course, county-year
fixed effects are infeasible, but county and triad-year fixed effects along with state-year fixed
effects are not. Column (4) reports the results of this regression. For the most part, it mirrors the
results for column (1). The only exception in this regard is the reduction in the size of the
27

coefficient for wet in subsequent years. Although the coefficient on wet in subsequent years
becomes statistically insignificant, we do not put much interpretive weight on this result as the
category of wet includes both counties which opt for wet status and counties within states which
opt for wet status. By including state trends (or state-year fixed effects), we thereby eliminate
any variation coming from wet states. Instead, we emphasize that the coefficient on dryish in
subsequent years is remarkably robust even after conditioning on a very large set of controls.
Consequently, the results in column (4) are encouraging in that they control for any number of
unobserved contemporaneous changes to government programs, legislative enactments, and local
economic conditions that vary at the state-year level.
We also extend the sample up to 1941 in column (5). Previously, we argued for a
terminal date of 1939, given that there is little variation in treatment status after that date. Here,
we consider a terminal date of 1941 to extend the sample but avoid any effects that World War II
and its associated mobilization effort might have had on infant mortality. The coefficients for
and statistical significance of dryish in subsequent years and wet in subsequent years persist. At
the same time, the results on wet in subsequent years suggest that some of the effects identified
here may be transitory in nature.
We also consider the placebo effect of adding lead terms for the treatment variables in
our preferred specification in column (6) of Table 5. That is, if a county becomes dryish in 1935,
we assign a value of one for a new indicator variable for this county in 1934. For both dryish and
wet status, no lead terms are individually or jointly statistically significant in column (6),
suggesting that we are not picking up the residual effects of unobserved county characteristics in
our preferred specification.
A final specification using our triad-based sample of nearby counties considers the
importance of the triad-year fixed effects. We report in column (7) estimates from a model where
the triad-year fixed effects #st are constrained to be identical for all triads (so that #st = #t). This is
equivalent to a model with just county and year fixed-effects. While the coefficients on wet in
subsequent years are nearly identical to our preferred results in column (1), the coefficient on
dryish in subsequent years is 30% lower (but still statistically significant at the 5% level).
The exclusion or inclusion of triad-year fixed effects does not affect the estimated value
of the wet treatment effect. Thus, a more standard approach of including county and year fixed
28

effects would not be very misleading for estimation of the wet effect. However, the estimated
value of the dryish treatment effect does depend on whether or not triad-year fixed effects are
included. This means that the DLR innovation of allowing for heterogeneous time trends is
important for the consistent estimation of the dryish effect.17
6. Conclusion
In considering the effects of the repeal of federal prohibition, we find robust evidence
that relaxing restrictions on alcohol sales lead to increases in infant mortality. Critical in
establishing this result is recognizing that it is not only an individual county’s choice of
prohibition status which matters but also the prohibition status of its neighbors. Thus, our
strongest set of results—both in the estimated magnitude of the effect and in the number of
specifications for which it holds—relates to dry counties being “treated” with wet neighbors.
Clearly, this type of policy externality is important not only in the context of assessing the repeal
of federal prohibition but also in the context of current policy debates related to states potentially
legalizing other illicit substances.
This paper also documents that these developments occurred in an environment when the
general trajectory of infant mortality rates was distinctly downward. From 1934 to 1939, the
nation-wide infant mortality rate for the US dropped from 60.0 per thousand live births to 50.2
per thousand in 1939, or by 16.33%. In our sample of triads of nearby counties, we estimate that
dryish status was associated with a 4.7% increase in infant mortality rates. We also estimate that
wet status was associated with a 4.0% increase in infant mortality rates. Thus, the repeal of
federal prohibition can be thought of as having reversed the generalized decline in infant
mortality rates in this period by 24.50 to 28.78% for the treated counties in our sample.
Cumulating across all counties and all years, as in Section 5, our results imply 26,960 excess
infant deaths that could be attributed to the repeal of federal prohibition in 1933.
Admittedly, we have been relatively silent on mechanisms, instead offering a preferred
interpretation of the data in the form of potential maternal alcohol consumption. And while there
17

Appendix C considers an extended robustness exercise incorporating all US counties and their spatial
distribution into the empirical model. This approach necessitates the use of county and time year fixed effects.
All of the results presented there are qualitatively similar to our baseline results in Table 3 and quantitatively
similar to the results in column (7) of Table 5. However, they come with the caveats discussed here.

29

is an established medical literature which suggests a link from maternal alcohol consumption to
infant mortality via both compromised immune systems and low birth-weights, we have very
little by way of corroborating evidence in support of this hypothesis. Thus, other linkages in
between the availability of alcohol and infant death remain as possibilities and as an area for
future work.
Further avenues for future work come in assessing the effects of repeal on other
contemporaneous outcomes, such as adult morbidity and mortality, violent crime, and worker
productivity. Similar work could also exploit the variation in prohibition laws at the county level
which predated federal prohibition in 1920 and which has been neglected in the literature. More
ambitiously, we hope to explore the long-run effects of prohibition by considering how changes
in potential maternal alcohol consumption induced by prohibition laws affected children born in
these periods throughout their lives. Thus, we will correlate the ample geographic and temporal
heterogeneity in restrictions on alcohol, both before and after federal prohibition, with long-term
outcomes such as educational attainment, occupational status, and wages. Taken together, such
work will—at last—allow a final tab for prohibition in all of its forms to be drawn.

30

References
Acemoglu, D., D.H. Autor, and D. Lyle (2004), “Women, War, and Wages: The Effect of
Female Labor Supply on the Wage Structure at Midcentury.” Journal of Political Economy
112(3), 497-551.
Alsan, M. and C. Goldin (2015), “Watersheds in Infant Mortality: The Role of Effective Water
and Sewerage Infrastructure, 1880 to 1915.” NBER Working Paper 21263.
Anand, S. and T. Bärnighausen (2004), “Human Resources and Health Outcomes: Cross-country
Econometric Study.” The Lancet 364(9445), 1603-1609.
Baird, S., J. Friedman, and N. Schady (2011), “Aggregate Income Shocks and Infant Mortality in
the Developing World.” Review of Economics and Statistics 93(3), 847-856.
Barreca, A. and M. Page (2015), “A Pint for a Pound? Reevaluating the Relationship Between
Minimum Drinking Age Laws and Birth Outcomes.” Health Economics 24(4), 400-418.
Blocker, J.S. (2006), “Did Prohibition Really Work? Alcohol Prohibition as a Public Health
Innovation.” American Journal of Public Health 96(2), 233-243.
Bodenhorn, H. (2016), “Blind Tigers and Red-Tape Cocktails: Liquor Control and Homicide in
Late-Nineteenth Century South Carolina.” NBER Working Paper 22980.
Cameron, A. C. and D. L. Miller (2015), “A Practitioner’s Guide to Cluster-robust Inference.”
Journal of Human Resources 50(2), 317-372.
Cameron, A.C. and P.K. Trivedi (2013a), Regression Analysis of Count Data. Cambridge:
Cambridge University Press.
Cameron, A.C. and P.K. Trivedi (2013b), Count Panel Data. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Carpenter, C. and C. Dobkin (2009), “The Effect of Alcohol Consumption on Mortality:
Regression Discontinuity Evidence from the Minimum Drinking Age.” American Economic
Journal: Applied Economics 1(1), 164-182.
Clay, K., J. Lewis, and E. Severnini (2016), “Canary in a Coal Mine: Infant Mortality, Property
Values, and Tradeoffs Associated with Mid-20th Century Air Pollution.” NBER Working
Paper 22155.
Cook, P. (2007), Paying the Tab: The Costs and Benefits of Alcohol Control. Princeton:
Princeton University Press.
Culver, D.C. and J.E. Thomas (1940), State Liquor Control Administration. Bureau of Public
Administration, University of California-Berkeley.
Cutler, D. and G. Miller (2005), “The Role of Public Health Improvements in Health Advances:
The Twentieth-Century United States.” Demography 42(1), 1-22.
Dills, A.K. and J.A. Miron (2004), “Alcohol Prohibition and Cirrhosis.” American Law and
Economics Review 6(2), 285-318.
Dills, A.K., S. Goffard, and J. Miron (2017), “The Effects of Marijuana Liberalizations:
Evidence from Monitoring the Future.” NBER Working Paper 23779.
Distilled Spirits Institute (1935), Summary of State Liquor Control Laws and Regulations
Relating to Distilled Spirits. Washington, D.C.: Distilled Spirits Institute.
Distilled Spirits Institute (1941), Summary of State Liquor Control Laws and Regulations
Relating to Distilled Spirits. Washington, D.C.: Distilled Spirits Institute.
Doyle, J.J. and K. Samphantharak (2008), “$2.00 Gas! Studying the Effects of a Gas Tax
Moratorium.” Journal of Public Economics 92(4), 869-884.
Dube, A., T.W. Lester, and M. Reich (2010), “Minimum Wage Effects Across State Borders.”
Review of Economics and Statistics 92(4), 945-964.
31

Evans, M., E. Helland, J. Klick, and A. Patel (2016), “The Developmental Effect of State
Alcohol Prohibitions at the Turn of the 20th Century.” Economic Inquiry 54(2), 762-777.
Fishback, P.V., M. Haines, and S. Kantor (2001), “The Impact of the New Deal on Black and
White Infant Mortality in the South.” Explorations in Economic History 38(1), 93-122.
Fishback, P.V., M. Haines, and S. Kantor (2007), “Births, Deaths, and New Deal Relief During
the Great Depression.” Review of Economics and Statistics 89(1), 1-14.
Fishback, P.V., W. Troesken, T. Kollmann, M. Haines, P. Rhode, and M. Thomasson (2011),
“Information and the Impact of Climate and Weather on Mortality Rates During the Great
Depression.” In The Economics of Climate Change (Ed.s G. Libecap and R. Steckel).
Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 131-168.
García-Jimeno, C. (2016), “The Political Economy of Moral Conflict: An Empirical Study of
Learning and Law Enforcement under Prohibition.” Econometrica 84(2), 511-570.
Hahn, J. and W. Newey (2004), “Jackknife and Analytical Bias Reduction for Nonlinear Panel
Models.” Econometrica 72(4), 1295-1319.
Hansen, B., K. Miller, and C. Weber (2018), “The Grass is Greener on the Other Side: How
Extensive is the Interstate Trafficking of Recreational Marijuana?” NBER Working Paper
23762.
Hao, Z. and B. Cowan (2017), “The Cross-Border Spillover Effects of Recreational Marijuana
Legalization.” NBER Working Paper 23426.
Harding, M., E. Leibtag, and M.F. Lovenheim (2012), “The Heterogeneous Geographic and
Socioeconomic Incidence of Cigarette Taxes: Evidence from Nielsen Homescan Data.”
American Economic Journal: Economic Policy 4(4), 169-198.
Harrison, L.V. (1938), The Local Option Fallacy. Washington, D.C.: Distilled Spirits Institute.
Horrace, W.C. and R.L. Oaxaca (2006), “Results on the Bias and Inconsistency of Ordinary
Least Squares for the Linear Probability Model.” Economics Letters 90(3), 321-327.
Hoynes, H.W. and D.W. Schanzenbach (2012), “Work Incentives and the Food Stamp Program.”
Journal of Public Economic 96(1), 151-162.
Johansson, P., T. Pekkarinen, and J. Verho (2014), “Cross-border Health and Productivity
Effects of Alcohol Policies.” Journal of Health Economics 36(1), 125-136.
Kyvig, D.E. (2000), Repealing National Prohibition. Ashland: Kent State University Press.
LaVallee, R.A. and H. Yi (2011), “Apparent Per Capita Alcohol Consumption: National, State,
and Regional Trends, 1977-2009.” NIAAA Surveillance Report 92.
Lovenheim, M.F. (2008), “How Far to the Border? The Extent and Impact of Cross-Border
Casual Cigarette Smuggling.” National Tax Journal 61(1), 7-33.
Lovenheim, M.F. and J. Slemrod (2010), “The Fatal Toll of Driving to Drink: The Effect of
Minimum Legal Drinking Age Evasion of Traffic Fatalities.” Journal of Health Economics
29(1), 62-77.
Machado, M.P. (2004), “A Consistent Estimator for the binomial Distribution in the Presence of
‘Incidental Parameters’.” Journal of Econometrics 119(1), 73-98.
Mills, J.L., B.I. Graubard, E.E. Harley, G.G. Rhoads, and H.W. Berendes (1984), “Maternal
Alcohol Consumption and Birth Weight. How Much Drinking during Pregnancy is Safe?”
Journal of the American Medical Association 252(14), 1875-1879.
Moehling, C.M. and M.A. Thomasson (2014), “Saving Babies: The Impact of Public Education
Programs on Infant Mortality.” Demography 51(2), 367-386.
Murdock, C.G. (1998), Domesticating Drink. Baltimore: Johns Hopkins University Press.
32

Nilsson, P.J. (2017), “Alcohol Policy, Prenatal Conditions, and Long-term Economic
Outcomes.” Journal of Political Economy, 25(4), 1149-1207.
Okrent, D. (2010), Last Call: The Rise and Fall of Prohibition. New York: Scribner.
Olegård, R., K.G. Sabel, M. Aronsson, B. Sandin, P.R. Johansson, C. Carlsson, M. Kyllerman,
K. Iversen, and A. Hrbek (1979), “Effects on the Child of Alcohol Abuse during Pregnancy:
Retrospective and Prospective Studies.” Acta Paediatrica 68(S275), 112-121.
Rose, K.D. (1996), American Women and the Repeal of Federal Prohibition. New York: New
York University Press.
Stepner, M. (2016), “binscatter: A stata program to generate binned scatterplots” Available at
https://michaelstepner.com/binscatter/ [accessed on January 17, 2017].
Strandberg-Larsen, K., M. Grønbæk, A. Andersen, P. Andersen, and J. Olsen (2009). “Alcohol
Drinking Pattern During Pregnancy and Risk of Infant Mortality.” Epidemiology 20(6),
884-891.
Strumpf, K.S. and F. Oberholzer-Gee (2002), “Endogenous Policy Decentralization: Testing the
Central Tenet of Economic Federalism.” Journal of Political Economy 110(1), 1-36.
Tan, C.H., C.H. Denny, N.E. Cheal, J.E. Sniezek, and D. Kanny (2015), “Alcohol Use and Binge
Drinking among Women of Childbearing Age–United States, 2011-2013.” Morbidity and
Mortality Weekly Report 64(37), 1042-1046.
Thomas, J.E. and D.C. Culver (1940), “Protection of Dry Areas.” Law and Contemporary
Problems 7(4), 696-708.
Warburton, C. (1932), The Economic Results of Prohibition. New York: Columbia University
Press.

33

Figure 1a: A County with High Willingness-to-pay (WTP) for Alcohol

Figure 1b: A County with Low Willingness-to-pay (WTP) for Alcohol

Notes: We assume that each county can be characterized by its distribution of individuals’ willingness-to-pay (WTP)
for alcohol and that this distribution differs by county. To simplify, let the distribution of WTP be symmetric and
unimodal so that the median voter is at the top (mode) of the density function. For individuals, assume that
consuming alcohol (at a potentially dangerous level) is a binary decision. They do so if their willingness-to-pay for
alcohol exceeds its price. The effective price of purchasing and consuming alcohol while the county is variously dry,
dryish, or wet are respectively denoted by “dry price”, “dryish price”, and “wet price”.

34

Figure 2: Infant Mortality Rates by Prohibition Status for All US Counties, 1934–1939
(deaths per 1000 births)

Notes: Figure 2 uses all 3,043 US counties. The infant mortality rate is the number of infant deaths within a year
from live birth per 1000 births. The number of births for each county are used as weights. Bone dry are dry counties
surrounded by other dry counties. Dryish counties are dry counties with at least one wet neighbor. Wet counties are
counties which allow for alcohol sales within their borders.

Figure 3: Proportion of All US Counties by Prohibition Status, 1930–1942

Notes: Figure 3 uses all 3,043 US counties. Bone dry are dry counties surrounded by other dry counties. Dryish
counties are dry counties with at least one wet neighbor. Wet counties are counties which allow for alcohol sales
within their borders. The figure treats every county as bone dry prior to 1934. The two vertical dashed lines
correspond to the beginning (1933) and end (1939) of our sample period.

35

Figure 4: Spatial Distribution of All US Counties by Prohibition Status

Notes: Figure 4 uses all 3,043 US counties. The counties in dark gray, red, and white correspond to bone dry, dryish,
and wet counties, respectively. Bone dry are dry counties surrounded by other dry counties. Dryish counties are dry
counties with at least one wet neighbor. Wet counties are counties which allow for alcohol sales within their borders.

36

Figure 5a: Pre-trends in Infant Mortality Rates for Sample of Triads of Nearby Counties,
1928–1933 (deaths per 1000 births)
80

Dry partner
Ever dryish
Wet partner

75

70

65

60

55
1928

1929

1930

1931

1932

1933

Notes: Figure 5a uses our sample of triads of nearby counties. The infant mortality rate is the number of infant
deaths within a year from live birth per 1000 births. The number of births for each county are used as weights. Dry
partner counties are the nearest bone dry counties to their dryish counterparts and generally stayed bone dry during
our sample period from 1933 to 1939 (although some did transition to dryish and wet status). Ever dryish are the
counties which became dryish at any time from 1933 to 1939 and which could be matched with bone dry and wet
counterparts. Wet partner counties are the nearest wet counties to their dryish counterparts and stayed wet during
our sample period from 1933 to 1939.

Figure 5b: Pre-trends in Infant Mortality Rates for All US Counties,
1928–1933 (deaths per 1000 births)
75

Bone dry
Ever dryish
Wet

70

65

60

55

50
1928

1929

1930

1931

1932

1933

Notes: Figure 5b uses all US counties. The infant mortality rate is the number of infant deaths within a year from
live birth per 1000 births. The number of births for each county are used as weights. Bone dry are dry counties
which are surrounded by other dry counties throughout this period. Ever dryish are the counties which became
dryish at any time from 1933 to 1939. Wet counties are counties which allow for alcohol sales within their borders.

37

Table 1: Variable Definitions and Data Sources
Variable name
Retail sales
% Baptist/Methodist
% black
% female
% immigrant
% urban
Unemployment rate
New Deal spending
Medical institutions
Hospital beds

Definition
Retail sales per capita, linearly interpolated between 1933,
1935, and 1939 (time varying)
Number of Baptists and Methodists in 1926 divided by
total population in 1930
Number of blacks divided by total population in 1930

Source
Fishback et al.
(2011)
1926 Census of
Religious Bodies
1930 Census - State
and County I
Number of females divided by total population in 1930
1930 Census - State
and County I
Number of foreign born divided by total population in 1930 1930 Census - State
and County I
Number of urban residents divided by total population in
1930 Census - State
1930
and County I
Number of unemployed divided by population aged 15-64 1930 Census - State
in 1930
and County I
Cumulative New Deal spending from March 1933 through Fishback et al.
June 1939 divided by total population in 1930
(2011)
Number of medical institutions divided by total population Fishback et al.
in thousands (time varying)
(2011)
Hospital beds per 1000 women aged 15-44 (time varying)
Fishback et al.
(2011)

Sources: Fishback, P.V., W. Troesken, T. Kollmann, M. Haines, P. Rhode, and M. Thomasson (2011), “Information
and the Impact of Climate and Weather on Mortality Rates During the Great Depression.” In The Economics of
Climate Change (Ed.s G. Libecap and R. Steckel). Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 131-168; Gardner, J. and
W. Cohen (1992), “Demographic Characteristics of the Population of the United States, 1930-1950: County-Level.”
Ann Arbor: Inter-university Consortium for Political and Social Research, http://doi.org/10.3886/ICPSR00020.v1;
US Department of Commerce, Bureau of the Census (1980), Censuses of Religious Bodies, 1906-1936. Ann Arbor:
Inter-university Consortium for Political and Social Research, http://doi.org/10.3886/ICPSR00008.v1

38

Table 2: Baseline Sample County Characteristics by Treatment Group
for Sample of Triads of Nearby Counties

(1)
62.54
[20.73]

Mean by treatment group
Dry
Ever
Wet
partner
dryish
partner
(2)
(3)
(4)
58.75
62.05
66.08
[18.08]
[22.17]
[19.99]

4.08
[0.35]

4.02
[0.34]

4.07
[0.36]

4.14
[0.33]

Retail sales in 1933

364.85
[206.05]

308.65
[188.92]

325.27
[186.57]

435.43
[221.14]

% Baptist/Methodist in 1926

18.97
[19.86]

16.67
[19.99]

20.21
[20.53]

20.04
[19.19]

% black

33.21
[31.74]

22.84
[24.80]

29.32
[31.48]

42.77
[32.75]

% female

3.12
[4.99]

2.39
[4.30]

2.62
[4.46]

3.74
[5.54]

% immigrant

24.28
[15.34]

25.87
[15.52]

25.94
[15.93]

22.77
[14.28]

% urban

49.55
[1.62]

49.24
[1.53]

49.48
[1.66]

49.86
[1.56]

Unemployment rate

2.10
[1.55]

1.72
[1.35]

1.87
[1.53]

2.48
[1.55]

New Deal spending

115.77
[72.85]

116.87
[78.33]

108.74
[68.89]

123.22
[73.52]

Medical institutions

51.15
[60.63]

46.26
[49.80]

45.23
[47.77]

59.44
[75.15]

Hospital beds

9.70
[15.54]

6.77
[8.60]

9.55
[17.60]

11.14
[14.56]

1,301

327

683

378

All
Infant mortality rate in 1933
Log (infant mortality rate) in 1933

Number of counties

Notes: Here, we use our sample of triads of nearby counties. Column (1) reports means across all counties within
triads while columns (2)–(4) report means by each treatment group with standard deviations in brackets. The number
of births in each county is used as weights. Unless otherwise mentioned, values of each variable above come from
1930. Dry partner counties are the nearest bone dry counties to their dryish counterparts and generally stayed bone
dry during our sample period from 1933 to 1939 (although some did transition to dryish and wet status). Ever dryish
are the counties which became dryish at any time from 1933 to 1939 and which could be matched with bone dry and
wet counterparts. Wet partner counties are the nearest wet counties to their dryish counterparts and stayed wet
during our sample period from 1933 to 1939. Finally, the sum of observations in the last three columns (N = 1,388)
does not equal the value for the first column (N = 1,301) as a few ever dryish counties serve as a dry or wet partner
in other triads.

39

Table 3: The Effect of Repeal on Infant Mortality Rates
(1)

Without dryish
(2)

(3)

Dryish in initial year
Dryish in subsequent years

(4)
0.008
(0.016)

With dryish
(5)
0.009
(0.016)

(6)
0.009
(0.016)

0.046***
(0.016)

0.046***
(0.016)

0.047***
(0.016)

Wet in initial year

0.004
(0.012)

0.003
(0.012)

0.003
(0.012)

0.014
(0.017)

0.013
(0.017)

0.013
(0.017)

Wet in subsequent years

0.011
(0.012)

0.009
(0.011)

0.009
(0.011)

0.041**
(0.018)

0.040**
(0.018)

0.040**
(0.018)

N
N of county
County & triad-year FEs
County controls
New Deal spending
Hospital beds/
Medical institutions

14,337
683
X
X

14,337
683
X
X
X

14,337
683
X
X
X

14,337
683
X
X

14,337
683
X
X
X

14,337
683
X
X
X

X

X

Notes: All estimates are from binomial fixed effect maximum likelihood estimation (MLE), bias-corrected following
Hahn and Newey (2004). Standard errors clustered at the county level are reported in parentheses. The sample size
is 14,337 (683 triads of counties for each year from 1933 to 1939 excluding six observations with no births in the
year). Columns (1)–(3) do not distinguish dryish from dry while columns (4)–(6) separate dryish counties from dry
counties. Critically, the control group between the two sets of columns varies: for columns (1)–(3), the control group
is all dry counties while for columns (4)–(6), the control group is only bone dry counties. County controls are the
variables reported in Table 1 interacted with a linear trend, except for retail sales which is time-varying. New Deal
spending is the cumulative amount of county-level New Deal spending per capita interacted with a linear trend.
Hospital beds is the number of hospital beds per 1000 women aged 15–44 in a county while medical institutions is
the number of medical institutions per 1000 people in a county (both of which are time-varying). Significance
levels: *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.10

40

Table 4: Wet Counties versus Wet States
(1)
0.008
(0.014)

With wet state/county
(2)
0.009
(0.014)

(3)
0.009
(0.014)

0.046***
(0.014)

0.046***
(0.014)

0.047***
(0.014)

Wet state in initial year

0.017
(0.035)

0.017
(0.035)

0.018
(0.035)

Wet state in subsequent years

0.046*
(0.026)

0.045*
(0.027)

0.045*
(0.027)

Wet county in initial year

0.013
(0.014)

0.012
(0.014)

0.012
(0.014)

0.041***
(0.015)

0.039***
(0.015)

0.039***
(0.015)

14,337
683
X
X

14,337
683
X
X
X

14,337
683
X
X
X
X

Dryish in initial year
Dryish in subsequent years

Wet county in subsequent years
N
N of triads
County & triad-year FEs
County controls
New Deal spending
Hospital beds/Medical institutions

Notes: All estimates are from binomial fixed effect maximum likelihood estimation (MLE), bias-corrected following
Hahn and Newey (2004), and consistent for slowly increasing T. Standard errors clustered at the county level are
reported in parentheses. The sample size is 14,337 (683 triads of counties for each year from 1933 to 1939 excluding
six observations with no births in the year). County controls are the variables reported in Table 1 interacted with a
linear trend, except for retail sales which is time-varying. New Deal spending is the cumulative amount of countylevel New Deal spending per capita interacted with a linear trend. Hospital beds is the number of hospital beds per
1000 women aged 15–44 in a county while medical institutions is the number of medical institutions per 1000
people in a county (both of which are time-varying). In columns (1) through (3), wet is divided into those counties
which went wet through state legislation (wet state) and those counties which went wet through local option (wet
county). The former includes: Arizona, California, Indiana, Nevada, and South Dakota in 1934; Delaware, Idaho,
Iowa, Montana, South Carolina, Utah, and Wyoming in 1935; and North Dakota in 1937. Significance levels:
*** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.10

41

Table 5: The Effect of Repeal on Infant Mortality Rates, Additional Specifications
(1)

0.009
(0.016)

(2)
(1) with
controls
interacted
with year
FEs
0.006
(0.014)

(3)
(1) w/o
counties
bordering
Canada or
Mexico
0.008
(0.014)

(4)
(1) with
state by
year
fixed
effects
0.004
(0.017)

0.047***
(0.016)

0.047***
(0.014)

0.049***
(0.014)

Wet in initial year

0.013
(0.017)

0.015
(0.014)

Wet in subsequent years

0.040**
(0.018)

0.040***
(0.015)

Preferred
(Col. 6,
Table 3)
Dryish in initial year
Dryish in subsequent years

(5)

(6)

(7)

(1) with
extended
sample to
1941

(1) with
lead
terms

County
and year
fixed
effects

0.007
(0.014)

0.005
(0.017)

0.020
(0.013)

0.040**
(0.017)

0.042***
(0.013)

0.044***
(0.016)

0.033**
(0.014)

0.010
(0.014)

0.016
(0.021)

0.008
(0.014)

0.003
(0.017)

0.017
(0.013)

0.038***
(0.015)

0.014
(0.025)

0.031**
(0.014)

0.029*
(0.017)

0.039***
(0.015)

Dryish one year before (t-1)

-0.001
(0.017)

Wet one year before (t-1)

-0.020
(0.015)

N
N of triads
County & triad-year FEs
All county controls with linear trends
All county controls with year FEs
State-year FEs
County & year fixed effects

14,337
683
X
X

14,337
683
X

13,984
666
X
X

14,337
683
X
X

18,422
683
X
X

14,337
683
X
X

9,098
X

X
X
X

Notes: All estimates are from binomial fixed effect maximum likelihood estimation (MLE), bias-corrected following Hahn and Newey (2004), and consistent for
slowly increasing T. Standard errors clustered at the county level are reported in parentheses. Column (1) replicates our baseline estimates from Column (6) of
Table 3. Column (2) includes other county controls interacted with year fixed effects rather than a linear trend. Column (3) excludes those counties which border
Canada or Mexico. The resulting sample size is 13,984. Column (4) includes state by year fixed effects. Column (5) extends the sample to 1941. Column (6) adds

42

lead treatment variables for dryish and wet. Column (7) includes county and year fixed effects instead of county and triad-year fixed effects, exploiting the
within-county variation in prohibition status over time. The resulting sample size is 9,098 (1301 counties for each year from 1933 to 1939 excluding nine
observations with no births in the year). County controls are the variables reported in Table 1 interacted with a linear trend, except for retail sales which is timevarying. New Deal spending is the cumulative amount of county-level New Deal spending per capita interacted with a linear trend. Medical institutions is the
number of medical institutions per 1000 people in a county while hospital beds is the number of hospital beds per 1000 women aged 15–44 in a county (both of
which are time-varying). Significance levels: *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.10

43

FOR ONLINE PUBLICATION
Appendix A: An Illustrative Model of Alcohol Consumption
Suppose that individuals have a willingness to pay for alcohol, v, drawn from a county-specific
(time-invariant) distribution, Fc(v). Suppose that the cost of buying alcohol under prohibition
(that is, in a dry county) is d and the cost when buying without prohibition restrictions (that is, in
a wet county) is w and that d > w. Suppose that each individual faces a binary choice of whether
or not to buy alcohol based on whether their v exceeds the cost of purchase. Then, the purchase
rate is 1- Fc(d) in a dry county and 1- Fc(w) in a wet county. The causal effect of ending
prohibition on alcohol purchases is thus 1- Fc(w)-(1- Fc(d))= Fc(d)- Fc(w).
Suppose that individuals prefer to change the law to end prohibition if for some cutoff k ≤ w,
their willingness to pay satisfies v > k. This cutoff k is assumed to be less than or equal to w
because individuals who value alcohol at least enough to buy it when it is legal will be interested
in ending prohibition. Additionally, some individuals who would not buy it might value freedom
of choice as a generic good or might value the reduced criminal activity associated with ending
prohibition. Then, under majority rule, prohibition will end in those counties where 1-Fc(k) >
0.5, or, equivalently, where Fc(k) < 0.5. Thus, the distribution Fc determines both whether or not
a county will end prohibition and the causal effect on alcohol consumption. This implies that we
have both heterogeneous treatment effects and correlated heterogeneity determining which
counties are treated.
Since the only heterogeneity we allow for in this simple model is time-invariant, the inclusion of
county fixed effects is enough to ensure that treatment is exogenous to the regressors. This
implies that we can obtain an unbiased estimate of the average treatment effect on the treated
(ATT) for wet counties. However, since the model tells us that treatment effects are
heterogeneous, the ATT for wet counties does not in general equal the average treatment effect
(ATE) for the population.
Individuals who have a willingness to pay greater than or equal to d are drinkers, because they
will buy alcohol whether or not it is prohibited. Individuals who have willingness to pay less
than or equal to zero are abstainers, because they will not buy alcohol at any price. The normal
distribution implies that all counties have a nonzero fraction of abstainers who do not value
alcohol consumption and a nonzero fraction of drinkers who highly value alcohol consumption.
Neither abstainers nor drinkers change their binary alcohol purchase decision in response to
changes in legal prohibition.
Suppose that Fc is normal with unit variance and heterogeneous medians, mc, which vary across
counties. Counties whose county-specific median, mc, is low would have nearly all abstainers
and counties whose median is high would have nearly all drinkers. A county with mostly
drinkers would have a very high mc so that both w and d would be very far below the median.
Consequently, such a county would go wet, but the causal effect on alcohol purchase will be
small. Such counties have high fractions of the population purchasing alcohol regardless of its
prohibition status.
44

A county with mostly abstainers would have a very low median so that have both w and d would
be very far above the median. Such a county would stay dry, but if it went wet, it would also
have a very small causal effect on alcohol consumption.
Counties with mc just below w might go either way on staying dry, but those that become wet
would tend to have a large causal effect because the density of a normal is highest at the median.
The observed ATT will, thus, depend on the distribution of mc across counties. If the empirical
distribution of mc across counties is right-skewed, for example, the ATT could be quite small
because the counties full of drinkers would dominate the counties that ended prohibition.
Now consider an intermediate treatment: having a wet neighbor but remaining dry (that is, dryish
in the language of the main text). This reduces the cost of purchase from d to n, where w < n < d
gives the cost of buying alcohol from a neighboring county, which is less than the cost of buying
it locally under prohibition, but more than the cost of buying it in a wet county. The source of
this price friction is at least twofold: (1) travel distance between one’s residence and the county
line of the nearest wet neighbor and (2) potential local enforcement of prohibition restrictions in
the home county.
The treatment effect for dryish is then Fc(n)- Fc(w). Conditional on the distribution of
willingness-to-pay in the country, this treatment effect is strictly smaller than that of transitioning
to wet status, because we integrate a smaller range of the willingness-to-pay distribution. Further,
only a dry county can be treated with this intermediate treatment. For these two reasons, we
argue that the treatment effect of a dry county having a wet neighbor provides a conservative
(lower-bound) estimate of the ATT for a dry county becoming wet. This is an interesting object
for two reasons: (1) we can say something about the effect of treatment on agents that never
choose treatment and (2) if we take our estimated ATT for wet as unbiased, then we can combine
the estimates to get a lower-bound estimate of the ATE for the population.
The above arguments suggest that in this simple model, the treatment effect is non-monotonic in
the county-specific preference parameters. If treatment is exogenous to the regressors (as in the
fixed-effects estimate), then we can recover the ATT for wet counties. However, if treatment is
endogenous, perhaps due to time-varying county-specific unobserved preference shocks, then
one would typically appeal to instrumental variables to correct for that endogeneity. However,
because the treatment effect is non-monotonic, standard instrumental variables approaches will
not work.
We can also express this intuition more formally as a heterogenous treatment effects model.
Let Yct be the alcohol purchase rate (binary for individuals, but a rate for a county-year). The
above model implies that

Yct = Tct * Gc + X ct * B + !c + " t + ect ,
where Tct is the treatment status (wet=1, dry=0) for county c in period t, Xct are covariates, c
are county fixed effects, t are year fixed effects, and ect are error terms. The important feature
45

here is that the treatment effects Gc are heterogeneous across counties, so this a random
coefficients model. Furthermore, there is an underlying parameter governing county-specific
preferences for consuming alcohol, mc, that determines both Tct and Gc. Under the model above,
Tct is monotonically increasing in mc. Further, for mc high enough, G is monotonically decreasing
in mc.
Given the restriction that variation in alcohol preferences (mc) is time-invariant, then the only
variable that treatment depends on is county. If we include county fixed effects as regressors,
then we satisfy the selection-on-observables condition that guarantees that the estimated value of
the coefficient on wet is an unbiased estimate of the average treatment effect on the treated
(ATT) for counties that go wet.
Now assume that alcohol preferences vary over both time and county in ways uncorrelated with
the observed covariates (so that we have mct). This implies
Yct = Tct * Gct + X ct * B + !c + " t + ect ,

because mct causes variation in the treatment effect (G). Furthermore, assume that counties that
go wet have mct high enough that the treatment effect (G) is monotonically decreasing in mct. In
this case, including the county fixed effects does not deliver selection-on-observables, and the
estimated coefficient on wet is a biased estimate of the ATT for counties that choose wet status.
However, because we know that Tct increases in mct and Gct decreases in mct, we can sign the
bias: the estimated coefficient is a downward-biased estimate of the ATT for wet status.
Note that the channel for this form of endogeneity does not run through the additive error term
(ect). Instead, the issue arises all through the fact that a single unobserved variable (alcohol
preferences) drives both the response of alcohol consumption to a change in prohibition status
and the probability of opting for a change in prohibition status.

46

Appendix B: A Comparison of Results under MLE and OLS
A very common specification in much of the literature is to regress the (logged) infant mortality
rate on covariates of interest. Thus, we compare our MLE with unweighted and weighted OLS
where the weight is the number of births in a county-year.
We begin with the observation that for small numbers of births Bct, the binomial distribution of
infants deaths Dct is skewed and discrete, but as Bct gets large, the distribution of infant deaths
becomes more symmetric and smooth. As Bct → ∞ , the distribution of Dct is approximately
normal by the de Moivre–Laplace theorem and is approximately distributed as Dct ~ N(Bctγct ,
Bctγct (1- γct)). Consequently, the infant mortality rate, Ict = Dct / Bct, is approximately
asymptotically distributed as Ict ~N(γct , γct (1- γct)/ Bct), leading to the widespread use of least
squares estimates regressing the infant mortality rate on covariates. The limiting distribution of
the binomial suggests that if the observed numbers of deaths are large, then least squares
estimators are acceptable, but they should use weights Bct to gain efficiency. That is, estimation
should be by weighted least squares, given the dependence of the variance γct (1- γct)/ Bct on the
observed numbers of births. Furthermore, robust standard errors should be used to deal with the
fact that the variance also depends on the unobserved observation-specific γct.
Following the same notation from the fixed effects binomial model in the main text, we estimate
the following OLS equation:
8
log(%&' ⁄(&' ) = ,- + ,/ 0&' + ,1 2&' + ,3 0&'∗ + ,5 2&'∗ + 67&'
+ 9& + :' + ;&'

where Dct and Bct are the number of infant deaths and the number of births at county c in time t.
Wct and Nct are equal to one in all the years following the change in prohibition status and equal
to zero in the year of—and all years preceding—the change in prohibition status for wet and
neighboring counties, respectively. Similarly, Wct* and Nct* are equal to one in the year of the
status change and equal to 0 in all other years to allow for partial treatment effects in the year of
change in prohibition status. The control group is then the set of bone dry counties, dry counties
without any wet neighbors. Xct is a set of the time-varying county characteristics which is the
same as in our baseline estimate found in column (6) of Table 4. λc and θt are county and time
fixed effects, respectively. Our coefficients of interests are β2 and also potentially β1.
This specification presents another issue which arises with OLS: observations with no infant
deaths must be dropped or scaled before taking the log. Following the convention in the literature
(e.g., Carpenter and Dobkin, 2009), we add 0.5 to the value of infant deaths in order to retain the
342 observations that have no reported infant deaths. Unweighted OLS estimates do not change
if instead we add 0.1.
For ease of comparison, columns (1) through (3) in Table B1 replicates the MLE estimates from
columns (4) through (6) in Table 3. Columns (4) through (6) present the results of an equivalent
regression of the logged infant mortality rate on the same covariates estimated via unweighted
OLS. Comparing our preferred results in column (3) to those in column (6), we see that the
estimated effect of dryish in subsequent years in column (6) is nearly 50% larger than that in
column (3). Likewise, we see a 33% larger estimated effect associated with wet in subsequent
47

years in column (6) as opposed to column (3), but now with a lack of statistical significance.
This suggests that unweighted OLS may be problematic in that it may be placing undue weight
on unrepresentative observations, e.g., particularly small counties.
Table B1: MLE versus Unweighted OLS Estimates

Dryish in initial year

(1)
0.008
(0.016)

MLE
(2)
0.009
(0.016)

(3)
0.009
(0.016)

Unweighted OLS
(4)
(5)
(6)
0.014
0.014
0.013
(0.027)
(0.027)
(0.027)

Dryish in subsequent years

0.046*** 0.046*** 0.047***
(0.016)
(0.016)
(0.016)

0.071**
(0.028)

0.070**
(0.028)

0.069**
(0.028)

Wet in initial year

0.014
(0.017)

0.013
(0.017)

0.013
(0.017)

0.026
(0.026)

0.025
(0.026)

0.025
(0.026)

Wet in subsequent years

0.041**
(0.018)

0.040**
(0.018)

0.040**
(0.018)

0.054
(0.033)

0.054
(0.033)

0.053
(0.033)

R-squared

N/A

N/A

N/A

0.66

0.66

0.66

N
N of triads

14,337
683

14,337
683

14,337
683

14,337
683

14,337
683

14,337
683

X
X

X
X
X

X
X
X
X

X
X

X
X
X

X
X
X
X

County & triad-year FEs
County controls
New Deal spending
Hospital beds/Medical institutions

Notes: Estimates in columns (1)–(3) are from binomial fixed effect maximum likelihood estimation (MLE), biascorrected following Hahn and Newey (2004), and consistent for slowly increasing T. Standard errors clustered at the
county level are reported in parentheses. Columns (4)–(6) report the estimates from unweighted OLS with standard
errors clustered at the county level in parentheses. The outcome in these columns is the logged infant mortality rate
where we add 0.5 deaths to the observations with no infant deaths before taking the log. Changing this number to 0.1
has no effects on our estimates. The sample size is 14,337 (683 triads of counties for each year from 1933 to 1939
excluding six observations with no births in the year). See Table 1 for the definition of each control variable.
Significance levels: *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.10

48

Table B2 again compares our preferred set of estimates from MLE to those of an equivalent
regression of the logged infant mortality rate on the same covariates, estimated this time via OLS
weighted by the number of births in a county. While the results are quite similar in magnitude,
there is a distinct decline in precision as we move to columns (4) through (6) with the associated
standard errors increasing by roughly 35%. This suggests that even weighted OLS is not the ideal
estimation technique for our sample.
Table B2: MLE versus Weighted OLS Estimates

Dryish in initial year

(1)
0.008
(0.016)

MLE
(2)
0.009
(0.016)

(3)
0.009
(0.016)

Weighted OLS
(4)
(5)
(6)
0.008
0.009
0.008
(0.020)
(0.020)
(0.020)

Dryish in subsequent years

0.046*** 0.046*** 0.047***
(0.016)
(0.016)
(0.016)

0.049**
(0.022)

0.050**
(0.022)

0.049**
(0.022)

Wet in initial year

0.014
(0.017)

0.013
(0.017)

0.013
(0.017)

0.009
(0.020)

0.008
(0.020)

0.008
(0.020)

Wet in subsequent years

0.041**
(0.018)

0.040**
(0.018)

0.040**
(0.018)

0.037
(0.024)

0.036
(0.024)

0.036
(0.024)

R-squared

N/A

N/A

N/A

0.75

0.75

0.75

N
N of triads

14,337
683

14,337
683

14,337
683

14,337
683

14,337
683

14,337
683

X
X

X
X
X

X
X
X
X

X
X

X
X
X

X
X
X
X

County & triad-year FEs
County controls
New Deal spending
Hospital beds/Medical institutions

Notes: Estimates in columns (1)–(3) are from binomial fixed effect maximum likelihood estimation (MLE), biascorrected following Hahn and Newey (2004), and consistent for slowly increasing T. Standard errors clustered at the
county level are reported in parentheses. Columns (4)–(6) report the estimates from weighted OLS with standard
errors clustered at the county level in parentheses. The outcome in these columns is the logged infant mortality rate
where we add 0.5 deaths to the observations with no infant deaths before taking the log. Changing this number to 0.1
has no effects on our estimates. The sample size is 14,337 (683 triads of counties for each year from 1933 to 1939
excluding six observations with no births in the year). See Table 1 for the definition of each control variable.
Significance levels: *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.10

49

Appendix C: Incorporating All US Counties and their Spatial Distribution into the
Empirical Model
As an extended robustness exercise, we can more fully exploit the underlying dataset collected
for this project which tracks the prohibition status of all counties in the then 48 states and which
is depicted in Figure 4. In so doing, we necessarily have to consider a specification which moves
away from the use of triad-year fixed effects but which preserves much of our concern with
controlling for as much variation in unobservables as possible. One candidate in this vein would
be a standard panel specification with county and year fixed effects as reported in Column (7) in
Table 5 for our sample of triads of nearby counties. Thus, we relate variation in infant mortality
on a county-level basis to variation in dryish and wet status along with a large set of control
variables detailed in section 3 for all 3,043 counties in the then 48 states.
Table C1 reports the results of this specification with county and time fixed effects for all US
counties via binomial fixed effect maximum likelihood estimation. Here, the triad-year fixed
effects !st are constrained to be identical for all triads (so that !st = !t), and we use a sample of all
US counties (with no multiply-observed counties) rather than the sample of triads of nearby
counties. In Table C1, we see qualitatively similar results to those in Table 3, but with somewhat
smaller magnitudes attached to dryish in subsequent years and wet in subsequent years. The
results in column (3) suggest that the effect of one county’s (or state’s) decision to go wet on its
neighboring dry counties corresponds to a 2.3% increase in infant mortality for those counties
affected and the effect of one county going wet corresponds to a 2.0% increase in infant
mortality for those counties affected.
While both estimates are smaller than our preferred estimates in the previous section, we should
again view these results with a considerable caution. Here, in addition to the stricter common
trend assumption as mentioned above, using the full sample of all US counties introduced much
more heterogeneity—both observed and unobserved. Thus, while we report these estimates for
the sake of the completeness, our preferred estimates come from the specification that exploit
only within triad-year variation using the triads of nearby counties (Table 3).

50

Table C1: The Effect of Repeal on Infant Mortality Rates, Nation-wide Sample
(1)
0.029**
(0.012)

(2)
0.029**
(0.012)

(3)
0.029**
(0.012)

Dryish in subsequent years

0.024**
(0.012)

0.023*
(0.012)

0.023*
(0.012)

Wet in initial year

0.006
(0.008)

0.006
(0.008)

0.006
(0.008)

Wet in subsequent years

0.020**
(0.009)

0.020**
(0.009)

0.020**
(0.009)

N
N of county
County & year FEs
County controls
New Deal spending
Hospital beds/Medical institutions

21,291
3,043
X
X

21,291
3,043
X
X
X

21,291
3,043
X
X
X
X

Dryish in initial year

Notes: All estimates are from binomial fixed effect maximum likelihood estimation (MLE), bias-corrected following
Hahn and Newey (2004), and consistent for slowly increasing T. Standard errors clustered at the county level are
reported in parentheses. The sample size is 21,291 (3,043 counties for each year from 1933 to 1939 excluding 10
observations with no births in the year). County controls are the variables reported in Table 1 interacted with a linear
trend, except for retail sales which is time-varying. New Deal spending is the cumulative amount of county-level
New Deal spending per capita interacted with a linear trend. Hospital beds is the number of hospital beds per 1000
women aged 15–44 in a county while medical institutions is the number of medical institutions per 1000 people in a
county (both of which are time-varying). Significance levels: *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.10

51

In the results presented in Table C1, our main explanatory variable of interest is dryish, an
indicator variable for whether a dry county has at least one wet neighbor. One of the primary
reasons for using this particular specification is to increase the statistical power of our
estimation. However, dryish counties may be heterogeneous. In particular, the spatial distribution
of counties might need to be taken into account. That is, what might matter is not only whether a
neighboring county chooses wet status, but also how far away that county is. For instance,
counties in the eastern and western halves of the United States have widely divergent sizes: New
York County comprises 59 square kilometers while San Bernardino County comprises 52,072
square kilometers, implying that their respective neighbors could be very near or very far. Figure
C1 below lays out the cumulative distribution of dryish county seats by distance to the border of
the nearest wet county. The sample is comprised of the 700+ counties which are dryish at some
point in between 1934 and 1939. The horizontal line corresponds to the first quartile of 13.0
kilometers, suggesting dryish counties were, in the main, close to their wet neighbors (for
presentation purposes, we limit the value of the x-axis to 80 kilometers while the maximum value
observed in sample is 125.8 kilometers).
Figure C1: Cumulative Distribution of Dryish Counties by Distance to Nearest Wet County

As a first step, we can consider the unconditional relationship between distance to the nearest
wet county and infant mortality rates as in Figure C2. More specifically, the raw correlation
between the distance to the county border of the nearest wet county and the logged infant
mortality rate is plotted. The sample is comprised of the 700 counties which are dryish at some
point in between 1934 and 1939 (N = 2,546). We use the command “binscatter” in Stata
(Stepner, 2016) to generate an equal-sized binned scatterplot. The solid line is the line fitted by
OLS when we assign the distance in the contemporaneous year for the initial year when the
county becomes dryish and the distance from the previous year for the subsequent years, in order
to be consistent with our main specification. Thus, there is some indication of a negative
relationship in between the two variables.
52

Figure C2: Distance to Nearest Wet County and Infant Mortality Rate

We now formalize this relationship by incorporating distance to the nearest wet county into our
empirical model and replicating the specifications of Table C1. Here, we make a distinction
between dryish counties which are near and dryish counties which are far from neighboring wet
counties. Ideally, we would like to split this distance to the nearest wet county into multiple bins
in order to estimate the differential effects by distance in a flexible way (e.g., Lovenheim and
Slemrod, 2010). However, since the number of dryish counties is not very large, we will
unfortunately lack power in that type of specification. We instead choose to impose a degree of
parameterization to increase the statistical power. In this case, we would like our distance
measure to satisfy the following two conditions: (1) its value should approach one as the distance
to the nearest wet county approaches zero and (2) its value should approach zero as the distance
to the nearest wet county increases.
One natural starting point might be the inverse of the distance to the nearest wet county.
However, its value approaches infinity as the distance approaches zero. Slightly modifying this
measure, we define an inverse-distance measure as follows:

if d ! L
"1
Inverse distance = #
$ L / d if d > L

where d is the distance to the nearest wet county and the L is a threshold value. In this way, our
inverse distance measure is bounded between 0 and 1. To be consistent with our main
specification, we assign the distance (d) in the contemporaneous year for the initial year and
assign the distance from the previous year for the subsequent years. In terms of the distance
measure (d), we consider both the distance from a county seat to the border of the nearest wet
county (our preferred choice) and the distance from a county seat to the county seat of the
nearest wet county. In terms of the threshold distance (L), we take the 25th percentile of distance
to the nearest wet county among dryish county as our default. We also report the results using the
5th and 10th percentiles. Thus, our default L, the 25th percentile value for the distance to the
53

nearest wet county border, is 13.0 kilometers as shown in Figure C1 while that for the distance to
the nearest wet county seat is 28.6 kilometers.
To follow our main specification, we also separately include wet county/state in the initial year
and wet county/state in subsequent years. Thus, the control group is bone-dry. In this way, we
exploit the heterogeneity among dryish counties where the variation comes from the distance to
the nearest wet county. However, we choose to not take any of these specifications as our
baseline because: (1) there is a relative lack of power when we incorporate this heterogeneity in
distance; (2) the inverse distance measure likely suffers from measurement error, primarily for
the fact that we do not know the distribution of population within the counties and, thereby,
cannot calculate population-weighted distances to the nearest wet county; and (3) it is unclear
what functional form any inverse distance measure should take as the decay rate of a variable
like dryish is unknown.
With these caveats in mind, Table C2 presents the results of our preferred specification
incorporating distance to the border of the nearest wet county. Table C3 presents the results of a
very similar specification which incorporates distance to the nearest wet county seat while Table
C4 presents the results for both measures of distance, but with varying threshold values (L).
Consider column (1) of Table C2. Again, we have statistically significant effects estimated for
both dryish counties in subsequent years along with wet counties in subsequent years. Naturally
though, the interpretation of the coefficients is slightly different. Here, the value of 0.028 for
inverse distance in subsequent years suggests that dryish counties which were 13 kilometers or
less away from a wet border experienced a 2.8% rise in infant mortality while dryish counties
which were more than 13 kilometers from a wet border experienced less than a 2.8% rise in
infant mortality. For instance, moving from the 25th percentile of distance (13.0 kilometers) to
the 75th percentile of distance (22.3 kilometers) entailed a decline in the estimated effect of being
dryish from 2.8% to 1.8%.
The remaining columns of Table C2 suggest that materially the same results arise across the use
of different controls. Table C3 speaks to a broad equivalence of results when using the distance
separating dryish county seats from wet county seats as opposed to wet county borders, although
the results for wet county borders generally have greater power and for inverse distance in
subsequent years are now statistically insignificant. Finally, Table C4 suggests that our distancerelated results are relatively robust, regardless of the choice of the threshold value. Cumulatively,
the tables speak to the fact that geography was an important factor in mediating our results for
the nationwide sample.

54

Table C2: The Effect of Repeal on Infant Mortality Rates,
Distance from Dryish County Seats to Nearest Wet County Borders
(1)
0.041***
(0.015)

(2)
0.040***
(0.015)

(3)
0.040***
(0.015)

Inverse distance in sub. years

0.028*
(0.015)

0.027*
(0.015)

0.027*
(0.015)

Wet in initial year

0.006
(0.008)

0.006
(0.008)

0.006
(0.008)

Wet in subsequent years

0.020**
(0.009)

0.020**
(0.009)

0.020**
(0.009)

N
N of county
County & year FEs
County controls
New Deal spending
Hospital beds/Medical institutions

21,291
3,043
X
X

21,291
3,043
X
X
X

21,291
3,043
X
X
X
X

Inverse distance in initial year

Notes: Estimates are from binomial fixed effect maximum likelihood estimation (MLE), bias-corrected following
Hahn and Newey (2004), and consistent for slowly increasing T. Standard errors clustered at the county level are
reported in parentheses. The sample size is 21,291 (3,043 counties for each year from 1933 to 1939 excluding 10
observations with no births in the year). Inverse distance takes a value of one if the distance from a dryish county
seat to the nearest wet county border (d) is less than or equal to the threshold (L) and takes the value of L/d if the
distance is greater than the threshold (L). Therefore, inverse distance is bounded between 0 and 1. To be consistent
with our main specification, we assign the distance (d) in the contemporaneous year for the initial year and assign
the distance from the previous year for the subsequent years. Here, we take the 25th percentile of distance to the
nearest wet county border which is 13.0 kilometers (as shown in Figure C1). Column (1) includes our baseline
covariates. County controls in column (2) are the variables reported in Table 1 interacted with a linear trend, except
for retail sales which is time-varying. New Deal spending in column (2) is the cumulative amount of county-level
New Deal spending per capita interacted with a linear trend. Medical institutions in column (3) is the number of
medical institutions per 1000 people in a county while hospital beds is the number of hospital beds per 1000 women
aged 15–44 in a county (both of which are time-varying). Significance levels: *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.10

55

Table C3: The Effect of Repeal on Infant Mortality Rates,
Distance from Dryish County Seats to Nearest Wet County Seats
(1)
0.041***
(0.015)

(2)
0.041***
(0.015)

(3)
0.041***
(0.015)

Inverse distance in sub. years

0.024
(0.015)

0.024
(0.015)

0.024
(0.015)

Wet in initial year

0.005
(0.008)

0.006
(0.008)

0.006
(0.008)

Wet in subsequent years

0.019**
(0.009)

0.019**
(0.009)

0.019**
(0.009)

N
N of county
County & year FEs
County controls
New Deal spending
Hospital beds/Medical institutions

21,291
3,043
X
X

21,291
3,043
X
X
X

21,291
3,043
X
X
X
X

Inverse distance in initial year

Notes: Estimates are from binomial fixed effect maximum likelihood estimation (MLE), bias-corrected following
Hahn and Newey (2004), and consistent for slowly increasing T. Standard errors clustered at the county level are
reported in parentheses. The sample size is 21,291 (3,043 counties for each year from 1933 to 1939 excluding 10
observations with no births in the year). Inverse distance takes a value of one if the distance from a dryish county
seat to the nearest wet county border (d) is less than or equal to the threshold (L) and takes the value of L/d if the
distance is greater than the threshold (L). Therefore, inverse distance is bounded between 0 and 1. To be consistent
with our main specification, we assign the distance (d) in the contemporaneous year for the initial year and assign
the distance from the previous year for the subsequent years. Here, we take the 25th percentile of distance to the
nearest wet county seat which is 28.6 kilometers. Column (1) includes our baseline covariates. County controls are
the variables reported in Table 1 interacted with a linear trend, except for retail sales which is time-varying. New
Deal spending in column (2) is the cumulative amount of county-level New Deal spending per capita interacted with
a linear trend. Medical institutions in column (3) is the number of medical institutions per 1000 people in a county
while hospital beds is the number of hospital beds per 1000 women aged 15–44 in a county (both of which are timevarying). Significance levels: *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.10

56

Table C4: The Effect of Repeal on Infant Mortality Rates,
Distance from Dryish County Seats to Nearest Wet Counties Using Different Thresholds
Percentile of threshold (L)
Threshold (L) in km
Inverse distance in initial year

Nearest wet county borders
5th
10th
25th
7.5
9.2
13.0
(1)
(2)
(3)
0.055*** 0.048*** 0.040***
(0.021)
(0.018)
(0.015)

Nearest wet county seats
5th
10th
25th
16.0
20.9
28.6
(4)
(5)
(6)
0.062*** 0.051*** 0.041***
(0.020)
(0.018)
(0.015)

Inverse distance in sub. years

0.038*
(0.022)

0.031
(0.019)

0.027*
(0.015)

0.024
(0.022)

0.026
(0.019)

0.024
(0.015)

Wet in initial year

0.006
(0.008)

0.006
(0.008)

0.006
(0.008)

0.005
(0.008)

0.006
(0.008)

0.006
(0.008)

Wet in subsequent years

0.019**
(0.009)

0.019**
(0.009)

0.020**
(0.009)

0.017*
(0.009)

0.019**
(0.009)

0.019**
(0.009)

N
N of county
County & year FEs
County controls
New Deal spending
Hospital beds/
Medical institutions

21,291
3,043
X
X
X

21,291
3,043
X
X
X

21,291
3,043
X
X
X

21,291
3,043
X
X
X

21,291
3,043
X
X
X

21,291
3,043
X
X
X

X

X

X

X

X

X

Notes: Estimates are from binomial fixed effect maximum likelihood estimation (MLE), bias-corrected following
Hahn and Newey (2004), and consistent for slowly increasing T. Standard errors clustered at the county level are
reported in parentheses. The sample size is 21,291 (3,043 counties for each year from 1933 to 1939 excluding 10
observations with no births in the year). Inverse distance takes a value of one if the distance from a dryish county
seat to the nearest wet county border (d) is less than or equal to the threshold (L) and takes the value of L/d if the
distance is greater than the threshold (L). Therefore, inverse distance is bounded between 0 and 1. To be consistent
with our main specification, we assign the distance (d) in the contemporaneous year for the initial year and assign
the distance from the previous year for the subsequent years. For columns (1) through (3), we change the threshold
(L) to the 5th, 10th, and 25th percentile of distance to nearest wet county border, respectively. Thus, column (3)
replicates column (1) of Table C1. Columns (4)–(6) instead use the distance to nearest wet county seat with column
(6) replicating column (1) in Table C2. County controls are the variables reported in columns (1) and (3) of Table 2
interacted with a linear trend, except for retail sales which is time-varying. Significance levels: *** p<0.01,
** p<0.05, * p<0.10

57

