NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

THE NEXUS OF MONETARY POLICY AND SHADOW BANKING IN CHINA
Kaiji Chen
Jue Ren
Tao Zha
Working Paper 23377
http://www.nber.org/papers/w23377
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
May 2017, Revised May 2018

This research is supported in part by the National Science Foundation Grant SES 1558486
through the NBER and by the National Natural Science Foundation of China Project Numbers
71473168, 71473169, and 71633003. We thank Dean Corbae, Marty Eichenbaum, Sergio Rebelo,
Richard Rogerson, Wei Xiong, and seminar participants at Federal Reserve Bank of Richmond,
2016 NBER Chinese Economy Working Group Meeting, International Monetary Funds,
University of Virginia, 2016 Society of Economic Dynamics Meetings, North Carolina State
University, Tsinghua University, Bank of Canada, Princeton University, and Federal Reserve
Bank of San Francisco for helpful discussions. Karen Zhong provided outstanding research
assistance. The current version of this paper draws heavily from the two unpublished manuscripts
``What We Learn from China's Rising Shadow Banking: Exploring the Nexus of Monetary
Tightening and Banks' Role in Entrusted Lending'' and ``China Pro-Growth Monetary Policy and
Its Asymmetric Transmission.'' The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not
necessarily reflect those of the Federal Reserve Bank of Atlanta, the Federal Reserve System, or
the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.
© 2017 by Kaiji Chen, Jue Ren, and Tao Zha. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to
exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.

The Nexus of Monetary Policy and Shadow Banking in China
Kaiji Chen, Jue Ren, and Tao Zha
NBER Working Paper No. 23377
May 2017, Revised May 2018
JEL No. E02,E5,G11,G12,G28
ABSTRACT
We estimate the quantity-based monetary policy system in China. We argue that China's rising
shadow banking was inextricably linked to banks' balance-sheet risk and hampered the
effectiveness of monetary policy on the banking system during the 2009-2015 period of monetary
policy contractions. By constructing two micro datasets at the individual bank level, we
substantiate this argument with three empirical findings: (1) in response to monetary policy
tightening, nonstate banks actively engaged in intermediating shadow banking products; (2) these
banks, in sharp contrast to state banks, brought shadow banking products onto the balance sheet
via risky investments; (3) bank loans and risky investment assets in the banking system respond
in opposite directions to monetary policy tightening, which makes monetary policy less effective.
We build a theoretical framework to derive the above testable hypotheses and explore
implications of the interaction between monetary and regulatory policies.
Kaiji Chen
Department of Economics
Emory University
Atlanta, GA 30322
chen.kaiji@gmail.com
Jue Ren
Emory University
Department of Economics
1602 Fishburne Drive
Atlanta, GA 30322-2240
jue.ren@emory.edu

Tao Zha
Emory University
1602 Fishburne Drive
Atlanta, GA 30322-2240
and Federal Reserve Bank of Atlanta
and also NBER
tzha@emory.edu

THE NEXUS OF MONETARY POLICY AND SHADOW BANKING IN CHINA

1

I. Introduction
In the aftermath of an unprecedented stimulus of multitrillion RMBs injected by the
Chinese government to combat the 2008 financial crisis, the People’s Bank of China (PBC)
pursued contractionary monetary policy by tightening the M2 supply between 2009 and 2015.
The policy of persistent monetary tightening, which aimed to contract the credit supply that
had soared during the stimulus period, achieved the expected outcome of a simultaneous fall
of M2 supply and bank loans (top left panel of Figure 1). During the same period, however,
shadow banking loans rose rapidly (top right panel of Figure 1). The share of shadow banking
loans in the sum of shadow banking loans and bank loans increased steadily to around 20%
in 2013-2015 (bottom left panel of Figure 1).
In this paper, we establish empirical evidence that contractionary monetary policy during 2009-2015 in China, although exerting an expected effect on traditional bank loans,
stimulated shadow banking and encouraged banks to bring shadow banking products onto
their balance sheets in the form of risky nonloan assets. We advance a theory to explain
why banks, in response to contractionary monetary policy, have an incentive to circumvent
banking regulations by increasing nonloan assets. Both empirical evidence and theoretical
analysis demonstrate that the effectiveness of monetary policy on the total credit in the
banking system was severely hampered by the rise of shadow banking.
Specifically, we make four distinctive contributions. First, we provide institutional details
of China’s quantity-based monetary system, its regulations on commercial banks, and the
relationship between shadow banking and traditional banking. One unique feature of monetary policy in China is to use M2 growth as the intermediate target to support growth of
gross domestic product (GDP) beyond annually targeted GDP growth. In fact, M2 growth
has been the only intermediate target used on a quarterly basis by the central government
since 2000.
We find that China’s quantity-based monetary policy interacted with two major regulations specific to China’s banking system to influence bank lending. One regulation is the legal
ceiling on the ratio of bank loans to bank deposits imposed by the PBC on each commercial
bank, which we call the LDR regulation, where LDR stands for the loan-to-deposit ratio; the
other regulation, issued by the Chinese Banking Regulatory Commission (CBRC), prohibits
commercial banks from expanding bank loans to risky industries such as real estate, which
we call the safe-loan regulation. The LDR regulation controls the quantity of bank lending
and the safe-loan regulation controls the quality of bank lending.

THE NEXUS OF MONETARY POLICY AND SHADOW BANKING IN CHINA

2

We also find that one of the most unique characteristics in China’s banking system is an
institutional division of state and nonstate commercial banks. State banks are owned by
the central government and the remaining commercial banks are nonstate banks. Nonstate
banks as a whole represent almost half the size of the entire banking system. State banks,
directly controlled by the central government, are part of the government and thus adhere to
the government’s own policy against actively bringing shadow banking products onto their
balance sheets. This is not true of nonstate banks, however. Between 2009 and 2015, contractionary monetary policy gave nonstate banks a strong incentive to take advantage of the
lax regulatory environment of shadow banking by first increasing shadow banking activities
off balance sheet and then bringing shadow banking products into a special investment category on the asset side of their balance sheets. This special category, called account-receivable
investment (ARI), is not subject to the LDR and safe-loan regulations.
To test whether nonstate banks behave differently than state banks in their responses
of shadow banking activities to changes in monetary policy, it is essential to estimate the
existing quantity-based monetary policy rule and obtain an exogenous M2 growth series
usable for our subsequent empirical analysis. The estimated monetary policy rule is based
on China’s institutional facts. It is tractable in the spirit of Taylor (1993, p.197) “to preserve
the concept of a policy rule even in an environment where it is practically impossible to follow
mechanically the algebraic formulas economists write down to describe their preferred policy
rules.” The estimation of both endogenous and exogenous components of China’s monetary
policy constitutes a second contribution of this paper.
As a third contribution of the paper, we construct two micro datasets at the level of
individual banks and use these data to shed light on the disparate responses of shadow
banking activities conducted by state versus nonstate banks to changes in monetary policy.
The first dataset, named the entrusted loan dataset, covers new entrusted loans between
nonfinancial firms for the period 2009-2015 during which entrusted lending was the most
important part of shadow banking in China and grew rapidly relative to bank loans (bottom
right panel of Figure 1). The dataset identifies the name of a financial trustee that facilitated
each entrusted loan, which is crucial for our subsequent panel regression analysis. We follow
Jiménez, Ongena, Peydró, and Saurina (2014) and control for bank-specific attributes such
as LDR, size, liquidity, and profitability in our regressions. We find that entrusted lending
funneled by nonstate banks rose significantly in response to contractionary monetary policy,
while there is no such evidence for state banks.

THE NEXUS OF MONETARY POLICY AND SHADOW BANKING IN CHINA

3

The second dataset, named the bank asset dataset, covers the two major categories on
the asset side of an individual bank’s balance sheet: bank loans and ARI excluding central
bank bills or government bonds, which we call ARIX. A major part of ARIX is in the form
of beneficiary rights of entrusted loans funneled by banks. Thus, this new dataset connects
off-balance-sheet activities to risky nonloan investments on the balance sheet. Our panel
regression analysis based on this dataset finds strong evidence that in response to a fall in
M2 growth, nonstate banks increased their ARIX holdings significantly, but state banks did
not. This finding of nonstate banks’ risk-taking behavior, consistent with the finding of
their off-balance-sheet behavior, implies that these banks bear the risk of shadow banking
products in the form of ARIX.
A fourth contribution of this paper is to advance an analysis of how the rise of shadow
banking dampens the effectiveness of monetary policy on the banking system. The total bank
credit combines both bank loans and ARIX holdings on banks’ balance sheets. For monetary
policy to be effective, it is the total bank credit that matters. To lay the groundwork for our
empirical work, we build a theoretical model of how monetary policy functions through open
market operations to influence banks’ portfolio allocations and the total bank credit. The
theory, inspired by Bianchi and Bigio (2017), highlights nonstate banks’ optimal portfolio
choices between bank loans and risky nonloan assets. Bank loans are safe but subject to
the LDR regulation, while nonloan assets are subject to default risks but not to the LDR
regulation. As a result, individual banks trade off the default risk of nonloan assets against
the regulation cost of bank loans. We show that contractionary monetary policy increases the
risk of deposit withdrawals in individual banks. This risk in turn increases the expected cost
for individual banks to recoup deposit shortfalls and leads to banks’ portfolio adjustments
toward risky nonloan assets. Consequently, contractionary monetary policy not only exerts
the opposing effects on bank loans and nonloan assets, but also can lead to an increase in
total bank credit.
The theoretical analysis provides a framework for empirically evaluating the effectiveness
of monetary policy. We estimate a panel structural vector autoregression (VAR) model with
the identifying restriction justified by our theory. Unlike the existing VAR literature, the
model allows bank loans and ARIX holdings to be determined simultaneously. Despite the
simultaneity, the panel structural VAR is globally identified. Our estimation indicates that
in response to a one-standard-deviation fall of M2 growth, bank loans fall persistently. The
estimated dynamics are statistically significant. But the estimated response of ARIX is

THE NEXUS OF MONETARY POLICY AND SHADOW BANKING IN CHINA

4

positive over time. The rise of ARIX, therefore, makes monetary policy ineffective on total
bank credit because the rise of ARIX offsets the decline of bank loans.
A complementary paper is Hachem and Song (2016). They explore how a regulatory tightening can lead to a credit expansion due to the growth of shadow banking. Relative to that
paper, we make a number of contributions, including: propose and estimate a monetary policy rule; provide new micro data both off and on banks’ balance sheets; estimate the impacts
of contractionary monetary policy on banks’ shadow banking activities, again both off and
on the balance sheet; and quantify the opposing effects of monetary policy on bank loans
and ARIX in the banking system. The latter point on the opposite effects of contractionary
policy on the formal and shadow banking system is not a point of emphasis in Hachem and
Song (2016).
The rest of the paper is organized as follows. Section II presents the institutional details of
China’s banking system and monetary policy. Section III estimates China’s quantity-based
monetary policy rule. Section IV discusses the two new datasets we constructed. Section V
provides panel regressions on banks’ roles in shadow banking activities both off and on the
balance sheet. Section VI explores how the rise of ARIX affects the effectiveness of monetary
policy on the banking system by first developing a theoretical model and then obtaining
empirical evidence from estimation of a panel structural VAR. Section VII concludes the
paper.

II. China’s banking system and monetary policy
In this section, we discuss the unique features of China’s monetary policy, banking system, and banking regulations, all of which are pertinent to the subsequent empirical and
theoretical analyses in the paper. The discussion centers on three issues: (a) how quantitybased monetary policy works in China, (b) institutional facts about rising shadow banking
during the 2009-2015 period of monetary policy tightening, and (c) institutional asymmetry
between nonstate and state banks in shadow banking activities off and on the balance sheet.
II.1. Quantity-based monetary policy.
II.1.1. The intermediate target of monetary policy. For the U.S. monetary authority, the
intermediate target of monetary policy is the federal funds rate to meet the two ultimate
goals: inflation and employment (or output). For China, the intermediate target of monetary

THE NEXUS OF MONETARY POLICY AND SHADOW BANKING IN CHINA

5

policy has been M2 growth since 2000.1 The central government’s ultimate goals are price
stability and output growth (top two panels of Figure 2). Unlike the U.S. economy with
the inflation target as the primary goal of monetary policy, China is an emerging market
economy and the overriding objective of the central government is to achieve the annual
GDP growth target.
The monetary policy goal is to use M2 growth as the intermediate target in support of GDP
growth beyond its annual target while keeping stable inflation measured by the consumer
price index (CPI). According to the Chinese law, the PBC must formulate and implement
monetary policy under the leadership of the State Council. GDP and M2 growth targets have
been specified in the State Council’s Annual Report on the Work of Government (RWG) until
recently. The Central Economic Work Conference, organized jointly by the State Council
and the Central Committee of Communist Party of China (CPC) and typically held in
December of each year, decides on particular target values of GDP growth and M2 growth
for the coming year. Once these targets are decided, it is formally announced by Premier of
the State Council as part of the RWG to be presented to the annual assembly of the National
People’s Congress (NPC) during the next spring.2
The central government’s GDP growth target for a particular year is a lower bound of
GDP growth for that year. Because of its strong desire of maintaining social stability, the
government views such a lower bound as a crucial factor in keeping unemployment low
by means of economic growth. For example, when explaining why 6.5% was a targeted
lower bound for the GDP growth rate during a press conference for the NPC’s 2016 annual
assembly, Xu Shaoshi, Head of the National Development and Reform Commission (NDRC)
for the State Council, remarked: “The floor is employment, the floor has another implication,
which is economic growth. Therefore, we set this lower bound [of GDP growth].” The central
government’s GDP growth target as a lower bound is an overarching national priority for
every government unit, especially for the PBC.
Important decisions on adjusting M2 growth from quarter to quarter are made by the
Politburo consisting of General Secretary of CPC, Premier of the State Council, and other
top central government officials including Governor of the PBC. Unlike the Federal Reserve
System, the PBC is not independent of other central government units and its decision on
1In

1999, the PBC officially switched its monetary policy from controlling bank credit to controlling M2

growth.
2See this link for the State Council’s RWG: http://www.gov.cn/test/2006-02/16/content\
_200875.htm

THE NEXUS OF MONETARY POLICY AND SHADOW BANKING IN CHINA

6

quarterly changes of monetary policy is severely constrained by its obligation of meeting
the ultimate goal of surpassing targeted GDP growth and by the central government’s view
of how monetary policy should be conducted. For example, the 2009Q1 Monetary Policy
Report (MPR) stated: “In line with the overall arrangements of the CPC Central Committee
and the State Council, and in order to serve the overall objective of supporting economic
growth, expanding domestic demand, and restructuring the economy, the PBC implemented
a moderately loose monetary policy, adopted flexible and effective measures to step up
financial support for economic growth, and ensured that aggregate money and credit supply
satisfy the needs of economic development.”3
In practice, the PBC adjusts M2 growth rates on a quarterly basis in response to economic
conditions but at the same time makes these adjustments consistent with the annual M2
growth target set by the State Council (see various issues of quarterly MPRs). On an annual
basis, the targeted and actual rates of M2 growth are very close (Figure 3). No other policy
variables employed by the PBC, not even market interest rates, have been used to serve
as the intermediate target of monetary policy since 2000. On the contrary, a plethora of
instruments are used for the purpose of meeting the M2 growth target set by the central
government.

II.1.2. Instruments for the intermediate target of monetary policy. There are many instruments used by the PBC to meet the M2 growth target, including open market operations,
central bank base interest rate, central bank lending, reserve requirement, rediscounting, and
other tools specified by the State Council.4 In this section, we focus our discussion on two
major instruments: open market operations and changes in the reserve requirement.
The system for open market operations was established by the PBC in May 1998. Over
the past 20 years, it has matured rapidly to become the main tool for the PBC to manage the
money supply on a regular basis. Initially, primary dealers in open market operations were
commercial banks that undertook a large number of bond transactions. Over time, however,
primary dealers have been extended to security companies and other financial institutions.
In May 2015, there were a total of 46 primary dealers.
3Since

2001Q1, the MPR has been the only official release of how the PBC conducts monetary policy

each quarter. The MPR provides an executive summary of the state of the economy along with additional
descriptions of how the PBC adjusts its monetary policy actions in response to the state of the economy.
4See

the link: http://www.pbc.gov.cn/english/130727/130870/index.html

THE NEXUS OF MONETARY POLICY AND SHADOW BANKING IN CHINA

7

Bond trading in open market operations includes spot trading, repurchase trading, and
issuance of central bank bills (short-term bonds issued by the PBC) and government bonds.
Repurchase transactions are divided into the “repurchase” (repo) and “reverse repurchase”
(reverse repo) categories. In 2010 and 2011, for example, the PBC used issuance of both
central bank bills and repos to tighten the M2 supply: issuance of central bank bills totaled
4.3 trillion RMBs in 2010 and 1.4 trillion RMBs in 2011, and repo operations totaled 2.1
trillion RMBs in 2010 and 2.5 trillion RMBs in 2011. In Section VI.1, we analyze how open
market operations change deposits in the banking system.
The system for reserve requirements was established in 1984. Changes in the reserve
requirement ratio (RRR) are used by the PBC to help meet the M2 growth target, but this
instrument is used much less regularly than open market operations. Reserve requirements
should not be considered as representative of the PBC’s monetary policy instrument on a
quarterly basis. It is well known that a change in the RRR is one of several main instruments
or tools used by the central bank to target the money supply or the federal funds rate in recent
U.S. history.5 The logic that a change in the RRR is not the intermediate target of monetary
policy remains the same for China, though the RRR is less frequently changed in the U.S.
Leeper, Sims, and Zha (1996) argue that because excess reserves fluctuate considerably on a
regular basis, the reserve requirement is an insufficient statistic for measuring the contraction
or expansion of money supply. This is certainly the case for China as shown in Figure 4,
where excess reserves as a difference between total reserves and required reserves are volatile.
Distinction between instrument and target is essential for understanding monetary policy.
For many countries, open market operations and reserve requirements are two instruments
used to meet the intermediate target of monetary policy. In the U.S. and other developed
countries, the intermediate target has been explicitly the interest rate. In China, the intermediate target has been explicitly M2 growth until recently. Indeed, as shown in Figure 3, the
PBC has been successful in employing various instruments to keep its targeted M2 growth
on track.
II.1.3. The bank lending channel of monetary policy. Given M2 growth as the intermediate
target of monetary policy, the PBC uses various instruments such as open market operations
to influence the credit volume in the banking system with the help of China’s two specific
5

See the Federal Reserve Board’s website for details: https://www.federalreserveeducation.

org/about-the-fed/structure-and-functions/monetary-policy.

THE NEXUS OF MONETARY POLICY AND SHADOW BANKING IN CHINA

8

banking regulations. As a result, growth rates of M2 supply and bank loans move closely
together.
The first banking regulation is a 75% ceiling on the ratio of bank loans to bank deposits for
each commercial bank as a way to manage the quantity of bank loans. The LDR regulation
was established in 1994. To see how monetary policy interacts with the LDR regulation to
influence the quantity of bank lending, consider the following episode. At the end of 2009,
the PBC began to tighten the M2 supply for fear of an overblown bank credit expansion
after the 2008 financial crisis. As M2 growth continued to slow down, banks became more
vulnerable to unexpected deposit withdrawals, which exposed banks to the risk of violating
the LDR regulation.
To meet unexpected deposit shortfalls against the LDR ceiling, the bank attracted additional deposits by offering a much higher price than the official deposit rate imposed by the
PBC. The government used the phrase “the last-minute rush (chongshidian in Chinese)” to
refer to the last-minute actions taken by banks to pay high prices to increase deposits in
order to recoup deposit shortfalls.6 Such high prices during the last-minute rush decreased
the effective return on bank loans and compelled banks to reduce issuance of new bank loans.
As a result, growth in M2 and bank loans declined simultaneously. This impact of monetary
policy on bank loans via the LDR regulation is called the bank lending channel.
In addition to controlling the quantity of bank loans, the PBC uses another regulation
to control the quality of bank lending. In 2006 the State Council, concerned with potential
financial risks associated with bank credit to real estate and other risky industries, issued a
notice to accelerate the restructuring process of these industries. The CBRC took concrete
steps in 2010 to curtail an expansion of bank credit to these industries.7 These actions were
reinforced by the State Council in its 2013 Guidelines.8 In the Introduction, we term this
quality-control regulation the safe-loan regulation. This regulation gave banks incentives to
invest in risky nonloan assets that deliver higher expected returns. Our newly constructed
6See

the proclamation “Number 236 Notice on Strengthening Commercial Banks Deposit Stability Man-

agement” announced on 12 September 2014 jointly by the CBRC, the Ministry of Finance, and the PBC.
7The 2010Q1 MPR stated that “in the next stage, the PBC will tightly control lending to new projects,
strictly restrain lending to high energy-consuming, heavily-polluting industries, and industries with excess
capacity ... .”
8In addition, the 2014 CFSR (pages 37 and 41) emphasizes the significant credit risks in real estate,
local government financing vehicles, and overcapacity industries. As a result, the CBRC has strengthened
supervision of credit advancements to high risky industries.

THE NEXUS OF MONETARY POLICY AND SHADOW BANKING IN CHINA

9

dataset (Section IV) reveals that these risky assets were associated with shadow banking
products. In the next section, we provide an institutional background of banks’ shadow
banking activities in 2009-2015.
II.2. Facts about shadow banking during the period of monetary policy tightening. In contrast to the slowdown of growth in both M2 and bank loans since late 2009,
shadow banking activities sprang up with a rapid increase of the loan volume in the shadow
banking industry (top row of Figure 1). The shadow banking loan volume is the sum of
entrusted lending, trusted lending, and bank acceptances, all of which are off balance sheet.
The share of shadow banking loans in the sum of shadow banking loans and bank loans
increased steadily to around 20% in 2013-2015 (bottom left panel of Figure 1). All these
loans are in outstanding amount; a similar time series pattern holds for newly originated
loans as well. In particular, new bank loans during 2010-2015 declined on average by 7%
from the 2009 level, but an increase of shadow banking loans more than offset this decline
so that the total new credit as the sum of new bank loans and new shadow banking loans
increased on average by 4.2% from the 2009 level during the same period.
II.2.1. Entrusted lending. From 2009 to 2015, entrusted loans became the second largest
financing source of loans after traditional bank loans, and their share in the sum of entrusted
and bank loans reached over 10% in 2015 (bottom right panel of Figure 1). In particular, the
share of outstanding entrusted loans in total outstanding shadow banking loans was always
high with 47% in 2009 and 49% in 2015. Given the importance of entrusted lending in the
shadow banking industry, we provide below a detailed discussion of this particular shadow
banking product.
In 1996, the PBC issued “General Rules for Loans” that allowed entrusted lending. In
May 2000, the PBC provided formal operational guidelines for commercial banks to be
trustees of entrusted lending in its “Notice on Issues Related to Practices of Commercial
Banks in Entrusted Lending” (No. 100 Notice). The key requirement in these guidelines was
the mandatory participation of a financial institution acting as a trustee to facilitate a loan
transaction between two nonfinancial firms. This regulation required the participating financial institution to verify that all lending practices met various legal forms and requirements.
An entrusted lending transaction between nonfinancial firms with a commercial bank or a
nonbank financial company acting as a trustee is summarized as
Lender (firm A)

Trustee

Borrower (firm B)

THE NEXUS OF MONETARY POLICY AND SHADOW BANKING IN CHINA

10

On paper, a trustee is a middleman in the transaction of an entrusted loan as a passive
facilitator. If the trustee is a commercial bank, it is commonly assumed that “the bank earns
a fee for its service, but does not bear the risk of the investment” (Allen, Qian, Tu, and Yu,
2015). In Section V, however, we show that the risk was brought onto the balance sheet:
entrusted loans were first facilitated by banks and then their beneficiary rights (entrusted
rights for short) were in turn purchased by banks as risky investments on the asset side of
banks’ balance sheets.
Entrusted lending activity, as well as other shadow banking activities, did not really
blossom until after 2009, a period when monetary policy tightened. One important piece
of direct evidence from our entrusted loan data as described in Section IV.1 reveals that
most entrusted loans ended up in real estate and other risky industries classified by the
Ministry of Industry and Information Technology, most of which have problems with excess
capacity. From 2009 to 2015, over 60% of entrusted loans were funneled to these industries.
For the entrusted loans that went to real estate companies, 75.33% of loan volumes were
channeled to enterprises that are not state-owned. Table 1 reports that the average maturity
of entrusted loans is shorter than that of bank loans, but the interest rate is higher due to
the risky nature of entrusted loans relative to bank loans.

II.2.2. The asset side of banks’ balance sheets. We now describe how banks brought offbalance-sheet products into their balance sheets. In the Introduction, we discuss the category
of ARIX holdings on the asset side of banks’ balance sheets. These holdings are not counted
as part of traditional bank loans; they conceal risky investment assets brought onto the
balance sheet from shadow banking products. As a result, they are not subject to the LDR
and safe-loan regulations.
One principal component of ARIX is entrusted rights. Because commercial banks were
not required to report the detailed products within the ARIX category until recently, it is
impossible to obtain a complete time series of entrusted rights within ARIX. For 2014-2015,
however, the share of entrusted rights in ARIX is as high as 78.04% for nonstate banks. For
a longer time series, we can calculate the correlation between entrusted loans facilitated by a
bank and ARIX on the same bank’s balance sheet. Section V.4 reports that the correlation
for nonstate banks is over 0.60. The high share for nonstate banks in 2014-2015 is consistent
with the high correlation between entrusted loans and ARIX.

THE NEXUS OF MONETARY POLICY AND SHADOW BANKING IN CHINA

11

Other components of the ARIX category include trusted rights (associated with trusted
loans) and various wealth management products. Because ARIX holdings are risky investments brought onto the balance sheet from shadow banking products, we use the two
terms—ARIX holdings and risky nonloan assets—interchangeably. Our empirical work based
on ARIX in Sections V.3 and VI.2 quantifies the impact of monetary policy on investments
in shadow banking that is broader than entrusted loans.
II.3. State versus nonstate commercial banks. As discussed in the previous sections,
one distinctive characteristic of China’s banking system is a division of state and nonstate
commercial banks. There are five state banks controlled and protected directly by the central government: the Industrial and Commercial Bank of China, the Bank of China, the
Construction Bank of China, the Agricultural Bank of China, and the Bank of Communications.9 The remaining commercial banks are nonstate banks, including China CITIC Bank,
China Everbright Bank, China Merchants Bank, Shanghai Pudong Development Bank, the
Industrial Bank of China, and the Bank of Beijing. Nonstate banks as a whole represent
almost half the size of the entire banking system. In 2015, for example, the share of their
assets was 47.38% and the share of their equity was 47.22%.
The most conspicuous fact from our entrusted loan data is that nonstate banks play a
dominant role in channeling entrusted loans between nonfinancial firms. In this section, we
review a list of key regulatory requirements and analyze which one is likely to contribute to
the difference between state and nonstate banks in their roles of promoting shadow banking
activities.
II.3.1. The usual suspects. There were three major regulatory requirements of commercial
banks: capital requirement, reserve requirement, and LDR requirement. We provide evidence
on whether there was a notable difference between state and nonstate banks in meeting each
of the three requirements for the 2009-2015 period.
First, both state and nonstate banks met the capital requirement by a comfortable margin
(first column of Table 2). One can see from the table that the difference of capital adequacy
ratios between state and nonstate banks is statistically insignificant and economically inconsequential because both ratios are far above the capital requirement ratio of 8%. Second,
nonstate banks had more cushion than state banks in meeting reserve requirements with a
9The

Bank of Communications, initially listed in the Hong Kong Stock Exchange, has officially become

the fifth largest state-owned bank since May 16, 2006.

THE NEXUS OF MONETARY POLICY AND SHADOW BANKING IN CHINA

12

considerably higher excess reserve ratio than state banks (second column of Table 2), implying that nonstate banks were more cautious than state banks in managing their reserves to
meet reserve requirements.
Third, the LDR of nonstate banks is higher than state banks’ LDR during 2009-2015, but
the difference is statistically insignificant.10 Thus, the issue for banks is not the LDR ceiling
per se, but rather the risk of surpassing the ceiling due to unexpected deposit shortfalls. This
is especially the case for nonstate banks, as their average LDR was above 75% in the earlier
part of the 2009-2015 period and needed the last-minute rush to keep the ratio below the
75% ceiling around the time of the PBC audit. The deposit withdrawal risk is an important
ingredient in our theoretical analysis presented in Section VI.1.
In summary, the difference between state and nonstate banks in each of the three major
policy requirements during 2009-2015 is statistically insignificant. It is therefore not any
of these regulatory requirements that helps explain the disparate roles played by state and
nonstate banks in promoting shadow banking products. Our empirical findings in later
sections of the paper indicate that nonstate banks, not state banks, play a dominant role in
shadow banking activities after controlling for a host of bank-specific attributes such as LDR,
size, liquidity, and profitability. In the next section, we argue that the difference between
state and nonstate banks is mainly institutional in the sense that the central government’s
direct control of state banks make them behave differently than nonstate banks.
II.3.2. Institutional asymmetry. State banks, controlled directly by the central government,
adhere to the government’s regulations for promoting the healthy banking system rather than
undermine the soundness of the banking system by circumventing the regulations. In 2010,
the PBC and the CBRC issued a joint notice to reinforce the 2006 announcement made by
the State Council that banks shall not partake in risky investments themselves to maintain
“the soundness of the banking system.” Government-controlled state banks should not and
did not circumvent the safe-loan regulation by bringing risky shadow banking products onto
their balance sheet.
The institutional structure for nonstate banks is different: the government does not have
direct control of these banks. Despite the regulations intended for limiting the risk on the
balance sheet, nonstate banks had largely benefitted from China’s lax regulatory system
10A

direct measure of the LDR is not provided by Bankscope. We construct this measure as the ratio

of “gross loans” to “total customer deposits.” For a publicly listed bank, we compare this measure to the
reported LDR published by the bank’s own annual report and verify that they match.

THE NEXUS OF MONETARY POLICY AND SHADOW BANKING IN CHINA

13

for shadow banking until the end of 2015. On November 12, 2012, for example, the PBC
Governor Zhou Xiaochuan told a news conference: “Like many countries, China has shadow
banking. But the scale and problem of China’s shadow banking are much smaller compared
with its counterpart for the developed economies that was exposed during the latest financial
crisis” (reported in the Chinese edition of 15 January 2014 Wall Street Journal). Indeed,
before 2015 the government viewed the development of shadow banking as a new way to
diversify financial services. The PBC’s 2013Q2 MPR had a positive view on rapid growth
of entrusted and trusted lending because “the financing structure continues to diversify.”
Therefore, a combination of contractionary monetary policy and the lax regulatory system
on shadow banking allowed nonstate banks to take advantage of regulatory arbitrage by
increasing ARIX, which was not subject to the LDR and safe-loan regulations.
II.4. Roadmap. Against a backdrop of all these institutional elements, Figure 5 presents a
roadmap for the rest of the paper. The lines connecting “Central bank” through “Primary
Dealers” and “Banks” to “Bank loans” depict how monetary policy shocks are transmitted to
affecting bank loans. To obtain monetary policy shocks, Section III estimates the quantitybased monetary policy rule based on China’s institutional facts. The lines on the top of
Figure 5 connecting the two regulations to bank loans highlight the importance of these regulations for monetary transmission into bank loans. All these relationships, taken together,
summarize the bank lending channel enhanced by the interaction between monetary and
regulatory policies.
Section IV constructs two bank-level data for all the empirical analyses conducted in the
paper. The lines connecting “Lenders” and “Risky borrowers” describe off-balance-sheet
activities and the role of banks as passive facilitators. Sections V.1 and V.2 present a panel
regression analysis along these lines. The curly line connecting “Banks” and “Lenders”
reflects how nonstate banks, as active participants in shadow banking, brought off-balancesheet shadow banking products onto the balance sheet through ARIX. Section V.3 provides
another panel regression analysis along this particular line. Section VI provides both theoretical and panel VAR analyses of the effectiveness of monetary policy along the lines connecting
“Central bank” through “Primary Dealers” and “Banks” to “Lenders.”
III. Estimation of China’s monetary policy
Monetary policy consists of two components: endogenous growth of money supply in response to economic fundamentals and an exogenous change in money growth. To determine

THE NEXUS OF MONETARY POLICY AND SHADOW BANKING IN CHINA

14

the extent to which monetary policy causes a rapid rise of shadow banking in China, it
is necessary to extract from the data a series of changes in exogenous money growth (i.e.,
unexpected monetary policy shocks) as in the empirical macroeconomic literature (Leeper,
Sims, and Zha, 1996; Christiano, Eichenbaum, and Evans, 1999, 2005; Sims and Zha, 2006).
In his 24 June 2016 speech to the International Monetary Fund (Zhou, 2016), the PBC’s
Governor Xiaochuan Zhou acknowledged: “As China has the features of both a large transition economy and an emerging market economy, the central bank of China and its monetary
policy are yet to be well understood by the outside world.”
In this section, we develop and estimate a tractable rule that characterizes the essence of
the otherwise intractably complex operations of China’s monetary policy. With the estimated
rule, we obtain an exogenous M2 growth series used for subsequent empirical analyses in this
paper.
III.1. Estimating the monetary policy rule. The original interest rule of Taylor (1993),
called the Taylor rule, is inapplicable to the Chinese economy for two reasons. First, China is
an emerging-market economy and its transitional path is characterized by unbalanced growth
with the rising share of investment in GDP since the late 1990s (Chang, Chen, Waggoner, and
Zha, 2016). For such an economy, it is conceptually problematic to define what constitutes
potential output or trend growth. Second, financial markets in China have yet to be fully
developed and no interest rate has become the intermediate target of monetary policy.11 The
intermediate target of China’s monetary policy has been to control M2 growth in support of
rapid economic growth as discussed in Section II.1.1.
The PBC’s Monetary Policy Committee (MPC) is an integral part of the policymaking
body.12 At the end of each year, the central government sets the target of M2 growth
consistent with targeted GDP growth for the next year. Within each year, the MPC meets
at the end of each quarter t (or the beginning of the next quarter) to decide on a policy
action for the next quarter (i.e., quarterly M2 growth gm,t+1 = ∆Mt+1 ) in response to CPI
11In

Appendix A, we show that the conventional monetary policy rules using either market interest rates

or potential GDP yield no significant empirical results and thus fail to describe China’s monetary policy.
12The MPC is composed of the PBC Governor, two PBC Deputy Governors, a Deputy Secretary-General
of the State Council, a Deputy Minister of the NDRC, a Deputy Finance Minister, the Administrator of the
State Administration of Foreign Exchange, the Chairman of China Banking Regulatory Commission, the
Chairman of China Securities Regulatory Commission, the Chairman of China Insurance Regulatory Commission, the Commissioner of National Bureau of Statistics (NBS), the President of the China Association
of Banks, and experts from academia (three academic experts in the current MPC).

THE NEXUS OF MONETARY POLICY AND SHADOW BANKING IN CHINA

15

inflation πt = ∆Pt and the gap between GDP growth (gx,t = xt − xt−1 ) in the current
∗
quarter and the GDP growth target (gx,t
= x∗t − xt−1 ), where the superscript star denotes

the targeted value.13 The GDP growth target set by the State Council serves as a lower
bound for monetary policy. When actual GDP growth in each quarter is above the target,
therefore, M2 growth increases to accommodate output growth as long as inflation is not a
serious threat.
The above description of China’s monetary policy can be formalized as

∗
gm,t = γ0 + γm gm,t−1 + γπ (πt−1 − π ∗ ) + γx,t gx,t−1 − gx,t−1
+ εm,t ,

(1)

where εm,t is a serially independent random shock that has a normal distribution with mean
zero and time-varying standard deviation σm,t . Every quarter, the PBC adjusts M2 growth
in response to inflation and output growth in the previous quarter, a practice consistent with
the PBC’s decision-making process. The inflation coefficient γπ is expected to be negative.14
Since the GDP target serves as a lower bound, we allow the output coefficient to be timevarying with the form
γx,t =


γx,a
γ

x,b

∗
≥0
if gx,t−1 − gx,t−1

if gx,t−1 −

∗
gx,t−1

,

<0

where the subscript “a” stands for “above the target” and “b” for “below the target.” These
coefficients represent two states for policy response to output growth: the normal state
when actual GDP growth meets the government’s target as a lower bound, and the shortfall
state when actual GDP growth falls short of the government’s target. During the period
when GDP growth is above the target, we expect the coefficient γx,a to be positive. On
the other hand, when actual GDP growth is below its target, we expect the coefficient γx,b
to be negative. This asymmetric response reflects the central government’s determination
in making economic growth an overriding priority.15 Accordingly, the heteroskedasticity is
specified as
σm,t =


σm,a
σ

13The

m,b

∗
if gx,t−1 − gx,t−1
≥0

if gx,t−1 −

∗
gx,t−1

.

<0

variables Mt , Pt , and xt , expressed in natural log, represent M2, CPI, and GDP. For construction

of the quarterly time series of these and other variables, see Appendix B.
14Discussions in the MPRs indicate that the annual CPI inflation target is around 3% − 4%. We set π ∗
at 0.875% (i.e., an annualized quarterly rate of 3.5%).
15See

Kahneman and Tversky (1979) and Chen, Xu, and Zha (2017) for theoretical justifications.

THE NEXUS OF MONETARY POLICY AND SHADOW BANKING IN CHINA

16

The sample period for estimation is from 2000Q1 to 2016Q2. This is a period in which
the PBC has made M2 growth an explicit policy target. The endogenously switching rule is
estimated with the maximum likelihood approach of Hamilton (1994). Table 3 reports the
results. As one can see, all the estimates are significant statistically with the p-value much
less than 1%. The persistence coefficient for M2 growth is estimated to be 0.39%, implying
that monetary policy is mildly inertial. When GDP growth is above the target, annualized
M2 growth is estimated to rise by 0.72% (0.18% × 4) in support of a 1% annualized GDP
growth rate above its target. When GDP growth falls short of the target, the estimate
of γx,b indicates that annualized M2 growth rises by 5.20% (1.30% × 4) in response to a
1% annualized GDP growth rate below the target. Thus, the negative sign of γx,b and its
estimated magnitude reveal that monetary policy takes an unusually aggressive response to
stem a shortfall in meeting the GDP growth target. The asymmetry in China’s monetary
policy is also reflected in the volatility of its policy shocks (0.005 vs. 0.10). The estimate of
the inflation coefficient in the monetary policy rule, which is negative and highly significant,
indicates that annualized M2 growth contracts 1.6% (0.40% ×4) in response to a 1% increase
of annualized inflation.
We test the endogenously switching policy rule, represented by equation (1), against other
alternatives. One alternative is the same rule without any of the time-varying features (i.e.,
γx,t = γx and σm,t = σm for all t). The log maximum likelihood value for the constantparameter rule is 192.42. We then allow γx,t to depend on the two different states of the
economy (the normal and shortfall states) while keeping σm,t = σm for all t. The log
maximum likelihood value for this rule is 198.49. The log maximum likelihood value for
our endogenously switching rule (i.e., allowing both γx,t and σm,t to be time varying) is
203.78. The likelihood ratio test for a comparison between the rule with time-varying γx,t
only and the constant-parameter rule rejects the constant-parameter rule at a 0.05% level
of statistical significance, implying that the data strongly favor the time-varying parameter
γx,t . The likelihood ratio test for a comparison between the rule with both time-varying
γx,t and σm,t and the rule with only time-varying γx,t rejects the latter rule at a 0.11% level
of statistical significance, implying that the data strongly favor additional time variation
coming from volatility.16 These econometric tests rationalize the statistical results of high
significance reported in Table 3.
16These

two tests are supported by both the Bayesian information criterion (BIC) and the Akaike infor-

mation criterion (AIC).

THE NEXUS OF MONETARY POLICY AND SHADOW BANKING IN CHINA

17

III.2. Exogenous M2 growth. The bottom two panels of Figure 2 display the decomposition of M2 growth into the endogenous component and the exogenous component according
to the estimated monetary policy rule. All the series in the figure are expressed in year-overyear changes. Endogenous monetary policy tracks the series of actual M2 growth rates very
closely (third panel of Figure 2). This suggests that a large fraction of the variation in M2
growth can be attributed to the systematic reaction of the policy authority to the state of
the economy, which is what one would expect of endogenous monetary policy.
The series of exogenous M2 growth is the gap between actual and endogenous M2 growth
rates, displayed in the bottom panel of Figure 2. As discussed in Section II.1.2, changes in
various instruments such as the reserve requirement aim at helping achieve the intermediate
target of monetary policy mandated by the State Council and thus should be encompassed
by the endogenous part of monetary policy. To see whether this argument is supported
by empirical evidence, we regress the endogenous M2 growth series on contemporaneous or
lagged changes in the RRR. The testing hypothesis is that the coefficient of RRR changes on
the right hand side of the regression is zero. The p-value is 0.6% for the contemporaneous
coefficient and 2.4% for the lagged coefficient. The hypothesis is thus rejected. When we
regress the estimated exogenous M2 growth series on the same variables, however, we find the
regression coefficients statistically insignificant: the p-value is 15.5% for the contemporaneous
coefficient and 74.7% for the lagged coefficient. These results indicate that the estimated
series of exogenous M2 growth is orthogonal to changes in the RRR and thus reflects only
the outcome of open market operations.17
As shown in the bottom two panels of Figure 2, both endogenous M2 growth and exogenous monetary policy shocks have been steadily declining since 2009. After controlling for
endogeneity of monetary policy, the exogenous series allows us to analyze how contractionary
monetary policy caused the rise of shadow banking products off banks’ balance sheets as well
as the rise of risky assets on banks’ balance sheets in 2009-2015.

IV. Microdata of shadow banking activities off and on the balance sheet
While the aggregate time series on shadow banking reported in Figure 1 are informative,
they do not show the degree to which commercial banks are involved in shadow banking. In
17Chen,

Higgins, Waggoner, and Zha (2017) document that the estimated monetary policy shocks are

also orthogonal to changes in the exchange rate and net exports.

THE NEXUS OF MONETARY POLICY AND SHADOW BANKING IN CHINA

18

this section, we provide such information by constructing two datasets at the level of individual banks. These datasets help show the level of banks’ involvement in shadow banking
and enable us to conduct an empirical analysis of the effects of monetary policy shocks on
banks’ activities in shadow banking both off and on their balance sheets.
IV.1. Off balance sheet: a quarterly panel entrusted loan dataset. We constructed
an entrusted loan dataset that maps each loan transaction between two nonfinancial firms
to a particular trustee. The trustee information is most important for this paper. During
the long construction process, we manually collected all the PDF files of raw entrusted
loan announcements made by firms that were publicly listed on China’s stock exchanges.
By definition, listed firms are those that issue A-share stocks. The Chinese laws require
listed lending firms to make public announcements about each entrusted loan transaction;
listed borrowing firms may choose to make announcements but are not required by law.
China Securities Law Article 67, published in 2005, requires all listed firms to announce
major events which may have influenced their stock prices. According to Article 2 of the
Chinese Securities Regulatory Commission’s “Rules for Information Disclosure by Companies
Offering Securities to the Public” published in 2011, listed firms have responsibility to disclose
all entrusted loan transactions. Moreover, according to two disclosure memoranda provided
by the Shenzhen Stock Exchange in 2011, a listed company must disclose information of
entrusted loans as long as its subsidiary firm is a lender of entrusted loans, even if the
company itself is not a direct lender.
A raw announcement made for each transaction concerns either a newly originated loan or
a repaid loan. Information in each raw announcement contains the names of both lender and
borrower, the amount transacted, and the trustee name.18 For each year between 2010 and
2013, we verified the number of collected raw announcements against the number published
by the PBC’s 2011-2014 CFSRs. (The number was always published in the next-year report
and the PBC no longer published this number after 2014.) Figure 6 plots the number of
announcements. One can see from the figure that the discrepancy between our data and the
PBC’s published data is of little importance. Although both our data source and the PBC’s
data source were from WIND (the data information system created by the Shanghai-based
company called WIND Co. Ltd., the Chinese version of Bloomberg), at the time the PBC
18Allen,

Qian, Tu, and Yu (2015) use the annual reports of listed nonfinancial companies to gather

information about entrusted lending. Most of the trustee information, however, was missing in the annual
reports.

THE NEXUS OF MONETARY POLICY AND SHADOW BANKING IN CHINA

19

reported the number of announcements, some companies had not yet made announcements
until a later year. These delayed announcements, included in our data collection but not
in the PBC’s data collection, partially explains the inconsequential discrepancy between the
two datasets.
We cleaned up raw announcements by removing announcements of repayment to the existing entrusted loans as well as duplicated announcements and by correcting inaccurate reports
of loan amounts (see Appendix C for details). We call our cleaned-up announcements “announcements” to be distinguished from “raw announcements.” From 2009 to 2015, the total
number of announcements is 1379. Prior to the year 2009, there are only a handful of data
observations (announcements). From the announcements of entrused lending we constructed
a quarterly panel dataset that contains the total loan volume, the average loan amount, and
the number of loans facilitated by each financial trustee. We have 80 individual banks and
45 nonbank trustees, a total of 125 trustees. These 80 individual banks include the five state
banks; the rest are all nonstate banks.
IV.2. On the balance sheet: a quarterly panel bank asset dataset. The second
dataset we manually constructed is a quarterly panel dataset of bank loans and ARIX holdings on the balance sheets of 16 publicly listed banks. There are a total of 19 banks listed
in the Hongkong, Shenzhen, or Shanghai Exchange, but only 16 of them have information
about ARIX. These 16 publicly listed banks include the five state banks; the rest are all nonstate banks. Their assets take up, on average for 2009-2015, 81% of total bank assets and
83.4% of total bank loans in the entire banking system. Thus, these banks are representative
of the Chinese banking system.
We read through annual reports of these 16 publicly listed banks, collected the data on
bank loans and ARI, and constructed the data on ARIX by excluding central bank bills or
government bonds. The annual reports are downloadable from WIND. Our quarterly panel
of entrusted loan data are bridged to the balance-sheet information from WIND. When a
particular entrusted loan transaction was announced, we first identified the name of the
bank and then linked the transaction to the WIND information of this bank. This allows
us to compute, in Section V.4, the correlation of entrusted lending and ARIX. Bankscope
provides another data source for obtaining financial information such as LDR, size, capital,
liquidity, and profitability of a particular bank, but Bankscope does not have information
on ARIX or bank excess reserves, which we manually collected from banks’ annual reports
(see Appendix C.2 for the construction of the ARIX series).

THE NEXUS OF MONETARY POLICY AND SHADOW BANKING IN CHINA

20

Using these two panel datasets we estimated panel regressions on the impact of monetary
policy on both shadow banking loans and ARIX holdings. For the entrusted loan dataset, we
did not run regressions on the data at the transaction level as in Jiménez, Ongena, Peydró,
and Saurina (2014). Since the bank asset dataset is not transaction-based, we need to run
panel regressions on both datasets at the bank level in order to establish the link between
the findings based on entrusted lending and ARIX. Such a link provides a perspective on the
degree of how representative the estimated impact of monetary policy on shadow banking is
from our entrusted loan dataset, as discussed in Section V.3.
V. Impact of monetary policy on banks’ shadow banking activities
In this section, we use the two sets of panel data constructed in this paper to show that
state and nonstate banks behave differently in response to changes in monetary policy in their
shadow banking activities. We establish first that state and nonstate banks behave differently
as passive facilitators of entrusted loans (illustrated by the OffBS arrows in Figure 5) and
then that they behave differently as active participants in bringing shadow banking products
onto their balance sheets (illustrated by the OnBS arrow in Figure 5). We argue that these
two empirical findings reinforce each other in the sense that the different behaviors between
state and nonstate banks are similar whether they are off balance sheet or on the balance
sheet.
V.1. Banks as passive facilitators: off-balance-sheet activities. With the entrusted
loan dataset, we run the following panel regression:
log Lbt = α + αg gt−1 + βnsb gt−1 I (NSBb ) + βsb gt−1 I (SBb ) + Controlbt + ubt ,

(2)

where NSB stands for nonstate banks, SB stands for state banks, I (NSBb ) returns 1 if the
trustee is a nonstate bank and 0 otherwise, and I (SBb ) returns 1 if the trustee is a state
bank and 0 otherwise. The subscript “bt” stands for a particular trustee (b) that facilitates
entrusted lending at time t and Lbt represents the total loan amount facilitated by trustee b
at time t. The variable gt−1 is an annual change in the exogenous M2 supply in the previous
year. The regression residual is ubt . The control variables, denoted by Controlbt , include
GDPt−1 (an annual change in GDP in the previous year), Inft−1 (an annual change in the
GDP deflator in the previous year), and the types of trustees (I (NSBb ) and I (SBb )). GDP
and inflation variables control for other macroeconomic factors than exogenous monetary
policy. Our regression results change little when the GDP deflator is replaced by the CPI.

THE NEXUS OF MONETARY POLICY AND SHADOW BANKING IN CHINA

21

Including nonbank trustees helps obtain the accurate estimate of double interactions between
monetary policy and the type of banks. The sample size for this panel regression is 583.
All panel regressions in Section V are unbalanced: for the entrusted loan dataset, a trustee
may have facilitated one entrusted loan in the whole sample, or a few loans but in distant
intervals separated by years; for the bank asset dataset, a handful of ARIX observations are
missing in the original annual reports from 2009 to 2011.
Column (1) of Table 4 reports the estimated results of panel regression (2). The coefficient
αg reflects the impact of monetary policy on entrusted loans facilitated by nonbank trustees.
The positive coefficient value indicates that the amount of entrusted lending facilitated by
nonbank trustees decreases, not increases, in response to a fall in M2 growth (and the
coefficient is statistically significant at a 10% level). This result indicates that nonbank
trustees did not actively participate in entrusted loans during the period of monetary policy
tightening.
The coefficient βsb of the double-interaction term gt−1 I (SBb ) captures how much entrusted lending is intermediated by state banks in addition to the lending channeled by
nonbank trustees when M2 growth changes. From column (1) of Table 4, one can see that
this marginal effect is statistically insignificant, indicating that state banks’ activities in
facilitating entrusted loans did not increase when monetary policy tightened.
The coefficient βnsb of the double-interaction term gt−1 I (NSBb ) captures how much entrusted lending is intermediated by nonstate banks in addition to the lending channeled by
nonbank trustees when M2 growth changes. This marginal effect is estimated to be negative
and the estimate is highly significant. The negative sign means that a fall in M2 growth
leads to an increase, not a decrease, in entrusted lending. The estimates of overall impacts
of monetary policy tightening on entrusted lending facilitated by state and nonstate banks
are given at the bottom of of Table 4. As one can see, the overall impact of M2 growth on
entrusted lending intermediated by state banks, αg + βsb , has a sign opposite to the impact
on nonstate banks. Monetary policy tightening reduces entrusted lending facilitated by state
banks with a decrease of 17.42% (at a 10% level of statistical significance) in response to
a one-percentage-point fall in M2 growth. On the other hand, the overall impact of M2
growth on entrusted lending intermediated by nonstate banks, αg + βnsb , is large and highly
significant. Indeed, the total volume of entrusted lending intermediated by nonstate banks
increases by 10.65% (at a less than 1% level of statistical significance) in response to a onepercentage-point fall in M2 growth. This empirical result indicates that nonstate banks’

THE NEXUS OF MONETARY POLICY AND SHADOW BANKING IN CHINA

22

activities in facilitating entrused loans increased in response to contractionary monetary
policy.
V.2. Robustness analysis. In this section, we perform a robustness analysis of the previous
regression results. The analysis centers on two questions. Is an increase of entrusted lending
driven by an increase in the number of transactions (extensive margin) or an increase in the
average loan amount (intensive margin)? And do the empirical results for nonstate banks
simply reflect the effects of bank-specific attributes such as LDR, size, capital, and liquidity?
V.2.1. Intensive versus extensive margins. The significant role played by nonstate banks in
funneling entrusted loans may reflect the number of loans (extensive margin), not the average
loan amount (intensive margin). A large number of loans may reflect the diversification
strategy of nonstate banks, not necessarily a concentration of risk. To see whether nonstate
banks’ promotion of entrusted lending stems from the increasing number of loans or the
increasing average loan amount, we run two additional panel regressions as
Sbt = α + αg gt−1 + βnsb gt−1 I (NSBb ) + βsb gt−1 I (SBb ) + Controlbt + ubt ,

(3)

where Sbt represents either the log value of the average loan amount facilitated by trustee b
at time t or the number of loans facilitated by trustee b at time t.
Column (1) of Table 5 reports the regression results on the average loan amount. As one
can see, the estimated values in column (1) of Table 5 are comparable to those in column (1)
of Table 4. When we use the number of loans as the dependent variable in a panel regression,
the estimates of αg , βsb , and βnsb are all statistically insignificant (thus not reported). These
results indicate that the increase of the total loan amount channeled by nonstate banks is
driven by the intensive margin. There is no evidence that state banks or nonbank financial
companies intermediated more entrusted lending when monetary policy tightened in terms
of either the number of loans or the average loan amount.
V.2.2. Individual bank attributes. One critical question is whether the bank variable I (NSBb )
is an outcome of other bank characteristics such as LDR, size, liquidity, and capital position.
A significant portion of our data sample contains entrusted loans facilitated by nonbank
financial trustees. Because the data on characteristics such as size and liquidity do not exist
for nonbank trustees, we need to reduce our sample by selecting the data intermediated by
commercial banks only. With this reduced sample (342 observations), we extend regression (2) by adding control of various bank-specific attributes as in Kashyap and Stein (2000)

THE NEXUS OF MONETARY POLICY AND SHADOW BANKING IN CHINA

23

and Jiménez, Ongena, Peydró, and Saurina (2014). These attributes are the LDR (Chinaspecific), log value of total assets (size), the ratio of bank equity to total assets (capital), the
ratio of liquid assets to total assets (liquidity), the ratio of total net income to total assets
(ROA), and the nonperforming loan ratio (NPL). Table 6 reports the summary statistics of
these bank-specific attributes. As one can see, there are considerable variations across banks
for each of these attributes.
We add all these bank attributes to the existing control variables and run the following
panel regression:
log Lbt = α + αg gt−1 + βnsb gt−1 I (NSBb ) + Controlbt + ubt ,

(4)

where the control variables, represented by Controlbt , are GDPt−1 , Inft−1 , I (SBb ), I (NSBb ),
single terms for all the bank-specific attributes listed in Tables 6, and their double-interaction
terms with gt−1 . A key question is whether the bank-type indicator I (NSBb ) in its doubleinteraction term remains statistically significant after we control for bank-specific attributes.
The results are reported in column (3) of Table 4. We do not find that the LDR is an important factor in influencing entrusted loans. The bank size and ROA in the double-interaction
terms are significant (column (3) of Table 4). After these bank-specific attributes are controlled for, the coefficient of the double-interaction term gt−1 I (NSBb ) remains highly significant. That is, the bank-type indicator I (NSBb ) does not reflect whether the bank is small
or large, whether the bank’s LDR is different from the LDRs of other banks, how strong
the bank’s capital position is, or whether the bank’s other characteristics differ from those
of other banks. Furthermore, the demand for entrusted loans has no bearing on whether a
trustee is a state bank or a nonstate bank, ceteris paribus. As long as the borrower’s loan
demand is met, the borrower does not care whether the loan is facilitated by a nonbank
trustee, a state bank, or a nonstate bank.
In regression (4), we calculate the overall impact of monetary policy on entrusted lending
funneled by nonstate banks as the sum of α, βnsb , and the coefficients of double-interaction
terms related to all bank-specific attributes at the mean bank level.19 Recall that the regression is run on a smaller sample because there is no data on the balance-sheet information
of nonbank trustees. To see whether bank-specific attributes severely affect the estimated
impact of monetary policy, we need to compare the results based on the same sample. For
19We

use mean bank to indicate that the average value of each attribute across banks is used as an input

for computing the overall impact of money growth when bank-specific attributes are controlled for.

THE NEXUS OF MONETARY POLICY AND SHADOW BANKING IN CHINA

24

that purpose, we run regression (4) on the same reduced sample with and without bankspecific attributes to be included in the control variables. The estimated impact without
any bank-specific attribute is −14.00% (reported at the bottom in column (2) of Table 4).
With the smaller sample, the estimated impact is expected to differ from the estimate in
regression (2): −10.65% vs. −14.00% reported at the bottom in columns (1) and (2) of
Table 4. More important is our finding that given the standard error 5.73%, this estimate
is not statistically different from the estimated impact of monetary policy with inclusion of
all bank-specific attributes as control variables (−17.97% reported at the bottom of column
(3) in Table 4). By contrast, the estimated impact of monetary policy on total entrusted
lending channeled by state banks has an opposite sign and is statistically insignificant for
the smaller sample. Comparing the results for the smaller sample with and without bankspecific attributes at the bottom of columns (2) and (3) in Table 5, one can see the similar
results when the average entrusted loan amount is used as the dependent variable in the
panel regression. In summary, we establish robust evidence that nonstate banks facilitated
more entrusted lending when monetary policy tightened while state banks did not.
Despite the statistical significance of some bank-specific attributes in double-interaction
terms, these results suggest that the bank-type indicator I (NSBb ) in regressions without
any bank-specific attribute as a control variable is a good approximation to capturing the
institutional asymmetry between state and nontate banks, not the difference in individual
attributes such as LDR, size, capital position, and liquidity. In other words, the institutional
asymmetry discussed in Section II.3.2 is, to a large extent, orthogonal to individual bank
characteristics.
V.3. Banks as active participants: on-balance-sheet activities. In the preceding two
sections, we establish evidence of banks’ activities as passive facilitators in channeling entrusted loans between nonfinancial firms. In this section, we obtain evidence of banks’ activities as active participants in bringing shadow banking products onto their balance sheets.
In the next section, we provide a general perspective of the connection among the results
obtained in this and previous sections.
Using the bank asset dataset, we run the following panel regression:
log Abt = α + αg gt−1 + βnsb gt−1 I (NSBb ) + Controlbt + εbt ,

(5)

where Abt represents ARIX for bank b at time t and control variables, including GDPt−1 ,
Inft−1 , and I (NSBb ), are similar to those used in previous regressions. Column (1) of Table 7

THE NEXUS OF MONETARY POLICY AND SHADOW BANKING IN CHINA

25

reports the estimated results without controlling for various bank-specific attributes. The
impact of monetary policy on state banks’ ARIX is estimated to be a 26.56% decrease, not
an increase, in response to a one-percentage-point fall in M2 growth and the estimate is at a
5% level of statistical significance (bottom of column (1) in Table 7). This finding indicates
that ARIX on state banks’ balance sheets did not increase when monetary policy tightened.
By contrast, the impact of monetary policy on nonstate banks’ ARIX is estimated to be a
37.69% increase in response to a one-percentage-point fall in M2 growth, with an extremely
high statistical significance. In sum, our evidence shows that nonstate banks invested in
more ARIX on their balance sheet when monetary policy tightened while state banks did
not.
As discussed in Section V.2.2, the bank-type indicator I (NSBb ) is a good approximation
to the institutional feature of nonstate banks even when we omit individual bank attributes.
To see whether this result continues to hold for the bank asset dataset, we run the same
regression as (5) but add single terms of all the bank-specific attributes listed in Table 6 as
well as their double-interaction terms to the existing control variables. This exercise leads
to a loss of 37 observations because the data on several bank-specific attributes in certain
years are missing for some banks. When we run the same regression on this reduced sample
without including any bank-specific attribute as a control variable, the estimated impact
on nonstate banks’ ARIX is a 45.73% increase in response to a one-percentage-point fall in
M2 growth (bottom of column (2) of Table 7). As expected, this value is different from the
estimated 37.69% based on the original and larger sample (bottom of column (1) of Table 7).
Column (3) of Table 7, where the end-of-year LDR is used, reports the estimated results
for ARIX with bank-specific attributes as control variables. The estimated coefficients of
double-interaction terms are statistically insignificant except for those involving I (NSBb )
and ROA. The statistical significance for the coefficient of the double-interaction term involving I (NSBb ) is particularly high. Taking into account all bank-specific attributes, the
impact of monetary policy on nonstate banks’ ARIX is estimated to be a 42.33% increase
in response to a one-percentage-point fall in M2 growth (bottom of column (3) of Table 7).
This estimate is not significantly different from the estimated 45.73% (with the estimated
standard error of 8.89%) when none of the bank-specific attributes is included as a control variable. Such a finding is similar to the result discussed in Section V.2.2, where the
entrusted loan dataset is used.

THE NEXUS OF MONETARY POLICY AND SHADOW BANKING IN CHINA

26

Our estimated results hold when the end-of-year LDR is replaced by the average LDR. In
regression (5) with all bank-specific attributes included as control variables, the estimated
impact is −42.33% when the end-of-period LDR is used and −43.68% when the average LDR
is used (bottom of columns (3) and (4) of Table 7). As for double-interaction terms, the
coefficient of gt−1 I (NSBb ) is −108.58% when the end-of-year LDR is used and −113.84%
when the average LDR is used instead (top of columns (3) and (4) of Table 7). The difference
between the results for the end-of-year and average LDRs is inconsequential.
Because entrusted lending is part of shadow banking loans, the significance of nonstate
banks’ activities in shadow banking may be underestimated. To determine the degree of
such an underestimation, we compare the regression results based on the entrusted loan
dataset and those based on the bank asset dataset, which includes all shadow banking
products brought onto the balance sheet. That is, we compare the estimated 17.97% (bottom
of column (3) of Table 4) to the estimated 42.33% (bottom of column (3) of Table 7).
Because the entrusted loan dataset pertains to new loans (flow) and the bank asset dataset
concerns outstanding loans (stock), we convert the flow estimate 17.97% to its stock value as
(1 + 17.97%) ∗ 30.10% = 35.51%, where 30.10% is an average quarterly growth rate of ARIX
between 2009 and 2015. Comparing the stock coefficient 35.51% based on the entrusted loan
data to the stock estimate 42.33% based on the bank asset data, we conclude that although
the regression results based on the entrusted loan dataset may underestimate nonstate banks’
response to contractionary monetary policy in funneling shadow banking loans, the degree
of underestimation may not be large, especially when one takes into account the standard
error of the estimate. This conclusion also holds if we compare the regression results with
the original and larger sample but without any bank-specific attribute.
The robust finding of a highly significant impact of monetary policy on nonstate banks’
ARIX holdings provides an additional support for the argument that nonstate banks’ activity
in funneling entrusted loans when monetary policy tightens is not driven from borrowers’
demand for entrusted loans. Demand itself would not explain why only nonstate banks,
not state banks, would actively bring shadow banking products onto their balance sheets
via ARIX. Rather, it is the institutional asymmetry that explains the disparate behaviors
between state and nonstate banks, which persist even after we control for all individual bank
attributes.
V.4. The connection between off-balance-sheet and on-balance-sheet activities.
The previous results from our panel regressions on both entrusted lending and ARIX are

THE NEXUS OF MONETARY POLICY AND SHADOW BANKING IN CHINA

27

mutually consistent; together they show that nonstate banks were willing to use the ARIX
category to bear a credit risk of entrusted lending as well as other shadow banking products
for higher profits. Had off-balance-sheet shadow banking products never been brought onto
the balance sheet in the form of ARIX, we would not have obtained these consistent results.
Such consistency implies that nonstate banks were not only passive facilitators but also
active participants in bringing off-balance-sheet shadow banking products onto the balance
sheet.
To see whether an individual bank facilitated entrusted lending off balance sheet and at
the same time brought these shadow banking products onto its balance sheet, we report in
Table 8 the correlation of entrusted lending and ARIX by the same bank. During 2009-2015,
the correlation between newly issued entrusted loans and changes in ARIX is significantly
positive for nonstate banks, while the same correlation is statistically insignificant for state
banks. A similar result holds for the correlation between entrusted lending and

ARIX
,
ARIX+B

where B stands for bank loans. These correlation facts are not a mere accident; they suggest
that nonstate banks had a penchant for bringing shadow banking products onto their balance
sheets in the form of ARIX while state banks did not.
The correlation evidence presented in Table 8 is corroborated by the share of ARIX in total
credit (the sum of ARIX holdings and bank loans on banks’ balance sheets). Figure 7 shows
that the share for state banks was unimportant, below 3% for most of the period 2009-2015.
By contrast, the share of ARIX for nonstate banks increased rapidly during 2009-2015 until
it reached almost 30% in 2015.
Since ARIX includes all possible shadow banking products brought onto the balance sheet,
a key question is how important ARIX is in total bank credit. Table 9 provides more summary
information about the importance of ARIX in total credit. As previously argued, state banks
do not avail themselves of regulatory arbitrage to circumvent the government’s regulations.
As a result, the share of ARIX in total credit on their balance sheets remained at a very
low level and the high 70th percentile for the share was only 4.8% in 2009 and 5.3% in 2015.
The opposite is true for nonstate banks, which rapidly brought shadow banking loans onto
their balance sheets in the form of ARIX during the same period. The 30th percentile for
their share increases from 0.5% in 2009 to 20.6% in 2015 and the 70th percentile indicates
an even higher share.
In a recent paper, Chen, He, and Liu (2017) demonstrate that as bank loans declined, local
government debts that funded shadow banking products such as entrusted loans and wealth

THE NEXUS OF MONETARY POLICY AND SHADOW BANKING IN CHINA

28

management products increased. But was this off-balance-sheet activity brought onto the
balance sheet in the banking system? The consistent results based on both entrusted loan
and ARIX datasets establish a positive answer to this question. In the empirical analysis
presented in the following section, we treat ARIX as a whole rather than single out entrusted
rights within ARIX. What matters to the effectiveness of monetary policy is ARIX, which
encompasses all shadow banking products brought into the banking system.

VI. The effectiveness of monetary policy on the banking system
In the preceding sections, we establish micro evidence that nonstate banks responded to
monetary policy tightening first by helping increase entrusted loans as passive facilitators
and then by bringing shadow banking products onto their balance sheets via investments
in ARIX as active participators. While monetary policy tightening is expected to reduce
traditional bank loans, the impact of the rise of shadow banking loans on the effectiveness
of monetary policy has been a serious concern for the Chinese government. In this section,
we analyze the extent to which investments in shadow banking products in the form of
ARIX reduce the effectiveness of monetary policy. We first build a theoretical model to
shed light on how monetary policy shocks affect the optimal portfolio choice of nonstate
banks between bank loans and investments in ARIX.20 We then develop a panel structural
VAR model with the identifying restriction justified by the theory, and estimate the dynamic
impacts of changes in monetary policy on total bank credit.
VI.1. A theoretical model. Consider an economy populated by a continuum of banks
whose identity is indexed by j ∈ [0, 1]. All banks are infinitely-lived and are subject to
idiosyncratic withdrawal shocks to deposits with a fraction ωt of deposits withdrawn in the
economy. We model the stochastic process of the idiosyncratic shock ωt to be continuously
distributed with the probability density function f(ωt ) that is uniformly distributed with the
support of [µ (εm,t ) , 1], where µ (εm,t ) is a function of the monetary policy shock εm,t . The
lower bound is influenced by a monetary policy shock that directly affects aggregate deposits
in the economy.
20As

discussed in the Introduction, state banks as part of the government do not circumvent the govern-

ment’s regulatory policies by actively participating in shadow banking activities. But bank loans in state
banks do respond to changes in monetary policy. In theoretical Appendices D and E, we consider both state
and nonstate banks when simulating the effect of monetary policy on the entire banking system.

THE NEXUS OF MONETARY POLICY AND SHADOW BANKING IN CHINA

29

We derive the functional form of µ(·) to formalize Anna J. Schwartz’s informative description of how monetary policy changes influence total (aggregate) deposits in the banking
system.21 We denote the deposits of bank j in period t by Dt (j). The deposits of bank j after
the realization of an idiosyncratic withdrawal shock to deposits, therefore, is Dt (j) (1 − ωt ).
To understand the mechanism of how changes in monetary policy influence the banking
system, we first show that εm,t has direct impact on aggregate deposits. Note that εm,t =
∆ log Mtexog , where Mtexog represents the exogenous money supply. It follows that
εm,t = ∆ log Mtexog
Z 1Z 1
= log

Z

"Z
= log

Dt (j) dj
0

µ(εm,t )

0

1

Dt (j) (1 − ωt ) f(ωt ) dωt dj − log

1

Z

Z

(1 − ωt ) ft (ωt ) dωt − log

Dt (j) dj
0

#

1

µ(εm,t )

1

Dt (j) dj
0

= log (1 − E [ωt | µ (εm,t )])
' −(1 + µ (εm,t ))/2,
which leads to
µ (εm,t ) ' −(2εm,t + 1).

(6)

Estimated annual changes of εm,t (Section III) are between −0.05 and 0.05. Since the variation of εm,t is small, approximation (6) is valid. It indicates that contractionary monetary
policy leads to a fall of aggregate deposits by directly altering the distribution of the idiosyncratic deposit withdrawal. This result is consistent with Figure 8, in which the fall of
growth in aggregate deposits after 2009 tracks the fall of M2 growth closely.
In Section III, we show that the estimated monetary policy shocks are orthogonal to
changes in the reserve requirement. That is, exogenous shifts in the money supply are carried
out only through open market operations. In our theoretical model, therefore, changes in
εm,t affect bank deposits directly through open market operations.
We now analyze how banks’ portfolio allocation and total credit react to monetary policy
changes via open market operations. Following Bianchi and Bigio (2017), there are two
stages within each period: a lending stage and a balancing stage. To keep the notation
simple, we omit the time subscript in the following description of our dynamic model.
21We

thank a referee for bringing out this important point to us. As Anna J. Schwartz succinctly stated,

absent movements of currency in circulation, “deposits and M2 move together almost by definition” (http:
//www.econlib.org/library/Enc/MoneySupply.html).

THE NEXUS OF MONETARY POLICY AND SHADOW BANKING IN CHINA

30

At the very beginning of the period, the central bank conducts its contractionary monetary
policy (i.e., εm falls) through open market operations by selling central bank bills to the
primary dealer, while making short-term liquidity loans (within the period) to the primary
dealer with an amount equal to the increase of central bank bills.22 Diagram I illustrates
how such open market operations change the T-accounts of both central bank and primary
dealer at the lending stage.23
Diagram I: Lending Stage
Central Bank (CB)
Loans to PD % CB Bills %

Primary Dealer (PD)
CB Bills %

CB Loans %

Deposits at Banks
Cash
At this stage, the bank observes the open market operations initiated by the central bank
and anticipates a higher risk of deposit withdrawal from the primary dealer (i.e., an increase
of µ (εm,t )). The bank then decides the amount of deposits to demand (D), how much of
the dividend to distribute (DIV), and how to allocate three types of assets for investment:
intertemporal bank loans (B), within-period risky nonloan assets (I r ), which are in the form
of ARIX in reality, and cash (C).24 Bank loans are safe (default free) but subject to the
regulatory constraint on the LDR, and are purchased at a discount price 0 < q < 1. By
contrast, risky nonloan assets are not subject to the LDR constraint, but to a default risk.
They are purchased at a discount price 0 < q r < 1.
In the balancing stage, two random events occur: an idiosyncratic withdrawal shock (ω)
to deposits and a default shock (ξ) to risky nonloan assets. At this stage, the primary dealer
pays off central bank loans by withdrawing deposits from commercial banks. This action
of primary dealers affects the T-accounts as shown in Diagram II and forms idiosyncratic
withdrawal shocks from the perspective of individual banks.
Diagram II: Balancing Stage
22For

a description of open market operations through primary dealers who have depository accounts in

commercial banks, see also the Federal Reserve Bank of New York webpage: https://www.newyorkfed.
org/aboutthefed/fedpoint/fed32.html
23
In addition to central bank bills, China’s central bank also sells and purchases government bonds as in
many other countries. In that case, government bonds appear on the asset side of the central bank’s balance
sheet in lieu of central bank bills on the liability side. The balance sheet of the primary dealer remains the
same except central bank bills are now replaced by government bonds.
24To keep our model tractable and clear, we abstract from other considerations such as bank reserves.
Reserves play a similar role to cash in our model. For an extensive analysis on reserves and other issues, see
Bianchi and Bigio (2017).

THE NEXUS OF MONETARY POLICY AND SHADOW BANKING IN CHINA

Central Bank (CB)

31

Primary Dealer (PD)

Loans to PD CB Bills
Cash &

CB Bills

CB Loans

Deposits at Banks &

When the withdrawal shock ω to deposits is realized, the volume of bank loans is constrained
by the LDR regulation as
qB ≤ θ

(1 − ω) D
,
RD

where θ is the LDR ceiling set by the government25 and RD is the interest rate of deposits.
When deposits are short of what is required by the LDR regulation, the bank incurs an
extra cost to recoup the deposit shortfall (the last-minute rush discussed in Section II.1.3).
Denote the deposit shortfall by
x = qB − θ

(1 − ω) D
RD

(7)

and the extra cost to recoup the shortfall by

rb x if x ≥ 0
,
χ(x) =
0
if x < 0
where rb > 0 is a cost of acquiring additional deposits.
The second random event represented by default shocks has the binary stochastic process
as
ξ=


1

with probability 1 − pr (the no-default state)

,

φ with probability pr (the default state)
where 0 ≤ φ < 1 represents the recovering rate of risky nonloan assets in the default state.
When the default on I r does not occur (the no-default state), the bank’s liability is reduced
by I r at the end of the period because of repayment of the principal of risky nonloan assets.
If I r is defaulted (the default state), the bank’s equity is reduced by (1 − φ)I r at the end of
the period.
25The

LDR is the key ingredient of both our model and Hachem and Song (2016). Hachem and Song

(2016) argue that a tightening in the LDR regulation (isomorphic to a decrease in θ in our model) is the key
to increasing shadow banking loans. In our model, we fix the value of θ and focus on monetary policy and
changes in deposits because evidence shows that a decrease in M2 growth leads to a decrease in deposits.

THE NEXUS OF MONETARY POLICY AND SHADOW BANKING IN CHINA

32

At the end of each period (the beginning of the next period), all the stock variables are
determined as
D̃0 = D(1 − ω) + χ(x) − ξRD 0 I r ,

(8)

C̃ 0 = C − ωD,

(9)

B̃ 0 = B,

(10)

where C̃, B̃, and D̃ denote these variables at the beginning of the period and the superscript
prime denotes the beginning of the next period (or the end of the period). When there is
a liquidity shortfall (C < ωD) due to a deposit withdrawal, the bank can borrow from the
central bank to satisfy depositors’ withdrawal needs and repay the loan at the beginning of
the next period.26 Accordingly, C̃ 0 corresponds to the net balance with the central bank. A
negative value of C̃ 0 simply means net borrowing from the central bank. We summarize the
timeline of events within each period in Diagram III.
Diagram III: Timeline Within Each Period
Lending Stage
OMOs
Aggregate Shock
εm , µ(εm )
Beginning
of Each Period
(C̃, B̃, D̃)

Portfolio Choice
DIV, C, B, I r , D

Balancing Stage
Idiosyncratic
Shocks
ω, ξ

Recoup Deposit
Shortfall
χ(x)
End of
Each Period
(C̃ 0 , B̃ 0 , D̃0 )

The bank’s optimization problem in the lending stage can thus be summarized as




V l C̃, B̃, D̃; εm = max U (DIV) + Eω,ξ V b (C, B, D; εm ) ,

(11)

where V l denotes the value function at the lending stage, V b denotes the value function
at the balancing stage (described later), U ( ) is the bank’s utility function, and Eω,ξ is the
mathematical expectation with respect to the (ω, ξ) measure. Expectation with respect to
ω is governed by the distribution of deposit withdrawal shocks, which is in turn influenced

by monetary policy shocks (i.e., µ(εm )). The bank takes εm , µ, rb , q, q r , RD as given when
26A

major task of the PBC is to maintain the stability of liquidity within the banking system to prevent

default. For instance, the PBC provides short-term liquidity to the bank in need of liquidity via central
bank liquidity loans or the standing lending facility. On the bank’s balance sheet, this short-term liquidity
is termed “Liability to Central Bank.” The practice of these policy instruments is documented in the PBC’s
quarterly MPRs.

THE NEXUS OF MONETARY POLICY AND SHADOW BANKING IN CHINA

33

solving its problem. By choosing (DIV, ϕ, S, I r , D), the bank solves problem (11) subject to


D/RD − D̃ + (1 − q r )I r + (1 − q)S − DIV = ϕ + I r + B − B̃ ,
(12)
| {z } |
{z
} |
{z
}
∆equity
∆deposits
∆assets


D/RD ≤ κ C + q r I r + qB − D/RD ,
|
{z
}

(13)



C ≥ ψ C + q r I r + qB − D/RD ,
|
{z
}

(14)

C = C̃ + ϕ,

(15)

B = δ B̃ + S,

(16)



ex-dividend equity

ex-dividend equity

where ϕ represents additional cash holdings chosen by the bank, (1−δ)B̃ represents a fraction
of loans that are retired, and S represents new bank loans. Equation (12) is the bank’s flowof-funds constraint. Equation (13) represents the leverage constraint on the bank, where κ is
the leverage ratio and the term in brackets after κ represents the equity net of the dividend
payout. Equation (14) is the liquidity constraint on the bank, which serves as a proxy for a
regulation on the sufficiency of the bank’s liquid assets. The liquidity ratio is denoted by ψ.
Equations (15) and (16) are the laws of motion for cash and bank loans in the lending stage.
The bank’s behavior in the balancing stage can be described as
h
i
b
l
0
0
0 0
V (C, B, D; εm ) = βEm V (C̃ , B̃ , D̃ ; εm ) | εm
subject to equations (7), (8), (9), and (10), where β is a subjective discount factor and Em
represents the mathematical expectation with respect to monetary policy shocks. The solution to the bank’s optimization is fully derived in Appendix D. In particular, Proposition S3
in this appendix shows that the bank chooses between bank loans and risky assets according
to the no-arbitrage asset pricing condition that equates the effective return of bank loans and
the expected return of risky nonloan assets adjusted for the default premium. The returns
of bank loans and risky nonloan assets are
RB =

q0δ + 1 − δ I
εRD
,R = r ,
q
q

The effective return of bank loans is RB net of expected regulation cost and regulation
risk premium (defined in Appendix D). As shown in Appendix D.5, when monetary policy
tightens, the bank, in anticipation of a higher probability of deposit shortfalls in the future,
optimally adjusts its portfolio by decreasing traditional bank loans (B &) and increasing

THE NEXUS OF MONETARY POLICY AND SHADOW BANKING IN CHINA

34

risky nonloan assets (I r %). Bank loans decline because monetary policy tightening increases
the risk of deposit withdrawal and thus the expected cost for the bank to recoup a deposit
shortfall. As a result, the effective return of bank loans declines. Because I r is not subject
to the LDR and safe-loan regulations, it is optimal for the bank to raise I r as an effective
way to circumvent these regulations.
Not only does a contractionary monetary policy shock shift the bank’s portfolio toward
risky nonloan assets, but also it exerts a dynamic impact on total bank credit, measured
as the sum of bank loans and risky nonloan assets. Proposition S4 in Appendix D shows
that a contractionary monetary policy increases the total bank credit when the risk aversion
parameter in the bank’s utility function (U (DIV)) is greater than one. An increase in the
expected regulation cost reduces the return of the bank equity, which generates two opposing
effects. The first is an income effect under which the dividend declines and thus the exdividend equity increases. The second is a substitution effect (the substitution between
today’s and tomorrow’s dividend payoffs), which reduces the bank’s incentive to save. When
the income effect dominates the substitution effect, it is optimal for the bank to expand the
total credit through an increase in risky nonloan assets to compensate for the extra cost of
recouping deposit losses.
This intuitive result can be readily seen from the following balance-sheet equation (derived
from equations (12), (15), and (16)):
D/RD + E − DIV = C + q r I r + qB,

(17)

where the bank’s equity at the beginning of each period is


E = C̃ + qδ B̃ − D̃ − (1 − δ)B̃ .
One can see from equation (17) that the ex-dividend equity (E − DIV) and thus the total
liability (the right-hand side of (17)) rises as the dividend (DIV) falls. This result relies on
the fact that both the leverage constraint (13) and the liquidity constraint (14) are always
binding under the assumption RD < RB − rb (Proposition S3 in Appendix D). The low
borrowing cost is a unique Chinese institutional fact that the deposit rate imposed by the
government is kept artificially low. The increase of the total liability on the bank’s balance
sheet, together with the decline in bank loans in response to monetary policy tightening,
implies that risky assets (q r I r ) must increase by more than the fall of bank loans (qB).

THE NEXUS OF MONETARY POLICY AND SHADOW BANKING IN CHINA

35

VI.2. Evidence from a panel structural VAR. Our theoretical analysis suggests that
monetary policy tightening should reduce bank loans but increase risky nonloan assets. This
effect hampers the intended impact of monetary policy. In this section, we provide VAR
evidence of the effectiveness of monetary policy on the banking system during the shadow
banking boom. Specifically, we extend the Romer and Romer (2004) methodology and
develop a dynamic panel model that is estimated using our constructed bank asset dataset.
The dynamic quarterly panel model is of simultaneous-equation form as
"
Ab0

∆Bbt

#

∆ARIXbt

= cb +

`
X
k=1

"
Abk

∆Bbt−k
∆ARIXbt−k

#

"P`
+

b
k=0 ck εm,t−k

0

#
+ ηbt ,

(18)

where the subscript b represents an individual bank, Bbt represents bank loans made by bank
b at time t, ARIXbt is accumulated by bank b at time t, ηbt is a vector of i.i.d. disturbances
that capture other shocks than monetary policy shocks, ` is the lag length set to 4 (one
year), and for k = 0, . . . , `

cnsb , cnsb , Ansb , if bank b is a nonstate bank
k
k
.
cb , cbk , Abk =
csb , csb , Asb ,
if bank b is a state bank
k
k
Both ∆Bbt and ∆ARIXbt are scaled by nominal GDP to keep the panel VAR stationary. The
lagged variables ∆Bbt−k and ∆ARIXbt−k on the right hand side of the panel equations are
used to capture changes of Bbt and ARIXbt influenced by different maturities at which some
bank assets are retired. After controlling for these lagged variables, the dynamic impact of
εm,t reflects the effect only on new loans and new investment. Both contemporaneous and
lagged changes of exogenous M2 growth are included in the panel VAR. Because of missing
data on ARIX in earlier years, the sample period for panel estimation is from 2011Q1 to
2015Q4.
The identification of equations in panel structural VAR (18) is achieved as follows. The
first equation captures the direct effects of exogenous changes in M2 growth on bank loans;
the second equation, excluding all monetary policy shocks, reflects the indirect effects on
both types of assets. This identifying restriction is justified by our theory in which monetary
policy shocks directly affect bank loans via the LDR regulation, while indirectly influencing
risky nonloan assets only through the no-arbitrage asset pricing equation. A combination
of direct and indirect effects leads to the simultaneous portfolio adjustment between the
two types of assets and generates the overall equilibrium effect of monetary policy on these

THE NEXUS OF MONETARY POLICY AND SHADOW BANKING IN CHINA

36

assets. Unlike the existing literature, we impose no restriction on Ab0 . That is, there are no
strong and controversial assumptions such as a Choleski ordering of Ab0 .
Because of the simultaneity in the dynamic panel system, a key question is whether the
dynamic responses of Bbt and ARIXbt in response to εm,t are uniquely determined. Since
εm,t−k for k = 0, . . . , ` enters the first equation but not the second equation and because
εm,t−k is exogenously given, the dynamic system represented by (18) is globally identified
according to Theorem 1 of Rubio-Ramı́rez, Waggoner, and Zha (2010). In other words,
conditional on the observed bank asset data of Bbt and ARIXbt , all the coefficients cb and
Abk (b = nsb, sb and k = 0, . . . , `) are uniquely determined by the maximum likelihood
estimation, which can be executed equation by equation (Waggoner and Zha, 2003).
Given the estimated coefficients, the next step is to calculate the dynamic responses of
Bbt and ARIXbt in response to εm,t . As an illustration, we consider the following simple
one-variable process
∆xt = a0 +

`
X

bk ∆xt−k +

k=1

`
X

ck εm,t−k + ηt .

k=0

For this simple example, the dynamic responses of xt+h for h = 0, 1, 2, . . . to a one-standarddeviation unit of εm,t can be calculated as
• xt (h = 0): c0 ;
• xt+1 (h = 1): c1 + b1 c0 + c0 ;
• xt+2 (h = 2): c2 + b2 c0 + b1 (c1 + b1 c0 ) + c1 + b1 c0 + c0 .
Although the complete formula for the dynamic responses to εm,t in the dynamic panel
system is much more involved, the calculation is similar to this simple example.
The coefficients in system (18) have two different values, depending on whether the bank
is state owned. Allowing for different values captures the institutional asymmetry between
state and nonstate banks as well as other potential differences between these two groups
of banks. Given this panel structure, the estimated dynamic responses of ARIX and bank
loans for all banks (the banking system) to a one-standard-deviation fall in M2 growth are
a simple sum of the dynamic responses for each group of banks. The responses are plotted
in Figure 9. Bank loans steadily decline in response to contractionary monetary policy
as expected. ARIX holdings, however, respond in an opposite direction, increasing and
reaching the peak at 2.5% at the fourth quarter. The response of nonstate banks contributes
to most of the rise in ARIX. According to the error bands displayed in Figure 9, estimates
of the aggregate dynamic responses are statistically significant. As a result, the total credit

THE NEXUS OF MONETARY POLICY AND SHADOW BANKING IN CHINA

37

in the banking system (bank loans and ARIX holdings combined) increases steadily over
time for the first year with the estimated increase marginally significant above zero at the
fourth quarter (judged by the error bands). Afterward, the response of the total bank
credit becomes statistically insignificant. From the central bank’s viewpoint, the effect of
contractionary monetary policy on the banking system is ineffective because the responses
of ARIX holdings offset those of bank loans. These empirical findings are consistent with
our simulated impulse responses presented in Appendix E.
Given the existing quantity-based monetary policy in China, what regulatory remedy
would make monetary policy more effective? The difficulty in dealing with ARIX is that the
degree of its risk is largely unknown partly because the detailed assets contained in the ARIX
category are murky and partly because the extent to which ARIX is implicitly guaranteed
by the government is unknown. The lack of precise knowledge about risk factors within
ARIX and the unknown degree of implicit guarantee make it difficult, if not impossible, to
make necessary risk adjustments to capital adequacy related to ARIX. The CBRC recognizes
this difficulty and has begun to impose a direct restriction on growth of the total credit by
requiring it to be in line with M2 growth targeted by the PBC.27
In light of our panel VAR results, such a regulatory change is moving in the right direction
to improve the effectiveness of monetary policy on the banking system. The quantity-based
monetary policy works through the bank lending channel to influence the total bank credit.
This system was set up long before shadow banking became popular. But the rise of ARIX
allowed banks to bypass the LDR and safe-loan regulations by promoting shadow banking
activities on the balance sheet. Consequently, it marginalized the effectiveness of monetary
policy tightening on total bank credit.
Alternative and comprehensive reforms would require simultaneous changes in monetary
and regulatory policies: moving the monetary policy system toward using some policy interest rate as the intermediate target of monetary policy, removing the LDR regulation in its
entirety, and strengthening the criterion of capital adequacy requirements by appropriately
adjusting the risk associated with the detailed assets within the ARIX category. The central
government is moving gradually toward these reforms, but their speed and success depend on
27Since

late 2015, the government has gradually enforced stricter guidelines to restrict fast growing off-

balance-sheet products that eventually showed up in the ARIX category of nonstate banks. At the beginning
of 2016, for example, the government incorporated the so-called Macro Prudential Assessment System, which
requires that the “broad credit” growth rate should not deviate from the targeted growth rate of M2 by
more than 22%.

THE NEXUS OF MONETARY POLICY AND SHADOW BANKING IN CHINA

38

how the government will address much broader issues such as liberalizing financial markets
and restructuring government-protected industries with excess capacity, a topic that merits
thorough and separate research in the future.
VII. Conclusion
The rapid rise of shadow banking induced incentives for China’s banking sector to bring
the shadow banking risk onto its balance sheet. In this paper, we establish empirical evidence that contractionary monetary policy during 2009-2015 caused the rise of both shadow
banking lending off balance sheet and risky assets in the form of ARIX in the banking system. Grounded in China’s institutional facts, we estimate the tractable monetary policy
rule and obtain a time series of monetary policy shocks. This time series, together with the
two micro banking datasets we constructed, enables us to perform robust analyses on our
findings, especially about the role nonstate banks played in shadow banking activities both
off and on the balance sheet. Our theory shows that while contractionary monetary policy
reduces bank loans as expected, it simultaneously encourages nonstate banks to increase investments in risky nonloan assets to circumvent the LDR and safe-loan regulations to which
bank loans are subject.
Our research focuses on the banking sector: how monetary policy affects the asset side of
banks’ balance sheets. It abstracts from other important issues. One issue is how the bank
lending channel is transmitted into the real economy. It is possible that the transmission
mechanism for bank loans differs materially from transmission for ARIX holdings. The
importance of this topic merits future research.
Another issue relates to policy reforms. In a recent paper, Brunnermeier, Sockin, and
Xiong (Forthcoming) provide a discussion on how financing flexibility may erode the effectiveness of the government’s well-intended policies. In particular, they argue that China’s
liberalized financial system, by loosening financial regulations on the shadow banking system, does not allow its government to experiment with a temporary stimulus such as the
post-2008 stimulus program, that can be easily reversed afterwards. Our paper provides
strong empirical support for their argument and is consistent with calls for establishing a
macroprudential framework to coordinate with monetary policy while financial markets are
liberalized. Although our empirical findings are specific to China, we hope that their broad
policy implications as well as our empirical methodology for analyzing the banking data will
be useful for studies on other economies.

THE NEXUS OF MONETARY POLICY AND SHADOW BANKING IN CHINA

39

Table 1. Bank loans versus entrusted loans (average for 2009-2015)
Loan type

Loan maturity Loan rate

Bank loans

30.91

6.51

Entrusted loans

20.99

7.59

Note. Loan maturity is expressed in months and loan rate in percent. Both measures are
averages weighted by loan amount. Data source: CEIC and our constructed entrusted loan
dataset.
Table 2. Capital adequacy ratios (CAR), excess reserve ratio (ERR), and
LDR for state and nonstate banks in 2009-2015 (%)
Description

CAR ERR LDR (EOY) LDR (Average)

State banks

13.07

1.45

68.06

68.69

Nonstate banks

12.16

3.32

73.02

76.68

Overall

12.71

1.90

69.15

70.4

Std. Err.

4.49

0.46

1.48

1.86

P-value

0.85

0.00

0.4

0.27

Note. EOY stands for end of year. Average means an average value of the LDRs within
each year for each bank. Each ratio for each year is weighted by bank assets and the
reported ratio is a simple average across years. The calculation is based on the
balance-sheet information of commercial banks reported by Bankscope and WIND. Capital
adequacy ratios for all commercial banks are available from Bankscope. LDRs and excess
reserve ratios are manually collected from annual reports of publicly listed banks, which are
available from WIND. We compute the excess reserve ratio of each bank for every year,
calculate a weighted average of these ratios for all the banks within each group (the state
group and the nonstate group) for each year, and then take a simple average of these ratios
across years. “Str. Err.” stands for standard error. The standard error for the difference
between the ratio for state banks and the ratio for nonstate banks, along with the
corresponding p-value (round to two decimal places), is reported in the last two rows of the
table.

THE NEXUS OF MONETARY POLICY AND SHADOW BANKING IN CHINA

40

Table 3. Estimated monetary policy
Coefficient

Estimate

SE

p-value

γm

0.391∗∗∗ 0.101

0.000

γπ

−0.397∗∗∗ 0.121

0.001

γx,a

0.183∗∗∗ 0.060

0.002

γx,b

−1.299∗∗∗ 0.499

0.009

σm,a

0.005∗∗∗ 0.001

0.000

σm,b

∗∗∗

0.010

0.002

0.000

Note. Estimated results for the endogenously switching monetary policy rule. “SE” stands
for standard error. The three-star superscript indicates a 1% significance level.

THE NEXUS OF MONETARY POLICY AND SHADOW BANKING IN CHINA

41

Table 4. Estimated results for panel regressions on total entrusted lending
Main finding: nonstate banks facilitated more entrusted lending during monetary policy tightening while state
banks did not. The table presents estimates from the panel regressions in which the dependent variable is the
logarithm of total entrusted loan amount. Column (1) uses a total of 583 trustee-quarter observations from 2009Q1
to 2015Q4, including observations of entrusted loans facilitated by nonbank trustees. Columns (2) and (3) report
the regression results based on a smaller sample with bank-specific attributes. The smaller sample has a total of 342
bank-quarter observations from 2009Q1 to 2015Q4. The bank-specific attributes include LDR, size, capital level,
liquidity ratio, return on assets, and non-performance loan ratio. We also include GDP at t − 1 (an annual change
of GDP in the previous year) and Inf at t − 1 (an annual change of the GDP deflator in the previous year) as
control variables. A constant term is included but its coefficient is not reported. The superscript † means that the
overall impact has no standard error but the double-interaction term between gt−1 and I (NSBb ) is statistically
significant at a 1% level. Standard errors are reported in parentheses. The symbols ***, **, and * denote statistical
significance at 1%, 5%, and 10% levels, respectively.

Dependent variable: log of total entrusted lending
gt−1 : αg
gt−1 I (NSBb ) : βnsb
gt−1 I (SBb ) : βsb

(1)
Trustee
Sample

(2)
Bank
Sample

(3)
Bank
Sample

13.12*
(7.51)
-23.77***
(7.70)
4.306
(10.72)

16.50
(10.14)
-30.46***
(9.838)

253.6***
(85.76)
-55.30***
(13.49)

gt−1 ∗ Liquidity
gt−1 ∗ ROA
gt−1 ∗ Size
gt−1 ∗ Capital
gt−1 ∗ N P L
gt−1 ∗ LDR
Observations
Single term controls for bank attributes
GDP, deflator controls
Impacts of money growth via state banks
Impacts of money growth via nonstate banks

583
No
Yes
17.42*
(9.29)
-10.65***
(4.39)

342
No
Yes
16.50
(10.14)
-14.00***
(5.73)

0.51
(0.90)
90.47***
(30.22)
-18.87***
(6.35)
-4.17
(2.59)
9.62
(14.77)
-0.37
(0.590)
342
Yes
Yes
37.33
-17.97†

THE NEXUS OF MONETARY POLICY AND SHADOW BANKING IN CHINA

42

Table 5. Estimated results for panel regressions on average entrusted lending
Main finding: nonstate banks facilitated more entrusted lending on average (intensive margin) during monetary
policy tightening while state banks did not. The table presents estimates from the panel regressions in which the
dependent variable is the logarithm of average entrusted loan amount. Column (1) uses a total of 583
trustee-quarter observations from 2009Q1 to 2015Q4, including observations of entrusted loans facilitated by
nonbank trustees. Columns (2) and (3) report regression results based on a smaller sample with bank-specific
attributes. The smaller sample has a total of 342 bank-quarter observations from 2009Q1 to 2015Q4. The
bank-specific attributes include LDR, size, capital level, liquidity ratio, return on assets, and non-performance loan
ratio. We also include GDP at t − 1 (an annual change in GDP in the previous year) and Inf at t − 1 (an annual
change in the GDP deflator in the previous year) as control variables. A constant term is included but its coefficient
is not reported. The superscript † means that the overall impact has no standard error but the double-interaction
term between gt−1 and I (NSBb ) is statistically significant. Standard errors are reported in parentheses. The
symbols ***, **, and * denote statistical significance at 1%, 5%, and 10% levels, respectively.

Dependent variable: log of average entrusted lending
gt−1 : αg
gt−1 I (NSBb ) : βnsb
gt−1 I (SBb ) : βsb

(1)
Trustee
Sample
13.24**
(6.38)
-21.80***
(6.61)
3.36
(9.26)

(2)
Bank
Sample
12.95
(8.41)
-27.63***
(8.12)

gt−1 ∗ Liquidity
gt−1 ∗ ROA
gt−1 ∗ Size
gt−1 ∗ Capital
gt−1 ∗ N P L
gt−1 ∗ LDR
Observations
Single term controls for bank attributes
GDP, deflator controls
Impacts of money growth via state banks
Impacts of money growth via nonstate banks

583
No
Yes
16.60**
(7.96)
-8.56**
(4.18)

342
No
Yes
12.95
(8.41)
-14.68***
(4.09)

(3)
Bank
Sample
175.4**
(79.76)
-34.85**
(16.10)

-0.32
(0.82)
87.38***
(27.25)
-12.98**
(6.12)
-6.88**
(3.10)
12.91
(12.42)
-0.25
(0.53)
342
Yes
Yes
17.75
-17.09†

THE NEXUS OF MONETARY POLICY AND SHADOW BANKING IN CHINA

Table 6. Summary statistics of bank-specific attributes from 2009 to 2015
Attribute/Variable

Obs Mean Std. Dev.

Min Median

Max

LDR

396

69.49

7.11

47.43

71.70 85.16

Size

396

14.86

1.20

11.42

14.84 16.84

Capital

396

6.05

1.25

3.18

5.99 12.34

Liquidity

396

27.01

7.13

12.21

25.44 48.10

ROA

396

1.06

0.19

0.42

1.06

1.58

NPL

396

1.08

0.56

0.38

0.96

4.32

Note. All variables except size (log value of total assets) are expressed in percent. Data
source: Bankscope.

43

THE NEXUS OF MONETARY POLICY AND SHADOW BANKING IN CHINA

44

Table 7. Estimated results for panel regressions on ARIX
Main finding: nonstate banks invested in more ARIX on their balance sheets during monetary policy tightening
while state banks did not. The table presents estimates from the panel regressions in which the dependent variable
is ARIX, which includes all shadow banking products on the balance sheet. The sample period is from 2009Q1 to
2015Q4. Column (1) uses a total of 410 bank-quarter observations from 2009Q1 to 2015Q4 without inclusion of
bank-specific attributes. Columns (2)-(4) report regression results based on a smaller sample with bank-specific
attributes. The smaller sample has a total of 373 bank-quarter observations from 2009Q1 to 2015Q4. Column (3)
reports the regression results with the end-of-year LDR. Column (4) reports the regression results with the average
of daily LDR. We also include GDP at t − 1 (an annual change in GDP in the previous year) and Inf at t − 1 (an
annual change in the GDP deflator in the previous year) as control variables. A constant term is included but its
coefficient is not reported. The superscript † means that the overall impact has no standard error but the
double-interaction term between gt−1 and I (NSBb ) is statistically significant at a 1% level. Standard errors are
reported in parentheses. The symbols ***, **, and * denote statistical significance at 1%, 5%, and 10% levels,
respectively.

Dependent variable: log of ARIX
gt−1 : αg
gt−1 I (NSBb ) : βnsb

(1)
Bank
Sample
26.56**
(12.55)
-64.26***
(15.45)

(2)
Bank
Sample
23.57*
(13.01)
-69.30***
(15.48)

410
No
Yes
26.56**
(12.55)
-37.69***
(9.85)

373
No
Yes
23.57*
(13.01)
-45.73***
(8.89)

gt−1 ∗ Liquidity
gt−1 ∗ ROA
gt−1 ∗ Size
gt−1 ∗ Capital
gt−1 ∗ N P L
gt−1 ∗ LDR
Observations
Single term controls for bank attributes
GDP, deflator controls
Impacts of money growth via state banks
Impacts of money growth via nonstate banks

(3)
Bank
Sample
245.9
(189.8)
-108.6***
(32.83)
1.006
(1.15)
196.2**
(93.56)
-24.26
(16.60)
-13.29
(12.47)
-18.74
(24.62)
0.731
(1.37)
373
Yes
Yes
66.27

(4)
Bank
Sample
341.1
(215.3)
-113.8***
(32.59)
0.992
(1.35)
190.7**
(87.09)
-27.34
(18.40)
-14.73
(12.89)
-29.19
(21.09)
0.448
(1.29)
373
Yes
Yes
70.12

-42.33†

-43.68†

THE NEXUS OF MONETARY POLICY AND SHADOW BANKING IN CHINA

45

Table 8. Correlation between new entrusted loans (L ) channeled by banks
and changes in ARIX or the share of ARIX in 2009-2015
Description

State banks p-value Nonstate banks p-value

Corr (∆ARIX, L )

ARIX
Corr ARIX+B
,L

0.224
-0.179

0.197

0.621∗∗∗

0.000

0.304

∗∗∗

0.001

0.458

Note. The symbol “B” stands for bank loans. Data source: our constructed micro data at
the level of individual banks.
Table 9. ARIX shares in 2009-2015 (%)
Year

State banks

Nonstate banks

p30 median average p70

p30

median average

p70

2009

2.82

3.89

3.87

4.79

0.50

1.68

1.59

4.56

2010

1.77

3.35

3.20

4.43

0.65

1.12

1.71

6.78

2011

1.03

3.02

2.84

3.54

0.59

1.13

1.50

2.20

2012

1.78

2.00

2.10

2.27

3.35

9.25

7.14

11.37

2013

1.64

1.86

2.02

2.58

9.84

17.67

14.18

18.70

2014

1.29

1.86

2.35

4.12

17.98

20.80

21.98

25.88

2015

2.18

2.27

2.98

5.31

20.58

22.28

29.03

31.06

Note. The (weighted) average values are computed in the same way as in Figure 7. The
distribution demarcations p30 and p70 stand for the 30% and 70% percentiles. These
percentiles, as recommended by Sims and Zha (1999), contain two thirds of the pointwise
probability for the distribution of each group of banks. Data source: the same as in
Figure 7.

THE NEXUS OF MONETARY POLICY AND SHADOW BANKING IN CHINA
Annual growth rate

35

M2
Bank loans

Shadow-banking loans outstanding

10

9.5

Log

25

20

9

15

8.5

10
2008

22

2010

2012

8
2008

2014

Share of shadow-banking loans

11

20

10

18

9

Percent

Percent

30

Percent

10.5

16

7

12

6

2010

2012

2014

2012

2014

Share of entrusted loans outstanding

8

14

10
2008

2010

5
2008

2010

2012

2014

Figure 1. Aggregate time series of M2, bank loans, and shadow banking
variables. The shadow banking loan volume is the sum of entrusted lending,
trusted lending, and bank acceptances, all of which are off balance sheet. The
share of shadow banking loans is the ratio of shadow banking loans to the
sum of shadow banking loans and bank loans. The share of entrusted loans
is the ratio of entrusted loans to the sum of entrusted loans and bank loans.
Data source: PBC and CEIC (the database provided by China Economic
Information Center, now belonging to the Euromoney Institutional Investor
Company).

46

THE NEXUS OF MONETARY POLICY AND SHADOW BANKING IN CHINA

GDP growth less target

6
4
2
0
-2
2001

2003

2005

2007

2009

2011

2013

2015

2003

2005

2007

2009

2011

2013

2015

8

CPI inflation

6
4
2
0
-2
2001

Year over year change

30
Data
Endogenous

25
20
15
10
2001

2003

2005

2007

2009

2011

2013

2015

Year over year change

5
Exogenous

0

-5
2001

2003

2005

2007

2009

2011

2013

2015

Figure 2. Ultimate goals of monetary policy and its endogenous and exogenous components. Top two panels: quarterly year-over-year real GDP growth
rates minus the year-over-year growth targets set by the State Council and
quarterly year-over-year CPI inflation rates. The small bars mark periods in
which an actual GDP growth rate is less than the GDP growth target. Bottom
two panels: quarterly year-over-year M2 growth rates, estimated systematic
responses of monetary policy, and monetary policy shocks. The gap between
the actual M2 growth path and the systematic response path represents the
series of (exogenous) monetary policy shocks. Data source: PBC and CEIC.

47

THE NEXUS OF MONETARY POLICY AND SHADOW BANKING IN CHINA

48

12.5
Actual
Target

12

M2 in log

11.5
11
10.5
10
9.5
9

Year-over-year growth of M2 (%)

2001

2003

2005

2007

2009

2011

2013

2015

2005

2007

2009

2011

2013

2015

30
Actual
Target

25
20
15
10
5
2001

2003

Figure 3. Actual and targeted end-of-year M2 series. The government sets
the M2 growth target each year as year-over-year M2 growth at the end of the
year. Note that the end-of-year M2 growth (year-over-year) rates are slightly
different from the annual M2 growth rates based on the average M2 stock
for each year (top left panel of Figure 1). Data source: various RWG issues
published by the State Council and PBC.

THE NEXUS OF MONETARY POLICY AND SHADOW BANKING IN CHINA

49

Percentage Change

4
RRR
TRR

3
2
1
0
-1
-2
2001

2003

2005

2007

2009

2011

2013

2015

Percentage Change

4
ERR

3
2
1
0
-1
-2
2001

2003

2005

2007

2009

2011

2013

2015

Figure 4. Quarterly time series of the reserve requirement ratio (RRR), total
reserve ratio (TRR), and excess reserve ratio (ERR). Data source: PBC and
CEIC.

THE NEXUS OF MONETARY POLICY AND SHADOW BANKING IN CHINA

Safe-loan regulation

Lenders

Regulation

Bank loans

OffBS

(firm A)
ARIX (OnBS)

Banks

on the LDR

OffBS Risky borrowers
(firm B)

Deposits

Regulation

Primary

on capital

dealers

OMOs

Central
bank

Figure 5. An illustration of the nexus between monetary policy, the banking
system, and shadow banking. “Banks” refers to nonstate banks. “Safe-loan
regulation” refers to a series of 2010-2013 laws that strictly banned commercial banks from expanding bank loans to risky industries. “OffBS” refers to off
balance sheet, “OnBS” on the balance sheet, and “OMOs” open market operations. The dashed line arrow indicates that the current capital requirement
regulation is far from binding.

50

THE NEXUS OF MONETARY POLICY AND SHADOW BANKING IN CHINA
450
Our data
PBC
400

Number of raw announcements

350

300

250

200

150

100

50

0
2010

2011

2012

2013

Figure 6. Cross-check on the number of raw announcements of entrust lending. The number of raw announcements we collected is plotted against the
number published by the PBC’s CFSRs. There were no numbers published by
the PBC in years other than 2010-2013. Data source: PBC and WIND.

51

THE NEXUS OF MONETARY POLICY AND SHADOW BANKING IN CHINA

52

ARIX share

30
State
Nonstate

25

Percent

20

15

10

5

0
2009

2010

2011

2012

2013

2014

2015

Figure 7. Share of ARIX in total bank credit. “ARIX share” is the ratio of
ARIX holdings to the sum of ARIX holdings and bank loans on the balance
sheets of the 16 publicly listed commercial banks. Based on the bank asset
data from these individual banks, the data are categorized into state banks as
one group and nonstate banks as the other group. ARIX holdings and bank
loans are aggregate values for each group. Data source: PBC and WIND.

THE NEXUS OF MONETARY POLICY AND SHADOW BANKING IN CHINA

53

26
M2
Deposits

24

22

Growth (%)

20

18

16

14

12

10

8
2001

2003

2005

2007

2009

2011

2013

2015

Figure 8. Quarterly time series of M2 growth (year-over-year) and growth
of bank deposits (year-over-year). Data source: PBC and CEIC.

THE NEXUS OF MONETARY POLICY AND SHADOW BANKING IN CHINA

54

Bank loans

0

Percent

-1
-2
-3
-4
-5
1

2

3

4

5

6

7

8

9

10

11

12

7

8

9

10

11

12

8

9

10

11

12

ARIX

4

Percent

3
2
1
0
1

2

3

4

5

6

Total credit

4

Percent

2
0
-2
-4
1

2

3

4

5

6

7

Figure 9. Estimated quarterly dynamic responses to a one-standarddeviation fall of exogenous M2 growth. The estimation is based on our constructed banking data. Solid lines are the estimates and dashed lines represent
the .68 probability bands as advocated by Sims and Zha (1999).

THE NEXUS OF MONETARY POLICY AND SHADOW BANKING IN CHINA

55

References
Allen, F., Y. Qian, G. Tu, and F. Yu (2015): “Entrusted Loans, A Close Look at
China’s Shadow Banking System,” Manuscript, University of Pennsylvania.
Bianchi, J., and S. Bigio (2017): “Banks, Liquidity Management and Monetary Policy,”
Unpublished Manuscript.
Brunnermeier, M. K., M. Sockin, and W. Xiong (Forthcoming): “China’s Gradualistic Economic Approach: Does It Work for Financial Development?,” American Economic
Review Papers & Proceedings.
Chang, C., K. Chen, D. F. Waggoner, and T. Zha (2016): “Trends and Cycles in
China’s Macroeconomy,” NBER Macroeconomics Annual 2015, 30, 1–84, University of
Chicago Press.
Chen, K., P. Higgins, D. F. Waggoner, and T. Zha (2017): “Impacts of Monetary
Stimulus on Credit Allocation and Macroeconomy: Evidence from China,” NBER Working
Paper No. 22650.
Chen, K., T. Xu, and T. Zha (2017): “Optimal Monetary Policy Applicable to China,”
Unpublished Manuscript.
Chen, Z., Z. He, and C. Liu (2017): “The Financing of Local Government in China:
Stimulus Loan Wanes and Shadow Banking Waxes,” Unpublished Manuscript.
Christiano, L. J., M. S. Eichenbaum, and C. L. Evans (1999): “Monetary Policy
Shocks: What Have We Learned and To What End?,” in Handbook of Macroeconomics,
ed. by J. B. Taylor, and M. Woodford, vol. 1A, pp. 65–148. North-Holland, Amsterdam,
Holland.
(2005): “Nominal Rigidities and the Dynamic Effects of a Shock to Monetary
Policy,” Journal of Political Economy, 113, 1–45.
Dang, T. V., H. Wang, and A. Yao (2015): “Shadow Banking Modes: The Chinese
versus US System,” Columbia University Working Paper.
Fernandez, R. B. (1981): “A Methodological Note on the Estimation of Time Series,”
Review of Economics and Statistics, 63(3), 471–476.
Hachem, K., and Z. M. Song (2016): “Liquidity Regulation and Unintended Financial
Transformation in China,” NBER Working Paper No. 21880.
Hamilton, J. D. (1994): Times Series Analysis. Princeton University Press, Princeton,
NJ.

THE NEXUS OF MONETARY POLICY AND SHADOW BANKING IN CHINA

56

Higgins, P. C., and T. Zha (2015): “China’s Macroeconomic Time Series: Methods and
Implications,” Unpublished Manuscript, Federal Reserve Bank of Atlanta.
Jiménez, G., S. Ongena, J.-L. Peydró, and J. Saurina (2014): “Hazardous Times
for Monetary Policy: What do Twenty-three Million Loans Say About the Impact of
Monetary Policy on Credit Risk-Taking?,” Econometrica, 82(2), 463–505.
Kahneman, D., and A. Tversky (1979): “Prospect Theory: an Analysis of Decision
Under Risk,” Econometrica, 47(2), 263–291.
Kashyap, A. K., and J. C. Stein (2000): “What Do a Million Observations on Banks Say
About the Transmission of Monetary Policy?,” American Economic Review, 90, 407–428.
Leeper, E. M., C. A. Sims, and T. Zha (1996): “What Does Monetary Policy Do?,”
Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, 2, 1–78.
Li, B., and Q. Liu (2017): “On the Choice of Monetary Policy Rules for China: A Bayesian
DSGE Approach,” China Economic Review, 44, 166–185.
Romer, C. D., and D. H. Romer (2004): “A New Measure of Monetary Shocks: Derivation and Implications,” American Economic Review, 94(4), 1055–1084.
Rotemberg, J. J., and M. Woodford (1997): “An Optimization-Based Econometric
Framework for the Evaluation of Monetary Policy,” in NBER Macroeconomics Annual, ed.
by B. S. Bernanke, and J. J. Rotemberg, pp. 297–346. The MIT Press, Cambridge (MA).
Rubio-Ramı́rez, J. F., D. F. Waggoner, and T. Zha (2010): “Structural Vector Autoregressions: Theory of Identification and Algorithms for Inference,” Review of Economic
Studies, 77, 665–696.
Sargent, T. J., and P. Surico (2011): “Two Illustrations of the Quantity Theory of
Money: Breakdowns and Revivals,” American Economic Review, 101, 109–128.
Sheng, A., C. Edelmann, C. Sheng, and J. Hu (2015): “Bringing Light upon The
Shadow—An Analysis of China’s Shadow Banking,” Discussion paper, Oliver Wyman
Management Consulting Company and Fund Global Institute, Research Report (in Chinese).
Sims, C. A., and T. Zha (1999): “Error Bands for Impulse Responses,” Econometrica,
67(5), 1113–1155.
(2006): “Were There Regime Switches in U.S. Monetary Policy?,” American Economic Review, 96, 54–81.
Taylor, J. B. (1993): “Discretion versus Policy Rules in Practice,” in Carnegie-Rochester
Conference Series on Public Policy, ed. by A. H. Meltzer, and C. I. Plosser, vol. 39, pp.

THE NEXUS OF MONETARY POLICY AND SHADOW BANKING IN CHINA

57

195–214. Amsterdam.
Waggoner, D. F., and T. Zha (2003): “A Gibbs Sampler for Structural Vector Autoregressions,” Journal of Economic Dynamics and Control, 28(2), 349–366.
Zhou, X. (2016): “Managing Multi-Objective Monetary Policy: From the Perspective of
Transitioning Chinese Economy,” Michel Camdessus Central Banking Lecture at International Monetary Fund, http://www.imf.org/external/np/speeches/2016/062416.htm.

THE NEXUS OF MONETARY POLICY AND SHADOW BANKING IN CHINA

58

In the following appendices, all labels for equations, figures, tables, definitions, and propositions begin with S, standing for supplement to the main text.
Appendix A. Conventional monetary policy rule specifications
In this section, we show that mechanically applying various policy rules in the existing
literature without taking into account China’s institutional facts leads to weak or misleading
results. We start with the conventional money growth rule and end with the stantard interest
rate rule using various market interest rates in China.
A.1. Conventional money growth rules. The existing Taylor-type rules in the dynamic
stochastic general equilibrium (DSGE) literature, whether money growth or the interest rate
is used as a monetary policy variable, require one to specify potential GDP or output. As
discussed in the text (Section III.1), there is no applicable concept of potential GDP for
emerging-market economies like China. Nonetheless, if one wishes to estimate conventional
monetary policy rules mechanically with the Chinese data, one could obtain the potential
GDP labeled as x̄t or the corresponding growth rate ḡx,t using either the HP filtered series
with the smoothing parameter set at 1600 for the quarterly series or the fitted log-linear
trend. In the spirit of Sargent and Surico (2011), we estimate the following conventional
monetary policy rule using “output gap” constructed from one of the these detrended series:
gm,t = γ0 + γm gm,t−1 + γπ (πt−1 − π ∗ ) + γx (gx,t−1 − ḡx,t−1 ) + σm εm,t .

(S1)

For comparison, the inflation and output growth variables on the right-hand side are lagged
one period to be consistent with the timing specification of practical monetary policy represented by equation (1).
The left and middle panels of Table S1 report the regression results. As one can see,
the estimated coefficient of “output gap” is statistically insignificant for the HP filtered
approach or carries a wrong sign for the log-linear detrending method. The positive sign of
output coefficient implies destabilizing monetary policy; that is, when output growth is below
the potential, monetary policy contracts instead of expanding to stablize the macroeconomy.
These results confirm our argument that the standard concept of output gap is inappropriate
for understanding China monetary policy.28
28In

a recent paper, Li and Liu (2017) do not use potential output but instead use long-run output

growth in their money growth rule. All coefficients in that rule are statistically insignificant, supporting our
argument that researchers should not ignore China’s institutional facts when developing China’s monetary
policy system.

THE NEXUS OF MONETARY POLICY AND SHADOW BANKING IN CHINA

59

Table S1. Estimation of conventional monetary policy rules for M2 growth
HP filtered
Coefficient

Estimate

SE

∗
ḡx,t = gx,t

Log-linear detrended
p-value

Estimate

SE

p-value

Estimate

SE

p-value

γm

0.607∗∗∗ 0.095

0.000

0.514∗∗∗ 0.096

0.000

0.569∗∗∗ 0.097

0.000

γπ

−0.551∗∗∗ 0.191

0.005

−0.629∗∗∗ 0.155

0.000

−0.555∗∗∗ 0.165

0.001

0.357

0.085∗∗∗ 0.032

0.009

γx

0.132

0.142

0.094

0.065

0.156

Note. “SE” stands for standard error. The three-star superscript indicates a 1%
significance level.

We also estimate the conventional monetary policy rule represented by (S1) by setting
∗
ḡx,t = gx,t
. The estimates are reported in the right panel of Table S1. As one can see in the

table, their magnitude is remarkably similar to that when potential GDP is approximated
by either HP filter or log-linear trend. What is common across the three cases (HP filter,
∗
log-linear trend, and ḡx,t = gx,t
) is that monetary policy is strongly anti-inflation. But the
∗
output coefficient for the ḡx,t = gx,t
case has a wrong sign and is statistically insignificant.

A.2. The interest rate rule. Another conventional specification for monetary policy is the
widely-used empirical Taylor rule for many developed economies as described in Rotemberg
and Woodford (1997):
Rt = α0 + αR Rt−1 + απ (πt − π ∗ ) + αx (xt − x̄t ) + εR,t ,

(S2)

where Rt is the (net) nominal interest rate. Table S2 reports the estimated results with
various short-term market interest rates, where potential GDP x̄t is the HP-filtered series.
As one can see, although the persistence parameter αR is statistically significant, απ is
statistically insignificant at a 10% level for all four cases while αx is statistically significant
only at a 10% level for three out of four interest rates. These results imply that monetary
policy does not care at all about inflation pressures, contradictory to the MPRs (the central
bank’s own reports). Worse than this implication, these results are unstable as they are
sensitive to how potential output is computed. When log-linear trend is applied to output
as potential GDP and the 7-day Repo rate is used, for example, the output coefficient
becomes statistically insignificant at a 49% significance level but the inflation coefficient is
now significant at a 1.6% significance level. When lagged output gap and inflation are used
as regressors instead of the contemporaneous counterparts, απ is often statistically significant

THE NEXUS OF MONETARY POLICY AND SHADOW BANKING IN CHINA

60

Table S2. Estimation of the widely-used Taylor rule
1-day Repo
Coefficient

Estimate

SE

7-day Repo
p-value

Estimate

SE

p-value

αR

0.706∗∗∗ 0.078

0.000

0.770∗∗∗

0.063

0.000

απ

0.007

0.103

0.948

0.144

0.098

0.144

αx

0.139∗

0.078

0.079

0.147∗

0.076

0.057

1-day Chibor
Coefficient
αR
απ
αx

Estimate

SE

p-value

Estimate

SE

p-value

0.000

0.779∗∗∗

0.063

0.000

0.101

0.919

0.149

0.096

0.123

0.076

0.085

0.117

0.074

0.119

0.707∗∗∗ 0.078
−0.010
0.132∗

7-day Chibor

Note. “SE” stands for standard error. The one-star superscript indicates a 10% significance
level and the three-star superscript a 1% significance level.

at a 1% significance level but αx is statistically insignificant even at a 10% significance level,
a result similar to the conventional monetary policy rules for M2 growth. Clearly, the results
for the interest rate rule vary widely, depending on which interest rate, which potential
output, or which variable (lagged or contemporaneous) is used.
Such unstable and contradictory results are unsurprising; they support the argument that
Chinese financial markets are yet to be fully developed and that the standard interest rate
rule may be incompatible with the central government’s ultimate target of real GDP growth.
This target is achieved by carefully planning M2 growth to support the central government’s
strategy of promoting economic growth by allocating medium and long term bank credit to
investment. The standard interest rate rule represented by (S2) does not take into account
these key institutional facts.
Appendix B. Quarterly time series data
The methodology of collecting and constructing the quarterly data series used in this
paper is based on Higgins and Zha (2015) and Chang, Chen, Waggoner, and Zha (2016).
The main data sources are China National Bureau of Statistics, People’s Bank of China,
CEIC, Bankscope, and WIND. The X11 method is used for seasonal adjustments. We
do not use the X12 software package because there are no indenpendent regressors used

THE NEXUS OF MONETARY POLICY AND SHADOW BANKING IN CHINA

61

to seasonally adjust our quarterly data.29 All series bar interest and exchange rates are
seasonally adjusted. All interpolated series are based on the method of Fernandez (1981),
as described in Higgins and Zha (2015).
• Aggregate bank loans: quarterly series of bank loans aggregated from all commercial banks within the banking system.
• ARI: quarterly series of account receivable investment (ARI) on the asset side of
an individual bank’s balance sheet. The series is based on WIND, which collects
the ARI series from quarterly reports of 16 publicly listed commercial banks. See
Appendix C.2 for details.
• ARIX: quarterly series of ARI excluding central bank bills and government bonds.
See Appendix C.2 for details.
• Bank loans: quarterly series of bank loans for each individual bank. The series is
based on WIND, which collects the bank loan information from quarterly reports of
16 publicly listed commercial banks. See Appendix C.2 for details.
• Chibor rates: The 1-day and 7-day China interbank offered rates, quarterly average.
• CPI: Consumer price index monitored by the central government of China.
• Deposits: Deposits in the banking system (RMB billion), quarterly average of
monthly deposit series. The monthly series is constructed based on CEIC ticker
CKSAB and CEIC ticker CKAAAB.
• Entrusted loans: quarterly series of entrusted loans facilitated by an individual
trustee, constructed from the transaction-based data from announcements of entrusted loans. See Appendix C.1 for details.
• ERR: Excess reserves ratio computed as TRR - RRR.
• GDP: Real GDP by value added (billions of 2008 RMB).
• GDP growth target: Real GDP growth target set by the central government of
China.
• M2: M2 supply (RMB billion), quarterly average of monthly M2 series.
• Repo rate: The 7-day market rate for national interbank bond repurchases, quarterly average.
29For

monthly series, one should use the X12 package by incorporating independent regressors to account

for the Chinese New Year effect that may cause problems for data in January and February. The Census
Bureau’s X13 program removes outliers before seasonal adjustments using TRAMO/SEATS software from
the Bank of Spain. For this paper, the quarterly series since 2000 does not appear to have serious outliers.

THE NEXUS OF MONETARY POLICY AND SHADOW BANKING IN CHINA

62

• RRR: Required reserve ratio based on CEIC ticker CMDAAJM “CN: Required Reserve Ratio.” The original CEIC series is available daily; it is converted to a monthly
average and then an average of the three months. Daily series starts in September
2003. The values prior to 2003Q4 are constructed as follows. We first average the
contemporaneous and end-of-month values of CEIC ticker CMAAAA “CN: Required
Reserve Ratio” and then take an average of these monthly values within the quarter.
• TRR: Total reserve ratio computed as the ratio of total reserved divided by total
deposits.
Appendix C. Details of the microdata construction
This section provides a detailed description of how we constructed the two micro datasets.
We first show in detail how we constructed the data on entrusted loans and then describe
the construction of balance sheet data of individual commercial banks.
C.1. Construction of entrusted loan data. The data on entrusted loans are off banks’
balance sheets. We read all the raw announcements of entrusted lending between nonfinancial firms from 2009 to 2015. One main reason we must read raw announcements line
by line is that there were often multiple announcements made by an individual lender for
the same transaction. In such cases, we manually combined these raw announcements into
one announcement. Some announcements were for repayment of entrusted loans. To avoid
double counting, we drop those announcements because the same transaction was recorded
in previous announcements. Another reason for reading through raw announcements relates
to the nuances of the Chinese language in expressing how the transaction of a particular
entrusted loan was conducted. For some announcements, the amount of an entrusted loan
was planned but never executed or executed with a different amount in a later announcement. During the loan planning stage, the name of the trustee was often not given in an
announcement. If we had not been careful about these announcements, we would have exaggerated the number and the amount of entrused loans collected. A fourth reason is that
we must remove announcements about loans that had already been paid to avoid duplication. The announcements organized this way are the ones we use for the paper and we
call them “announcements” rather than “raw announcements” with the understanding that
those announcements have been already cleaned up from raw announcements.
Our data construction involves extracting the transaction data, manually, from our cleanedup announcements of new loans. For each announcement, we recorded the names of the

THE NEXUS OF MONETARY POLICY AND SHADOW BANKING IN CHINA

63

lender and the borrower. Because the same transaction may be announced by both lender
and borrower, two announcements may correspond to only one transaction. In these cases,
we manually compared both announcements to ascertain the accuracy of our processed data
set.30 After the comparison, we merged the two announcements for the same transaction
into one unique observation. It turns out that there was only one such announcement for
the period 2009-2015. Subtracting this double-counted announcement gives us 1379 unique
observations. The timing of the observation corresponds to the exact timing of the transaction and does not necessarily correspond to the time when an announcement was made.
The transaction data constructed from these unique observations are used for our empirical
analysis.
The announcement data we constructed is the most important source for off-balance-sheet
activities. These data were also used by the PBC in their financial stability reports and we
cross-checked our data with these reports. We read through more than a thousand relevant
announcements line by line and cross-checked the data from different sources to decipher the
reporting nuances in the Chinese language, eliminate redundant and duplicated observations,
and obtain accurate and comprehensive data for entrusted lending facilitated by banks and
nonbank trustees. During this construction process that has taken us years to complete, we
identified lending firms, borrowing firms, and, most important of all, trustees that facilitated
entrusted lending between nonfinancial firms. Our data sample begins in 2009 and ends in
2015. There are relatively few observations before 2009.
Table S3 shows the number of unique observations without duplicated announcements.
The total number of unique observations must equal the sum of “NLA” and “NBA” minus
“NLABA” (the number of duplications). Clearly, the number of announcements made by
lenders was considerably greater than the number of announcements made by borrowers, a
fact that is consistent with the legal requirement that listed lending firms must reveal all the
details of entrusted loan transactions.
Table S4 shows a breakdown of transactions by different types of trustees and different
types of loans. Affiliated loans involve both lending and borrowing firms within the same
conglomerate. While most entrusted loans facilitated by nonbank trustees were affiliated
ones, a majority of affiliated loans were channeled by banks, a fact that is not well known.
As one can see from the table, no matter whether entrusted loans were affiliated, small banks
facilitated more transactions than large banks, and large banks facilitated more transactions
30We

find that the lender’s announcement typically contains more information than the borrower’s.

THE NEXUS OF MONETARY POLICY AND SHADOW BANKING IN CHINA

64

than nonbank trustees. Thus, banks played a critical role in facilitating both affiliated and
non-affiliated entrusted loans.
Nonstate banks accounted for the largest fraction of both loan transactions (number) and
loan volume (amount). Table S5 shows that the number of entrusted loan transactions
facilitated by nonstate banks took 50% of the total number and the amount of entrusted
loans 47% of the total amount in 2009-2015. Thus, nonstate banks played a special role in
funneling entrusted loans.
Table S3. Number of announcements made by lenders and borrowers
Description

NLA NBA NLABA Total

Number of observations

1152

228

1

1379

Note. NLA: number of lenders’ announcements; NBA: number of borrowers’
announcements; NLABA: number of the same transactions announced by both lenders and
borrowers.
Table S4. A breakdown of the total number of transactions by types of
trustees and types of loans
Description

NBTs State banks Nonstate banks Total

Non-affiliated loans

5

11

255

376

Affiliated loans

304

256

443

1003

Total

309

372

698

1379

Note. NBTs: nonbank trustees.
Table S5. Proportions (%) of loan transactions and loan volume according
to different types of trustees
Description

NBTs State banks Nonstate banks Total

Number of transactions

22.41

26.98

50.62

100

Loan volume

28.73

24.03

47.24

100

Note. NBTs: nonbank trustees.
C.2. Construction of bank asset data. The bank asset data contain bank loans and
ARIX on banks’ balance sheets. We constructed the bank asset dataset using banks’ quarterly reports downloaded from the WIND database. The Bankscope database is also used for

THE NEXUS OF MONETARY POLICY AND SHADOW BANKING IN CHINA

65

obtaining annual balance sheet information such as LDR, capital adequacy ratio, liquidity
ratio, and size for all Chinese commercial banks, including banks other than the 16 large
publicly listed banks. Quarterly series of bank-specific attributes are unavailable for most
private banks. Our panel regression analyses in Sections V.1 and V.2 include private banks
as facilitators of entrusted lending.
As for bank loans and ARI, we downloaded the quarterly reports for each of the 16
commercial banks listed in the Hongkong, Shenzhen, or Shanghai Exchanges from WIND.
Chinese commercial banks publish a first quarterly report (Q1), an interim report (Q2), a
third quarterly report (Q3), and an annual report(Q4). The ARIX series, equal to ARI subtracting the amount of central bank bills and government bonds, is available only annually;
we interpolated the quarterly ARIX series by the quarterly ARI series. Since the annual
ARIX series is missing for a number of commercial banks in 2009 and 2010, the interpolated
quarterly ARIX series are missing for these banks during these years. We organized all these
data into an unbalanced quarterly panel dataset from 2009Q1 to 2015Q4.
During the process of constructing our bank asset dataset, we discovered that commercial
banks were not required to report the detailed products within ARIX until recently and
there was no breakdown of the ARIX series until recent years as the CBRC regulations have
been increasingly enforced over time. We find that during 2014-2015, a breakdown of ARIX
may include asset management plan, trust plan, wealth management products, and various
bonds issued by corporations, financial institutions, and local governments (see Figures S1
and S2 for examples). The name “trust plan” or “asset management plan” can be deceiving
because the beneficiary rights of entrusted loans (entrusted rights) were repackaged by trust
companies or asset management companies into a trust plan or an asset management plan
to be sold to banks and other investors. In other words, investors (e.g., banks) did not buy
entrusted rights directly from the firm who was the lender of entrusted loans, but rather
they invested in a trust plan or an asset management plan used to transfer entrusted rights.
As an example of a trust plan, on July 8, 2010 CICTC trust announced a trust plan to
transfer the beneficiary right of an entrusted loan made by Guangzhou Electronic Real
Estate Development Co. Ltd to its affiliated company (see Figures S3-S5). As an example
of an asset management plan, Zhongrong (Beijing) Asset Management Co. Ltd issued an
announcement describing an asset management plan that was created to transfer entrusted
rights between two nonfinancial companies (see Figures S6-S7). We approximate the amount
of entrusted rights as the sum of trust plan and asset management plan, which has an average

THE NEXUS OF MONETARY POLICY AND SHADOW BANKING IN CHINA

66

78.04% (43.64%) share of ARIX for nonstate (state) banks during 2014-2015. The high share
for nonstate banks is consistent with the high correlation between entrusted loans and ARIX
documented in Section V.4.
Bonds issued by local governments within ARIX are related to Chen, He, and Liu (2017) as
part of shadow banking products showing up on banks’ balance sheets. But unfortunately,
this portion is not always available on banks’ annual reports. Although we suspect that
bonds issued by local governments are part of ARIX, we cannot separate them from ARIX.
Appendix D. A dynamic equilibrium model
In this section, we construct a dynamic theoretical model fully in regard to the impacts of
monetary policy shocks on banks’ portfolio allocation and total credit. The purpose of this
section is to provide a mechanism that shows that contractionary monetary policy causes
bank loans to decline as expected (the bank lending channel) but risky nonloan assets to
increase (dampening the effectiveness of monetary policy).
We begin with a description of the model and the bank’s optimization prolbem. We then
establish important features of the model, which makes it tractable to solve an individual
bank’s optimization problem. After that, we characterize the equilibrium solutions on banks’
portfolio and dividend choices. The proofs of all lemmas and propositions in this section are
provided in Appendix E.
To maintain tractability, we abstract from a host of factors such as reserve requirements
to highlight the bank lending channel. Instead, we focus on the two regulatory constraints
(LDR and safe-loan constraints) and regulatory costs associated with deposit shortfalls.
The economy is populated by a continuum of infinitely-lived banks whose identity is denoted by j ∈ [0, 1]. Each bank is subject to an idiosyncratic withdrawal shock to its deposits
with a fraction ωt of deposits withdrawn. Specifically, the idiosyncratic shock ωt is continuously distributed with the probability density function f(ωt ) that is uniformly distributed
with the support of [µ (εm,t ) , 1], where εm,t is an i.i.d. monetary policy shock as in previous empirical sections. As shown in Section VI.1, a contractionary monetary policy shock
leads to a fall of aggregate deposits by changing the distribution of idiosyncratic deposit
withdrawals. That is,
µ (εm,t ) ' −(2εm,t + 1).
In the subsequent analysis of an individual bank’s problem, we omit the subscript j as
we show that the bank’s equity is a sufficient statistic for that bank’s individual state. The

THE NEXUS OF MONETARY POLICY AND SHADOW BANKING IN CHINA

67

dynamic aggregation problem is postponed to Appendix E (see in particular equation (S50)).
The bank has three types of assets to choose: (i) cash represented by C, (ii) traditional bank
loans, B, subject to both LDR and safe-loan regulations, and (iii) risky investment assets,
I r , subject to a default risk but not to the two regulations as I r is not regarded as a part of
bank loans. Bank loans have a longer maturity than risky investment assets.31
Within each period, the banking activity involves two stages: lending and balancing stages.
D.1. Lending stage. At the lending stage, the bank decides the amount of deposits to
demand, how much of the dividend to distribute, and how to allocate three types of assets
for investment: inter-temporal bank loans, within-period risky nonloan assets, and cash.
Bank loans, Bt , are safe (default free) but subject to the regulatory constraint on the LDR,
and are purchased at a discount price qt . Risky assets, Itr , have a default probability prt and
are purchased at a discount price 0 < qtr < 1.
The law of motion for bank loans evolves as
Bt = δ B̃t + St ,

(S3)

where B̃t represents outstanding bank loans at the beginning of time t, (1 − δ)B̃t represents
a fraction of loans that are retired, and St represents new bank loans. Denote cash at the
beginning of t by C̃t such that
Ct = C̃t + ϕt ,

(S4)

where ϕt represents additional cash holdings chosen by the bank.
At the beginning of period t, the repayment of the bank loan that is retired reduces the
bank’s liability by (1 − δ)B̃t . Accordingly, the bank’s balance sheet constraint is
D̃t − (1 − δ)B̃t + Et = C̃t + qt δ B̃t ,

(S5)

where D̃t denotes deposits before the bank loan is repaid and Et the bank’s equity or capital.
Table S6, below, represents the balance sheet in which the left column indicates the asset
side and the right column the liability side.
The bank’s balance sheet constraint, after choosing Ct (or ϕt ), Itr , Bt (or St ), Dt , and
dividend DIVt , is
Dt /RtD + Et − DIVt = Ct + qtr Itr + qBt ,
31This

(S6)

feature is consistent with our empirical finding that entrusted loans had a shorter maturity than

bank loans (Table 1).

THE NEXUS OF MONETARY POLICY AND SHADOW BANKING IN CHINA

68

Table S6. Balance sheet at the beginning of the period
Asset
 
Cash C̃t


Loans qt δ B̃t

Liability


Deposits D̃t − (1 − δ)B̃t
Equity (Et )

where RtD is the deposit rate. Without loss of generality, we assume RtD > 1. Rearranging
the above equation yields the following balance sheet equation
Dt /RtD + Et − DIVt + (1 − qtr )Itr + (1 − qt )Bt = Ct + Itr + Bt .
| {z } |
{z
} |{z} | {z }
cash

equity

deposits

(S7)

assets

The balance sheet now becomes Table S7.
Table S7. Balance sheet after the bank’s optimization
Asset

Liability

Cash (Ct )

Deposits

Risky assets

Dt /RtD

Itr

Equity

Loans

Et − DIVt +

Bt

(1 − qtr )Itr + (1 − qt )Bt

Substituting (S3), (S4), and (S5) into (S7) gives us the flow-of-funds constraint as
D/RtD
|

− D̃t + (1 −
{z
} |

∆deposits

qtr )Itr

+ (1 − qt )St − DIVt = ϕt +
{z
} |
∆equity

Itr





+ Bt − B̃t .
{z
}

(S8)

∆assets

The leverage constraint is
Dt /RtD ≤ κ [Et − DIVt ] ,

(S9)

where κ is the leverage ratio and the term in brackets after κ represents the equity net of
the dividend payout. The liquidity constraint, as a proxy for a regulation on the sufficiency
of the bank’s liquid assets, is a lower bound for cash holdings in the model:
Ct ≥ ψ [Et − DIVt ] .

(S10)

THE NEXUS OF MONETARY POLICY AND SHADOW BANKING IN CHINA

69

D.2. Balancing stage. In the balancing stage, two random events occur: an idiosyncratic
withdrawal shock to deposits and a default shock to risky assets. When the first random
event occurs, the volume of bank loans is constrained by the LDR regulation as
qBt ≤ θ

(1 − ωt ) Dt
,
RD

where θ is the LDR ceiling set by the government.
Denote the deposit shortfall as
xt = qBt − θ

(1 − ωt ) Dt
RD

and the extra cost to recoup the shortfall by

r b xt
χ(xt ) =
0

if xt ≥ 0

(S11)

,

if xt < 0

where rb > 0 is an extra cost of acquiring additional deposits x.
When the default on Itr does not occur (the no-default state), the bank’s liability is reduced
at the end of the period because of repayment of the principal of risky assets. If Itr is defaulted
(the default state), the bank’s equity is reduced. We use the stochastic variable ξ to denote
this default contingency:

1 with probability 1 − pr (the no-default state)
ξt =
,
φ with probability pr (the default state)
where 0 ≤ φ < 1 represents the recovering rate of risky assets in the default state. The
balance-sheet constraint for each bank is
Dt /RtD − ξt Itr + Et − DIVt − (1 − ξt ) Itr + (1 − qtr )Itr + (1 − qt )Bt = Ct + Bt .
|
{z
} |
{z
} | {z }
liabilities

equity

assets

At the end of period t (the beginning of period t + 1), the stock variables are balanced as
D
D̃t+1 = Dt (1 − ωt ) + χ(xt ) − ξt Rt+1
Itr ,

(S12)

C̃t+1 = Ct − ωt Dt ,

(S13)

B̃t+1 = Bt .

(S14)

When there is a liquidity shortfall (Ct < ωt Dt ) due to a deposit withdrawal, the bank can
borrow from the central bank to satisfy depositors’ withdrawal needs and repay the loan at

THE NEXUS OF MONETARY POLICY AND SHADOW BANKING IN CHINA

70

the beginning of the next period.32 Accordingly, C̃t+1 corresponds to the net balance with
the central bank. A negative value of C̃t+1 simply means a net borrowing from the central
bank. Note that the balance sheet constraint (S6) makes sure that the bank repays the
borrowed amount to the central bank at the beginning of the next period.33
D.3. The bank’s optimizing problem. The bank takes µ(εm,t ), as well as rb , qt , qtr , RtD , as
given when solving its problem. To avoid notational glut and make our theory transparent,
we omit the time subscript whenever no confusion arises. The optimizing behavior at the
lending stage can thus be described as




V l C̃, B̃, D̃; εm = max U (DIV) + Eω,ξ V b (C, B, D; εm ) ,
where V l is the value function at the lending stage, V b is the value function at the balancing
stage, and Eω,ξ is the mathematical expectation with respect to the (ω, ξ) measure. By
choosing (DIV, ϕ, S, I r , D), the bank solves the above problem subject to
D/RD = D̃ − (1 − δ)B̃ + DIV + ϕ + q r I r + qS,

(S15)

C = C̃ + ϕ,

(S16)

B = δ B̃ + S,

(S17)



D/RD ≤ κ C + q r I r + qB − D/RD ,


C ≥ ψ C + q r I r + qB − D/RD ,

(S18)
(S19)

where constraint (S15) corresponds to (S8), and constraint (S18), derived from equation (S7)
and (S9), represents the leverage constraint on the bank’s optimization problem.
The balancing stage behavior can be described as
h
i
V b (C, B, D; εm ) = βEm V l (C̃ 0 , B̃ 0 , D̃0 ; ε0m ) | εm
32A

major task of the PBC is to maintain the stability of liquidity within the banking system to prevent

default. For instance, the PBC provides short-term liquidity to the bank in need of liquidity via central bank
liquidity loans or the standing lending facility (SLF). The practice of these policy instruments is documented
in the PBC’s quarterly MPRs.
33To highlight the costs associated with a deposit shortfall and its impact on the bank’s portfolio choice
between bank loans and risky non-loan assets, we assume that the interest rate for the bank to borrow from
the central bank is zero.

THE NEXUS OF MONETARY POLICY AND SHADOW BANKING IN CHINA

71

subject to
D̃0 = (1 − ω)D + χ(x) − ξRD I r ,

(S20)

C̃ 0 = C − ωD,

(S21)

B̃ 0 = B,

(S22)

x = qB − θ(1 − ω)D/RD ,

(S23)

where β is a subjective discount factor and Em represents the mathematical expectation
with respect to monetary policy shocks. Constraints (S20), (S21), and (S22) correspond to
(S12), (S13), and (S14), respectively, and constraint (S23) corresponds to (S11).
Combining the two stages, we describe the overall optimization problem as
V l (C̃, B̃, D̃; εm ) = max U (DIV)



+ βEm,ω,ξ V l C − ωD, B, (1 − ω)D + χ(x) − ξRD I r ; ε0m εm (S24)
subject to (S15), (S16), (S17), (S18), and (S19). The choice variables for this optimization
are (DIV, ϕ, S, I r , D).
D.4. Features of the bank’s optimization problem. We show that the original bank’s
optimization problem can be simplified into the single state-space representation. Moreover,
it satisfies two nice properties: homogeneity in bank equity and separability of portfolio
choice from dividend choice.
Proposition S1. The optimization problem (S24) can be simplified and collapsed into the
single-state representation
V (E ; εm ) = max U (DIV) + βEm,ω,ξ [V (E 0 ; ε0m ) | εm ]

(S25)

subject to (S18), (S19), (S23), and
E − DIV = C + q r I r + qB − D/RD ,


E 0 = C − ωD + q 0 δB + (1 − δ)B − (1 − ω)D + χ(x) − ξRD I r ,

(S26)
(S27)

where the single state is E , (S26) corresponds to (S6), (S27) is derived from (S5), (S12),
(S13), and (S14) (by moving time t in (S5) forward to time t + 1), and the choice variables
are (DIV, C, B, D, I r ).

THE NEXUS OF MONETARY POLICY AND SHADOW BANKING IN CHINA

72

Since constraints (S18), (S19), (S26), and (S27) are linear in E and the objective function
is homothetic in E , the solution to the bank’s problem not only exists but also is unique and
the policy function is linear in equity E . Moreover, thanks to the Principle of Optimality,
the bank’s dynamic problem can be separated into two subproblems, one concerning an
intertemporal choice of dividend payoffs and the other relating to an intratemporal portfolio
allocation. The following proposition formalizes these two results.34
Proposition S2. Let
U (DIV) =

DIV1−γ
,
1−γ

where γ ≥ 1. Optimization problem (S25) satisfies the two properties: homogeneity in E
and separability of portfolio choice from dividend choice.
• Homogeneity. The value function V (E ; z) is
V (E ; z) = v(z)E 1−γ ,
˜
and v(z) satisfies the Bellman equation over the choice variables {div, c̃, ir , b̃, d}
h
i
1−γ
0
0
0
v(z) = max U (div) + βEm,ω,ξ v(z ) (e (ω, ξ; εm , εm ))
|z
(S28)
subject to


d/RD ≤ κ c + q r ir + qb − d/RD ,

(S29)

1 = c + div + q r ir + qb − d/RD ,

(S30)


e0 = c + (q 0 δ + 1 − δ)b − d − χ qb − θ(1 − ω)d/RD + ξRD ir ,


c ≥ ψ c + q r ir + qb − d/RD ,

(S31)
(S32)

where
[div, c, b, d, ir , e0 ] =

[DIV, C, B, D, I r , E 0 ]
.
E

(S33)

• Separability. Problem (S28) can be broken into two separate problems. The first
problem is for banks to make an optimal portfolio choice by choosing {wc , wi , wb , wd }
to maximize the certainty-equivalent portfolio value as

1−γ 1
} 1−γ
Ω(ε0m , εm ) = max{Eω,ξ wc + RI wi + RB wb − RD wd − Rx
34The

(S34)

homogeneity and separability properties in Proposition S2 are similar to Bianchi and Bigio (2017).

THE NEXUS OF MONETARY POLICY AND SHADOW BANKING IN CHINA

73

subject to
1 = wc + wi + wb − wd ,

(S35)

wd ≤ κ(wc + wi + wb − wd ),

(S36)

wc ≥ ψ(wc + wi + wb − wd ),

(S37)

and taking the following prices as given
RI =

ξRD
q0δ + 1 − δ x
B
, R = χ (wb − θ(1 − ω)wd ) ,
,
R
=
qr
q

(S38)

where
c
q r ir
qb
d/RD
wc =
, wi =
, wb =
, wd =
.
1 − div
1 − div
1 − div
1 − div
The second problem is to choose div in response to aggregate shocks:


v(εm ) = maxU (div) + β(1 − div)1−γ Em Ω(ε0m , εm )1−γ v(ε0m ) z .
div

(S39)

Note that equations (S29), (S30), (S31), and (S32) are derived from equations (S18), (S26),
(S27), and (S19) and that equation (S31) implies e0 is a function of ω, ξ, ε0m , and εm such
that
e0 (ω, ξ; ε0m , εm ) = (1 − div)RE (ω, ξ; ε0m , εm ) ,

(S40)

where RE is the return on the bank’s equity after dividend payout
RE (ω, ξ; ε0m , εm ) = wc + RI wi + RB wb − RD wd − Rx .

(S41)

Proposition S2 breaks the potentially unmanageable problem into two tractable problems
by separating dividend decision about DIV from portfolio choice of ϕ, S, I r , and D.
Thanks to the homogeneity feature, banks during the lending stage are replicas of one
another scaled by equity, making aggregation a straightforward exercise. In other words,
the equilibrium sequence of the aggregate variables {DIVt , Ct , Bt , Dt , Itr , Et }∞
t=0 is the same
as its counterpart in an otherwise identical representative bank environment in which the
representative bank faces a deposit withdrawal shock µ(εm ) in each period. This allows us
to simplify the problem by solving the competitive equilibrium of the representative bank’s
problem numerically.

THE NEXUS OF MONETARY POLICY AND SHADOW BANKING IN CHINA

74

D.5. Characterizing the optimal portfolio allocation. The separability feature of the
bank’s optimal problem allows us to solve the bank’s optimal portfolio choice separately
from its dividend choice. In this section, we characterize the optimal choice of cash holdings,
deposits, and a portfolio allocation between bank loans and risky assets. The next section
characterizes the dividend choice and how it responds to monetary policy shocks.
Assumption 1.
RD < RB − r b ,

(S42)

Assumption 1 can be justified by the unique Chinese institutional feature that the deposit
rate imposed by the government was kept artificially low. We now establish the following
lemma regarding the bank’s optimal portfolio choice:
Proposition S3. With the low deposit rate satisfying Assumption 1, the bank’s optimal
portfolio choice {wc , wi , wb , wd } satisfies
(1) Both the leverage constraint (S36) and the liqidity constraint (S37) are always binding;
(2) The equilibrium portfolio allocation between wb and wd is governed by the following
no-arbitrage condition
"
#

I
E −γ
x
E −γ
Cov
R
,
E
(R
)
Cov
R
,
E
(R
)
ξ
ω
ω
ξ
b
Eξ (RI )− −
= RB −Eω [Rbx (wb , wd ; ω)] −
, (S43)
|
{z
}
Eξ [Eω (RE )−γ ]
Eω [Eξ (RE )−γ ]
|
{z
}
expected regulation cost
|
{z
}
default risk premium

regulation risk premium

where Rbx (wb , wd ; ω) is the partial derivative of Rx (wb , wd ; ω) with respect to wb :
(
x
rb if ω > 1 − wb /(wd θ)
∂R
(w
,
w
;
ω)
b
d
Rbx (wb , wd ; ω) =
=
.
∂wb
0 otherwise
The intuition for the binding leverage constraint is straight forward. Under Assumption 1,
the borrowing cost RD is lower than the effective return on bank loans. As a result, the
leverage constraint represented by (S36) is binding in equilibrium. The intuition for the
binding liquidity constraint as represented by (S37) is also simple: Since RD > 1 (a positive
deposit rate), with the return for cash lower than the borrowing cost, the bank would like
to hold the minimum cash in this economy to satisfy the liquidity constraint.
In equation (S43), the left side is the expected return on risky nonloan investments, adjusted for the risk premium due to the default risk. The right side is the expected return

THE NEXUS OF MONETARY POLICY AND SHADOW BANKING IN CHINA

75

on bank loans, adjusted for the expected (marginal) regulation cost and regulation risk premium. The risk premium is always positive. The expected regulation cost is the expected
marginal cost of recovering deposit shortfalls associated with lending amount B under the
LDR regulation. The non-negativeness of Rbx implies that the expected regulation cost is
always positive.
The necessary condition for (S43) to hold is

E −γ
x
,
E
(R
)
Cov
R
ξ
ω
b
Eξ (RI ) > RB − Eω [Rbx (wb , wd ; ω)] −
.
Eξ [Eω (RE )−γ ]

(S44)

Equation (S44) states that the expected return on risky investments is greater than the
effective return on bank loans such that the bank has an incentive to invest in risky assets,
even if the bank is risk averse. Thus, it is optimal for the bank to increase the share of risky
assets in its total investment on the asset side of the balance sheet.
To understand the effects of monetary policy shocks on banks’ portfolio choice, note that
the expected regulation cost can be expressed as
Eω [Rbx (wb , wd ; ω)] = rb × Prob (ω ≥ 1 − wb / (wd θ))
|
{z
}
Probability of deposit shortfalls

= rb

wb / (wd θ)
.
1 − µ (εm )

Contractionary monetary policy causes the risk of deposit withdrawal to increase (i.e., µ (εm )
increases), which in turn increases the expected regulation cost. This tends to reduce the
effective return on bank loans. According to the no-arbitrage condition (S43), the decline of
the effective return on bank loans encourages the bank to substitute risky nonloan assets for
bank loans.35
D.6. Characterizing the optimal dividend choice. Because of the homogeneity and
separability features, the policy function for the portfolio choice of the bank, scaled by exdividend equity, is the same every period. We now solve the value function and dividend
payout for transitional dynamics as well as the steady state. It follows from the first-order
condition for problem (S39) that
div−γ = β (1 − γ) (1 − div)−γ EM [v (ε0m ) | εm ] Ω(ε0m , εm )1−γ
35The

(S45)

effect of a monetary policy shock on the covariance terms in (S43) is of second order in magnitude

when compared with its effect on the expected regulation cost.

THE NEXUS OF MONETARY POLICY AND SHADOW BANKING IN CHINA

76

which gives
1

div =

(S46)
1 .
1 + {(1 − γ) βEM [v (ε0m ) | εm ] Ω(ε0m , εm )1−γ } γ
Substituting (S46) into (S39) and reorganizing the terms, we obtain the value function
 1 oγ

1 n
v (εm ) =
1 + (1 − γ) βEM [v (ε0m ) | εm ] Ω(ε0m , εm )1−γ γ .
(S47)
1−γ
At steady state, εm = ε0m and v (εm ) = Em [v (ε0m ) | εm ] . Hence, (S47) implies the steady
state value function as
1
v ss (εm ) =
1−γ

"

#γ

1
1

1 − β γ Ω(εm )

1−γ
γ

.

(S48)

Substituting (S48) into (S46), we obtain
1

divss = 1 − β γ Ω(εm )

1−γ
γ

.

(S49)

To understand the impacts of monetary policy shocks on the total credit, we establish the
following lemma:
Lemma S1. With γ > 1,

∂div
∂εm

> 0.

Equipped with Lemma S1, we have the following proposition regarding the impacts of
monetary policy shocks on total bank credit.
Proposition S4. With γ > 1, a contractionary monetary policy shock increases the total
credit. In other words,
∂ (q r ir + qb)
< 0.
∂εm
Proposition S4 shows that a sufficient condition for a contractionary monetary policy shock
to increase the total credit is γ > 1, under which dividend payout (ex-dividend equity) falls
(increases) when there is monetary policy tightening. This can be seen from equation (S6)
in which the left side term increases when DIVt falls. This increase of total liability on the
bank’s balance sheet, together with the decline in bank loans in response to monetary policy
tightening, implies that qtr Itr must increase more than the drop in bank loans, implying an
increase in total credit.
Intuitively, when the income effect of a reduction in the expected return on equity (Eω,ξ RE )
due to an increase in the expected regulation cost dominates the corresponding substitution
effect (the substitution between today’s and tomorrow’s dividend payoffs), it is optimal for
the bank to expand total credit via risky assets to compensate for extra costs of recouping

THE NEXUS OF MONETARY POLICY AND SHADOW BANKING IN CHINA

77

deposit losses. Note that in our theoretical model, the expected net return for leverage
adjusted for the risk premium is always greater than RD . Hence, when the risk of deposit
withdrawals increases due to monetary policy tightening, it is profitable for banks to borrow
as much as possible at the lending stage until the leverage constraint binds. The resource
from deposits, together with ex-dividend equity, is used to purchase risky nonloan assets to
compensate for the costs associated with actual deposit shortfalls in the balancing stage.
Appendix E. Additional details to the dynamic model
In this section, we provide additional details to the dynamic model described in Appendix D. This includes the definition of the competitive equilibrium, proofs of lemmas and
propositions, and an algorithm for solving the model numerically. We also calibrate the
model to the Chinese economy and simulate the impulse responses to be comparable with
the point estimates of VAR impulse responses presented in Section VI.2.
E.1. Equilibrium. Define E =

R1
0

E (j) dj as the aggregate of equity in the banking sector.

The equity of an individual bank evolves according to E 0 (j) = e0 (ω, ξ; ε0m , εm )E (j) . The
measure of equity holdings of each bank is denoted by Γ (E ). Since the model is invariant
to scale, we only need to keep track of the evolution of the average equity, which grows at
the rate Eω,ξ [e0 (ω, ξ; ε0m , εm )] because
0

E =

Z
0

1

E (j) dj =
0

Z
0

1

E (j) dj

Z

e0 (ω, ξ; ε0m , εm )f (ω, ξ) d (ω, ξ)

ξ,ω

= E × Eω,ξ [e0 (ω, ξ; ε0m , εm )] . (S50)
We define the (partial) equilibrium for the banking sector as follows.
Definition S1. Given M0 , D0 , B0 , a competitive equilibrium is a sequence of bank policy rules
∞
∞
{ct , dt , bt , irt , divt }∞
t=0 , bank value {vt }t=0 , government policies {µ(εm,t )}t=0 , and the measure

of equity distribution {Γt }∞
t=0 such that
∞
r
(1) Given policy sequences {µ(εm,t )}∞
t=0 , the policy functions {ct , dt , bt , it , divt }t=0 are a

solution to problem (S34). Moreover, vt is the value for problem (S39).
(2) Γt evolves consistently with e0 (ω, ξ; ε0m , εm ).
(3) All policy functions satisfy [div, c, b, d, ir , e0 ] =
E.2. Proofs of lemmas and proposition.

[DIV, C,B,D,I r ,E 0 ]
.
E

THE NEXUS OF MONETARY POLICY AND SHADOW BANKING IN CHINA

78

Proof of Proposition S1. The proof for Proposition S1 follows from the fact that E is a
sufficient statistic for the bank’s problem. In other words, once E is determined, the bank’s
optimal decision does not depend on the sources from which the equity E is accumulated. 
Proof of Proposition S2. We begin with the proof of homogeneity. We use the conjectureverify approach to this complicated problem. We conjecture that the form of the value
function is
V (E ; εm ) = v(εm )E 1−γ .
Because
E 0 = e0 (ω, ξ; ε0m , εm )E ,
the optimization problem (S25) can be rewritten as
h
i
1−γ
V (E ; εm ) = max U (div E ) + βEm,ω,ξ v(z 0 ) (e0 (ω, ξ; ε0m , εm )E )
εm
n
h
io
1−γ
= E 1−γ max U (div) + βEM,ω,ξ v(ε0m ) (e0 (ω, ξ; ε0m , εm ))
εm
subject to (S29), (S30),(S31), and (S32). Let ṽ(εm ) be the solution of
i
h
1−γ
0
0
0
εm
ṽ(εm ) = max U (div) + βEm,ω,ξ ṽ(εm ) (e (ω, ξ; εm , εm ))

(S51)

subject to (S29), (S30), (S31), and (S32). Hence, v(εm ) = ṽ(εm ), which verifies the conjecture
of our Bellman equation
V (E ; z) = v(z)E 1−γ .
We turn to the proof of separability. From (S40) we have
(e0 (ω, ξ; ε0m , εm ))

1−γ

1−γ
= (1 − div)1−γ RE (ω, ξ; ε0m , εm )

so that
h
i
h
1−γ i
1−γ
Eω,ξ (e0 (ω, ξ; ε0m , εm ))
= (1 − div)1−γ Eω,ξ RE (ω, ξ; ε0m , εm )
.
(S52)
h
1−γ i
E
0
Since the utility is a power function, the certainty equivalence of Eω,ξ R (ω, ξ; εm , εm )
,
denoted as Ω(ε0m , εm ), follows as
1
n
h
1−γ io 1−γ
0
E
0
max
Ω(εm , εm ) =
Eω,ξ R (ω, ξ; εm , εm )
{wc ,wi ,wb ,wd }

=

max

{wc ,wi ,wb ,wd }

1
n
h
 io 1−γ
I
B
D
x 1−γ
Eω,ξ wc + R wi + R wb − R wd − R

(S53)

subject to (S35), (S36), and (S37). Substituting (S52) into (S51) and using the definition of
Ω(ε0m , εm ) in (S53), we obtain (S39).



THE NEXUS OF MONETARY POLICY AND SHADOW BANKING IN CHINA

79

Proof of Proposition S3. We first prove that the liquidity constraint (S37) is always
binding. Substituting (S35) into (S34) , (S36) and (S37) transforms the optimization problem (S34) to
1
n

1−γ o 1−γ
max
Eω,ξ −(RB − 1)wc + (RI − RB )wi − (RB − RD )wd − Rx (wb , wd ; ω)
{wc ,wi ,wd }

(S54)
subject to wd ≤ κ (with the Lagrangian multiplier φd ) and wc ≥ ψ (with the Lagrangian
multiplier φc ). The first order condition with respect to wc gives

x
E −γ
Cov
R
,
E
(R
)
ω
ξ
b
B
x
φec = R − Eω (Rb ) −
− 1.
Eω [Eξ (RE )−γ ]

(S55)

where
φec ≡

φc
γ



 1−γ
−γ
Eω,ξ (RE )−γ
Eω,ξ (RE )

We now show that φec > 0. Note that





Covω Rbx , Eξ (RE )−γ = Eω Eξ (RE )−γ Rbx − Eω (Rbx ) Eω Eξ (RE )−γ






L
L
b
E −γ
b
− r prob ω > 1 −
Eωξ (RE )−γ
= r Eω Eξ (R ) | ω > 1 −
θ
θ






L
Eωξ (RE )−γ
≤ rb Eωξ (RE )−γ − rb prob ω > 1 −
θ





L
= rb 1 − prob ω > 1 −
Eωξ (RE )−γ
θ
Hence,




Covω Rbx , Eξ (RE )−γ
L
b
≤ r 1 − prob ω > 1 −
Eω [Eξ (RE )−γ ]
θ
Accordingly, we have

Covω Rbx , Eξ (RE )−γ
B
x
R − Eω [Rb ] −
Eω [Eξ (RE )−γ ]





L
L
B
b
b
≥ R − r × prob ω > 1 −
− r 1 − prob ω > 1 −
θ
θ
= RB − r b
> RD .
Plugging (S57) into the right side of (S55) , we have
φec > RD − 1 > 0.
Hence, the liquidity constraint (S37) is always binding. In other words, wc = ψ.

(S56)

(S57)

THE NEXUS OF MONETARY POLICY AND SHADOW BANKING IN CHINA

80

We now derive the optimal allocation between wb and wd . Denote
Rx (L, 1; ω) = χ (L − θ (1 − ω)) ,

(S58)

where L ≡ wb /wd . The portfolio choice of the representative bank can be rewritten as
1
n
 I

 I


1−γ o 1−γ
I
D
I
B
x
max Eω,ξ R − wc R − 1 + wd R − R − R − R L − R (L, 1; ω)

L,wd

subject to wd ≤ κ and wc = ψ.
The first order condition with respect to L is
Covω RLx , Eξ (RE )−γ
B
x
R − Eω [RL (L, 1; ω)] −
|
{z
}
Eω [Eξ (RE )−γ ]
{z
}
expected liquidity cost |
regulation risk premium






I


E −γ

Covξ R , Eω R



= Eξ RI − −
Eξ Eω (RE )−γ
|
{z
default risk premium


. (S59)
}

where RLx (L, 1; ω) is the partial derivative of Rx (L, 1; ω) with respect to L
(
RLx

(L, 1; ω) =

rb if ω ≥ 1 −

L
θ

0 otherwise.

Hence,
RLx (L, 1; ω) = Rbx (wb , wd ; ω) .

(S60)

Plugging equation (S60) into (S59), we obtain (S43).
Finally, we prove that the leverage constraint (S36) is always binding. Define RL ≡


RI − RD − RI − RB L − Rx (L, 1; ω) . The first order condition with respect to wd is
Eω,ξ

h

R


E −γ

R

L

i

=

µ
e,

 γ ≡µ
Eω,ξ (RE )−γ 1−γ

(S61)

where µ is the Larangian multiplier associated with the inequality constraint wd ≤ κ. Plugging the definition of RL into (S61) and reordering the terms, we have
Eξ

n

B

R −R

I



I

L+ R −R

D



Eω

h

R


E −γ

io

h
i

E −γ
x
− Eω Eξ R
R (L, 1; ω) = µ
e,

THE NEXUS OF MONETARY POLICY AND SHADOW BANKING IN CHINA

81

which gives

 
I
E −γ
Cov
R
,
E
R
ξ
ω

µ
e

 = LRB − RD + (1 − L) Eξ RI +



−γ
Eω,ξ (RE )
Eξ Eω (RE )−γ
i
h

x
E −γ
R (L, 1; ω)
Eω Eξ R


−
Eω,ξ (RE )−γ
"
#
x
E −γ
Cov
R
,
E
(R
)
ω
ξ
L
= LRB − RD + (1 − L) RB − Eω [Rbx (wb , wd ; ω)] −
Eω [Eξ (RE )−γ ]
h
i
h
i


E −γ
x
E −γ
x
LEω Eξ R
Rb + Eω Eξ R
Rd


,
(S62)
−
Eω,ξ (RE )−γ


where the second equality is derived by utilizing equation (S59) and
Rx (L, 1; ω) = LRbx + Rdx ,

(
Rbx =

rb if ω ≥ 1 −

L
θ

,

0 otherwise

and
(
Rdx

=

−rb θ (1 − ω) if ω ≥ 1 −
0

L
θ

.

otherwise

Note that
h
h
h
i
i

 i

E −γ
x
E −γ
x
E −γ
x
Eω Eξ R
Eω [Rb ] + covω Eξ R
, Rb
Rb
Eω,ξ R




=
Eω,ξ (RE )−γ
Eω,ξ (RE )−γ
h
−γ x i
covω Eξ RE
, Rb


= Eω [Rbx (wb , wd ; ω)] +
Eω,ξ (RE )−γ

(S63)

Substituting (S63) into (S62), we have
Covω RLx , Eξ (RE )−γ
RB −Eω [Rbx (wb , wd ; ω)]−
Eω [Eξ (RE )−γ ]



h
−γ x i
Eω Eξ R E
Rd
µ
e



.
−RD −
=
−γ
Eω,ξ (RE )
Eω,ξ (RE )−γ

THE NEXUS OF MONETARY POLICY AND SHADOW BANKING IN CHINA

82

We now show that µ
e > 0, which implies that the collateral constraint is binding. It is easy
to show that
h
−γ x i
Eω Eξ R E
Rd


−
Eω,ξ (RE )−γ



L
b
E −γ
(1 − ω) | ω ≥ 1 −
= r θEωξ R
θ
> 0
Together with (S57), this implies that µ
e > 0. Hence, the leverage constraint (S36) is always
binding.



Proof of Lemma S1. Equation (S45) expresses div as an implicit function of εm . Taking
the partial derivative of div with respect to εm , we have
h
i


1−γ
h
i

∂Eω,ξ (RE )
0 )|ε ]
1−γ
−γ
∂E
[v(ε
m
M
m
β (1 − γ) (1 − div)
EM [v (ε0m ) | εm ]
+ Eω,ξ RE
∂εm
∂εm
∂div


=
∂εm
−γdiv−γ−1 − β (1 − γ) (1 − div)−γ−1 EM [v (ε0m ) | εm ] Eω,ξ (RE )1−γ
(S64)
Given γ > 1, the denominator on the right side of (S64) is negative.36 Hence, to prove
∂div
∂εm

> 0, we only need to show the numerator is negative. We now show
h
1−γ i
∂Eω,ξ RE
<0
∂εm

Since

∂Eω,ξ

∂µ(εm )
∂εm

h

(R E )

1−γ

(S65)

i

< 0, this is equivalent to
> 0. Note that
∂µ(εm )
Z 1−L/θ
Z 1
h
 i
1−γ
1−γ
E 1−γ
E
Eω,ξ R
Eξ R (ω)
Eξ RE (ω)
=
f(ω)dω +
f(ω)dω
µ

= Eξ

1−L/θ

1−γ 1 − L/θ − µ
+
R (R = 0)
1−µ
E

x

Z

1

1−γ
Eξ RE (ω)

1−L/θ

1
dω
1−µ

Hence,
∂Eω,ξ

h

R


E 1−γ

∂µ (εm )

i
= −Eξ

1−γ
R (R = 0)
E

x

L/θ
+
(1 − µ)2

Z

1

1−L/θ

1−γ
Eξ RE (ω)

1
dω
(1 − µ)2
(S66)

Given the definition of RE as in (S41), it is easy to show that ∀ω ∈ (1 − L/θ, 1] ,
Hence, with γ > 1, we have ∀ω ∈ (1 − L/θ, 1]
1−γ
1−γ
1−γ
Eξ RE (ω)
> Eξ RE (ω = 1 − L/θ)
= Eξ RE (Rx = 0)
.
36Equation

(S47) implies that when γ > 1, EM [v (ε0m ) | εm ] < 0.

∂RE (ω)
∂ω

< 0.

THE NEXUS OF MONETARY POLICY AND SHADOW BANKING IN CHINA

Therefore,
Z 1
Eξ

1−γ
R (ω)
E

1−L/θ

1
dω >
(1 − µ)2

Z

1

1−γ
Eξ RE (Rx = 0)

1−L/θ

1−γ
= Eξ RE (Rx = 0)

83

1
dω
(1 − µ)2

L/θ
.
(1 − µ)2

(S67)

Plugging (S67) into (S66), we have
h
 i
E 1−γ
∂Eω,ξ R
1−γ L/θ
1−γ L/θ
E
x
> −Eξ RE (Rx = 0)
+
E
R
(R
=
0)
= 0.
ξ
∂µ (εm )
(1 − µ)2
(1 − µ)2
Therefore,

∂Eω,ξ

h

(RE )

∂εm

1−γ

i

< 0. Since εm is serially independent random shocks,

∂EM [v(ε0m )|εm ]
∂εm

=

0. Hence,

β (1 − γ) (1 − div)−γ EM [v (ε0m ) | εm ]

= β (1 − γ) (1 − div)−γ EM [v (ε0m ) | εm ]

∂Eω,ξ

h

R


E 1−γ

i

∂εm

∂Eω,ξ

h

RE

+ Eω,ξ

h


i ∂E [v (ε0 ) | ε ]

1−γ
m 
M
m
RE
∂εm

1−γ i
< 0.

∂εm


Proof of Proposition S4. By definition,
q r ir + qb = (1 − div) (wi + wd )
= (1 − div) (1 − wc + wd )
= (1 − div) (1 − ψ + κ)
By Lemma S1, with γ > 1,

∂div
∂εm

> 0. Hence,

∂(q r ir +qb)
∂εm

= − (1 − ψ + κ) ∂div
< 0.
∂εm



E.3. Calibration. To obtain quantitative implications of the dynamic model, we calibrate

the key model parameters. These parameters are β, κ, RD , δ, q r , q, ψ, pr , γ, µ, rb , φ, θ . The
time period of the model is calibrated to be quarterly.
Following Bianchi and Bigio (2017), we set β = 0.98. We set θ = 0.75, which is the PBC’s
official LDR limit. We set κ = 7.2 so that the capital adequacy ratio E /(C + qB + q r I r )
is 12% in steady state as in the data. The quarterly deposit rate RD = 1.0068 corresponds
to an annual interest rate of 2.7%, which is the mean deposit interest rate between 2009
and 2015. We set δ = 0.33 such that the average maturity of bank loans is 1.5 times that
of risky assets to be consistent with the data. We set q r = 0.9882 such that an annualized
 D

R
return of a risky investment is 7.5% qr × 4 , consistent with the mean return on entrusted

THE NEXUS OF MONETARY POLICY AND SHADOW BANKING IN CHINA

84

lending during the 2009-2015 period (Table 1). We set q = 0.9762 such that an annualized



loan rate is 6.5%
δ + 1−δ
×
4
, consistent with the average loan rate for the 2009-2015
q
period (Table 1). The parameter for the lower bound for the liquidity constraint is set at
ψ = 2.354 such that the liquidity ratio,

C
,
C+qB+q r I r

is targeted at 27%, which equals the

average liquidity ratio for the 2009-2015 period (Table 6).
According to Sheng, Edelmann, Sheng, and Hu (2015), the NPL rate for China’s shadow
banking is 4% under their optimistic scenario and 10% under their benchmark scenario.
Therefore, we take the median and set the probability of default for risky investments at
pr = 0.07, which is much higher than the average NPL rate for bank loans reported in
Table 6. Such a low NPL rate for bank loans is consistent with the assumption that bank
loans are safe.
Without loss of generality, we set the risk aversion parameter at γ = 2. The steady state
value of µ is set to be −1 for εm = 0 (no monetary policy shock in the steady state). The
cost of meeting deposit shortfalls is set at rb = 1.75% according to the recent WIND data.
The recovery rate of risky assets is set at φ = 0.85. This high rate reflects the reality in
China that banks benefit from the government’s implicit guarantees on their deposits as well
as on risky investments.37
E.4. Impulse responses. We use the calibrated model and simulate the dynamics of bank
loans and risky nonloan assets in response to contractionary shocks to monetary policy. The
simulation is based on the aggregate (average) bank loans and risky assets to be comparable
with the VAR results.
The impulse responses of aggregate bank loans and risky assets are computed as the sum of
the impulse responses for state and nonstate banks. To obtain the impulse responses of state
banks, we simulate a counterfactual economy in which the response of Itr to contractionary
monetary policy (a one-standard-deviation fall of εm,t ) is restricted to be zero, while all
parameter values are the same as in our benchmark economy. This setup stems from the
institutional fact that state banks are part of the government and hence have no incentive
to exploit shadow banking activities for regulatory arbitrage.
The initial state at t = 0 is in the steady state. A negative shock to monetary policy,
εm,t < 0, occurs at t = 1.38 In response to a one-standard-deviation shock, we simulate
the dynamic paths of new bank loans St and risky investments Itr for t ≥ 1 with the initial
37See

Dang, Wang, and Yao (2015) for a formal model of implicit guarantees of China’s shadow banking.

38Without

loss of generality, we assume that the path of money growth after t = 1 is perfectly foresighted.

THE NEXUS OF MONETARY POLICY AND SHADOW BANKING IN CHINA

85

response of Itr set at 0.5%, the same value as the estimated one for the empirical panel VAR
model studied in Section VI.2.
Figure S8 displays the cumulative impulse responses of Itr and St . Risky assets increase
and reach 1.9% at the tenth quarter. Note that the response of aggregate risky assets
to contractionary monetary policy shocks is equal to the response of nonstate banks. By
contrast, bank loans of both state and nonstate banks decline in response to contrationary
monetary policy shocks via the bank lending channel. The economic intuition behind the
opposite effects of contractionary monetary policy on risky assets and bank loans comes
directly from the asset pricing equation governing the tradeoff between bank loans and risky
investment assets (equation (S43)). When εm,t falls, the probability of deposit shortfalls
increases. This leads to a rise of the expected regulation cost. As a result, the return on
risky assets relative to the return on bank loans increases, making it optimal for the bank
to rebalance its portfolio by increasing risky assets in total assets.
The bottom panel of Figure S8 shows that the response of total credit for the whole banking
system is slightly above zero for most periods, indicating that the decline of aggregate bank
loans is offset by the increase of aggregate risky assets.
E.5. Algorithms for a numerical solution.
E.5.1. Steady state. Given µ(εm ), rb , q, q r , and RD , we need to solve for


L∗ , wd∗ , wb∗ , wi∗ , RB∗ , Ω∗ , div∗ , v ∗ , wς∗ ,

where ς = {c, i, b, d} and the superscript ∗ indicates that the values are at steady state. The
algorithm for computing the steady state is as follows.
(1) Guess q, the price for B.
(2) Calculate wd∗ = κ, wc∗ = ψ, RB = δ +

1−δ
.
q

(3) Solve L∗ according to the no-arbitrage equation


 



I
E −γ
x
E −γ
Cov
R
,
E
R
ξ
ω

Covω Rb , Eξ (R )
L
,


RB −rb ×prob ω > 1 −
−
= Eξ RI −−
E
−γ
θ
Eω [Eξ (R ) ]
Eξ Eω (RE )−γ
where


L
L/θ
Prob ω > 1 −
=
.
θ
1−µ
(4) Calculate wb∗ = Lwd∗ , wi∗ = 1 − wb∗ − wc∗ + wd∗ .

THE NEXUS OF MONETARY POLICY AND SHADOW BANKING IN CHINA

86

(5) Solve Ω∗ according to

1−γ 1
Ω(ε0m , εm ) = {Eω,ξ RI wi∗ + wc∗ + RB wb∗ − RD wd∗ − Rx
} 1−γ ,
where RI =

ξRD
,
qr

Rx = χ (wb∗ − θ(1 − ω)wd∗ ).

(6) Solve the value function and dividend payout according to (S48) and (S49).
(7) Calculate
c = wc∗ (1 − div) , q r ir = wi∗ (1 − div) , qb = wb∗ (1 − div) , d/RD = wd∗ (1 − div)
i
h
θd/RD (L/θ)2
L/θ
+
+ RD (1 − pr ) ir .
(8) Calculate Eω,ξ [e0 ] = c + [qδ + (1 − δ)] b − rb qb 1−µ(ε
2(1−µ(εm ))
m)
(9) If expected equity growth equals zero (i.e., Eω,ξ [e0 ] does not change within the numerical tolerance), stop. Otherwise, adjust the value of q and continue the iteration.
E.5.2. Transitional dynamics. Given the sequence of {µ(εm,t )}∞
t=0 , the algorithm for computing the dynamic responses is as follows:
(1) Calculate wd,t = κ, wc,t = ψ, RtB =

qδ+1−δ
.
q

(2) Solve Lt according to the no-arbitrage equation


−γ  



I
E
Covξ R , Eω R

Covω Rbx , Eξ (RE )−γ
Lt
I
,
−


RtB −rb ×probt ωt > 1 −
−
=
E
R
−
ξ
θ
Eω [Eξ (RE )−γ ]
Eξ Eω (RE )−γ
where





RtE = RtI − wc,t RI − 1 + wd,t RtI − RtD − RtI − RtB Lt − Rx (Lt , 1; ωt ) ,
RtI =

ξt RtD
,
qr

Rx (Lt , 1; ωt ) = χ (Lt − θ (1 − ωt )) .
(3) Calculate wb,t = Lt κ; wi,t = 1 − wb,t − wc,t + wd,t .
 1−γ 1
(4) Solve Ωt according to Ωt = {Eω,ξ RtE
} 1−γ .
(5) Solve the value function and dividend payout according to (S47) and (S46).
(6) Calculate
∗
∗
∗
∗
ct = wc,t
(1 − divt ) , q r irt = wi,t
(1 − divt ) , qbt = wb,t
(1 − divt ) , dt /RD = wd,t
(1 − divt ) .
h
i
Lt /θ
θdt /RD (Lt /θ)2
b
(7) Calculate Eω,ξ [et+1 ] = ct +[qδ + (1 − δ)] bt −r qbt 1−µ(εm,t ) + 2(1−µ(εm,t )) +RD (1 − pr ) irt .

(8) Calculate E t+1 = Eω,ξ [et+1 ] E t .

r
(9) Calculate DIVt , C t , B t , Dt , I t = [divt , ct , bt , dt , irt ] E t .

THE NEXUS OF MONETARY POLICY AND SHADOW BANKING IN CHINA

Figure S1. A snapshot of the balance sheet of China Construction Bank
(state bank). Source: an annual report of China Construction Bank.

87

THE NEXUS OF MONETARY POLICY AND SHADOW BANKING IN CHINA

88

Figure S2. A snapshot of the balance sheet of Industrial Bank (nonstate
bank). Source: an annual report of Industrial Bank.
Emory University; Emory University; Federal Reserve Bank of Atlanta, Emory University, and NBER

THE NEXUS OF MONETARY POLICY AND SHADOW BANKING IN CHINA
!!!!!!!!!!!!!
!!!!!!!
!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!

Ёֵֵᠬ᳝䰤䋷ӏ݀ৌ
Ёֵђ᱃噝ᑓ⬉ഄѻᎹ㸠ྨᠬ䌋ℒᬊⲞᴗ
䲚ড়䌘䞥ֵᠬ䅵ߦ⏙ㅫ᡹ਞ
ᆭࡃԅพ෡ఆ!೓࿍ఆġ
‫ث‬໦ઽ෇ᆇqᄯ໰உ࠿噝‫ڜ‬ԨԙСٝ໻พ෡Ӟࣛೌ࿍௣‫ۦނ‬
ᆇࠡ໰෡‫ܣޙ‬rďྻຏ߅ыq·໰෡‫ܣޙ‬rĐēᄯ໰໰෡ပຫ႓ఉ
٤ഓďྻຏ߅ыq·٤ഓr‫ݧ‬qᄯ໰໰෡rĐ۳ఔ໽ᆴน೓෡ఆ
นઽඔ٢सϭ‫׻‬๠d
·໰෡‫ܣޙ‬ဟ "#$# ભ % ၥ & ఐюोēྸဟ "#$$ ભ ' ၥ $#
ఐᄴᄘd·٤ഓน‫ંົ؞‬ಁोॴ໰෡ᅥ‫ܜ‬ġ
ࢗ‫ܜ‬੠ыġᄯ໰໰෡ပຫ႓ఉ٤ഓ
ࢗ‫ܜ‬࿟໻ġᄯ‫ڳ‬ٝ౥࿟໻‫ךڂ‬ပຫ٤ഓ‫ڜ‬ᄼೇඟ۪ᄆ໻
࿟໻჌ۜġ()#"#$(*"+"##)*""()
()#"#$(*"+"##)*""()
̟ზ໰෡‫ۦ‬ලၟՇēົંൎ੿‫ނ‬ԅ໰෡ᆇࠡ௦Ϧဈဟ೓௾‫ڜ‬
ᄼ‫ڜ‬ԨּԙСࢗ֟‫ූނ‬ပຫ٤ഓඹ‫ڶ‬ᄯ‫ڳ‬ٝ౥࿟໻‫ڜ‬Պಘ‫ד‬໻
࿯ྜϦ຿ୣ୫ຏ๓‫ڜۑ‬Ԩ‫ּٌں‬ԙСࢗ֟ပຫ٤ഓׂ֟ԅࠡ֍
นఆ੖Λ "',### ฃ၍ԅพ෡Ӟࣛԅೌ࿍௣d
ٔ࡬໰෡‫ۦ‬ලԅၟՇē·٤ഓྸ࠼ߜ໰෡ᆇࠡ·ࠡۤ໰෡ೌ
࿍̟୙‫ܣ‬ύᄠ೓࿍ఆᄗՇԅ࿟໻჌‫ܜ‬d
·‫ܣޙ‬Ӊ༣୙޷ԅᆙ඘ᄆؑெࣣಾġ
ົં

ᆙ֍-၍.

$ ໰෡·ࠡ "'#,###,###0##

ೌ࿍৑ď/Đ

ᄆؑఐ
Ĕ "#$$ ભ ' ၥ $( ఐ
"

Figure S3. A snapshot of the description of a trust plan that was created to
transfer entrusted rights (see the circled portion). Source: a public announcement by a trust company.

89

THE NEXUS OF MONETARY POLICY AND SHADOW BANKING IN CHINA

300 ฃ၍ďϢ‫ۃ‬Đྻຏ
෇ᆇრભೌ࿍৑น
2

ೌ࿍‫ד‬ଅ

14,909,326.10 6.8%Ģ300 ฃ၍ď‫ۃ‬Đ 2011 ભ 5 ၥ 13 ఐ
ྻ౨ԅ෇ᆇრભೌ࿍৑
น 7.2%Ģ

3

‫ޙۦ‬

264,909,326.10

Ĕ

Ĕ

ைઽ‫ރ‬ನۢАᆇࠡӾ჌ெࣣd
‫ܫ‬࿲ઽ‫ޟ‬༣෇ᆇᄯ໰໰෡ԅ໰෡Сଶēแਬߜqஷੈ࠰ᄏr
ԙนઽඔ٢ညᄩ‫׻‬๠d
ᅠઽಆ඘ߒࢢēಹྜഈॆĈ

໰෡ᄓ໻࠼सġঞ໌ࢋ
Telġ010-84868549
Faxġ010-84868967
Emailġliuxj@citic.com
໰෡ᄓ໻ූղюၔġฆࡉ༆
Telġ010-84861413
Faxġ010-84868967
Emailġwangjx@citic.com
໰෡ᄓ໻ූղюၔġฆॄ
Telġ010-84868475
Faxġ010-84868967
2

Figure S4. A snapshot of the description of a trust plan that was created
to transfer entrusted rights (continued). Source: a public announcement by a
trust company.

90

THE NEXUS OF MONETARY POLICY AND SHADOW BANKING IN CHINA

Emailġwanglit@citic.com
໰෡ᄓ໻ූղюၔġฆథକ
Telġ010-84868209
Faxġ010-848618967
Emailġwangrp@citic.com

ᄯ໰໰෡ပຫ႓ఉ٤ഓ
֝嗟 ྡྷྡྷભ๔ၥసಥྡྷఐ

3

Figure S5. A snapshot of the description of a trust plan that was created
to transfer entrusted rights (continued). Source: a public announcement by a
trust company.

91

THE NEXUS OF MONETARY POLICY AND SHADOW BANKING IN CHINA

Figure S6. A snapshot of the description of how an asset management plan
was created to transfer entrusted rights (see the circled portion). Source: a
public announcement by an asset management company.

92

THE NEXUS OF MONETARY POLICY AND SHADOW BANKING IN CHINA

Figure S7. A snapshot of the description of how an asset management plan
was created to transfer entrusted rights (see the circled portion)—continued.
Source: a public announcement by an asset management company.

93

THE NEXUS OF MONETARY POLICY AND SHADOW BANKING IN CHINA

Bank loans

2
Percent

94

0
-2
2

4

8

10

12

8

10

12

8

10

12

Risky assets

2
Percent

6

0
-2
2

4

Total credit

2
Percent

6

0
-2
2

4

6

Figure S8. Dynamic responses to a one-standard-deviation fall of exogenous
money growth in the theoretical model.

