NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

FISCAL RULES AND SOVEREIGN DEFAULT
Laura Alfaro
Fabio Kanczuk
Working Paper 23370
http://www.nber.org/papers/w23370

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
April 2017, Revised June 2017

This paper does not reflect the views of the Minister of Finance, Brazil. We thank Luis Catão,
Davide Debortoli, Teresa Lloyd-Braga, Ricardo Sabbadini, Juliana Salomão, Jesse Schreger,
Hernán Daniel Seoane and participants at the AEA Meetings, Inflation Targeting Conference,
Bank of Spain's and Barcelona Graduate School of Economics Fiscal Sustainability in the XXI
century conference, LACEA, the Brazilian Central Bank seminar, DRCLAS Latin American
Seminar series for valuable comments and suggestions. The views expressed herein are those of
the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic
Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.
© 2017 by Laura Alfaro and Fabio Kanczuk. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to
exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.

Fiscal Rules and Sovereign Default
Laura Alfaro and Fabio Kanczuk
NBER Working Paper No. 23370
April 2017, Revised June 2017
JEL No. F34,H63
ABSTRACT
Recurrent concerns over debt sustainability in emerging and developed nations have prompted
renewed debate on the role of fiscal rules. Their optimality, however, remains unclear. We
provide a quantitative analysis of fiscal rules in a standard model of sovereign debt accumulation
and default modified to incorporate quasi-hyperbolic preferences. For reasons of political
economy or aggregation of citizens' preferences, government preferences are present biased,
resulting in over-accumulation of debt. Calibrating this parameter with values in the literature, the
model can reproduce debt levels and frequency of default typical of emerging markets even if the
household impatience parameter is calibrated to local interest rates. A quantitative exercise finds
welfare gains of the optimal fiscal policy to be economically substantial, and the optimal rule to
not entail a countercyclical fiscal policy. A simple debt rule that limits the maximum amount of
debt is analyzed and compared to a simple deficit rule that limits the maximum amount of deficit
per period. Whereas the deficit rule does not perform well, the debt rule yields welfare gains
virtually equal to the optimal rule.

Laura Alfaro
Harvard Business School
Morgan Hall 263
Soldiers Field
Boston, MA 02163
and NBER
lalfaro@hbs.edu
Fabio Kanczuk
University of São Paulo
R. Dr Alberto Cardoso de Melo Neto 110/131A
Sao Paulo-S.P.-CEP 01455-100
BRAZIL
kanczuk@usp.br

1

Introduction

Recurrent concerns over debt sustainability in emerging markets and the ongoing European debt crisis have prompted renewed debate in academic and policy circles on the
role of fiscal rules.
A data set compiled by the Fiscal Affairs Department of the IMF identifies countries’
adoption of fiscal policy restrictions.1 Only five countries had fiscal rules in place in
1990, more than 80 by 2014. National fiscal rules are most commonly responses to
pressure on public finances. Adoption in emerging economies was typically motivated
by debt excesses resulting from the debt crises of the 1980s and banking and economic
crises in the 1990s. Rules enacted in response to the more recent global financial crisis
attempt to provide credible commitment to long-term fiscal discipline.
Fiscal rules also play a role in business cycle frequencies. Standard economic theory
holds that fiscal policy should be countercyclical (Barro, 1979), yet most emerging countries, possibly owing to limited access to credit markets (Bauducco and Caprioli, 2014)
or distorted political incentives (Alesina and Tabelini, 2008), follow pro-cyclical fiscal
policies, which tend to exacerbate already pronounced cycles (Kaminsky, Reinhart and
Vegh, 2005; Vegh and Vuletin, 2012). Governments may adopt fiscal rules that constrain their behavior in order to correct distorted incentives to overspend, particularly
in good times. This, in turn, would alleviate distress on rainy days.
In this paper, we examine the welfare implications of fiscal rules in the context of
sovereign debt and default. The prevalent and increased use of fiscal rules is suggestive
of a desire to constraint a sovereign’s incentives to overspend. Despite widespread use,
less research has been devoted to understanding the optimality and role of such rules in
preventing sovereign default. Are the potential welfare gains of fiscal rules significant?
1

See www.imf.org/external/datamapper/FiscalRules. See also Vegh et al. (2017).

2

Should such rules take into account the economic cycle? How do the welfare implications
compare between simple and sophisticated rules? These questions relate to the broader
rules-versus-discretion debate, that is, to whether a commitment should be required,
and more generally to why governments hold positive amounts of debt.
To address these questions, we transform the traditional model of sovereign debt and
default by assuming governments’ preferences to be time inconsistent. Specifically, our
formulation of government preferences corresponds to the quasi-hyperbolic consumption model (Laibson, 1997). The consequent conflict between today’s government and
tomorrow’s generates an incentive to pre-commit to a particular fiscal rule. This argument is the primary motivator of our use of time-inconsistent government preferences.
We reconcile the impatience of a government with its citizens’ by recalling Jackson
and Yariv (2014, 2015), who propose that aggregating citizen’s time-consistent preferences naturally results in time-inconsistent preferences. Even if benevolent ex-ante, the
sovereign thus ends up with preferences that display an extra discount parameter that
captures the ex-post present bias. Alternatively, a deficit bias may also emerge as an
outcome of political game as in Aguiar and Amador (2011).
A second, more technical motivation relates to the calibration of models of sovereign
debt. As documented in the literature (Reinhart and Rogoff, 2009), emerging countries
are able, despite repeatedly defaulting, to accumulate debt levels close to 60% of GDP.
To obtain the observed levels of debt and default in an artificial economy, the intertemporal discount parameter must be calibrated to extremely low numbers. Aguiar and
Gopinath (2006), Alfaro and Kanczuk (2005, 2009), and Arellano (2008) employ for
annual data, beta values between 0.40 and 0.80, values much lower than what would
be obtained if calibration were to local interest rates.2 Notwithstanding this unintuitive
2

The literature has used other features to match higher debt levels. The use of asymmetric default
costs, for example, allows matching higher debt levels, but as noted by Mendoza and Yue (2012) and

3

calibration, the government is assumed to be benevolent and to maximize household
preferences. The use of inconsistent time preferences by the government removes this
calibration restriction allowing the household impatience parameter to be calibrated to
the interest rate.
Calibrating the model to the Brazilian economy, a typical emerging economy, yields
the following results.3 First, if the government is assumed to have hyperbolic preferences, and calibrating this parameter with values in the literature (Angeletos et al.,
2001), the model can reproduce the Brazilian level of debt and frequency of default
even if the household impatience parameter is calibrated to local interest rates. Second, adoption of the optimal fiscal rule implies substantive welfare gains relative to the
absence of a rule. Third, the optimal fiscal rule does not entail a countercyclical fiscal
policy, as is usually believed. Fourth, under the optimal fiscal rule, the country would
never opt to default on its debt. Fifth, a simple deficit rule that sets the maximum
amount of deficit per period incurs welfare losses relative to no rule. Because a deficit
rule reduces the potential benefits of defaulting by limiting consumption after default,
the government consequently resists default for large amounts of debt but achieves
lower welfare levels. Sixth, welfare gains are similar between a simple debt rule that
sets the maximum amount of debt and the optimal fiscal rule. Given its simplicity and
ease of contractibility, the simpler fiscal rule seems to be the best option for emerging
countries.
We analyze the robustness of the quantitative implications of our results to different
assumptions and parameter values. In terms of the role of debt, the hypothesis that
governments benefit from borrowing and thus have a motive to hold positive amounts of
Chatterjee and Eyigungor (2016b), the calibrated debt levels are still much lower than in the data.
3
Two additional features make Brazil particularly interesting. First, President Dilma Rousseff’s
impeachment in 2016 was due to disobedience of the existing fiscal rule; second, Congress passed
additional fiscal restrictions in December 2016.

4

debt is essential to our results. This is the case of emerging countries, which will eventually catch up to developed ones. Given that our analysis shows the benefits from frontloading household consumption to be quantitatively more important than those from
consumption smoothing, fiscal rules should be designed to allow consumption frontloading and avoid the cost of default. When the benefits from consumption smoothing
become larger, fiscal policy turns countercyclical. However, this result contradicts evidence regarding consumer preferences. Finally, since there are many political economy
motivations for excessive indebtedness including common pool problem-externalities
that lead to a deficit bias, and interest groups, we also contrast the results to the case
of a non-benevolent sovereign.4
This paper relates to the vast literature on sovereign debt and default (see Aguiar
and Amador (2014) and Aguiar et al. (2016) et al. for recent surveys of the literature).
In a related paper, Hatchondo et al. (2017), study the role of sovereign default and
fiscal rules limiting the maximum sovereign premium due to the time-inconsistency of
debt dilution. Differently from their work, in our model government preferences display
a present bias, which creates a natural alternative role for fiscal rules.5 Alternatively,
in Dovis and Kirpalani (2017), fiscal rules arise because governments want to signal
their type. More generally, this paper is related to a recent literature on rules versus
discretion in self-control settings (Amador, Werning and Angeletos, 2006; Halac and
Yared, 2014, 2015). If fiscal rules cannot define policy instructions for every possible
shock or eventuality, there is a cost from lack of flexibility and some discretion can be
optimal. Differently from this literature, we explicitly consider the possibility of default
4

See Alesina and Drazen (1991), Persson and Svensson (1989), and Alesina and Passalacqua (2015)
for a recent review of the literature.
5
See discussion in Chatterjee and Eyigungor (2016a). Bauducco annd Caprioli (2014) analyze
limited commitment in an open economy optimal fiscal policy model. Amador (2003, 2016) also
advances a sovereign debt model with present bias preferences. Gomtsyan (2017) explores related
models with less attention to the first-best benchmark. Chatterjee and Eyigungor (2016b) advance a
political economy setup.

5

and its effect on debt accumulation. We also assume the private sector to know as much
as the government about the state of the economy.
The rest of the paper is organized as follows. The model is developed in Section 2
and calibrated in Section 3. Results are reported in section 4, discussion and robustness
exercises presented in Section 5. Section 6 concludes.

2

Model

Our economy is populated by a benevolent government (the sovereign) that borrows
from a continuum of risk-neutral investors. Endowment being risky, the government
may optimally choose to default on its commitments to smooth consumption. As in
Aguiar and Gopinath (2006), Alfaro and Kanczuk (2005), and Arellano (2008), default
is assumed to temporarily exclude the government from borrowing and the sovereign
incurs additional output costs. Our environment is thus quite similar to standard
sovereign debt models incorporating the assumption of quasi-hyperbolic preferences.
In more precise terms, we assume the sovereign’s preferences to be given by:
"
Ut = Et u (gt ) + β

∞
X

#
δ τ u (gt+τ )

(1)

τ =1

with
u (gt ) =

g 1−σ − 1
,
(1 − σ)

(2)

where E is the expectation operator, g denotes government consumption (or public
spending), σ > 0 measures the curvature of the utility, and δ ∈ (0, 1) and β ∈ (0, 1)
are the traditional discount factor and an additional discount parameter, respectively.
Note that, the discount function being a discrete time function with values {1, βδ, βδ 2 , βδ 3 , ...},
these preferences are dynamically inconsistent in the sense that preferences at date t are
6

inconsistent with preferences at date (t + 1). This function, as Laibson (1997) explains,
has the advantage of mimicking the qualitative property of the hyperbolic discount
function while maintaining analytical tractability, and has been proposed, moreover,
by economists and psychologists as a characterization of human behavior.
One motivation for using such preferences in our set up is that government preferences are an aggregation of citizens’ preferences. As Jackson and Yariv (2014, 2015)
show, with any heterogeneity in preferences, every non-dictatorial aggregation method
that respects unanimity must be time inconsistent even if citizens’ preferences are time
consistent. Moreover, any such method that is time separable must entail a present bias.
We can thus interpret the β < 1 parameter as the bias resulting from this aggregation.
If the government chooses to repay its debt, its budget constraint is given by:

gt = τ exp (zt ) − dt + qt dt+1 ,

(3)

where dt denotes the government debt level in period t , τ is the exogenous and constant
tax rate, and zt is the technology state that determines the output level, exp (zt ), in
the present period. The debt price functions, q(st , dt+1 ), are endogenously determined
in the model and potentially depend on all the states of the economy, st , as well as the
government’s decisions.
We assume the technology state zt can take a finite number of values and evolves
over time according to a Markov transition matrix with elements π(zi , zj ). That is, the
probability that zt+1 = zj given that zt = zi is given by the matrix π element of row i
and column j.
When the government chooses to default, the economy’s constraint is:

gt = τ (1 − φ) exp (zt ) ,
7

(4)

where the parameter φ governs the additional loss of output in autarky, a common
feature in sovereign debt models.6 After defaulting, the government is temporarily
excluded from issuing debt. We assume θ to be the probability that it regains full
access to credit markets.
Investors are risk neutral, their opportunity cost of funds given by ρ, denotes the
risk-free rate. The investor action is to choose the debt price qt , which depends on the
perceived likelihood of default. For investors to be indifferent between the riskless asset
and lending, it must be the case that,

qt =

(1 − Ψt )
,
(1 + ρ)

(5)

where Ψt is the probability of default, endogenously determined and dependent on the
government incentive to repay debt.
We intentionally do not specify whether investors are international or domestic.
Therefore, dt stands for the total, domestic and international, government debt level.
The assumption that investors are risk neutral implies that investors compete away their
profits (and thus do not affect the government’s utility). Another implicit assumption
is that households’ private consumption does not affect the utility they derive from
public expenditures, which occurs, for example, when the two types of consumption are
separable in households’ preferences.
The timing of decisions is as follows. The government begins each period with debt
level dt and receives tax revenue endowment τ exp(zt ). Taking the bond price schedule
q(st , dt+1 ) as given, the government faces two decisions, (i) whether to default, and if it
6

To keep matters simple, we assume these output costs are a constant fraction of output. Alternative costs specifications as well the addition of elements of political uncertainty, debt maturity and
renegotiation have been shown to be useful ways to increase the amount of debt in equilibrium, see
discussion in Mendoza and Yue (2012).

8

decides not to default, (ii) the next level of debt, dt+1 .
The model described is a stochastic dynamic game played by a large agent (the government) against many small agents (the continuum of investors). We focus exclusively
on the Markov perfect equilibria, in which the sovereign (government) is not committed
and players act sequentially and rationally. This definition of equilibrium is identical to
that of Arellano (2008) and Alfaro and Kanczuk (2009), among many others, the only
difference being that it was adapted to deal with the time inconsistency problem that
results from the sovereign’s preferences. The quasi-hyperbolic assumption implies that
the solution can nevertheless be written as a recursive problem.
Note that investors are passive and their actions can be completely described by
equation (5). To write the government problem recursively, let wG denote the value
function if the government decides to maintain a good credit history (G stands for good
credit history), and wB the value function if the government defaults (B stands for bad
credit history) in the present period. The value of a good credit standing at the start
of a period can then be defined as:


w = M ax wG , wB ,

(6)

This indicates that the government defaults if wG < wB . The “good credit” value
function wG and policy function DG can be written as:

wG (st ) = M ax {u (gt ) + βδEυ (st+1 )} ,

(7)

DG (st ) = ArgM ax {u (gt ) + βδEυ (st+1 )} ,

(8)

9

subject to (3). The “bad credit” value function wB can be written as,



wB (st ) = u (gt ) βδ θEυ (st+1 ) + (1 − θ) Ev β (st+1 ) ,

(9)

subject to (4). In its turn, the “good credit” continuation value v G is written as:

v G (st ) = u (gt ) + δEv G (st+1 )

(10)

dt+1 = DG (st )

(11)

subject to (3) and to:

That is, it is evaluated using the policy function obtained in the good credit optimization. The “bad credit” continuation value v B is written as:



v B (st ) = u (gt ) + δ θEv G (st+1 ) + (1 − θ) Ev B (st+1 )

(12)

subject to (4). And the continuation value at the start of the period (with good credit
standing) is,

v = M ax v G , v B

(13)

To compute the equilibrium, it is useful to define a default set of states of the economy in which the government chooses to default. The default set, in turn, determines
the price qt through expression. With these prices, one can solve the government problem (7) to (12). The solution for (6) determines the default set, which can be used in
the next iteration.
The recursive equilibrium is defined by the set of policy functions for government
asset holdings and default choice such that (i) taking the price functions as given, the

10

government policy functions satisfy the government optimization problem, and (ii) the
price of bonds is consistent with the government decisions.
To grasp some intuition, recall the government has two instruments to affect the
time path of consumption: default and borrowing. In choosing default, the government
is opting for a higher level of immediate consumption in exchange for being excluded
from capital markets and incurring output costs. Default may thus make sense as a
means of escape from a situation in which high indebtedness and low technology would
result in extremely low consumption levels. Debt, the other instrument, can potentially
be used (i) to smooth income fluctuations relative to the mean level of income, in the
same manner as default, and (ii) to tilt the consumption profile towards the present,
given that the impatience level is higher for the country that for investors.
Because, in this model, available financial contracts are state dependent, front loading consumption is easier during high-income shocks when debt is cheaper and borrowing limits looser. The two objectives of the debt instrument thus tend to conflict. When
the technology shock is good, it is cheaper to frontload consumption but also makes
sense to save for rainy days. The converse is true when the technology shock is bad.
The policy rule obtained by solving the model reflects which objective, to smooth consumption or frontload its profile, is quantitatively more important. Note also, that in
our specification, as in models with no hyperbolic preferences, more impatience (lower
β) leads to a lower equilibrium debt level and more frequent defaults.

3

Calibration

We calibrate the model to Brazilian annual data from 1955. Brazil is a relatively
large and typical emerging economy. Its sovereign debt level, frequency of default and

11

business cycle characteristics are similar to those of Mexico, for example.7
We set the risk-free (international) interest rate ρ = 0.04 and inter-temporal substitution parameter σ = 2, as is usual in real-business-cycle research in which each period
corresponds to one year. We set tax rate τ = 30%, which is the average tax burden
over the period.
We calibrate the technology state z T by considering the (logarithm of) GDP to
T
= αztT + εt , where εt ≈ N(0, σε2 ) We obtain α
follow an AR(1) process, that is, zt+1

= 0.85 and σε = 0.044. We discretize this technology state and use the Quadrature
Method to calculate transition probabilities. We also discretize the space state of debt
sufficiently to avoid affecting the decision rules.
We set the probability of redemption at θ = 0.2, which implies an average stay in
autarky of five years, which is in line with estimates by Reinhart and Rogoff (2009) for
Brazil. Direct output costs, modeled from default episodes, equal φ=10%.
We calibrate δ = 0.90 using the Brazilian average real interest rate. The fact of
impatience being higher for the country than for investors is motivated by the fact of
growth being higher in emerging than in developed markets. That poorer countries
should catch up with richer ones provides the incentive to frontload consumption.
Finally, to obtain reasonable levels of debt in equilibrium we set the additional intertemporal factor related to government present bias at β = 0.70 as in Angeletos et al.,
(2001). Table 1 summarizes the parameter values.
7

Aguiar et al. (2016) document that typical emerging market countries, such as Mexico and Brazil,
are less volatile than Argentina which has a particular outlier behavior.

12

4

Simulation Results

As our analysis is normative, we proceed by studying welfare under several policy rules.
We start with a no rule benchmark case and compare against the optimal fiscal rule.
We then compare these cases against the rules countries typically applied: fiscal rules
and debt rules.

4.1

No Rule

We first consider the case in which the government is not subject to any fiscal rules.
Figures 1a and 1b represent the policy functions obtained by solving the model and
depict, respectively, the default decision and choice of next period debt level contingent
on not defaulting. The path denoted “high technology” refers to a good shock, or
“boom,” while that denoted “low technology,” refers to a bad shock, or “recession.”
Consider a sovereign’s choice to default, and compare expressions (9) and (12). On
one hand, default implies an instantaneous reduction in the cost of rolling debt. This
means higher consumption, especially when the debt service is large. On the other
hand, default implies lower output, and a reduction in the possibility of smoothing
consumption in future periods. This is the case because the sovereign loses access to
credit markets, and is forced to have zero debt. Default becomes attractive then when
debt is high and the technology shock is low, to avoid extremely low consumption as
debt becomes more expensive.
Figure 1a shows, when the technology shock is high, the government defaults when
the debt level exceeds 70% of GDP. The maximum amount of sustainable debt when
the technology shock is low is 58% of GDP. Default, if used as a means to smooth
consumption, is thus more likely the lower the output levels.
Figure 1b shows the next period debt level to be higher the higher the technology
13

state and current period debt. The positive relationship between consecutive debt levels
was anticipated because, for a given technology shock, the government would attempt
to avoid sharp changes in the debt level that would imply higher consumption volatility.
The relationship between technology and debt, a fairly surprising but previously obtained result (Arellano, 2008; Kanczuk and Alfaro, 2009), implies that the government
does not use debt to smooth consumption, a departure from the “pure” Eaton and
Gersovitz (1981) framework, but rather primarily to frontload consumption given that
the discount factor δ is lower than the inverse of the risk-free interest rate. Consumption smoothing is mostly achieved, as noted earlier, through default, as in contingent
debt service models such as that of Grossman and Van Huyck (1988).
Calculating the invariant distribution of the states, we determine the government
to be excluded from the market 3.2% of the time and average debt to be 60.1% of
output, as reported in the first line of Table 2. These results are broadly consistent
with the stylized facts. Notice that by assuming hyperbolic preferences on the part of
the government, the model can reproduce the level of debt and frequency of default
typical of emerging markets, even if the household impatience parameter is calibrated
to the local interest rate.

4.2

Optimal Fiscal Rule

We next consider the case of the optimal fiscal rule. This benchmark corresponds to
what Amador, Werning and Angeletos (2006) denominate the “first-best allocation”,
and Halac and Yared (2014) denominate “ex-ante optimal rule ”. In our setup, this
corresponds to the case of β = 1, if the rule was implemented last period, just after
the government expenditure. Our analysis contrasts with these papers in that there
is no private information about the technology shocks. In the latter, the optimal rule

14

has to balance discretion with commitment, and is shown to be history dependent,
as it provides dynamic incentives. In our simpler case, given the absence of private
information, the first best policy can be implemented with full commitment, that is, by
giving the government a pre-determined contingent path of efficient consumption.
The invariant distribution properties of the economy under the optimal fiscal rule are
reported in the second row of Table 2. Under the optimal rule, the invariant distribution
displays no default and the average debt level drops to 50.2% of GDP. In other words,
the government present bias is responsible for debt over-accumulation of about 10% of
GDP and the occurrence of default episodes.
Table 2 also compares, in terms of consumption, the welfare level of the economy
under the optimal rule and no rule. Considering, for both economies, the transition
path from a starting point with no debt to their respective invariant distribution, we
obtain that adoption of the optimal rule results in welfare gains of 0.277% of GDP,
substantial compared to typical business cycle welfare gains.
Figures 2a and 2b depict, respectively, the government’s default decision and choice
of next period debt level contingent on not defaulting. Figure 2a looks like Figure 1a,
but has different threshold axis values. As with no rule, default is more likely the lower
the output levels. The maximum amount of sustainable debt is 63% of GDP under a
high, and 50% of GDP under a low, technology shock. Although there is no default in
equilibrium, the threshold values for default are lower under the optimal than under no
rule.
Comparing Figure 2b with Figure 1b reveals the optimal policy to also have similar
qualitative properties to the solution with no fiscal rule. Again, contrary to the usual
intuition, debt accumulation does not increase when the economy is hit by a bad shock.
In other words, whereas default is (potentially) used to smooth consumption, debt is

15

used to tilt the consumption profile, and this holds regardless of the fact that default
does not occur in equilibrium, at least after the economy has converged to its invariant
distribution.
Figure 2b shows that when the debt level is relatively low, the economy saves the
same regardless of the output shock. When the debt level is high, however, the economy
borrows more in booms than in recessions because of the countercyclical interest rate
schedules. In other words, when debt (and the incentive to default) is greater, the
borrower would like to borrow heavily during bad shocks, but cannot because such
financial contracts are too expensive. Consequently, when debt is large the optimal
fiscal policy is pro-cyclical.

4.3

Debt Rules

We now consider the case of simple debt rules under the hypothesis that the government
is present biased (β = 0.70). These rules prohibit the government from choosing debt
levels above a previously set threshold. We solve for many thresholds and report the
corresponding invariant distribution properties in Table 2.
Note that when the debt threshold is set to 65% or 60% of GDP, the average debt
level is lower than under the no rule case but smaller than the threshold. Thus, the
threshold is constraining debt accumulation, but the government still has some margin.
Additionally, for these threshold levels the frequency of default is as high as under no
rule.
When the debt threshold is close to 50% of GDP or lower, the invariant distribution
debt level is equal to the threshold. Debt accumulation becomes, in fact, binding all
the time and there is no longer default in equilibrium (after converging to the invariant
distribution).

16

Figure 3 depicts, for the case in which output is neither high nor low (i.e., z = 0),
the policy function for the cases with no rule, with the optimal fiscal rule, and with
a simple rule with threshold d ≤ 50% of GDP. Note that the simple rule implies an
average debt level similar to the optimal rule, but the constraint affects consumption
smoothing, making the government accumulate the same level of debt regardless of its
previous indebtedness.
Welfare gains vary widely depending on the debt threshold. When the threshold
is too high or too low, the simple rule incurs substantial welfare losses even relative
to no rule. In the case of very high threshold levels, the rule does not prevent default
but limits consumption smoothing. When the threshold levels are too low, the costs of
preventing the sovereign to frontload consumption outweigh any gain from preventing
defaults. More interesting, when the threshold is set to 50%, welfare gain is virtually
equal to that of the optimal rule. That is, a very simple rule can yield gains comparable
to a fairly complex one.
We believe this finding may have relevant policy implications. Threshold debt rules,
being easily contractible and yielding welfare gains virtually equal to those afforded by
the optimal fiscal rule, would seem to be the better alternative for implementation in
practice.

4.4

Deficit Rules

Lastly, we consider the case of simple deficit rules, again under the hypothesis that
the government is present biased (β = 0.70). These rules prohibit the government
from choosing deficit levels (or changes in debt, ∆d ≡ dt+1 − dt ) above a previously
set threshold.8 We solve for many thresholds and report the corresponding invariant
8

In the case of Brazil, the fiscal rule approved in December 2016 is actually a transition rule to reign
in fiscal expenditures. It fixes government expenditure in real terms for twenty years. As GDP grows,

17

distribution properties in Table 3.
Note that as the maximum amount of deficit is reduced, and the constraint becomes
binding, we observe fewer defaults and higher amounts of debt. It is unexpected, but
promising, that the deficit constraint can generate high amounts of debt, and thus more
frontloading, without incurring the costs of default. But examination of the welfare
implications shows the arrangement to not be working as expected.
Figure 4 presents the debt policy (dt+1 as a function of dt ) for the deficit policy
(∆d < 2%) compared with the optimal policy (always when technology is neutral, i.e.,
z = 0). As expected, in the relevant region the deficit rule results in a policy very close
to the 45-degree line, that is, debt is restricted to very slow change.
To illustrate the practical implication of the deficit rule, Figure 5 displays the consumption profile for an economy that begins with zero debt in the beginning of time and
always faces neutral technology shocks (z = 0). Recall that zero debt is the case after a
sovereign defaults, and is also the initial condition adopted in our welfare calculations.
Under the optimal policy, the household frontloads consumption, which starts at a
much higher level and converges to its steady state in about six years. Under the deficit
rule, the government, restricted to increasing debt by small amounts, cannot increase
initial consumption and convergence to the steady state is much slower. In other words,
the government foregoes the benefits from frontloading consumption.
An indirect effect of the deficit rule is that the potential benefits of default are greatly
reduced. Default enables a country to shed debt and thus increase consumption. But
under a deficit rule, under which consumption can increase only slowly, little utility
is derived from default. The government consequently resists default even for large
amounts of debt, thus creating the apparent contradiction of being able to hold large
and revenues increase, this fiscal rule will generate an increasingly large fiscal surplus and assets, and
the equilibrium will be ill defined.

18

amounts of debt without defaulting but, achieving lower welfare levels .

5

Discussion and Robustness Exercises

5.1

Risk Aversion, Distortionary Taxes, and Fiscal Pro-Cyclicality

A surprising result of our simulations is that optimal fiscal policy is not countercyclical.
We are used to the idea that because tax distortion costs are convex, debt should
fluctuate in order to keep tax rates constant (see Barro, 1979). However, as discussed,
this logic does not hold in our calibrated model.
In principle, our simple endowment economy already has the ingredients that should
make countercyclical fiscal policy optimal. That is, modeling production, investment,
and further tax distortions would not imply more tax smoothing than our simpler model
does.
On the revenue side, our model assumes output is stochastically endowed and considers the extreme case in which tax rates are constant. Suppose instead the government
could choose the tax rate (to reduce distortions in output production). Then, the maximum counter-cyclicality would be obtained when tax rates are set constant, which is
already the case in our model, by assumption.
On the expenditure side, rather than assumed to be constant, consumption is chosen
to maximize utility. Because preferences are concave, the government also has incentives
to use debt to smooth consumption. In other words, the government is motivated to
hold expenditures constant and thus implement a countercyclical fiscal policy. Our
calibrated results indicate, however, that this motive is dominated by other motivations,
in particular, under the optimal fiscal rule, to use debt to frontload rather than smooth
consumption.

19

To investigate how quantitatively robust this result is we modify the model to increase the gains from consumption smoothing. A simple way to do so is to modify
the calibration by increasing the risk aversion parameter σ. Because this parameter
also plays the role of inter-temporal elasticity, it controls the benefits of smoothing
consumption.
Figure 6 displays the correlation between (the logarithm of) output and government
savings (the change in debt) for various risk aversion parameters. Note that for σ
less than or equal to 4, the model displays a pro-cyclical fiscal policy. When σ =
5, fiscal policy is completely a-cyclical. For higher values of σ, when the benefits
from consumption smoothing become larger, fiscal policy turns countercyclical. These
calibrations, however, contradict much evidence about consumer preferences.
We take this result as an indication that, from a quantitative perspective, the gains
from frontloading consumption seem to be more important than those from tax smoothing for a wide range of economies.

5.2

Dynamics and Initial Debt

Note that we obtained the quantitative results under the assumption that the initial
debt level is zero, which is the natural benchmark. But the qualitative result is a general
one. For all initial debt levels lower than the maximum sustainable debt, the sovereign
would gain from frontloading consumption and quickly increasing its debt holdings.
If initial debt level is higher than its maximum sustainable level, the sovereign would
default in the first period, debt would be equal to zero in the second period, and the
same analysis would apply.
Our case Brazil, is in the process of discussing a national fiscal rule, but does not
currently have one operating. The best know fiscal rule is the Euro area Stability and

20

Growth Pact. A common criticism is that there was no adherence to the rule, because
the prescribed punishments were not credible. However, even though many countries’
debt holdings are above the 60% of GDP limit, few have actually defaulted. The most
emblematic example is Germany, which held a debt level equal to 81 percent of GDP
in 2010, and faced no apparent risk of default. In our framework, this is an indication
that the maximum sustainable debt for Germany must be well above 80%. (In fact, the
60% limit was based on the median public debt levels at the time of the framing of the
Maastricht Treaty. It was not considered the optimal or the maximum sustainable debt
level.)9 Thus, according to our framework, the Euro area debt limit was set too low.
Many countries would benefit from having more debt and frontloading consumption
without incurring in default.

5.3

Private Information

As noted above, our framework has not incorporated private information about technology shocks. In other words, we assumed households to know as much as the government about the state of the economy (and contracts thus can be written contingent
on shocks). Although this is the natural hypothesis to entertain, there are possible
rationales for considering the case of private information whereby the government is
better informed than households. One is that private information is an indirect way to
capture the fact that some fiscal contingencies are not easily contractible and a value
for flexibility.
How would our results change if only the government observed the technology shock?
The optimal policy would be much more complex, as shown by Halac and Yared (2014),
but would yield welfare gains (to households) less than or equal to those obtained under
9

Countries such as Greece and Italy, for example, joined the Euro with initial debt levels well
beyond the limit.

21

the optimal rule with complete information. More precisely, the welfare gains of the
private information optimal rule lie somewhere between the welfare gains under the
public information optimal rule and simple debt threshold rules.
That welfare gains under the simple debt rule are almost identical to those under
the optimal rule, as highlighted in our analysis, is a good reason for using the simple
threshold rule, given that it is easily contractible. One can conclude that the same
policy implication holds when there is private information.

5.4

Self-Interested (Non-Benevolent) Government

The analysis in the previous sections hypothesized a benevolent government with quasihyperbolic preferences that motivated adoption of fiscal rules. A vast literature in
political economy has analyzed the over-accumulation of debt by non-benevolent, or
self-interested, governments.
A simple way to capture this possibility in our framework is to set β = 1 and calibrate
δ gov such that our artificial economy displays observed debt levels consistent. That is,
by supposing that government preferences are not time inconsistently, but differ from
those of the country’s citizens, who are less impatient.
Setting δ gov = 0.80, the invariant distribution displays debt equal to 62% of GDP
and projects default to occur 3.2% of the time, which are broadly consistent with both
the stylized facts and our basic calibration. As expected, the policy functions are also
quite similar.
If the government discount factor is δ gov = 0.80 and the citizens’ discount factor
δ = 0.90, the same policy implications as before would apply. The optimal rule and
results of simple threshold rules would also be the same as before.
An important omission from the analysis is why the optimal rule (or threshold rules)

22

would be applied. The self-interested government would certainly oppose adoption of
such rules. Although we do not analyze how, citizens need to somehow, perhaps by
means of elections, discipline politicians and force them to adopt the rules .

6

Conclusion

Emerging countries, as they catch up to developed ones, can borrow in order to frontload
their consumption profile. In practice, however, they tend to over borrow and often
resort to defaulting on their debt. Governments’ preferences, for reasons of political
economy or aggregation of heterogeneous citizens’ preferences, may display a present
bias.
Fiscal rules are a potentially useful commitment technology to solve this problem.
The continued approval of fiscal rules, as documented by the IMF, whether debt or
deficit related is suggestive of a desire to constraint a sovereign’s incentives to overspend.
In the context of a traditional model of sovereign debt and default, we analyze the
welfare gains from alternative fiscal rules. We find the gains from the optimal fiscal
rule to be economically relevant, and observe that the optimal fiscal rule does not entail
pro-cyclical fiscal policy. Although beyond the scope of the paper, the question remains
whether fiscal or debt rules are easier to enforce. However, we find that a simple, easily
contractible threshold rule can generate gains virtually as high as the optimal rule.

23

References
[1] Amador, M. 2003. “A Political Economy Model of Sovereign Debt Repayment”
Stanford Graduate School of Business working paper.
[2] Amador, M. 2012. “Sovereign Debt and the Tragedy of the Commons” Stanford
University working paper.
[3] Aguiar, M. and M. Amador. 2014. “Sovereign Debt.” In Handbook of International
Economics Vol 4, eds. G. Gopinath, E. Helpman and K. Rogoff. North-Holland:
647-87.
[4] Aguiar, M. and M. Amador. 2011. “Growth Under the Shadow of Expropriation,”
Quarterly Journal of Economics 126: 651–697.
[5] Aguiar, M., S. Chatterjee, H. Cole, and Z. Stangebye. 2016. “Quantitative Models
of Sovereign Debt Crises,” NBER Working paper 22125.
[6] Aguiar, M. and G. Gopinath. 2006. “Defaultable Debt, Interest Rates and the
Current Account,” Journal of International Economics 69: 64-83.
[7] Alesina, A. and A. Drazen. 1991. “Why Are Stabilizations Delayed?” American
Economic Review 81(5): 1170-1188.
[8] Alesina, A. and A. Passalacqua. 2015. “The Political Economy of Government
Debt” manuscript in preparation for the Handbook of Macroeconomics edited by
John Taylor and Harald Uhlig.
[9] Alesina, A. and G. Tabelini. 2008. “Why Is Fiscal Policy Often Pro-cyclical?”
Journal of the European Economic Association 6(5): 1006-36.
[10] Alfaro, L, and F. Kanczuk. 2005 “Sovereign Debt As a Contingent Claim: A
Quantitative Approach.” Journal of International Economics 65(2): 297-214.
[11] Alfaro, L. and F. Kanczuk. 2009. “Optimal Reserve Management and Sovereign
Debt,” Journal of International Economics 77(1): 23-36.
[12] Amador, M., I. Werning and G.-MS Angeletos. 2006. “Commitment vs. Flexibility,” Econometrica 74, 365-96.

24

[13] Angeletos, G.-MS, D. Laibson, J. Tobacman, A. Repetto and S. Weinberg. 2001.
“The Hyperbolic Consumption Model: Calibration, Simulation, and Empirical
Evaluation,” Journal of Economic Perspectives 15(3): 47-68.
[14] Arellano, C. 2008. “Default Risk and Income Fluctuations in Emerging Markets,”
American Economic Review 98(3): 690-712.
[15] Bauducco S. and F. Caprioli. 2014. “Optimal Fiscal Policy in a Small Open Economy with Limited Commitment,” Journal of International Economics 93(2): 30215.
[16] Barro, R. J. 1979. “On the Determination of the Public Debt,” The Journal of
Political Economy, 87(5): 940-97.
[17] Chatterjee, S. and B. Eyigungor. 2016a. “Continuous Markov Equilibria with
Quasi-Geometric Discounting,” Journal of Economic Theory, 163:467-494.
[18] Chatterjee, S. and B. Eyigungor. 2016b. “Endogenous Political Turnover and Fluctuations in Sovereign Default Risk,”Federal Reserve Bank of Philadelphia working
paper.
[19] Dovis, A. and R. Kirpalani. 2017. “Fiscal Rules, Bailouts, and Reputation in Federal Governments,”working paper.
[20] Eaton, J. and M. Gersovitz. 1981. “Debt with Potential Repudiation: Theoretical
and Empirical Analysis,” The Review of Economic Studies 48: 289-309.
[21] Gomtsyan, D. 2017. “Optimal Fiscal Rules” Working paper.
[22] Grossman, H. I. and J. B. Van Huyck. 1988. “Sovereign Debt as a Contingent
Claim: Excusable Default, Repudiation, and Reputation,” American Economic
Review 78:1088-97.
[23] Halac, M. and P. Yared. 2014. “Fiscal Rules and Discretion under Persistent
Shocks,” Econometrica 82(5): 1557-1614.
[24] Halac, M. and P. Yared. 2015. “Fiscal Rules and Discretion in a World Economy,”
Working Paper.
[25] Hatchondo, J. C., L. Martinez and F. Roch. 2015 “Fiscal Rules and the Sovereign
Default Premium,” Working Paper.
25

[26] Jackson, M. O. and L. Yariv. 2014. “Present Bias and Collective Choice in the
Lab,” American Economic Review 104: 4184-4204.
[27] Jackson, M. O. and L. Yariv 2015. “Collective Dynamic Choice: The Necessity of
Time Inconsistency,” American Economic Journal: Microeconomics 7(4): 150-78.
[28] Kaminsky, G., C. Reinhart and C. Vegh. 2005. “When It Rains It Pours: Procyclical Macro-policies and Capital Flows.” In NBER Macroeconomics Annual
2004, eds. M. Gutler and K. S. Rogoff. MIT Press: 11-53.
[29] Mendoza, E. and V. Yue. 2012. “A General Equilibrium Model of Sovereign Default
and Business Cycles,” The Quarterly Journal of Economics 127, 889-946.
[30] Laibson, D. 1997. “Golden Eggs and Hyperbolic Discounting,” Quarterly Journal
of Economics, 112: 443-78.
[31] Persson, T. and L.E.O. Svensson. 1989. “Why a Stubborn Conservative would
Run a Deficit: Policy with Time-Inconsistent Preferences,” Quarterly Journal of
Economics 104: 325-45.
[32] Reinhart, C. and K. Rogoff. 2009. This Time is Different: Eight Centuries of
Financial Follies. Princeton, New Jersey: Princeton University Press.
[33] Vegh, C., C. Lederman, D, and F. Bennett, F. 2017. “Leaning Against the Wind:
Fiscal Policy in Latin America and the Caribbean in a Historical Perspective.”
LAC Semiannual Report. World Bank, Washington, DC.
[34] Vegh, C. and G. Vuletin. 2012. “How Is Tax Policy Conducted over the Business
Cycle?” American Economic Journal: Economic Policy 7: 327-70.

26

Table 1: Calibration
Technology autocorrelation
Technology standard deviation
Probability of redemption
Output costs
Risk aversion
Risk free interest rate
Tax rate
Discount factor
Hyperbolic discount factor

α = −0.85
σε = 0.044
θ = 0.20
φ = 0.10
σ=2
ρ = 0.04
τ = 0.30
δ = 0.90
β = 0.70

Table 2: Invariant Distribution for Alternative Fiscal Rules
Model Specification
No Rule
Optimal Rule
Rule d ≤ 65%
Rule d ≤ 60%
Rule d ≤ 55%
Rule d ≤ 50%
Rule d ≤ 45%
Rule d ≤ 40%
Rule d ≤ 35%
Rule d ≤ 30%
Rule d ≤ 20%
Rule d ≤ 10%
Rule d ≤ 0

Exclusion from Market
(% time)
3.2
0.0
3.2
3.2
0.4
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0

27

Debt if Not Excluded
(%GDP)
60.1
50.2
59.8
57.8
55.0
50.0
45.0
40.0
35.0
30.0
20.0
10.0
0.0

Welfare
(% GDP)
0.0
0.277
-0.214
-0.163
0.259
0.276
0.275
0.212
0.129
0.024
-0.257
-0.656
-.1.414

Table 3: Invariant Distribution for Fiscal Deficits
Model Specification
No Rule
Rule d ≤ 20%
Rule d ≤ 10%
Rule d ≤ 5%
Rule d ≤ 4%
Rule d ≤ 3%
Rule d ≤ 2%
Rule d ≤ 1%

Exclusion from Market
(% time)
0.0
3.2
3.2
3.2
2.1
0.0
0.0
0.0

28

Debt if Not Excluded
(%GDP)
60.1
56.8
57.4
61.3
63.5
74.3
75.0
75.0

Welfare
(% GDP)
0.0
-0.184
-0.511
-0.946
-1.049
-1.056
-1.097
-1.135

Figure	  1a:	  Default	  Policy	  Function	  For	  No	  Rule	  Economy	  

	  
Figure	  1b:	  Debt	  Policy	  Function	  For	  No	  Rule	  Economy	  

	  
	  
	  

Figure	  2a:	  Default	  Policy	  Function	  For	  Optimal	  Rule	  

	  
Figure	  2b:	  Debt	  Policy	  Function	  For	  Optimal	  Rule	  

	  
	  

	  

	  

Figure	  3:	  Debt	  Policy	  Function	  For	  Different	  Fiscal	  Rules	  (z	  =	  0)	  

	  
Figure	  4:	  Debt	  Policy	  Function	  For	  Deficit	  Rule	  (Δd<2%,	  z	  =	  0)	  

	  
	  

	  

Figure	  5:	  Consumption	  Profile,	  Optimal	  Rule,	  and	  Deficit	  Rule	  (Δd<2%,	  z	  =	  0)	  

	  
Figure	  6:	  Fiscal	  Policy	  Counter-­‐Cyclicality	  against	  Risk	  Aversion	  

	  
	  

