                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




             ON THE JOINT EVOLUTION OF CULTURE AND INSTITUTIONS

                                          Alberto Bisin
                                         Thierry Verdier

                                      Working Paper 23375
                              http://www.nber.org/papers/w23375


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     April 2017




Thanks to Alberto Alesina, Gary Becker, Georgy Egorov, Luigi Guiso, David Levine, Massimo
Morelli, Nicola Persico, Louis Putterman, Kenneth Shepsle, Shlomo Weber, and the many others
we spoke with about this paper. We have presented the paper widely before writing it and we
thank all the audiences for help, suggestions, and support. This research has been undertaken
under financial support from the ERC Advanced Grant TECTACOM n324004. The views
expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National
Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2017 by Alberto Bisin and Thierry Verdier. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to
exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.
On the Joint Evolution of Culture and Institutions
Alberto Bisin and Thierry Verdier
NBER Working Paper No. 23375
April 2017
JEL No. O10,P16,P48

                                           ABSTRACT

Explanations of economic growth and prosperity commonly identify a unique causal effect, e.g.,
institutions, culture, human capital, geography. In this paper we provide instead a theoretical
modeling of the interaction between culture and institutions and their effects on economic
activity. We characterize conditions on the socio-economic environment such that culture and
institutions complement (resp. substitute) each other, giving rise to a multiplier effect which
amplifies (resp. dampens) their combined ability to spur economic activity. We show how the
joint dynamics of culture and institutions may display interesting non-ergodic behavior,
hysteresis, oscillations, and comparative dynamics. Finally, in specific example societies, we
study how culture and institutions interact to determine the sustainability of extractive societies as
well as the formation of civic capital and of legal systems protecting property rights.


Alberto Bisin
Department of Economics
New York University
19 West 4th Street, 5th Floor
New York, NY 10012
and NBER
alberto.bisin@nyu.edu

Thierry Verdier
PSE
and Ecole des Ponts-Paris Tech,
and PUC-Rio
48 Boulevard Jourdan
75014 Paris, France
and CEPR
verdier@pse.ens.fr
1       Introduction
            ”Era questo un ordine buono, quando i cittadini erano buoni [...] ma diventati i cittadini cattivi, divento’

        tale ordine pessimo.”1 ; Niccolo’ Machiavelli, Discorsi, I. 16, 1531

            [...] ”among a people generally corrupt, liberty cannot long exist.” Edmund Burke, Letter to the Sheriffs

        of Bristol (1777-04-03).

            ”If there be no virtue among us, no form of government can render us secure. To suppose that any form

        of government will secure liberty or happiness without any virtue in the people is an illusion.” James Madison,

        20 June 1788, Papers 11:163


    The distribution of income across countries in the world is very unequal: according to World
Bank data 2015, U.S. GDP per capita in international dollars is 71 times that of the Democratic
Republic of Congo, 58 times that of Niger, 9 times that of India and 3 times that of Brazil, for
instance. But accounts for economic growth and prosperity? What stands at its origin?
    The question of origin is typically translated, in the economic literature, into one of causation
in the language statistics and econometrics. Furthermore, often a single univariate cause is
searched for and different possible causes are run one against each other.2
    Identifying the main cause of economic growth, even if in different specific contexts, is compli-
cated.3 The argument for institutions, for instance, essentially requires historical natural exper-
iments where institutions are varied in geographical units with common geographical character-
istics, culture, and other possible socio-economic determinants of future prosperity. Perhaps the
most successful example is Acemoglu, Johnson and Robinson (2001)’s study of the institutional
design of colonial empires, the more extractive the higher settlers’ mortality rates.4 Even in this
    1
     This was a good institutional order when citizens were good [...] but when citizen became bad, it turned into
an horrible order; our translation
   2
     Acemoglu and Robinson (2012), for instance, argue explicitly against each one of several potential alternative
causes (geography, culture, ignorance; Ch. 2, Theories that don’t work ) before laying their argument in favor of
institutions in the rest of the volume.
   3
     Besides the arguments following, there are also methodological reasons to be skeptical about the concept of
causation when facing slow-moving non-stationary processes (as, arguably is long-run history). For instance, the
origin of the Mafia in Sicily has been reduced with good arguments to a price shock on sulfur an lemon in the
1850’s (Buonanno, Durante, Prarolo, and Vanin, 2012); to the lack of city states in the XIV’th century - in turn
a consequence of Norman domination (Guiso, Sapienza, and Zingales, 2016); to the Paleolithic split into nomadic
pastoralism in 7th millenium B.C. (Alinei, 2007).
  We might even suggest ironically that a single origin of economic growth and prosperity is a myth, like the one
about the birth of all languages after the Christian God’s destruction of the Babel’s Tower, an “event” which was
indeed ”accurately” dated, allegedly on May 5th, 1491 B.C. by James Ussher, in 1650.
   4
     Other examples include: the spanish colonial policy regarding the forced mining labor system in Peru’ (Dell,
2010); the U.S.-Mexico border separating the city of Nogales (Acemoglu and Robinson, 2010); the border separating
the island of Hispaniola into two distinct political and institutional systems, Haiti and the Dominican Republic
(Diamond, 2005).



                                                                1
case, however, the assumption that the distinct institutions originated in the natural experiment
arise in otherwise common cultural, geographical, environments is disputable. Indeed, settlers’
mortality rates could be correlated with natives mortality rates and hence pre-colonial devel-
opment; see e.g., Alsan, 2012, on the habitat for the Tse-Tse fly in Africa.5 Naturally, similar
issues arise when identifying culture as the cause of prosperity, by isolating cultural variation in
historical environments with a common institutional set-up.6
    Even when not problematic, these causal analyses disregard the interactions between various
determinant of economic growth: for instance, the same institutional change may have differential
effects according to different cultural environments. Instances where this is the case have indeed
been extensively documented.7 The main reference in this respect of course is the work of Put-
nam on social capital, following the differential effects in the North and in the South of Italy of
the institutional decentralization of the 60’s and 70’s (Putnam, 1993).8 More generally, instances
where institutions and cultural traits have manifestly jointly contributed to the development or
the disruption of economic activity are common. This is the case for instance of Italian indepen-
dent city states in the Renaissance (Guiso, Sapienza, and Zingales, 2008, 2016), industrialization
and social capital in Indonesia (Miguel, Gertler and Levine, 2006), the technology of plough, pa-
triarchal institutions and gender attitudes (Alesina, Giuliano and Nunn, 2013), the authoritarian
culture of the sugar plantation regions of Cuba operated with slave labor as opposed to the liberal
culture of the tobacco farms (Ortiz, 1963).9
   5
      Furthermore, even the identification of the historical natural experiment as a change in institution is often
debatable, as institutions generally reflect the cultural attitudes of the institution builders. Fischer (1989), for
instance, studies institution formation during the early immigration waves in North America, showing how the
cultural origins of the different groups of migrants (Puritans, Cavaliers, Quakers, Scots-Irish) affected the institu-
tions they set in place; see also the well-know analysis by Greif (1994) of the institutional set-up of the Genoese
and Maghrebi traders and Ben-Ner and Putterman (1998). The institutional changes in Medieval England from
the Magna Charta onwards, which arguably stand at the origin of British prosperity and the Industrial Revolution
(Acemoglu and Robinson, 2010) could also be attributed to a general bourgeois culture as forcefully argued by Mc-
Closkey (2006, 2010). The same can be said for the formation of Italian independent city states in the Renaissance
(Guiso, Sapienza, and Zingales, 2008 and 2016).
    6
      While the first example of such kind of analysis is perhaps Weber’s protestant ethic arguments (Weber, 1930),
recent examples include the effects of the slave trade on trust within african tribes differently exposed to it but
with similar institutional set-up (Nunn and Wantchekon, 2011); individual values about the scope of application
of norms of good conduct in Europe (Tabellini, 2008a).
    7
      See Alesina and Giuliano (2015) for a related argument, accompanied by a comprehensive survey of this
literature; along similar lines, see also Nunn (2012).
    8
      More recently, see e.g., Durante, Labartino, and Perotti, 2011, on university reform in Italy; Nannicini, Stella,
Tabellini, and Troiano, 2010 on voting reform again in Italy; Mauro and Pigliaru (2012) on how culture has different
effects when political institutions are centralized or decentralized; Grosjean (2011) on the traditonal (Scottish-Irish)
pastoral society honor code in the U.S.; Minasyan (2014) on the effects of development aid institutions depending
on donor-recipient cultural differences.
    9
      Even the presumption that culture is fundamentally immutable in the relevant time-frame, that is, chang-
ing at a much more slower pace than institutions, seems unfounded. Attitudes towards redistribution after the


                                                           2
    Motivated by (this reading of) this literature, therefore, we study socio-economic environments
in which culture and institutions jointly evolve and interact.10 Our objective is to develop an
abstract model of culture, institutions, and their joint dynamics. But while we aim at an abstract
model, we are not after full generality. Rather we aim at a simple model which could help identify
conditions under which the interaction of culture and institutions produces specific outcomes of
interest. In these environments the origin, and hence the causation, question loses most of its
interest: culture and institutions are jointly and endogenously determined and they jointly affect
economic growth and prosperity, indeed all sorts of economic activity.11 The focus is moved from
the cause (both culture and/or institution can have causal effects) to the process as determined
by the interaction.
    We characterize conditions under which cultural and institutional dynamics reinforce a specific
(e.g., desirable) socio-economic equilibrium pattern, and economies in which on the contrary the
interaction between culture and institutions ends-up weakening this equilibrium outcome. In
this context, we can define the cultural multiplier, as the ratio of the total effect of institutional
change divided and its direct effect, that is, the counterfactual effect which would have occurred
had the distribution of cultural traits in the population remained constant after the instritutional
change. We also show how the joint dynamics of culture and institutions may display non-ergodic
behavior, in which initial conditions determine important qualitative properties of their evolution,
including the stationary state the process converges to. Finally, we study how interesting examples
of hysteresis, oscillations, and comparative dynamics can emerge from the interaction of culture
and institutions.
    In specific example societies, we then study the sustainability of extractive institutions as
well as the formation of civic capital and of institutions protecting property rights. In a society
in which the elite is cultivating a differentiated value for leisure and is exercising its power by
institution of welfare states in Europe, for instance, (Alesina and Angeletos, 2005; Alesina and Giuliano, 2010)
and in East Germany after unification (Alesina and Fuchs Schuendeln, 2007) also changed very rapidly. So did
in various instances the applications of the honor code studied by Appiah (2010). This is also arguably the case
for social/civic/human capital after colonization (Glaeser, La Porta, Lopez-de-Silanez, Shleifer, 2004; Easterly and
Levine, 2012; and Bisin and Kulkarni, 2012) and for various social preferences after the creation of the Kuba King-
dom in the early 17th century Africa (Lowes et al., 2015). An example of a rapid joint change of institutions and
culture induce by pro-active policies is the case of the fight against corruption in Hong Kong in the last decades
which was driven by institutional change but engendered a deep modification of norms and attitudes towards
corruption in the population in just a few years (Clark, 1987 and 1989; see also Hauk and Saez-Marti’, 2002).
  10
     While the existing related theoretical literature is very thin, one such environment has been studied by Greif and
Tabellini (2010, 2011), where norms of cooperation (local vs. global) interact with institutional set-ups (informal
vs. formal, clan vs. cities) to determine distinct paths of economic activity (China vs. Europe). See also Birdner
and François (2011) for an analysis of how the size of gains from trade opportunities matters for the co-evolution
of institutions and honesty norms.
  11
     The quotation at the head of this section suggest this view has been shared by political scientists and social
philosophers since the early times of these disciplines.



                                                          3
extracting resources from the mass workers via taxation, we study the conditions under which
the cultural and institutional dynamics maintain or reverse extractive institutions. We show that,
in such society, depending on initial conditions, the elite might or might not have an interest
in establishing less-extractive institutions. When it does, it devolves part of the fiscal authority
to workers, to indirectly commit institutions to a lower tax rate (in turn inducing workers to
exert an higher labor effort and hence to contribute to fiscal authorities). We also show that, in
this society, culture and institutions are complements: institutional change devolving some fiscal
authority to the workers weakens the incentives of the elite to transmit its own leisure culture,
while in turn a smaller size of the elite augments its incentives to devolve fiscal authority to
workers.
    Our next example analyzes the case of a society where a fraction of the mass population
is endowed with a civic culture which induces actions that may have beneficial effects on the
functioning of public governance structures and on other members of the society. In such a
context, we study conditions under which the cultural and institutional dynamics favors or hinders
the spread of the civic culture. We show that, in this society, culture and institutions may
act as substitutes. Indeed, on the one hand, civic values are more likely to diffuse when the
degree of political representation given to the mass population increases; on the other hand, the
larger the diffusion of civic values in society, the smaller the need to design institutional changes
devolving formal power in a way that prevents the misgovernance of public policies. As it turns
out, an exogenous institutional change (democratization) enlarging political representation to a
mass population, may ends up having its effects mitigated by the induced civic culture diffusion
associated to this institutional shock.
    Finally, in a society where socio-economic interactions consist of conflictual relationships be-
tween groups with different propensions to act violently, we study conditions under which cultural
and institutional dynamics favors or hinders the development of a legal system for the protec-
tion of property rights. We show that, in this society, when the more conflict-prone agents are
powerful and institutions are stuck in their control, the cultural dynamics might work to un-do
this equilibrium, favoring first the spread of a conflict-prone culture until a threshold, after which
endogenous institutional dynamics are triggered which lead to the devolution of power, more
property rights protection and a long term disappearance of the conflict-prone culture.
    We proceed, in turn, with an abstract model of the dynamics of of institutions (Section 2) and
then with an abstract model of cultural evolution (Section 3). We then study the interaction of
the two (Section 4). Finally, we construct three simple examples aimed at illustrating the analyis
and the different forms of interactions (Section 5).




                                                  4
1.1    Culture and institutions: Conceptual frame
We conceptualize culture as preference traits, norms, and attitudes which can be transmitted
across generations by means of various socialization practices or can be acquired through socio-
economic interactions between peers. Models of the population dynamics of cultural traits along
these lines have been extensively studied in economics, e.g., by Bisin and Verdier in a series of
papers (1998, 2000a,b), 2001).12 The model of culture adopted in this paper conveniently remains
inside the confines of this literature.
    Less straightforwardly, we conceptualize institutions as mechanisms through which social
choices are delineated and implemented. This is in line with the recent work effort by Ace-
moglu, Johnson, and Robinson in various pathbreaking contributions,13 but it also diverges from
it in several ways. More specifically, e.g., in Acemoglu (2003) and in Acemoglu and Robinson
(2006), institutions coincide with the political pressure group exercising the power to control so-
cial choice; and institutional change represents an effective commitment mechanism on the part
of one political group to limit the extraction of resources from the others. With political power
and control embedded in one single group, institutional change is then the result of the voluntary
trasfer of power across groups, typically under threats of social conflict.14
    In this paper instead, while we share the view of institutional change as a commitment mech-
anism, we depart from the notion of political power and control as embedded in one single group.
Specifically, we model institutions as Pareto weights associated to the different groups in the so-
cial choice problem.15 This allows us to view institutional change as more incremental (formally,
a continuous rather than a discrete change in political control) than just revolutions and regime
changes.16 Most importantly, it also allows us to eschew relying necessarily on social conflict as
an explanation of institutional change: institutional change can much more generally occur as a
  12
      This literature builds on the work of Cavalli-Sforza and Feldman (1973, 1981) in evolutionary biology and of
Boyd and Richerson (1985) in anthropology; see Bisin and Verdier (2010) for a recent survey. For empirical work
using this framework, see Bisin and Topa (2003), Bisin, Topa and Verdier (2004), and more recently Giavazzi,
Petkov, and Schiantarelli (2014).
   13
      See Acemoglu, Johnson, and Robinson (2006) for a survey; see also Acemoglu, Egorov, and Sonin (2015).
   14
      Similarly, Besley and Persson (2009a,b, 2010) study a society with pressure groups alternating in the power
to control economic institutions regarding taxation and contractual enforcement. Along these lines, Angelucci and
Meraglia (2013) study charters to city states in the early Renaissance in Europe as concessions from the king to
citizens to check and control the extractive power of fiscal bureaucracies. Levine and Modica (2012) and Belloc
and Bowles (2012) take instead an alternative, explicitly evolutionary, approach to the dynamics of institutions.
   15
      See also Guimaraes and Sheedy (2016) who ground the study of institutions in the theory of coalition formation;
and Lagunoff (2009) who provides a general study of the theoretical properties of political economy equilibria with
dynamic endogenous institutions.
   16
      This approach is consistent with the view expanded by Mahoney and Thelen (2010) whereby institutional
change occurs through gradual and piecemeal changes that only ‘show up’ or ‘register’ as change if a somewhat long
time frame is considered. Mahoney and Thelen (2010) distinguish between four modal types of such institutional
change: displacement, layering, drift, and conversion.



                                                         5
mechanism to imperfectly and indirectly internalize the lack of commitment and the externalities
which plague social choice problems; social conflict being only one of them and not necessarily
the most prevalent in history.17


2        The society
Consider a society with a continuum of agents separated into distinct groups defined in terms
of relevant characteristics, i.e., political power and cultural traits.18 We shall assume first that
political and cultural groups are aligned and indexed by i ∈ I. In Section 4 and in several of
the examples in Section 5 we allow for groups which are distinct in terms of political power and
cultural traits (with no substantial effects on the general analysis). In this paper we also restrict
for simplicity to dychotomous groups, that is I = {1, 2}.19
    Let ai denote the action of an agent belonging to group i and a = {a1 , a2 } the vector profile
of actions, which we assume lies in some compact set. Let p denote economic policy in society,
also in some compact set.20
    We characterize culture in this society in terms of the distribution of the population by cultural
groups. Let q i denote the fraction of agents of group i in the population, with i∈I q i = 1. We
                                                                                    P

adopt the shorthand q 1 = q, q 2 = 1 − q.
    The preferences of the fraction of agents belonging to group (i) are represented by an indirect
utility function:

                                                 ui ai , p; a, q .
                                                                
                                                                                                                (1)

The dependence of ui on a captures indirectly any externality in the economy. The dependence of
ui on q captures instead indirectly the dependence of technologies and resources on the distribution
of the population by groups. A natural example would have the externality being represented by
the mean action in the population: A = qa1 + (1 − q)a2 .
    17
     Consinstently with this view, e.g., Lizzeri and Persico (2004) challenge Acemoglu and Robinson (2000, 2001,
2006) and Conley and Temimi (2001)’s rationalization of the extension of the franchise in early nineteenth century
England, as an effect of threats to the stablished order. They argue instead that such institutional change had
been motivated by the necessary evolution of public spending which required a commitment to limit particularistic
politics in favor of public programs.
  18
     Groups can of course be defined also in terms of resources, technologies, and so on. But we shall abstract from
these characteristics for simplicity in the paper.
  19
     With more than two groups the issue of coalition formation in institutional set-up and change becomes central.
We leave this for a subsequent paper. The dynamics of n ≥ 2 cultural traits has been studied by Bisin, Topa and
Verdier (2009) and Montgomery (2009).
  20
     Of course policies might be multi-dimensional, an extension we avoid for simplicity. Also, without loss of
generality we could add a parametrization of the component of economic institutions which acts directly on the
economic environment. We avoid clogging the notation when not necessary.



                                                         6
    We conceptualize institutions as mechanisms through which social choices are delineated and
implemented at equilibrium. Specifically, we model institutions as (Pareto) weights associated to
the different groups in the social choice problem which determines policy making at equilibrium.21
Let β i ≥ 0, denote the weight associated to group i, with i∈I β i = 1. Again, we adopt the
                                                              P

shorthand β 1 = β, β 2 = 1 − β.

2.1     Societal optimum and equilibrium
           ”[...] gli assai uomini non si accordano mai ad una legge nuova che riguardi uno nuovo ordine nella citta’

       se non e’ mostro loro da una necessita’ che bisogni farlo; e non potendo venire questa necessita’ sanza pericolo,

       e’ facil cosa che quella republica rovini, avanti che la si sia condotta a una perfezione d’ordine.”22 ; Niccolo’

       Machiavelli, Discorsi, I. 2, 1531.


    We introduce the concepts of social optimum and of equilibrium for our society, given insti-
tutions β and a distribution of the population by cultural group q.

Definition 1 The societal optimum is a tuple {aef f , pef f } such that:

                     {aef f , pef f } ∈ arg max β u1 a1 , p; a, q + (1 − β) u2 a2 , p; a, q .
                                                                                          
                                                                                                                           (2)

    The societal optimum is a normative concept. It will be generally unattainable at equilibrium
in our society. Two distinct equilibrium concept which will play a fundamental role in our analysis.

Definition 2 The societal equilibrium is a tuple {a, p} such that:

                           p ∈ arg maxp β u1 a1 , p; a, q + (1 − β) u2 a2 , p; a, q
                                                                                   
                                                                                      .                                    (3)
                           ai ∈ arg maxa ui (a, p; a, q) i ∈ I = {1, 2}

    That is, the societal equilibrium is a Nash equilibrium of the game between agents of the two
groups and the policy maker, in an institutional set-up characterized by weights β and distribution
by cultural group q.
    This simple formulation of the societal equilibrium captures lack of commitment on the part
of the policy maker, who is not allowed to pick the policy p in advance of the choices of the
economic agents.23 The appropriate equilibrium notion, in a society in which the policy maker
  21
     Importantly, we interpret the social choice problem not just normatively, but rather as the indirect choice
problem solved by the political process.
  22
     [...] the majority of people will never agree to a new institutional order for the city unless necessary; and since
necessity cannot come without danger, it is easily the case that institutions get into ruins before being perfected
in a new order; our translation.
  23
     No issues other than notational ones are involved in modeling a policy maker choosing after the economic
agents, thereby strengthening its lack of commitment.


                                                              7
has commitment is the societal commitment equilibrium. It is defined as the Stackelberg Nash
equilibrium of the same game, in which the policy maker is the leader.

Definition 3 The societal commitment equilibrium is a tuple {acom , pcom } such that:

                    {acom , pcom } ∈ arg max β u1 a1 , p; a, q + (1 − β) u2 a2 , p; a, q
                                                                                        
                                                                                           .                     (4)
                                   s.t. ai ∈ arg maxa ui (a, p; a, q) , i ∈ I = {1, 2}

   Under general conditions the societal optimum, the societal equilibrium, and the societal com-
mitment equilibrium are distinct. More precisely,

Proposition 1 Given institutions β and a distribution of the population by cultural group q, the
societal equilibrium and the societal commitment equilibrium are both weakly inefficient, that is,
they are weakly dominated by the societal optimum. On the other hand, the societal commitment
equilibrium weakly dominates the societal equilibrium.

    Proof. The statement is a straightforward consequence of the fact that, for any (β, q): i)
problem (4), which defines a societal commitment equilibrium , is a constrained version of problem
(2), which in turn defines a societal optimum; ii) any societal equilibrium satisfying (3) is always
contained in the constrained feasible set of problem (4), which defines a societal commitment
equilibrium.24                                                                                    

     Societal equilibrium is generally not efficient in this society. Furthermore, while its institu-
tional dynamics do drive society towards efficiency, it is not generally the case that institutions
are efficient in a stationary state. By combining the results of Proposition 1 and Proposition 3
we obtain that a stationary societal equilibrium at best constitutes a societal commitment equilib-
rium for some institutions. In particular, the societal commitment equilibrium will not represent
a societal optimum when the government policy p does not span the whole set of possible values of
the vector profile a. In other words, the institutional dynamics induces equilibria to tend towards
efficiency, but i) not generally all the way towards a societal optimal, and ii) to a specific point
of the attainable efficiency frontier (corresponding to a specific institutional set-up), that is, not
necessarily towards a Pareto improvement. Several of the examples we study clearly demonstrate
these points.
     Making the dependence on (β, q) explicit, the societal equilibrium, the societal commitment
equilibrium, and the societal optimum can be denoted, respectively:
                                                                   h                         i
                 [a(β, q), p(β, q)] ; [acom (β, q), pcom (β, q)] ; aef f (β, q), pef f (β, q) .
 24
      Of course, under robust conditions - in particular in all examples we study - domination holds strictly.




                                                          8
A simpler formulation of our analysis of the dynamics of institutions is obtained imposing the
following regularity assumptions.25

Assumption 1 Utility functions are sufficiently regular so that

                  a(β, q), p(β, q), acom (β, q), pcom (β, q) are continuous functions.



Assumption 2 Utility functions are sufficiently regular so that p(β, q) is monotonic in β.26

2.2    Institutional dynamics
In our formulation, turning to an explicit notation for time, a given current set of institutions
in period t, βt , induces the social preference order internalized by the policy maker at t. Future
political and economic institutions, βt+1 are designed, at the end of period t, to maximize the
current social preference order by means of future policy choices, at t + 1. We assume that
institutional design is myopic, that is, institutions are designed for the future as if they would
never be designed anew in the forward future.27
    More precisely, institutions at time t + 1 are designed at time t as a solution to:


                        max βt u1 a1 (βt+1 , qt+1 ), p(βt+1 , qt+1 ); a(βt+1 , qt+1 )
                                                                                       
                        βt+1

                     +(1 − βt ) u2 a2 (βt+1 , qt+1 ), p(βt+1 , qt+1 ); a(βt+1 , qt+1 ) ;
                                                                                      


That is, the societal equilibrium induced by institutions βt+1 at t + 1 is chosen to maximize the
social welfare induced by institutions set βt . The solution is characterized as follows:

Proposition 2 Under Assumptions 1-2, and given (qt , qt+1 ), the dynamics of institutions βt is
governed by the following implicit difference equation:
                   
                                    com
                    β
                     " such that p (βt , qt+1 ) = p(β, qt+1 )        if it exists
           βt+1 =              com
                        1 if p (βt , qt+1 ) > p(β, qt+1 ), ∀0 ≤ β ≤ 1              .        (5)
                   
                               com
                                                                      else
                        0 if p (βt , qt+1 ) < p(β, qt+1 ), ∀0 ≤ β ≤ 1
                   
  25
     Assumptions 1-2 are translated into obvious but stringent restrictions on fundamentals; see Appendix C for
details.
  26
     See the Appendix A for a formal generalization of the analysis when Assumption 2 is not imposed.
  27
     A greater degree of forward looking behavior when modeling institutional change is analytically intractable
when joined with cultural dynamics. For an analysis of forward looking institutional change per se, see Lagunoff
(2008), and Acemoglu, Egorov and Sonin (2015).




                                                        9
    At any time t, current institutions βt induce the choice p(βt , qt ) at equilibrium. But under the
current social preference order, the choice pcom (βt , qt ) would be the most preferred. Therefore,
institutions for time t + 1 are designed to induce a choice pcom (βt , qt+1 ) whenever possible at
equilibrium; that is, βt+1 is such that p(βt+1 , qt+1 ) = pcom (βt , qt+1 ). Whenever this is not possible,
under our assumptions, institutions will be designed which induce a policy choice p as close as
possible to pcom (βt , qt+1 ).
    To characterize the stationary states of the dynamics of institutions and their stability prop-
erties, it is convenient to define P (β, q) := pcom (β, q) − p(β, q).28 For a given society characterized
by institutions β and a distribution by cultural trait q, P (β, q) is an indicator of the extent of
the policy commitment problem faced by such society. Intuitively, the absolute value of P (β, q)
indicates the intensity of the commitment problem as it reflects the distance between what can
best be achieved under commitment and what is actually achieved at equilibrium. The sign of
P (β, q) on the other hand indicates the direction of the institutional change in β needed to resolve
the commitment problem.

Proposition 3 Under Assumption 1-2, and given q, the dynamics of institutions governed by
(5) have at least one stationary state. Any interior stationary state β ∗ obtains as a solution
to P (β, q) = 0. The boundary stationary state β = 1 obtains when P (β, q) |β=1 > 0; while the
boundary stationary state β = 0 obtains when P (β, q) |β=0 < 0.29 In the continuous time limit,
the dynamics governed by (5) satisfies the following properties:

- if P (β, q) > 0 for any β ∈ [0, 1], then β = 1 is a globally stable stationary state;

- if P (β, q) < 0 for any β ∈ [0, 1], then β = 0 is a globally stable stationary state;

- any boundary stationary state is always locally stable;
                                                                 ∂P (β ∗ ,q)
- any interior stationary state β ∗ is locally stable if            ∂β         < 0.



2.3    Cultural dynamics
Cultural transmission is modeled as the result of direct vertical (parental) socialization and hor-
izontal/oblique socialization in society at large. Direct vertical socialization to the parent’s trait
i ∈ I = {1, 2} occurs with probability di . If a child from a family with trait i is not directly
socialized, which occurs with probability 1 − di , he/she is horizontally/obliquely socialized by
  28
     We collect here the properties of (5) which are most relevant in our subsequent analysis. A more complete
global stability analysis is not particularly complex but tedious. We relegate it to Appendix B.
  29
     Note that we arbitrarily define β = 1 (resp. β = 0) as an interior stationary state if P (β, q i ) |β=1 = 0 (resp.
P (β, q i ) |β=0 = 0).




                                                          10
picking the trait of a role model chosen randomly in the population inside the political group
                                                                                       0
(i.e., he/she picks trait i with probability q i and trait i0 6= i with probability q i .
                   0
     If we let P ii denote the probability that a child, in (a family in) group i ∈ I is socialized to
trait i0 , we obtain:
                                            0                    0
                                        P ii = di + (1 − di )q i
               0
    Let V ii (β, q) denote the utility to a cultural trait i parent of a type i0 child. It depends on
the institutional set-up and the cultural distribution the child will face when he/she will make
                              0
his/her economic decision ai :
                                 0
                                              0                             
                             V ii (β, q) = ui ai (β, q), p(β, q); a(β, q), q                      (6)

Let C(di ) denote socialization costs. Direct socialization, for any i ∈ I = {1, 2}, is then the
solution to the following parental socialization problem:
                                                                          0    0
                                                               X
                                     max −C(di ) +                     P ii V ii (β, q)
                                    di ∈[0,1]
                                                               i0 ∈I
                                                         ii0                            0
                                                s.t. P         = di + (1 − di )q i
                                                                                    0
As usual in this literature, define ∆V i (β, q) = V ii (β, q) − V ii (β, q) as the cultural intolerance of
group i. It follows that direct socialization, with some notational abuse, has the form:

                               di = di (q, ∆V i (β, q)) = di (β, q), i ∈ I = {1, 2}.                  (7)

The following assumption simplifies the analysis.30

Assumption 3 Utility and socialization cost functions are sufficiently regular so that
   di = di (β, q) is continuous in (β, q), for any i ∈ I = {1, 2}.

   Let D(β, q) = d1 (β, q) − d2 (β, q). Turning again to the explicit notation for time t, the
dynamics of qt is straightforwardly determined.

Proposition 4 Under Assumption 3, and given βt+1 , the dynamics of the distribution by cultural
group qt is governed by the following difference equation:

                                      qt+1 − qt = qt (1 − qt )D(βt+1 , qt+1 ).                        (8)

The dynamics of qt governed by (8) have at least the two boundaries as stationary states, q = 0
and q = 1. Any interior stationary state 0 < q ∗ < 1 obtains as a solution to Di (β, q) = 0. In the
continuous time limit, the dynamics governed by (8) satisfies the following properties:
  30
       See the Online Appendix for the associated conditions on fundamentals.



                                                                11
- if D(β, q) > 0 for any q ∈ [0, 1], then qt converges to q = 1 from any initial condition q0 > 0;

- if D(β, q) < 0 for any q ∈ [0, 1], then qt converges to q = 0 from any initial condition q0 < 1;

- if D(β, 1) > 0, then q = 1 is locally stable ;

- if D(β, 0) < 0, then q = 0 is locally stable;
                                                           ∂D(β,q ∗ )
- any interior stationary state q ∗ is locally stable if     ∂q         < 0.


   It is often convenient to impose the following assumption (we do so in the examples as it
simplifies the study of of the dynamics of culture essentially without loss of generality).

Assumption 4 Socialization costs are quadratic:
                                                      1 i 2
                                           C(di ) =     d .
                                                      2


    The following corollary characterizes the resulting simplification:

Corollary 1 Under Assumption 4,

                             D(β, q) = ∆V 1 (β, q)q − ∆V 2 (β, q)(1 − q).

Given β, any interior stationary state q ∗ is obtained as a solution to:
                                          ∆V 1 (β, q)    q
                                             2
                                                      =     .                                   (9)
                                          ∆V (β, q)     1−q
With quadratic socialization costs an interior stationary state of the cultural dynamics has the
property that the relative share of the two groups in the population is equal to their relative
cultural intolerance; hence in particular, higher intolerance corresponds to a larger share at the
stationary state.


3    Joint evolution of culture and institutions
Under Assumptions 1-3, the joint dynamics of institutions and culture is governed by the system
(5,8), which we report here for convenience:

                     
                                    com
                      β
                      " such that p (βt , qt+1 ) = p(β, qt+1 )                if it exists,
            βt+1   =     1 if pcom (βt , qt+1 ) > p(β, qt+1 ), ∀0 ≤ β ≤ 1
                                                                              else
                         0 if pcom (βt , qt+1 ) < p(β, qt+1 ), ∀0 ≤ β ≤ 1
                     

       qt+1 − qt = q(1 − qt )D(βt+1 , qt+1 ).

                                                   12
Any interior stationary state of the system (5,8), (β ∗ , q ∗ ), solves:

                                            P (β, q) = D(β, q) = 0

Let β = β (q) be the steady state manifold associated with the first equation in (??) and q(β) be
the steady state interior cultural manifold associated with the second equation.
    Very little can be proved in general about the non-linear dynamical system (5,8); as a con-
sequence we will turn to phase-diagrams in specific examples. We can nonetheless show the
following:31

Proposition 5 Under Assumptions 1-3 the dynamical system (5,8) has at least one stationary
state.

    Let (β ∗ , q ∗ ) denote an interior stationary state of the dynamical system (5,8). To obtain a
more detailed analysis of the dynamics of the non-linear system (5,8) it is very useful to distin-
guish environments where culture and institutions are complements from those where they are
substitutes.32

Definition 4 Institutional and cultural dynamics are complementary, at (β ∗ , q ∗ ), when the steady
state manifolds β(q) and q(β) have slopes of the same sign:
                                                                 
                                 dβ(q)                        dq(β)
                          sign                       = sign                      .
                                  dq     (β ∗ ,q ∗ )           dβ    (β ∗ ,q ∗ )

Conversely they are substitutes at (β ∗ , q ∗ ) when the slopes have opposite signs.

    As it turns out, in fact, the existence of cycles in a neighborhood of a stationary state requires
some form of substituability in the dynamics of culture and substitution. In other words, sufficient
conditions to rule out oscillatory dynamics are characterized in the next two propositions, stated
for simplicity under the following separability condition on preferences:33

Assumption 5 Agents’ preferences satisfy

                                 ui ai , p; a, q i = v i ai , p) + H i (p; a, q i .
                                                                                


Proposition 6 Under Assumptions 1-5, at a locally stable interior steady state (β ∗ , q ∗ ), the
local dynamics show no converging cycles (dampening oscillations) if institutional and cultural
dynamics are complementary.
  31
     The proof is detailed in Appendix B.
  32
     To simplify the analysis we consider the continuous time limit of the system in what follows; see Appendix A
for details and a discussion.
  33
     See Appendix A for technical details.


                                                        13
    The existence of a stable spiral steady state requires that institutional and cultural dynamics
be substitutes and relative rates of change of culture and institutions which balance each other.34
A related complementarity condition rules out limit cycles (periodic orbits) in institutional and
cultural dynamics as an implication of the Bendixon Negative Criterion.

Proposition 7 Under Assumptions 1-5, there are no periodic orbits and limit cycles in the neigh-
borhood of at a locally stable interior steady state (β ∗ , q ∗ ) if: i) β ∗ is locally stable given q = q ∗ ;
and ii) q = q ∗ is locally stable given β = β ∗ .

3.1       The cultural multiplier
In this section we study more in detail the interaction between culture and institutions along
their dynamics, to identify conditions under which it produces specific outcomes of interest.
More specifically, we aim at conditions under which cultural and institutional dynamics reinforce
or hinder a specific socio-economic equilibrium pattern, e.g., induced by an exogenous shock to
the dynamical system. To this end, we introduce and study the concept of cultural (resp. in-
stitutional ) multiplier, the ratio of the long run change in institutions (resp. culture) relatively
to the counterfactual long run change that would have happened had the cultural composition
(resp. institutional set-up) of society remained fixed. In fact, motivated by the literature dis-
cussed in the Introduction, which mostly stresses the economic effects of institutions for given
cultural composition, we shall concentrate on the cultural multiplier, under the understanding
that symmetric arguments and conditions hold for the institutional multiplier.
    Consider the effects of a change in a parameter γ at a stable interior stationary state of the
dynamics, (β ∗ , q ∗ ) ∈ (0, 1)2 . Adding explicit reference to γ in the notation, we normalize the
arbitrary components of the comparative dynamics environment we study so that:

 γ increases, locally at the steady state, both the policy p as well as the extent of the commitment
      problem:
                                  dpcom (β ∗ , q ∗ ; γ)   dp(β ∗ , q ∗ ; γ)
                                                        >                   > 0;
                                         dγ                    dγ
 members of group 1 (with institutional power β) aim at a relatively larger policy level, p:
                                                     ∂p(β ∗ , q ∗ ; γ)
                                                                       > 0.
                                                         ∂β

    As a consequence, a positive change in γ induces a process of convergence to a new steady
state characterized by a larger
                             ∗societal
                                       equilibrium policy p (through a larger β); that is, in the
                              dβ
absence of cultural change, dγ       ∗
                                       > 0.
                                          q=q
    The cultural multiplier measures the strength of the interaction between culture and institu-
tions.
  34
       See Appendix A for precise conditions ensuring converging oscillations towards the steady state:


                                                          14
Definition 5 The cultural multiplier on institutional change, at a locally stable interior steady
state (β ∗ , q ∗ ), is               ∗  ∗
                                      dβ        dβ
                              m=            /             − 1.                               (10)
                                      dγ         dγ q=q∗

    A positive cultural multiplier reinforces the effect of a change in institutions at a socio-
economic equilibrium. Whether the multiplier is indeed positive, in turn, crucially depends on
culture and institutions being complements or substitutes:

Proposition 8 Under Assumptions 1-4 at a locally stable interior steady state (β ∗ , q ∗ ), the cul-
tural multiplier m is positive (resp. negative) if and only if the institutional and cultural dynamics
are complementary (resp. substitute).

    When the slopes of β (q) and q(β) have the same sign, institutional and cultural dynamics are
complementary and the cultural multiplier is positive. As an illustration, suppose that culture
and institutions are complements in the sense that dβ(q)        dq(β)
                                                       dq and dβ > 0. Then in our environment
an increase in γ is set to induce an increase in β. Because of complementarity, this in turn
induces an increase in q which feedbacks positively on the institutional weight β. Any exogenous
institutional change, through an increase in γ, is amplified by the associated cultural dynamics
that interact with institutions. Conversely, an institutional change would be hindered by cultural
changes (i.e., the cultural multiplier is negative) when culture and institution are substitutes,
that is, when the slopes of β (q) and q(p) have opposite signs.
    A better intuition for the mechanisms driving complementarity, and hence the sign of the
cultural multiplier, can be developed under Assumption 5. In this case, the complementarity
condition on the slopes of β (q) and q(β), can be shown to require that35
                                                             ∆V 1 (p)
                                     ∂P (β ∗ , q ∗ )     d   ∆V 2 (p)
                                                     ,                  have the same sign.
                                         ∂q                   dp
                   ∗   ∗
The term ∂P (β∂q ,q ) reflects how the institutional commitment problem is affected by a change
of the distribution by cultural groups. Institutional change represents a mechanism to solve the
commitment problem and therefore to induce an increase in the societal equilibrium policy p. This
is obtained by giving more institutional weight to the group supporting relatively more the policy
p, that is, by increasing β (given our normalization of the comparative dynamics environment).
                               ∆V 1 (p)
                           d
                               ∆V 2 (p)
Conversely, the term     dp    reflects how a change in the equilibrium policy p affects the dynamics
of the distribution of the population by cultural group. A higher p is associated to a larger steady
state frequency of the trait that is relatively more in favor of that policy, that is, an increase in q.
    The cultural multiplier governs the effects of the interaction between culture and institutions
on an aggregate economic variable of interest, e.g., per capita income, public good provision, or
 35
      See Appendix A for details.


                                                                   15
any other measure of economic activity. Let A(p, q, a1 (p), a2 (p)) formally denote the economic
aggregate. A cultural multiplier on A can then be defined as
                                               
                                         dA    dA
                                   mA =     /            − 1.
                                         dγ     dγ q=q∗

In Appendix B we decompose mA , and show that it is a proportional to 1 + m,

                                             mA = K · (1 + m)

where the coefficient of proportionality K depends on three components: the compositional cul-
tural effect of q on A(.), the full effect of the policy p on A(.), and the sensitivity of the equilibrium
policy p(β, q) to cultural change.


4    Distinct political and cultural types
In this section we extend our analysis to consider a society in which political and cultural groups
are distinct. Let i ∈ I index the political groups and j ∈ J the cultural groups. Let aij denote the
action of agents of subgroup (i, j) and a = {aij }i,j the vector profile of actions. Let q ij denote the
distribution of the population by cultural group and by q = {q ij }i,j the vector profile satisfying
satisfies j∈J q ij = 1, for i ∈ I. Let λi denote the fraction of agents in political group i. Utility
           P

functions are then written uij aij , p; a, q .
                                               

     In this society, we continue to identify political institutions with the weights of the groups i ∈ I
in the social choice problem which determines economic policy, β = {β i }i satisfying i∈I β i = 1.
                                                                                           P

     As for cultural transmission, we assume for simplicity that political groups are perfectly
segregated, so that the reference population for an agent in subgroup (i, j) is the subgroup itself.
Fixing a political group i ∈ I, direct vertical socialization to the parent’s trait, say j ∈ J, occurs
                                             0
with probability dij ; Pti,jj (resp. Pti,jj ) denote the probability that a child, in (a family in)
political group i ∈ I with trait j is socialized to trait j (resp. j 0 ) at t; V i,jj (βt+1 , qt+1 ) (resp.
      0
V i,jj (βt+1 , qt+1 )) denotes the utility to a cultural trait j parent in political group i of a type j
(resp. j 0 ) child.
     It is then straightforward to extend the analysis of the previous sections to this society, with
distinct political and cultural groups, to obtain the following system for the joint dynamics of
culture and institutions:

                       
                       
                        "   β such that pcom (βti , qt+1 ) − p(β, qt+1 )               if it exists,
              i                         com  i
             βt+1    =         1 if p (βt , qt+1 ) > p(β, qt+1 ), ∀0 ≤ β ≤ 1
                                                                                       else
                               0 if pcom (βti , , qt+1 ) < p(β, qt+1 ), ∀0 ≤ β ≤ 1
                       
                                                  0
                                                     
        ij
       qt+1 − qtij   = q ij (1 − qtij ) dij − dij , with dij = dij (qt , ∆V ij (βt+1 , qt+1 )).

                                                      16
5        Specific example societies
In this section we work out several specific example societies, simple but rich enough to display
some interesting cultural and institutional dynamics.36

5.1      Elites, workers, and extractive institutions
In this example we study extractive institutions, that is, a society where the power of a political
group is exercised by extracting resources from the other group, e.g., via taxation. We study in
particular conditions under which the cultural and institutional dynamics in this society maintain
or reverse its extractive character.
    Consider a society populated by two groups, workers and members of the elite, with dis-
tinct cultural traits and technologies. In particular, the preferences of the members of the elite
are shaped by cultural norms which let them value leisure greatly, more than workers. Hence
in equilibrium, while both the elite and workers are endowed with the same technology which
transforms labor into private consumption goods, workers will work and the elite will generally
eschew labor and constitute a leisure class. In this society, taxes on labor income finance public
good consumption, which is valued by both groups. But since members of the elite do not work,
(fiscal) institutions are extractive in that only workers bear the fiscal weight of the public good.
    Institutions lack commitment; that is, fiscal authorities choose the tax rate without internal-
izing its effect on workers’ labor effort. This gives institutions generally an incentive to tax labor
excessively. As a consequence, in this society, the elite might have an interest in establishing
less-extractive institutions, by devolving part of the fiscal authority to workers. This would indi-
rectly commit institutions to a lower tax rate, in turn inducing workers to exert an higher labor
effort and hence to contribute more to the public good. Indeed, we will show that, in this society,
culture and institutions are complements: institutional change devolving some fiscal authority to
the workers weakens the incentives of the elite to transmit its own culture and hence reduces the
size of the leisure class, while in turn a smaller leisure class augments the incentives of the elite
to devolve fiscal authority to workers.
    Formally, let workers be group i = 1 and the elite be i = 2. Both groups can transform labor
one-for-one into private consumption goods. Let ai denote labor exerted by any member of group
i. Let s denote the initial resources all agents are endowed with. Let p denote the (income) tax
rate and G the public good provided by fiscal institutions. Preferences for group i are represented
by the following utility function37 :

                         ui ai , G, p = u ai (1 − p) + s + θi v(1 − ai ) + Ω · G.
                                                       

    36
     In all the examples we impose and exploit various regularity conditions without explicit mentioning them. We
discuss however all the details in the Online Appendix.
  37
     u(.) and v(.) are concave increasing function with sufficient regularity. See the Online Appendix for details.


                                                        17
    Our characterization of the distinction between workers and the elite just in terms of cultural
values requires that:38

 the parameter θi , representing the preference for leisure, satisfies θ1 < θ2 .

    To better illustrate the dynamics of culture and institutions in this society we consider extreme
                                             0 (s)
preferences for leisure of the elite, θ2 > uv0 (1) > 1 = θ1 . In this case, members of the elite never
work, a2 = 0, and consume their resources, s. Workers instead exert some effort level a1 > 0 and
consume in fact a1 + s units of the private consumption good. Both groups consume the public
good G, in an amount equal the tax burden, to balance the budget of the fiscal institutions:
G = p a1 q + a2 (1 − q) where q is again the fraction of workers type i = 1.
                       

    The societal equilibrium and the societal commitment equilibrium are then easily character-
ized, for any institutional set-up, β, and distribution of the society by cultural traits, q. Equi-
librium policies, that is, tax rate p, are as in Figure 1. Consider first the societal equilibrium.
Typically, for β small enough, β ≤ β(q), all policies p inducing no labor effort are a societal equi-
librium. In this case, workers have so little power that the natural ex post incentive is to tax them
to the extent that they do not provide any labor supply, p ≥ p0 . On the contrary, for β ≥ β(q),
workers have effectively control of the fiscal authority. In this case, labor income is either not
taxed (if β > β(q)); or else it is taxed only inasmuch as it is necessary to finance the amount of
public good preferred by workers themselves, p∗ (in this last case β = 1). For intermediate values
                   
of β ∈ β(q), β(q) , the societal equilibrium policy p(β, q) takes interior values and is a decreasing
function of β. The ex-post incentives to finance the public good through labor income taxes are
lower when the workers’ interest are better represented.
    In the societal equilibrium, the policy maker does not internalize the negative distortion of
taxation on the tax base. Hence taxes at a societal equilibrium are systematically (and ineffi-
ciently) higher than at the societal commitment equilibrium where such effect is internalized. The
societal commitment equilibrium, pcom (β, q), more specifically, is also a decreasing function of β,
always smaller than the tax rate pmax which maximizes tax revenue. Furthermore, pcom (β, q) = 0
when β is larger than the threshold β(q) (or pcom (β, q) = p∗ if β(q) = 1). Most importantly,

                                 pcom (β, q) < p(β, q), ∀β < β(q), 0 < q < 1.
 38
      In the next subsection, we also some distinction in terms of initial resource endowment.




                                                         18
                                             p
                                      1


                                    p0                           p, q




                                                 p com , q

                                                                                               
                                         0        q                     q        1


                                Fi
                                Figure 1:
                                       1     Elites,
                                             Elit Workers,
                                                     W k      and
                                                                d Extractive
                                                                   E t ti Institutions
                                                                               I tit ti
                                             Equilibrium Policies and Institutional Dynamics




Institutional dynamics. The institutional dynamics tend to internalize the inefficiency of the so-
cietal equilibrium which is due to lack of commitment, for any given cultural distribution in the
population q. In this society, therefore, fixing 0 < q < 1, for any β < β(q), the institutional
dynamics tend towards increasing the fiscal authority of workers, that is towards increasing β.
This leads to reducing the excessive (and inefficient) tax rate p until it is optimal for the workers
to do so. At the stationary equlibrium, therefore, all fiscal authority ends up effectively in the
hands of workers.39 Importantly, the public good consumption G∗ , at the stationary equilibrium,
is efficient. It is the preferred level under the stationary institutional set-up β ∗ (which effec-
tively does not account for the preferences of the elite), but it does not generally constitute a
Pareto improvement with respect to the equilibrium level of public good associated to the initial
institutional set-up (which does account for the preferences of the elite).

Cultural dynamics. For every value of β the cultural dynamics tend to an interior stationary state
q(β), whereby q increases when q < q(β) and decreases instead when q > q(β). In other words,
given the institutional set-up, both group tend to engage in more intense cultural transmission
when their trait is relatively minoritarian in society.40 Furthermore, the relative incentives to
 39
      Even though β < 1, an higher β would have no effect on equilibrium policies.
 40
      This is the case when transmission is driven by cultural substitution; see Bisin and Verdier (2001) and (2010)


                                                            19
socialization ∆V 1 (p)/∆V 2 (p) are decreasing in p. Indeed, as taxation leads to increased rent
extraction on labor, leisure class norms are more likely to be transmitted than those of the
workers: the larger the rents of the elites, the larger their socialization advantage.

Joint evolution of culture and institutions. The joint cultural and institutional dynamics of this
society are concisely represented in the phase diagram in Figures 2a) and 2b). The curve along
which β is constant, β(q), is weakly increasing in q: to a larger fraction of the workers’ trait
in the distribution,(i.e., a larger q), is associated a (weakly) larger β in the long run dynamics
of institutions. Indeed, the larger is q, the larger are the incentives of the elite to extract re-
sources from workers by taxing labor income. Consequently a larger fiscal authority to workers
is necessary to reach their most preferred tax rate. At the stationary state all fiscal authority
is effectively devolved to the workers, p = 0, and no public good is consumed in the society, G = 0.



                      
                                                B
                       1
                                                                    
                                                                   q
                                                    A



                                                        q

                                                                q



                                                                            q
                      0                         qA                        1
                       Figure 2a:    Elites, workers, and Extractive Institutions
                                      Joint Dynamics (case a: G* = 0)




for, respectively, the underlying conceptual analysis and for a survey of the empirical evidence with respect to
several cultural traits.




                                                        20
                            
                                                                   A
                            1
                                                                            
                                                                           q


                                                          q

                                                                       q



                                                                                    q
                            0                                 qA                  1
                            Figure 2b:      Elites, workers, and Extractive Institutions
                                            Joint Dynamics (case b: G* > 0)



    The curve along which q is constant, q(β), is also weakly increasing in β: more fiscal authority
to workers leads to a lower equilibrium tax on labor p and therefore to an increase in the prevalence
of the workers’ cultural trait in the population in the long run dynamics of culture. Indeed, the
lower is the tax rate, the higher are the relative gains of workers in the socialization process.
    Since both β(q) and q(β) are increasing, culture and institutions are cultural complements in
this society, reinforcing each other: the cultural multiplier is positive (Proposition 8). Further-
more, the joint evolution of culture and institutions displays a unique ergodic stationary state.
The parameter configuration of the society determines whether any of the public good is provided
in the long run, that is whether the society is in case a) or b) in shown in Figures 2a) and 2b).41
In either case, however, extractive institutions are undermined by their own inefficiency (due to
the lack of commitment of the policy maker). The transition away from extractive institutions is
inevitable, from any initial condition.42
  41
      Formally, case a) without long run provision of G holds when β(q A ) ≤ 1, while case b) with long run provision
of G holds when β(q A ) > 1.
   42
      The mechanism driving the dynamics of institutions is distinct from the one stressed by Acemoglu (2003),
Acemoglu and Robinson (2006, 2010) and Acemoglu, Johnson, and Robinson (2006). In our society, the transition
is triggered independently of any technology on the part of the workers to threaten, e.g., by means of a revolution,
the power of the aristocrats. Furthermore, in this society, extractive institutions are not stable, independently of


                                                         21
5.1.1    The transition away from extractive institutions.

In the society we have just studied in the previous section, the elites’ lack of commitment leads
to very inefficient equilibrium outcomes when the elites themselves control the institutional set-
up. As a consequence the joint dynamics of culture and institutions necessarily drive the society
towards less extractive institutions where fiscal authority is devolved mostly (or even completely,
in some parameters’ configurations) to workers. In this section we study a simple extension of
this society with the objective of providing a more articulate and interesting representation of
the transition away from extractive institutions, one which delves more deeply into the cultural
preferences and the incentives of the elites.
    Consider a society alike to the one studied in the previous section except in that i) a fraction
of the members of the elite hold a cultural trait which specifies work-ethic norms akin to those of
the workers, rather than those of the leisure class;43 ii) workers are not endowed with an initial
endowment of resources, they can only consume off their production; iii) workers face a survival
constraint, a minimum level of consumption necessary for survival. Furthermore, in the society
we study in this section, taxes are not raised to finance the public good but are instead purely
extractive, being redistributed pro-capita to the members of the elite.44
    As in the previous section, the elites, as a political group, have the power of taxing workers,
but cannot commit ex-ante to a tax rate. In this society, however, their incentives and preferences
are heterogeneous: the members of the elite who share work-ethic norms (the bourgeois) are more
aligned with workers’ interests than those who do not (the aristocrats). Depending on their
distribution by cultural trait and the political control they exert on the fiscal authority in society,
the elites might impose a tax rate such that workers are constrained to subsistence (an extractive
regime).45
    The institutional dynamics of this economy will in general be non-ergodic, depending crucially
on initial conditions. Only when the initial institutional set-up guarantees enough control on fiscal
authority on the part of the workers, the institutional dynamics will tend to transition away from
the extractive regime. Interestingly, this transition will generally induce the formation of a sizeable
bourgeoisie. As well, it is also the case that a larger bourgeoisie at the initial conditions favors
the transition away from the extractive regime.
    The detailed analysis of this society follows. Workers, group i = 1, are in proportion 1 − λ
the population distribution between workers and elites. In particular, this is the case even if the relative power of
workers is unaffected by their relative size (or even relative income) in society.
  43
     Note that in this society, therefore, political groups (workers and elites) are not aligned with cultural groups
(bourgeois and aristocrats, inside the elite). The example is then a special case of the class of societies introduced
in Section 5 and therefore follows the notational structure laid out there.
  44
     This is not substantial to the analysis. It is just for the sake of variation.
  45
     The survival constraint can be binding only for workers, as members of the elites are endowed with initial
resources which we postulate are enough for survival.



                                                         22
and members of the elites, group i = 2, in proportion λ. Members of the elite carry one of two
possible cultural traits, j = a, b: i) the bourgeois, in proportion q 2b = q of the total elite size λ,
have the same preferences as workers; ii) the aristocrats are instead in proportion q 2a = 1 − q of
the elite and have preferences with extreme disutility for work.
    All agents have preferences over a consumption good cij and labor effort aij , where i = 1, 2
indexes the group and j the cultural trait.46 The production technology converts effort one-to-
one in the consumption good. Let β 1 = β denote the institutional weight of the workers, and
p, the policy choice, represent the tax rate on workers’ output, a1 . Let T denote the lump sum
fiscal transfer received by each member of the elite, by budget balance. Let finally c denote the
subsistence level required for survival. .
    Preferences are represented by the following utility functions, respectively for workers and
elites:
                        u1 (a1 , T 1 , p) = u a1 (1 − p) + s1 + T 1 + θ1 v(1 − a1 )
                                                                   

                         u2j (a2j , T 2 , p) = u a2j + s2 + T 2 + θ2j v(1 − a2j )
                                                               

   Our characterization of the distinction between the political groups (workers and elites) and
the cultural groups (bourgeois and aristocrats) in terms of cultural values and technologies re-
quires that:

 the parameter θ2j , representing the preference for leisure of the elites, satisfies θ2a > θ2b = θ1 ;

 initial resources si satisfy: s1 = 0, s2 = s > c ;

 tax transfers T i satisfy T 1 = 0, T 2 = T .
                                                                                                    0
    Again we assume that the aristocrats have extreme preferences for leisure θ2a > uv0 (1)
                                                                                        (s)
                                                                                            > 1 = θ1
so that again they never work, a2a = 0.
    In this society, the labor effort exerted by workers, a1 (p), is non-monotonic in the tax rate p,
depending on whether the survival constraint is binding, as shown in Figure 3. When the survival
constraint is not binding, a1 (p) is decreasing in p, because of the disincentive effects of the tax
rate on effort.
 46
      Abusing notation the apex j is omitted for workers, i = 1, since they are culturally homogeneous.




                                                         23
                   a 1 p
                          1

                    a 1op 0




                                   c                     a 1op p
                                  1−p

                              0                                              p
                                                    p         1−c
                              Figure 3: Transition away from extractive institutions
                                                   Worker’s effort


                                                                                             c
     When instead the survival constraint is binding (in the extractive regime),47 a1 (p) = 1−p for p ∈
                       1
 p, 1 − c] ; that is, a (p) is increasing in p. As for the labor effort choice of the bourgeoisie,
[b
a2b (T ) ≥ 0 is decreasing in the transfer level T . Aristocrats continue not exerting any effort (for
any value of T ≥ 0). The per-capita fiscal transfer to the members of the elite is set to balance
the budget of the fiscal institutions: T =: 1−λλ pa .
                                                     1

     The societal equilibrium policy p(β, q), and the societal commitment policy pcom (β, q) are
illustrated in Figure 4. When the institutional weight of the workers is low enough, below a
threshold β(q), at the societal equilibrium, the fiscal authorities tax the workers to a level that
forces them to an extractive regime where the survival constraint c is binding.48 Indeed, when
workers are at the survival constraint, more extractive institutions will not necessarily reduce their
labor effort, as workers will always have to exert enough effort to satisfy the survival constraint.
On the other hand, when workers are not at survival, the elites might have an incentive to
establish less-extractive institutions, to indirectly commit on a lower tax rate, in turn inducing
workers to extend an higher production effort, as in the society studied in the previous section. If
  47
    The policy space is assumed bounded in such a way as to always make survival of the workers feasible.
  48
    The maximal feasible tax rate is p = 1 − c. At this rate workers have to supply their full time endowment
a1 = 1 to maintain their consumption level at the survival limit.



                                                        24
workers are sufficiently powerful, therefore, their behavior is the same as in the previous section:
                                                     
p(β, q) > 0 , and declining in β, for β ∈ β(q), β(q) ; while p = 0 for β ≥ β(q).




                                                p com ,
                                                       q
                                p                                     p, q
                            1−c

                                                                                      Extractive
                              pe                                                       Regime


                               
                               p
                                                                                       Non Extractive
                                                                                         Regime


                                    0          e q
                                                        ̂
                                                          q         q
                                                                          1

                          Fi
                          Figure 4:
                                 4 Transition
                                    T     iti away from
                                                     f     extractive
                                                              t ti institutions
                                                                       i tit ti
                                    Equilibrium policies and institutional dynamics




    As the societal equilibrium policy, the optimal policy at the societal equilibrium with commit-
ment, is decreasing in the fiscal authority of workers β and is = 0 when β ≥ β(q). Furthermore,
when β is small enough, pcom (β, q) is also high enough so that workers are kept at subsistence
and the societal equilibrium with commitment is in the extractive regime. The transition away
from the extractive regime occurs at β = β̂(q) at the societal equilibrium with commitment, a
lower β than at the societal equilibrium, as in the first case the distortionary effects of taxation
are internalized.
    Not surprisingly, when the optimal policy at the societal equilibrium with commitment induces
a non-extractive regime, β > β̂(q), it is the case that pcom (β, q) < p(β, q). Indeed, without
commitment the fiscal authorities do not internalize the negative effect of taxation on the tax
base and therefore induce an equilibrium tax that is inefficiently high. This is not the case,
however in the extractive regime. In this regime, in fact the effect of taxation on the effort of
workers (and therefore on the tax base) is positive. This tends to make the societal equilibrium
policy p(β, q) too low compared to the societal equilibrium policy with commitment pcom (β, q).
On the other hand, in this regime it is also the case that the fiscal authorities do not internalize


                                                  25
the fact that a larger value of p makes workers deviate more from their optimal effort choice in
order to satisfy their survival constraint. Such distortionary effect on workers’ welfare tends to
make p(β, q) too high compared to pcom (β, q). When β is very low, the distortionary effect on
the workers’ welfare dominates: indeed pressed by a high value of p, workers have to choose a1
very close to the maximal possible value, in order to satisfy their survival constraint. The welfare
distortionary of the survival constraint on the workers’ labor supply is therefore maximal and
p(β, q) is too high compared to pcom (β, q). As β increases, the positive effect of p on the tax base
kicks in and turns to be larger, so that pcom (β, q) >    p(β, q).
                                                                  By continuity of the equilibrium
policy functions p(β, q) and p (β, q) in the range 0, β̂(q) , there is a point β = β e (q) where
                                 com

the two curves cross, as depicted in Figure 4. But as β increases even more, to the point where
the fiscal authorities select taxes p which do not constrain workers at survival, the distortionary
effects of taxation turn to have the negative usual impact on the tax base. As we noted, in fact, in
this case, pcom (β, q) < p(β, q) (it turns out that this happens discountinuously, as in the figure).

Institutional dynamics. From the previous discussion, the non-ergodic behavior of the institu-
tional dynamics is clear. Fixing a cultural distribution 0 < q < 1, for all initial value β0 ∈ [0, β̂(q)),
the institutional dynamics converge to a unique steady state β = β e (q) and the society ends up
in an extractive regime with low political representation of the workers who are maintained at
their survival constraint by extractive taxation on the part of the elites.49 Conversely for initial
values β0 ∈ (β̂(q), β(q)], the institutional dynamics are very different. The weight of the workers
on the institutional setting converge to the unique steady state β = β(q), characterized by no
taxation, in a non-extractive regime.50
  49
      Interestingly in the extractive regime, higher taxation may actually increase the efficiency of the rent extraction
process as the survival constraint prevents the traditional disincentives on labor supply to kick in. This local effect
is arguably instrumental in maintaining such an extractive regime for workers. This is reminiscent of an argument
in Clark (2009, chapter 2), suggesting that policies that would otherwise appear as having inefficiency costs in a
non extractive world, on the contrary may find some efficiency rationale under extractive conditions.
   50
      The dynamics from β0 = β̂(q) are indetermined. Also, for initial values β0 > β(q), the institutional weight of
the workers is already large enough to induce no taxation and therefore no distortions. Institutions do not change
and stay at their initial value βt = β0 for all t > 0.




                                                           26
                            
                                                    B
                            1
                                   q

                                                        A
                           ∗
                                   ̂ q                                         q
                                 e q
                           e
                                             E



                            0               qe      q∗                  1     q

                                Fi
                                Figure 5:
                                       5 Transition
                                          T     iti away from
                                                         f    extractive
                                                                t ti institutions
                                                                         i tit ti
                                          Joint dynamics




Cultural dynamics.       The dynamics of cultural evolution within the elite are driven by the
relative incentives to socialization ∆V b (p)/∆V a (p), which is generally51 decreasing in p. Indeed,
aristocratic norms are more likely to be transmitted than those of the bourgeoisie the larger the
rents of the elites. Since equilibrium taxation is a decreasing function of the institutional weight
of workers, β, the more fiscal authority the workers possess in society, the larger the diffusion of
(the norms of) the bourgeoisie inside the elite, and hence in society.

Joint evolution of culture and institutions. The joint cultural and institutional dynamics of this
society are concisely represented in the phase diagram in Figure 5. The relevant portion of the
institutional stationary manifold β(q) is decreasing in q: in this society, in fact, the workers
are at least in part supported by the bourgeoisie in their preferences over fical policy and as
a consequence, when the fraction of the elite with bourgeois values is larger, the institutions
support a no-tax policy even with less power to the workers. The cultural stationary manifold,
q(β) ∈ (0, 1), is instead as in the society studied in the previous section: an upward sloping curve
in the region β ∈ [0, β(q)] and a vertical line q = q ∗ in the region β ≥ β(q) for which there is no
  51
    More precisely, this is the case when the tax rate pb at which an extractive regime is triggered is below the tax
rate that maximizes total tax revenues.



                                                            27
redistribution, T = p = 0. This is essentially for the same reasons: a higher β leads to a lower p
and hence to greater socialization gains to the bourgeoisie and greater q in the long run.
    Differently from the case of the society studied in the previous section, therefore, culture and
institutions are not cultural complements in this society. Furthermore, the joint evolution of
culture and institutions does not display a unique stationary state, but rather two: an extractive
state, (β e , q e ), and a stationary state with no-tax, characterized by β ≥ β ∗ and q = q ∗ .
    The dynamics of culture and institutions in this society will in general be non-ergodic: which
stationary state they will converge to in the long-run depends on initial conditions. A transition
away from extractive institutions is not inevitable in this society, as higher taxes do not decrease
the fiscal rents of the elites when workers are at or around the survival constraint. Extractive
institutions are therefore not any more undermined by their own inefficiency and could be sup-
ported in the long-run. Whether extractive institutions are supported in the long-run, or whether
the dynamics transition away, depends on the political control the elites exert on the fiscal au-
thority in society, but also on their distribution by cultural trait (that is, the relative size of the
bourgeoisie, which is partly aligned with workers’ interests). When the initial institutional set-up
ensures enough control on fiscal authority on the part of the workers, the dynamics will tend to
transition away from the extractive regime. But a larger bourgeoisie at the initial conditions also
favors the transition away from the extractive regime. Formally, the basin of attraction of the
(β ≥ β ∗ , q ∗ ) stationary states comprises all (β, q) strictly above the line β(q).
                                                                                b     It is larger in β for
higher q and it is also larger in q for higher β.
    Importantly, even though culture and institutions are not cultural complements in this society,
along a transition away from extractive institutions, with a powerful elites and small bourgeoisie
(that is, in the region above β̂(q) and on the left of q(β) in Figure 5, the dynamics display the
devolution of power to workers jointly with the formation of a sizeable bourgeoisie (β and q both
increase along the path).

5.2    Civic Culture and institutions
In this example we study civic culture, that is, a society where a fraction of the population
is endowed with intrinsic motivations which induce actions that may have beneficial effects on
other members of the society. We study in particular conditions under which the cultural and
institutional dynamics in this society favors or hinders the spread of the civic culture.52
    Consider a society populated by two groups, workers and members of the elite, as in the
previous example. Both workers and members of the elite are endowed with the same technology
which transforms labor into private consumption goods. Fiscal institutions collect lump-sum
taxes to finance the provision of a public good, whose consumption is valued by both groups. The
  52
    See also Ticchi,Verdier and Vindigni (2013), and Besley and Persson (2016) for specific analyses of the inter-
actions between political culture and political institutions.



                                                       28
provision of the public good, however, creates opportunities for corruption that benefit exclusively
the elite. We can therefore think of the elite as of a caste of bureaucrats. The preferences of a
fraction of the workers are shaped by a civic culture, which motivates them to exert a participation
effort, complementary to the provision of the public good, as well as a monitoring effort to
fight corruption, costly to the elite. Civic participation involves e.g.,contributing privately to
public goods, creating social associations, volunteering in social activities. Civic control creates
transparency, by monitoring the government in its public good provision process.
    In this society, therefore, public good provision is associated to different externalities on
society. On the one hand, it stimulates the civic participation of a fraction of the workers, a
positive externality on society as a whole. On the other hand, public good provision induces
corruption and the reaction of a fraction of workers against it, a positive externality on workers
with no civic culture and a negative externality on the elite.
    Institutions lack commitment; that is, fiscal authorities choose lump-sum taxes to finance
public good provision without internalizing the effects of civic culture in society. Public good
provision can be larger or smaller at equilibrium than efficient, depending on whether the posi-
tive or the negative externalities of civic culture dominate. As a consequence, the institutional
dynamics lead to a stationary balanced allocation of power between workers and the elite.
    Most interestingly, in this society, culture and institutions may act as substitutes. Indeed,
on the one hand, the incentives to transmit civic culture are generally increasing in the political
representation of workers in society; on the other hand, the larger is the spread of civic culture in
the population of workers, the smaller are the incentives to design institutional changes devolving
power to the workers, as the beneficial effects of civic culture are already present. In this society,
therefore, an exogenous institutional change which endows with more political power citizens
could see its effects mitigated by the induced cultural dynamics associated to the spread of civic
culture in the population.
    Formally, let workers be group i = 1 and the elite be i = 2, in fractions λ1 = 1 − λ2 = λ.
Workers belong to one of two cultural groups.The first, j = c in proportion q, is characterized by
civic culture; the second group is passive with respect to the civic society, j = p. All individuals
(workers and elite) are endowed with a fixed amount of resources, s. Lump-sum taxes are raised
to finance public expenditures, g. In the process of providing for a public good, a fraction
µ > 0 of public expenditures leaks into corruption, generating diverted rents T = µg that benefit
exclusively the members of the elite. The residual share of public good expenditures is used to
provide public good, G = (1 − µ) g.
    Workers can exert two types of efforts, civic participation and civic control. Let worker’s j
participation (resp. control) effort be denoted e1j (resp. a1j ). Societal civic participation effort is
then E = λ q · e1c + (1 − q) · e1p , while societal civic control effort is A = λ q · a1c + (1 − q) · a1p .
                                                                                                      

Societal civic participation effort E produces a society wide externality which augments each in-


                                                   29
dividual’s endowment by κ · E, κ > 0. Societal civic control effort A increases the transaction
costs associated to corruption activities: the consumption associated to T units of diverted rents
is (1 − θA) T , with 0 < θ < 1.53 The government policy is total public expenditures g, financed
by lump-sum taxes in the same amount.
    Workers’ preferences are as follows:

         U 1c c1c , G, a1c , e1c , T       = c1c + v(G) − (α · T ) (1 − a1c ) − C(a1c ) + G · e1c − Φ(e1c )
                                       

        U 1p c1p , G, a1p , e1p , T        = c1p + v(G) − C(a1p ) − Φ e1p ;
                                                                            


where c1c + v(G) is the direct utility of private consumption and the public good; − (α · T ) (1 −
a1c ) is the intrinsic motivation for civic control; C(a1c ) is the utility cost of undertaking civic
control; G · e1c is the intrinsic motivation to contribute e1c to civic participation; while Φ(e1c ) is
the disutility cost of civic participation.54 Members of the elite have standard preferences over
consumption and the public good:

                                                 U 2 (c2 , G) = c2 + v(G).

    Policy choice p = g depends on the workers’ efforts only through θ · A and κ · E. Therefore,
since the contribution of each worker effort to societal efforts E and A is negligible, passive workers
always choose not to exert any effort, a1p = e1p = 0, and workers with civic culture contribute
according to their intrinsic motivations. In fact, since both G and T increase in g, e1c and a1c
also increase in g.
    Under some reasonable regularity conditions, p (β, q) and pcom (β, q) are as in Figure 6: down-
ward sloping in β, for any q. More specifically, when the character of civic culture is not too
unbalanced in terms of civic participation, workers with civic culture are less in favor of large
public expenditures than the elite. As a consequence, an increase in β would tend to reduce the
size of the public expenditures at the societal equilibrium, p (β, q), and the societal commitment,
pcom (β, q). For the same reason, at a given value of β, an increase in the fraction of workers with
civic culture, q, would have the same effect on public expenditures. Most importantly, p (β, q)
crosses pcom (β, q) from above at some interior point β(q).
                                                         b     Indeed, pcom (β, q) is the policy choice
once all externalities in society are internalized. But the negative externality, via θ (A), is born
out only by elite members, while the positive externality, via E, is enjoyed by the whole society.
As a consequence, when the political power of the elite is large (i.e., β small), internalizing the
negative externality dominates the society’s political objectives and pcom (β, q) < p (β, q) . Con-
versely, when the weight of the elite is small, internalizing the positive externality dominates and
consequently pcom (β, q) > p (β, q) .
 53
      Effort costs are normalized so that θA < 1.
 54
      See the Online Appendix for details, assumptions, and functional forms.




                                                            30
Institutional dynamics. For all initial value β0 the institutional dynamics converge to a unique
steady state β = β(q)
                  b   and political power is shared between the workers and the elite; see Figure
6.




                                p

                                                   q
                                                 p,



                                      p com , q




                                 0                                                 1   
                                                           q

                                     Fi
                                     Figure 6:
                                            6    Civic
                                                 Ci i Culture
                                                       C lt      and
                                                                   d institutions
                                                                     i tit ti
                                                  Institutional dynamics




    Importantly, in this society, the political power of workers at the stationary state, β(q),
                                                                                            b    is
decreasing in the cultural predominance of civic culture, q. This is because societal civic control
A increases in qand A substitutes
                                 for formal political power. More in detail, at the stationary
state β(q), p
      b      com  β, q = p β, q and the positive and negative externalities associated to public
                   b          b
expenditures balance out at the margin in the government objective function. An increase in q
would lead to fewer public expenditures, as workers with civic culture are more concerned than
the rest of society by corruption. To restore the equilibrium, institutional dynamics move then
in the direction of re-introducing larger public expenditures and hence of reducing the political
power of workers, β.

Cultural dynamics. The elite is culturally homogenous and hence displays no cultural dynam-
ics. The cultural dynamics within workers are determined by the relative incentives to trans-
mit civic culture, ∆V 1c (p)/∆V 1p (p), as they depend on the equilibrium policy instrument p.
When civic participation e1c is less sensitive to public good provision than civic monitoring a1c ,

                                                     31
∆V 1c (p)/∆V 1p (p) is decreasing in p. As the societal equilibrium p (β, q) is itself a decreasing
function of β and q, the relative incentives to transmit civic culture increase with both β and q
in society. As a consequence, q (β) is upward sloping in β: the formal delegation of power to the
workers tends to induce a larger diffusion of civic culture between workers; see Figure 7.




                           
                           1                                 B
                                 
                                 q
                                                            q
                           ∗                          A
                       




                           0                          q∗             1       q
                               Fi
                               Figures 7:
                                       7    Civic
                                            Ci i Culture
                                                  C lt    and
                                                            d institutions
                                                               i tit ti
                                                Joint dynamics




Joint evolution of culture and institutions. The joint evolution of culture and institutions is also
illustrated in Figure 8. The stationary state of the joint dynamics is (β ∗ , q ∗ ). At (β ∗ , q ∗ ), the two
manifolds β(q) and q(β) have slopes of opposite signs. As a consequence, culture and institutions
are substitute in this society and the cultural multiplier is negative (see Proposition 8): the effect
of an exogenous shock which changes the political power of workers in some direction would be
mitigated by the ensuing cultural dynamics.
    As a way of illustration, Figure 8 describes the effects of an increase in the coefficient κ, which,
other things equal, increases the positive externality associated to civic participation E. A change
in κ triggers a higher demand for public expenditures, and therefore some institutional dynamics
biased against the workers’ group. This institutional change in turn reduces the relative incentives
to transmit civic culture and leads to a reduction of q. As civic culture is reduced, there is less
civic control effort against corruption in society. This in turn calls for some institutional change
returning some formal power to workers, mitigating therefore the initial institutional impact of


                                                       32
the shock to κ.




                           
                           1
                               
                               q
                                                                   q
                                                        A
                         A
                         B                     B
                                                              A’
                         A′



                           0                      q ∗B q ∗A               1   q
                               Fi
                               Figures 8:
                                       8 Civic
                                          Ci i culture
                                                 lt    and
                                                         d institutions
                                                           i tit ti
                                           Comparative dynamics




    Interestingly, depending on the relative speeds of the dynamics of culture and institutions,
the dynamics of adjustment to the shock may not be monotonic. Suppose for instance that
institutions adjust much faster than culture, so that the adjustment dynamics lies on β(q).
                                                                                       b      In
                                                                                         ∗
this case, the shock on κ, after having induced β to jump downwards (with q constant at q ), has
q decrease and β increase along the adjustment path.

5.3    Property rights and conflict
In this example we study property rights, that is, a society where socio-economic interactions
consist of agents contesting the component of each other’s resource endowment which is not
protected by the legal system. We study in particular conditions under which the cultural and
institutional dynamics in this society, between groups with different propensions to act violently,
favors or hinders the development of a legal system for the protection of property rights.
    Consider a society populated by two groups, culturally differentiated by their propensity to act
in conflict. One group is more prone to violence, e.g., because it is adopting a culture of honor.55
  55
   Along the lines of the specific groups described by Nisbett (1993), Cohen and Nisbett (1994), or more recently
Grosjean (2014).


                                                        33
In this society, agents are matched randomly in a contest for their own endowment. After two
agents match, their relative effort determines the probability that each of them succeeds in the
contest, hence winning the fraction of the endowment of the opponent which is not protected by
property rights. The group which is more prone to violence has a lower cost of effort at the margin
and hence tends to engage in more violent conflict at equilibrium, winning a larger fraction of
the endowment contests.
     Property right protection, e.g., by means of a legal system, is the main policy variable. They
reduce the incentives to engage in violent conflict at equilibrium, for both groups. Property rights
are therefore valuable in terms of efficiency because the effort employed by each group in conflict
represents a negative externality on the other group. They are always favored by the group which
is less prone to violence and they are favored also by the more prove to violence group when its
fraction in the population is large enough. A larger fraction of conflict-prone agents in society, in
fact, hurts both groups ex-ante: it induces a larger rent dissipation for the conflict-prone agents
and also a larger probability of extortion (loss of endowment) for the others.
     The dynamics of culture and institutions in this society display several complex features,
including, notably, an interesting form of hysteresis. More specifically, societies where the more
prone to conflict group is relatively powerful in terms of its control of institutions and hence of
property rights policy, but small as a fraction of the population, will rely on limited property rights
pretection and will tend to display no institutional change. When however this group is relatively
large, it develops enough incentives to devolve institutional power to the other group to induce
more property right protection. It is then possible that, in a society where the conflict-prone
are powerful and institutions are stuck in their control, the cultural dynamics work to un-do this
equilibrium. Indeed the induced diffusion a conflict-prone culture will go through a threshold,
after which endogenous institutional dynamics are triggered. Such institutional changes lead
to the devolution of power and more property rights protection. Relatedly, in this society, a
temporary institutional shock may trigger persistent (indeed, long-run) effects on the dynamics
of culture and institutions, e.g., irreversibly drive the system into a new long run trajectory of
the institutional and cultural dynamics.
     In this society, political and cultural groups are aligned. Formally, let group i = 1 be the
group which is more prone to violent conflict. Agents in group 1 have a marginal cost of violent
effort to c1 , smaller than the marginal cost c2 which characterizes agents in group 2. Denote for
convenience α = c2 − c1 /c1 .
                            

     Each agent’s endowment of the consumption good, prior to the contest, is s > 0. The policy
variable, p, represents the fraction of each agent’s endowment s which is protected in the contest,
a measure of the extent to which property rights are protected in society. Let ahk denote the
violent effort exerted by an agent h when matching with an agent k.56 The probability of agent
 56
      Note that this example represents an extension of the general analysis in that aj is a multi-dimensional vector;



                                                          34
                                   hk
h winning the contest is ahka+akh .57 The winner of the contest appropriates of 2(1 − p)s units of
the consumption good.
    Agents observe the opponent type before choosing their effort, that is, the contest is a complete
information game. The Nash equilibrium effort of an agent of type i in his contest with an agent
of type j is:
                                                          cj
                                      aij = 2(1 − p)s             .
                                                      (ci + cj )2
    Matching is random, so that any agent will match a conflict-prone agent with probability q,
which represents the fraction of such agents in society. Let the ex-ante expected payoff for agents
of group i = 1, 2 at equilibrium be denoted Ωi (p, q). It is decreasing in q, for any i, as a larger
fraction of conflict-prone agents in society hurts both groups ex-ante: it induces a larger rent
dissipation for the conflict-prone agents and a larger probability of extortion (loss of endowment)
for the others. On the other hand, while Ω2 (p, q) is always increasing in p, Ω1 (p, q) is increasing in
p only for a large enough fraction q. Indeed conflict-prone agents gain as a consequence of better
property rights protection only when their fraction in the population is large enough. Finally,
assume that implementing a level p of property rights protection requires a resource cost C(p)
satisfying standard convexity properties.

Institutional dynamics. The policy schedules p(β, q) and pcom (β, q) are represented in Figure 9.
When β ≥ q, the societal equilibrium involves no property rights protection and p(β, q) = 0. On
the contrary, when β < q, some protection of property right is implemented, with p(β, q) > 0.
Moreover, in such a case, p(β, q) is a decreasing function of β and is increasing in q. The larger
the political power of the conflict-prone group, the smaller the level of property rights protection,
as such group benefits less from this protection. On the other hand, the larger the fraction of the
conflict-prone individuals in society, the larger the social need for a reduction of violent effort,
otherwise dissipated in resource contests, and hence the larger the social need for protection of
property rights.
the same methods apply however.
  57
     This is the case if ahk , akh > 0; while the probability of winning is 1/2 if ahk = akh = 0.




                                                          35
                                      p


                                                    p com , q



                                          p, q




                                                                                    
                                                                    
                                  0                                 q
                                                                              1


                                      Figure 9: Property rights and conflicts
                                                   Institutional dynamics




    It is also the case, in this society, that, p(β, q) ≤ pcom (β, q): for any (β, q), a larger extent
of property rights protection reduces the excessive (and inefficient) violent effort undertaken into
the contests. In conclusion, the dynamics of iinstitutions are simply characterized: for any given
q, there exists a β(q)
                  e    such that i) if β0 > β(q),
                                            e     then βt+1 = βt = β0 ; ii) if instead β0 < β(q),
                                                                                            e     then
βt converges towards β = 0.

Cultural dynamics. Conflict-prone agents have positive incentives ∆V 1 (β, q) to transmit their
trait, but such incentives decrease with their fraction q in society. The incentives for non conflict-
prone agents, ∆V 2 (β, q), are also positive. They are increasing with the fraction q of conflict prone
agents in the population. A larger value of q in fact has two opposing effects on the incentive
to socialization of non conflict-prone individuals: it reduces their expected payoff when matched
with conflict-prone agents, thereby reducing their incentives to transmit their own trait; but at
the same time, a larger q also increases the cost of effort for non conflict-prone agents whose
children turn out to be conflict-prone and undertake effort a11 when facing other conflict-prone
agents in a contest. It turns out that this last effect dominates. As a consequence, the cultural
dynamics has a unique interior stationary state and furthermore q (β) < 1/2.

                                                                                    c2
Joint dynamics of culture and institutions. Consider the case in which α =          c1   − 1 is large enough,

                                                     36
so that conflict-prone agents have a significant advantage in conflict.58 In this case, when initial
conditions (β0 , q0 ) are in the highlighted region in the figure and the §onflict-prone group is
powerful but relatively small, there are no institutional dynamics; see Figure 10.




                                No property right protection region
                                               B
                             1




                          A                     A
                           
                           
                                 
                                 q


                             0                               
                                        q0   q           q       1     q


                                 Figure 10: Property rights and conflicts
                                            Joint dynamics ( large enough)



    On the other hand, outside of this region of initial conditions the institutional dynamics evolve
towards increasing the political power of the non conflict-prone group, inducing more property
rights protection. Indeed the system converges towards an institutional set-up giving no power
to the conflict-prone group (β = 0) and to the distribution of the population q(0) < qb (α).
    Interestingly, when the conflict-prone is initially very powerful, β0 ≤ βA , even a small fraction
of conflict-prone individuals in society can be ultimately self-defeating in terms of institutional
dynamics. While the system does not exhibit any institutional change, in this case, the underlying
cultural dynamics tend to favor the socialization of the conflict-prone agents towards qb (α). As
soon as qt passes the threshold of βe−1 (β0 ), endogenous institutional dynamics are triggered which
induce the implementation of more extensive property rights and institutions biased towards the
  58
    When instead α = cc21 −1 is not too large, the marginal effort costs ci are similar across groups and the dynamics
are not very interesting. In this case, in fact, property rights are protected for any initial conditions. The joint
dynamics of culture and institutions converge to a stationary state characterized by institutions giving all power
to the non conflict-prone group and hence a maximal protection of property rights.



                                                         37
non conflict-prone group. As a consequence, qt regresses towards the long run steady state q(0)
and the conflict-prone group ends-up with no power (β = 0).
    Similar non-monotonic dynamics of culture and institutions in this society may manifest
themselves also as interesting forms of hysteresis as a consequence of an exogenous institutional
shock, whereby temporary shock may trigger persistent (indeed, long-run) effects on the dynamics
of culture and institutions. A shock that e.g., gives more formal power to the non conflict-prone
group might irreversibly take the system into a new long run trajectory of the institutional and
cultural dynamics. Suppose for instance that the society has settled to a point like point A in
Figure 10 with no property rights and qb (α). Then a reduction of β below βA , would lead an
endogenous institutional response towards further power to the non conflict-prone group. This
in turn would trigger reinforcing cultural dynamics favoring this group. An successive opposite
institutional shock of similar amplitude would then not bring back the system towards to region
with no property right protection. Indeed even when/if the conflict prone group regains some
formal power, the cultural dynamics might have irreversibly driven the system to a region where
property rights are protected and there are less individual conflicts for the contest of resources:


6    Conclusions
Motivated by the recent literature on the causal explanations of economic growth and prosper-
ity, this paper proposes a simple theoretical perspective to analyze how culture and institutions
evolve, interact, and jointly determine socio-economic outcomes. Institutional change obtains
as a process through which existing social and political power structures are designed to re-
solve fundamental socio-economic externalities. Cultural dynamics are instead driven by cultural
transmission processes at the population level.
     Our approach allows a simple and easily applicable description of the joint interactions be-
tween culture and institutions. Particularly, we provide conditions under which cultural and
institutional dynamics tend to strengthen each other in a complementary way, or on the contrary,
tend to mitigate each other as substitutes in terms of their effects on socio-economic aggregate
variables. Depending on whether culture and institutions are complements or substitutes, exoge-
nous historical accidents propagating over the joint dynamics induced by institutions and culture
may have magnified or mitigated effects on long run socioeconomic outcomes. Importantly, our
discussion indicates the extent of the comparative dynamic bias that can be generated by neglect-
ing one of the two dynamics, when the other one is affected by an exogenous shock (the cultural
and institutional multipliers) .
     Conceptually, our framework also suggests that in general the joint evolution of culture and
institutions is highly non-linear. This feature has a number of implications, including the non
ergodic character of the underlying dynamic processes between culture and institutions and com-


                                                38
plex phenomena like hysteresis and oscillations. In other words, the dynamics of culture and
institutions are prone to display, for instance, sensitivity of equilibrium trajectories to initial con-
ditions, existence of irreversibility and thresholds effects, and non-monotonicity of cultural and
institutional changes over transition paths. From an empirical point of view, these phenomena
appear consistent with the great diversity of development experiences encountered across the
world. As well, they suggest that even a careful causal analysis (e.g., by means instrumental
variables) may be at a disadvantage over more structural analyses of the data which consider
explicitly the joint evolution of culture and institutions.59
    Overall, our analysis underlines the fact that the search for a deep and unique origin for the
long-term development can be quite an arduous and even sterile undertaking. Focusing more
systematically on the positive or negative interactions between culture and institutions along the
development process might result more fruitful in terms of historical understanding as well as in
terms of policy implications.




  59
     An interesting recent example of such an approach explicitly testing for the joint evolution of culture and
institutions is Murrell and Schmidt, (2011), in the context of the cultural and institutional changes that happened
in seventeenth century England. They construct institutional measures of evolution of formal legal institutions
using citations of cases and statutes appearing in later legal decisions. They also measure the spread of a ”whig”
political culture which emphasized the virtues of freedom and the necessity of constraints on the monarchy, using the
frequency of use of the word ”freedom” in contemporary publications, and test for the possibility of cointegrating
relationships between culture and institutions. They interpret their results using a model of social learning that
explicitly describes the relationship between cultural diffusion and word frequency.


                                                         39
                                       References



Acemoglu, D. (2003): ”Why Not a Political Coase Theorem? Social Conflict, Commitment, and
   Politics,” Journal of Comparative Economics, 31, 620-52.

Acemoglu, D., G. Egorov, and K. Sonin (2015): ”Political Economy in a Changing World,”
   Journal of Political Economy, 123(5), pp. 1038-1086.

Acemoglu, D., S. Johnson and J.A. Robinson (2001): ”The Colonial Origins of Comparative
   Development: An Empirical Investigation,” American Economic Review, 91, 1369-1401.

Acemoglu, D., S. Johnson and J.A. Robinson (2006): ”Institutions as the Findamental Cause
   of Long-Run Growth,” in P. Aghion and S. Durlauf (eds.), Handbook of Economic Growth,
   Amsterdam, Elsevier.

Acemoglu D., and J.A. Robinson, (2000), ”Why Did the West Extend the Franchise? Democracy,
   Inequality, and Growth in Historical Perspective”, The Quarterly Journal of Economics, vol.
   115, 4, pp. 1167-1199

Acemoglu D., and J.A. Robinson, (2001), ”A Theory of Political Transitions”, The American
   Economic Review, Vol. 91, No. 4, pp. 938-963.

Acemoglu, D. and J.A. Robinson (2006): Economic Origins of Dictatorship and Democracy,
   Cambridge, Cambridge University Press.

Acemoglu, D. and J.A. Robinson (2010): Why Nations Fail, New York, Crown Publishers.

Alesina, A. and G. Angeletos, (2005), ”Fairness and Redistribution,” American Economic Re-
    view, 95(4): pp. 960-980.

Alesina, A. and N. Fuchs Schuendeln (2007): ”Good bye Lenin (or not?): The Effects of Commu-
    nism on People’s Preferences,” American Economic Review, vol. 97, no. 4, pp. 1507-1528.

Alesina, A. and P. Giuliano (2010): ”Preferences for Redistribution,” in Benhabib, J., A. Bisin,
    M. Jackson (eds.), Handbook of Social Economics, Amsterdam, Elsevier.

Alesina, A. and P. Giuliano (2015): ”Culture and Institutions,” Journal of Economic Literature,
    53(4), 898-944.

Alesina A., P. Giuliano and N. Nunn, (2013). ”On the Origins of Gender Roles: Women and
    the Plough,” The Quarterly Journal of Economics, vol. 128(2), pages 469-530.

                                              40
Alinei, M. (2007): ”Origini Pastorali e Italiche della ’Camorra’, della ’Mafia’ e della ’Ndrangheta’,”
    Quaderni di semantica: rivista internazionale di semantica teorica e applicata, 28(2), 247-
    286.

Alsan, M. (2012): “The Effect of The TseTse Fly on African Development,”

Appiah, K.A. (2010): The Honor Code: How Moral Revolutions Happen, New York, W.W.
   Norton & Co.

Angelucci, C. and S. Meraglia (2013): “Trade, Self-Governance, and the Provision of Law and
   Order, with an Application to Medieval English Chartered Towns,” mimeo, NYU.

Ben-Ner, A. and L. Putterman (1998): Economics, Values, and Organization, Cambridge, Cam-
    bridge University Press.

Besley, T., and T. Persson (2009a): ”The Origins of State Capacity: Property Rights, Taxation,
    and Politics”, American Economic Review, 99(4), p. 1218-44.

Besley, T., and T. Persson (2009b), ”Repression or Civil War?”, American Economic Review,
    99(2), 292-7.

Besley, T., and T. Persson (2010), ”State Capacity, Conflict and Development”, Econometrica,
    Vol.78, (1), pp. 1–34 .

Besley, T., and T. Persson (2016), ”Democratic Values and Institutions”, mimeo LSE.

Belloc, M. and S. Bowles (2012): ”Cultural-Institutional Persistence under International Trade
     and Factor Mobility,” CESifo Working Paper Series No. 2762.

Bidner C. and P. Francois, (2011), ”Cultivating Trust: Norms, Institutions and the Implications
    of Scale,” Economic Journal , 121(555), pp. 1097-1129, 09.

Bisin, A. and G. Topa (2003): ”Empirical Models of Cultural Transmission,” Journal of the
     European Economic Association, 1(2), 363-75.

Bisin, A., Topa, G. and Verdier, T. (2004): ”Religious Intermarriage and Socialization in the
     United States,” Journal of Political Economy, 112, 615–64.

Bisin, A., Topa, G. and Verdier, T. (2009): ”Cultural Transmission, Socialization and the Popu-
     lation Dynamics of Multiple State Traits Distributions,” International Journal of Economic
     Theory, 5(1), 139-154, issue in honor of Jess Benhabib.

Bisin, A. and P. Kulkarni (2012): ”On the Dynamics of Culture and Institutions: Colonization
     in India,” in progress, NYU.

                                                41
Bisin, A and T. Verdier (1998): ”On the Cultural Transmission of Preferences for Social Status,”
     Journal of Public Economics, 70, 75–97.

Bisin, A and T. Verdier (2000a): ”Beyond the Melting Pot: Cultural Transmission, Marriage
     and the Evolution of Ethnic and Religious Traits,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 115,
     955-88.

Bisin, A. and T. Verdier (2000b): ”Models of Cultural Transmission, Voting and Political Ide-
     ology,” European Journal of Political Economy, 16, 5-29.

Bisin, A and T. Verdier (2001a): ”The Economics of Cultural Transmission and the Dynamics
     of Preferences,” Journal of Economic Theory, 97, 298–319.

Bisin, A. and T. Verdier (2010): ”The Economics of Cultural Transmission,” in Benhabib, J.,
     A. Bisin, M. Jackson (eds.), Handbook of Social Economics, Amsterdam, Elsevier.

Boyd, Robert, and Peter Richerson (1985): Culture and the Evolutionary Process, Chicago, IL,
    University of Chicago Press.

Buonanno, P., R. Durante, G. Prarolo, and P. Vanin (2012): ”On the Historical and Geographic
   Origins of the Sicilian Mafia,” mimeo, SciencesPo.

Cavalli Sforza, L.L. and M. Feldman (1973): ”Cultural Versus Biological Inheritance: Phenotypic
    Transmission from Parent to Children,” American Journal of Human Genetics, 25, 618-37.

Cavalli Sforza L.L. and M. Feldman (1981): Cultural Transmission and Evolution: A Quantita-
    tive Approach, Princeton, NJ, Princeton University Press.

Clark, D. (1987): ”A Community Relations Approach to Corruption: The Case of Hong Kong,”
    Corruption and Reform, 2, 135-257

Clark, D. (1989): ”Mobilizing Public Opinion Against Corruption: A Commentary,” Corruption
    and Reform, 4, 123-129.

Clark G. (2007), A Farewell to Alms: A Brief Economic History of the World (The Princeton
    Economic History of the Western World. Princeton, NJ, Princeton University Press.

Cohen D. and R.E. Nisbett (1993), ”Self-Protection and the Culture of Honor: Explaining
    Southern Violence”, Personality and Social Psychology Bulletin, vol. 20,(5), pp. 551-567.

Conley J. and A. Temimi, (2001), ”Endogenous Enfranchisement When Groups’ Preferences
    Conflict”, Journal of Political Economy, Vol. 109, (1), pp. 79-102




                                              42
Dell, M. (2010): ”The Persistent Effects of Peru’s Mining Mita,” Econometrica, 78(6), pp.
     1863-1903.

Diamond J. (2005), Collapse: How Societies Choose to Fail or Succeed, Penguin Books, New
    York.

Doepke M. and F. Zilibotti (2006): ”Occupational Choice and the Spirit of Capitalism,” Quar-
   terly Journal of Economics, 123(2), 747-793.

Durante, R., G. Labartino, and R. Perotti (2011): ”Academic Dynasties: Decentralization and
    Familism in the Italian Academia,” NBER Working Papers 17572.

Easterly, W. and R. Levine (2012): ”The European Origins of Economic Development,” mimeo,
    Brown University.

Fischer D. H. (1989), Albion’s Seed: Four British Folkways in America, Oxford UK, Oxford
    University Press.

Giavazzi, F., Petkov, I., and F. Schiantarelli, (2014), ”Culture: Persistence and Evolution”,
    NBER Working Paper No. 20174. Cambridge, MA

Glaeser, E.L., R. La Porta, F. Lopez-de-Silanez, and A. Shleifer (2004): ”Do Institutions Cause
    Growth?,” Journal of Economic Growth, 9, 271-303.

Greif, A. (1994): ”Cultural Beliefs and the Organization of Society: A Historical and Theoretical
    Reflection on Collectivist and Individualist Societies,” Journal of Political Economy, 102(5),
    912-50.

Greif, A. and G. Tabellini (2010): ”Cultural and Institutional Bifurcation: China and Europe
    Compared,” American Economic Review, Papers & Proceedings, 100:2, 1-10.

Greif, A. and G. Tabellini (2011): ”The Clan and the City: Sustaining Cooperation in China
    and in Europe,” mimeo, Stanford University.

Grosjean P. (2014), ”A History of Violence: The Culture of Honor and Homicide in the US
    South”, Journal of the European Economic Association, Vol 12 (5), pp. 1285-1316.

Guimaraes, B. and K.D. Sheedy (2016): ”Guarding the Guardians”, Economic Journal, forth-
   coming.

Guiso, L. P. Sapienza, and L. Zingales (2016): ”Long-Term Persistence,” Journal of the European
    Economic Association, vol 14, 6, pp. 1401-1436.




                                               43
Guiso, L. P. Sapienza, and L. Zingales (2008): ”Social Capital and Good Culture,” Marshall
    Lecture, Journal of the European Economic Association, 6(2-3), pp. 295-320.

Hatcher, A. (2002): Algebraic Topology, Cambridge, Cambridge University Press.

Hauk, E. and Sáez-Martı́, M. (2002): ”On the Cultural Transmission of Corruption,” Journal
   of Economic Theory, 107, 311–35.

Lagunoff, Roger, (2009), . ”Dynamic stability and reform of political institutions,” Games and
    Economic Behavior, vol. 67(2), pages 569-583.

Levine, D. and S. Modica (2012): ”Anti-Malthus: Conflict and the Evolution of Societies,”
    mimeo, Washington University of Saint Louis.

Lizzeri, A. and N. Persico (2004): “Why Did the Elite Extend the Suffrage? Democracy and the
    Scope of Government, with an Application to Britain’s Age of Reform”,” Quarterly Journal
    of Economics, 707-65.

Lowes, S., N. Nunn, J.A. Robinson, and J. Weigel (2015): “The Evolution of Culture and
   Institutions: Evidence from the Kuba Kingdom,” mimeo, Columbia University.

Mahoney, J., and K. Thelen (Eds) (2010): Explaining Institutional Change –Ambiguity, Agency,
   and Power, Cambridge University Press.

Mauro, L. and F. Pigliaru (2012): ”How Binding is Low Social Capital for Economic Growth?
   Further Lessons from the Italian Regional Divide,” mimeo, Universita’ di Trieste.

McCloskey, D.N. (2006): The Bourgeois Virtues: Ethics for an Age of Commerce, Chicago,
   University of Chicago Press.

McCloskey, D.N. (2010): Bourgeois Dignity: Why Economics Can’t Explain the Modern World,
   Chicago, University of Chicago Press.

Miguel, E.A., P. Gertler, and D.I. Levine (2006): ”Did Industrialization Destroy Social Cap-
    ital in Indonesia?,” Does Industrialization Build or Destroy Social Networks?, Economic
    Development and Cultural Change, Vol. 54, No. 2, pp. 287-317

Minasyan, A. (2014): “Encountering Donor-Recipient Cultural Differences in the Effectiveness
   of Aid,” mimeo, University of Goettingen.

Milnor, J.W. (1965)” Topology from a Differentiable Viewpoint, Charlottesville, University Press
    of Virginia [reprinted in Princeton Landmarks in Mathematics and Physics, Priceton,
    Princeton University Press, 1997].


                                              44
Montgomery, J.D. (2010), ”Intergenerational Cultural Transmission as an Evolutionary Game.”
   American Economic Journal: Microeconomics, 2(4): pp. 115-136.

Murrell P. and M. Schmidt, (2011), ”The Coevolution of Culture and Institutions in Sev-
   enteenth Century England”. Available at SSRN: https://ssrn.com/abstract=1880957 or
   http://dx.doi.org/10.2139/ssrn.1880957.

Nannicini, T., A. Stella, G. Tabellini, and U. Troiano (2010): ”Social Capital and Political
   Accountability,” mimeo, Universita’ Bocconi.

Nisbett R. E. (1993), ”Violence and U.S. Regional Culture”, American Psychologist, 48, pp.
    441-449.

Nunn, N. (2012): ”Culture and the Historical Process,” NBER W.P. 17869.

Nunn N. and L. Wantchekon, (2011), ”The Slave Trade and the Origins of Mistrust in Africa”,
   American Economic Review,101 (7): 3221-3252

Ortiz, F. (1963): Contrapunteo Cubano del Tabaco y el Azucar, Barcelona, Editorial Ariel.

Putnam, R. (1992): Making Democracy Work: Civic Traditions in Modern Italy, Princeton,
    Princeton University Press.

Tabellini, G. (2008a): ”Institutions and Culture,” Presidental address, Journal of the European
    Economic Association, 6(2-3), 255-94.

Tabellini, G. (2008b): ”The Scope of Cooperation: Normes and Incentives,” Quarterly Journal
    of Economics, 123(3), 905-950.

Ticchi D., T. Verdier, and A. Vindigni (2013), ””Democracy, Dictatorship and the Cultural
    Transmission of Political Values,” IZA Discussion Papers 7441.

Weber M. (1930), The Protestant Ethic and the Spirit of Capitalism. Translated by Parsons,
   Talcott. New York: Dover.




                                             45
Appendix A: Results on the dynamical system (5,8)
In this Appendix we study in some detail the dynamics of our economy. We study then the
dynamics of (βt , qt ) ∈ [0, 1]2 . The fundamental dynamics equation, as reported in the text as
equations (5,8), are conveniently re-written to define the maps f : [0, 1]2 → [0, 1] and f : [0, 1]2 →
[0, 1] as follows: the following:
                                    
                                                     com
                                     β
                                     " such that p (βt , qt+1 ) = p(β, qt+1 )        if it exists,
           βt+1   = f (βt , qt ) :=     1 if P (βt , qt+1 ) > 0, ∀0 ≤ β ≤ 1
                                                                                     else
                                        0 if P (βt , , qt+1 ) < 0 ∀0 ≤ β ≤ 1
                                    

                             qt+1 − qt = g(βt , qt ) := qt (1 − qt )D(βt+1 , qt+1 )

We impose Assumptions 1-3 and we further assume for regularity that all maps, P (β, q), D(β, q)
are smooth.
    We shall study the dynamical system in the continuous time limit, where the change in βt
and qt between time t and t + dt are, respectively, λdt and µdt, for dt → 0.60
                                            ·
                                            β       = λ [f (β, q) − β]
                                                ·
                                            q = µg(β, q)

given the initial conditions (β0 , q0 ) .

The dynamics of β given q.
Lemma A. 1 Under Assumptions 1-3, f : [0, 1]2 → [0, 1] is a continuous function in (β, q) ∈
[0, 1]2 .

    Proof. First of all note that when p(βt+1 , qt+1 ) = pcom (βt , qt ) is not satisfied for any βt+1 ,
for some (qt , qt+1 ), the assumption that p(β, q) is monotonic implies that βt+1 is = 0 or = 1,
depending on the sign of pcom (βt+1 , qt+1 ) − p(βt , qt ). In the continuous time limit qt+1 = qt = q
and hence, in this case, trivially, f maps continuously (β, q) ∈ [0, 1]2 into {0}.
    Consider equation (β), again. We show that βt+1 is a continuous function of βt , qt , qt+1
when p(βt+1 , qt+1 ) = pcom (βt , qt ) is satisfied. To this end note that the assumed monotonicity
in β of p(β, q) implies that, when p(βt+1 , qt+1 ) = pcom (βt , qt ) is satisfied, we can write βt+1 =
p−1 (p, qt , qt+1 ) and hence βt+1 = p−1 (pcom (βt , qt ), qt , qt+1 ), a continuous function. Again, in the
continuous time limit qt+1 = qt and hence we can construct a continuous function f : [0, 1]2 → R
such that β̇t = f (βt , qt ).
  60
    As is well known, discrete time dynamics may generate complex dynamic behaviors that are difficult to char-
acterize and go beyond the points we want to emphasize about the co-evolution between culture and institutions.



                                                         46
    Finally, it is straightforward to see that as pcom (βt+1 , qt+1 ) − p(βt , qt ) crosses 0 βt+1 =
p−1 (pcom (βt , qt ), qt , qt+1 ) converges continuously to 0 or 1 depending on the direction of the cross-
ing so as to preserve continuity.                                                                        


    Let the β : [0, 1] → [0, 1] map q ∈ [0, 1] into the stationary states of f ; that is, β : [0, 1] → [0, 1]
satisfies
                                     0 = f (β, q), for any β ∈ β(q)

Lemma A. 2 Under Assumptions 1-3, the map β : [0, 1] → [0, 1] is an non empty and compact
valued upper-hemi-continuous correspondence with connected components.

    Proof. The proof is a direct consequence of the continuity of f proved in Lemma A.1.                  

    Let P (β, q) := pcom (β, q) − p(β, q). We consider only the regular case in which P (β, q) 6= 0 at
the vertices of [0, 1]2 , leaving the simple but tedious analysis of the singular cases to the reader.
Also, we say that q is a regular point of β ∈ β(q) if any stationary stationary state β ∈ β(q)
satisfies that property that ∂P∂β  (β,q)
                                         6= 0; that is if p(β, q) and pcom (β, q) intersect transversally.
The characterization of β : [0, 1] → [0, 1] depends crucially on the topological properties of the
zeros of P (β, q). Let π : [0, 1] → [0, 1] map q into the stationary states β such that P (β, q) = 0;
that is, the map π satisfies P (π(q), q) = 0.

Proposition A. 1 Under Assumptions 1-3, the dynamics of β as a function of q ∈ [0, 1] has the
following properties,

   1. P (0, q) > 0, P (1, q) < 0, for any q ∈ [0, 1], and p(β, q) is increasing; or P (0, q) < 0,
      P (1, q) > 0, for any q ∈ [0, 1], and p(β, q) is decreasing. For any given regular q ∈ [0, 1]
      there exist an odd number of regular stationary states β ∈ π(q); furthermore β = 0, 1 are
      also stationary states for given q ∈ [0, 1]. The stability properties of the regular stationary
      states alternate with the smallest and the larger being always locally stable; the boundaries
      β = 0, 1 are locally unstable for all q ∈ [0, 1].

   2. P (0, q) < 0, P (1, q) > 0, for any q ∈ [0, 1], and p(β, q) is increasing; or P (0, q) > 0,
      P (1, q) < 0, for any q ∈ [0, 1], and p(β, q) is decreasing. For any given q ∈ [0, 1] there exist
      an odd number of regular stationary states β ∈ π(q); furthermore β = 0, 1 are also stationary
      states for given q ∈ [0, 1]. The stability properties of the regular stationary states alternate
      with the smallest and the larger being always locally unstable; the boundaries β = 0, 1 are
      locally stable.

   3. P (0, q) < 0, P (1, q) < 0, for any q ∈ [0, 1]. For any given q ∈ [0, 1] there exist either
      none or an even number of regular stationary states β ∈ π(q); furthermore β = 0 is also a

                                                     47
      stationary state for given q ∈ [0, 1]. The stability properties of the regular stationary states
      alternate with the smallest always locally unstable; the boundary β = 0 is locally stable.

   4. P (0, q) > 0, P (1, q) > 0, for any q ∈ [0, 1]. For any given q ∈ [0, 1] there exist either
      none or an even number of regular stationary states β ∈ π(q); furthermore β = 1 is also a
      stationary state for given q ∈ [0, 1]. The stability properties of the regular stationary states
      alternate with the smallest always locally stable; the boundary β = 1 is locally stable.

   5. P (0, q) and/or P (1, q) change sign with q ∈ [0, 1]. The characterization obtained above then
      can be repeated for each sub-interval of [0, 1] in which the Brouwer degree of the manifold
      π(q) is invariant (see the proof ). We leave the tedious cathegorization of all possible cases
      to the reader.


The dynamics of q given β.
Lemma A. 3 Under Assumptions 1-3, g : [0, 1]2 → [0, 1] is a continuous function in (β, q) ∈
[0, 1]2 .

   Proof. The proof is an immediate consequence of the continuity of D(βt , qt ), imposed in
Assumption 8.                                                                            

    Let the q : [0, 1] → [0, 1] map β ∈ [0, 1] into the stationary states of g; that is, q : [0, 1] → [0, 1]
satisfies
                                     0 = g(β, q), for any q ∈ q(β)

Lemma A. 4 Under Assumptions 1-3, the map q : [0, 1] → [0, 1] is an non empty and compact
valued upper-hemi-continuous correspondence with connected components. It contains q(β) = 0
and q(β) = 1, for any 0 ≤ β ≤ 1.

    Proof. The proof is a direct consequence of the continuity of g, proved in Lemma A.1, and
of the fact that g(0, β) = g(1, β) = 1, for any 0 ≤ β ≤ 1.                                 

     As for the dynamics of culture given institutions, consider the regular case in which D(β, q) 6= 0
at the vertices of [0, 1]2 , leaving the simple but tedious analysis of the singular cases to the reader.
We say that β is a regular point of q ∈ q(β) if any stationary stationary state q ∈ q(β) satisfies
that property that ∂D(β,q)
                         ∂q     6= 0; that is if di (β, q) and dj (1 − β, 1 − q) intersect transversally. The
characterization of q : [0, 1] → [0, 1] depends crucially on the topological properties of the zeros
of D(β, q). Let σ : [0, 1] → [0, 1] map β into the stationary states q such that D(β, q) = 0; that
is, the map σ satisfies D(σ(β), β) = 0.

Proposition A. 2 Under Assumptions 1-3, the dynamics of q as a function of β ∈ [0, 1] has the
following properties,

                                                     48
  1. D(β, 0) < 0, D(β, 1) > 0, for any β ∈ [0, 1]. For any given regular β ∈ [0, 1] there exist an
     odd number of regular stationary states β ∈ σ(β). By Lemma 4, q = 0, 1 are also stationary
     states for given β ∈ [0, 1]. The stability properties of the regular stationary states alternate
     starting with the q = 0 being stable and ending with q = 1 also being stable. If the dynamics
     supports a unique interior stationary state q ∗ , then it in unstable.

  2. D(β, 0) > 0, D(β, 1) < 0, for any q ∈ [0, 1]. For any given regular β ∈ [0, 1] there exist an
     odd number of regular stationary states β ∈ σ(β). By Lemma 4, q = 0, 1 are also stationary
     states for given β ∈ [0, 1]. The stability properties of the regular stationary states alternate
     starting with the q = 0 being unstable and ending with q = 1 also being unstable. If the
     dynamics supports a unique interior stationary state q ∗ , then it in stable.

  3. D(β, 0) < 0, D(β, 1) < 0, for any β ∈ [0, 1]. For any given regular β ∈ [0, 1] there
     exist either none or an even number of regular stationary states β ∈ σ(β). By Lemma 4,
     q = 0, 1 are also stationary states for given β ∈ [0, 1]. The stability properties of the regular
     stationary states alternate starting with the q = 0 being stable and ending with q = 1 being
     unstable.

  4. D(β, 0) > 0, D(β, 1) > 0, for any β ∈ [0, 1]. For any given regular β ∈ [0, 1] there
     exist either none or an even number of regular stationary states β ∈ σ(β). By Lemma 4,
     q = 0, 1 are also stationary states for given β ∈ [0, 1]. The stability properties of the regular
     stationary states alternate starting with the q = 0 being unstable and ending with q = 1
     being stable.

  5. D(β, 0) and/or D(β, 1) change sign with β ∈ [0, 1]. The characterization obtained above then
     can be repeated for each sub-interval of [0, 1] in which the Brouwer degree of the manifold
     σ(q) is invariant (see the proof ). We leave the tedious cathegorization of all possible cases
     to the reader.


    Proof. Under Assumptions 1-3, D(β, q) is smooth and (β, q) lie in the compact set [0, 1]2 .
σ (q) is a dimension-1 smooth manifold with boundary , by a general version Implicit Function
Theorem; see e.g. Milnor (1965), lemma 4, p. 13. The statement is then proved, closely along
the lines of the proof of proposition A.1, using the full characterization of dimension-1 manifolds
and Brouwer degree theory, thinking of D(β, q) as a homothopy function varying β. We leave the
details to the reader.                                                                          


The joint dynamics of (β, q).
The dynamical system (5,8), even under Assumptions 1-3, is impossible to study in general.
We can however show that at least one stationary state always exists and characterize sufficient

                                                 49
conditions for the existence of an interior stationary state. To this end we re-state here more
formally Proposition 5 in the text.

Proposition A. 3 Under Assumptions 1-3 the dynamical system (5,8) has at least one station-
ary state. Furthermore, if the Brouwer degree of both π(q) and σ(β) is ±1, the dynamical system
has at least one interior stationary state.

    Proof.    The proof of the existence of a stationary state is a direct consequence of the
characterization of β(q) and q(β) in Lemmata A.2, A.4.
    The proof of the existence of an interior stationary state under the Brouwer degree conditions
is a consequence of the Jordan curve theorem, which we state in the following for completeness:61
    A curve J in R2 which is the image of an injective continuous map of a circle into R2 has
two components (an ”inside” and ”outside”), with J the boundary of each.

Figure A.1 represents a Jordan curve J on the plane.




                                                                        J              2
                                                                            Outside
                                                     Inside




                              0

                                  Figure A.1: Jordan Curve J in the (non negative) plane




   Consider the compact space [0, 1]2 ⊂ R2 , in which (β, q) lay. By Lemma 4, the map q(β)
contains the boundaries q = 0, 1 as well as the map σ(β) which, in the case its Brouwer degree is
±1, is homeomorphic to the compact interval [0, 1]. The map π(q) is also homeomorphic to the
compact interval [0, 1] in the case its Brouwer degree is ±1.
 61
      The theorem is a standard result in algebraic topology; see Hatcher (2002) p. 169 for a proof.


                                                           50
                                                                                J
                              
                                                     1
                              1

                                                                                 1, q  1
                                                               
             0,
                 0 q  0

                                                           q
                                                            q



                          0

                                                                                q
                              0
                                                                              1
                      Figure A.2: Jordan Curve J in [0,1]2 as constructed in the proof




   We can therefore construct a Jordan curve J composed of π(q), (β > π(0), q = 0), (β >
π(1), q = 1), β = 1. Since σ(β) connects the β = 1 and β = 0 its has a component inside and
one outside the curve J. Furthermore, 0 < σ(β) < 1, by construction. The Jordan curve theorem
then guarantees that π(q) and σ(β) cross in the interior of [0, 1]2 ; see Figure A.2 for a graphical
representation of the construction.                                                              

    Note that Proposition A.1 and A.2 provide conditions, respectively on P (β, q) and D(β, q),
guaranteeing that the Brouwer degree of π(q) and σ(β) is ±1. Also, the analysis leading to
Proposition A.3 can be extended to dynamical systems in which the Brower degrees of π(q) and
σ(β) are not invariant.
    The following study of the dynamics of the system is obtained, for simplicity, under Assump-
tions (4-5). Assumption 4 implies that q(β) = qb (p) with p = p (β, q), with some notational
abuse, where qb (p) ∈ [0, 1] is the unique solution of the following equation

                                           ∆V 1 (p)    q
                                              2
                                                    =     .
                                           ∆V (p)     1−q

Assumption 5 implies that the policy instrument p affects the optimal private actions, ai , inde-
pendently of the economy-level aggregates a and q. This in turn implies that cultural intolerences
∆V i depend only on the equilibrium policy level p. As usual, we denote the partial derivative of
a variable x on another variable y as ∂x/∂y = xy .

                                                    51
   The linearized local dynamics around the interior steady state (β ∗ , q ∗ ) can then easily be
obtained by
                           h pcom −p i                h com                   
              · !
                                                                 i
                               β     β                  pq −pq                      !
              β           λ      p                   λ     p                      β
                   =              β     (β ∗ ,q ∗ )         β     (β ∗ ,q ∗ )              (11)
              ·
              q               ∗        ∗             ∗         ∗
                        −µGq (1 − q ) · qbp · pβ µGq (1 − q ) [1 − qbp · pq ]     q

where G = −(∆V 1 (p (β ∗ , q ∗ )) + ∆V 2 (p(β ∗ , q ∗ )) < 0.
   The local stability of the interior steady state (β ∗ , q ∗ ) of (??) is obtained under the standard
Hessian conditions:
                                                                pβ − pcom
                                                                         
                                                                      β
                                                                                        > 0        (12)
                                                                   pβ       (β ∗ ,q ∗ )
                                                                        1 − [pq · qbp ](β ∗ ,q∗ ) > 0
                                               pβ −   pcom
                                                                                  
                                                       β                      com
                                                                                   
                       (1 − pq · qbp ) ·                       + qbp · pq − pq                    > 0
                                                  pβ                                 (β ∗ ,q ∗ )


Dynamic Complementarity and Substitution between institutions and culture

Lemma A. 5 Under Assumption 5, institutional and cultural dynamics are complementary at
a locally stable interior steady state (β ∗ , q ∗ ) if
                                                          ∆V 1 (p)  
                             ∗  ∗
                       dP (β , q )                        d ∆V 2 (p)
                                   has the same sign as                ;         (13)
                           dq                                dp
                                                                                           p(β ∗ ,q ∗ )

they are instead substitute if the signs are opposite.

     Proof. Institutional and cultural dynamics are complementary at (β ∗ , q ∗ ) when

                                    dβ(q)     dq(β)
                                          and       have the same sign.                                   (14)
                                     dq        dβ
Differentiating,
                                        pq − pcom
                                                  
                               dβ(q)          q       dq(β)      qbp pβ
                                     =−       com   ,       =              .
                                dq      pβ − pβ        dβ     1 − pq · qbp
Thus, condition (14) is equivalent to

                                                      dβ(q) dq(β)
                                                           ·      ≥0
                                                       dq    dβ
or
                                             pq − pcom
                                                       
                                                   q          qbp pβ
                                           −       com   ·              ≥ 0;
                                             pβ − pβ       1 − pq · qbp



                                                                52
Given the Hessian conditions for local stability, (12), at an interior locally stable steady state
(β ∗ , q ∗ ), this condition is equivalent to

                                                   pcom
                                                                
                                                    q   − pq · qbp (β ∗ ,q∗ ) ≥ 0.

   Recalling that the cultural manifold q(β) is obtained from

                                          ∆V 1 (p)    q
                                             2
                                                   =     and p = p(β, q)
                                          ∆V (p)     1−q

and that P (β, q) := pcom (β, q) − p(β, q), differentiating,
                                                      ∆V 1 (p)                                     
            com                                       d ∆V 2 (p)
                                                                                               (1 − q)2 
                             
             pq − pq · qbp (β ∗ ,q∗ ) = Pq (β, q) ·                                                                     .
                                                                                                      
                                                            dp
                                                                                      p(β,q)                (β ∗ ,q ∗ )

Therefore, institutional and cultural
                                    dynamics
                                             are complementary at a locally stable interior
                                                    ∆V 1 (p)
                                               d
                                                    ∆V 2 (p)
steady state (β ∗ , q ∗ ) when Pq and                  dp      have the same sign at (β ∗ , q ∗ ). Obviously they are
dynamic substitute otherwise.                                                                                     


Oscillations and Cycles

Proposition 6. Proof. Consider first an interior steady state (β ∗ , q ∗ ) of (11) that is locally
stable. The local stability conditions ensure that the trace T < 0 and that the determinant
∆ > 0. Dampened oscillations (a stable spiral steady state equilibrium) require T 2 < 4∆. With
respect to dynamical system (5,8), this last condition is translated into:


     com                                     2                 " pcom −pβ                  #
       pβ − pβ     ∗ ∗      ∗                        ∗ ∗      ∗
                                                                    β
                                                                      p     [1 − q p · p q ]
               + µG q (1 − q ) [1 − qbp · pq ] < 4λµG q (1 − q )
                                                                                 b
     λ                                                                 β                       ;
          pβ                                                        +bqp · (pcom
                                                                             q   − pq )

or, after manipulations,
                                                                     2
                  pcom − pβ
          
                   β                ∗ ∗            ∗
              λ               − µG q (1 − q ) [1 − qbp · pq ]             < 4λµG∗ q ∗ (1 − q ∗ )b
                                                                                                qp · (pcom
                                                                                                       q   − pq ),
                     pβ

                                                                            ∆V (p )∆V (p )          1   ∗        2   ∗
with G∗ = −(∆V 1 (p∗ ) + ∆V 2 (p∗ )) < 0. Using (??), G∗ q ∗ (1 − q ∗ ) = − ∆V 1 (p∗ )+∆V 2 (p∗ ) and hence

the condition for dampened oscillations becomes:

    com                                        2
      pβ − pβ     ∆V 1∗ ∆V 2∗                              ∆V 1∗ ∆V 2∗
    λ         +µ               [1 − q p · p q ]    < −4λµ               · qbp · (pcom
                                                                                  q   − pq ).                                 (15)
                 ∆V 1∗ + ∆V 2∗                            ∆V 1∗ + ∆V 2∗
                                    b
         pβ


                                                                53
The left hand side of this inequality is positive. It follows then that there are no dampen-
ing oscillations in cultural and institutional change when institutions and culture are dynamic
complements; i.e., when qbp · pcom
                                            
                                    q  − pq (β ∗ ,q∗ ) > 0 at the interior locally stable steady state
(β ∗ , q ∗ ).
     Conversely we have dampening oscillations when (15) is satisfied. If culture and institutions
are substitutes, qbp · (pcom
                         q    − pq ) = −bqp · (pcom
                                                 q     − pq ). In this case, non-monotonic dynamics in
culture and institutions obtain when
            com                                         2
       λ pβ − pβ       µ ∆V 1∗ ∆V 2∗                             ∆V 1∗ ∆V 2∗
                    +         1∗      2∗
                                         [1 −  q p · pq ]   <4                 qbp · (pcom
                                                                                       q   − pq ) . (16)
                                                               ∆V 1∗ + ∆V 2∗
                                               b
       µ        pβ     λ ∆V + ∆V

Using the local stability conditions for the Hessian at (β ∗ , q ∗ ),
                                                      pcom
                                                       β   − pβ
                                                                  = −a < 0
                                                          pβ
                                   ∆V 1∗ ∆V 2∗
                                                  [1 − qbp · pq ] = b > 0
                                  ∆V 1∗ + ∆V 2∗
                              ∆V 1∗ ∆V 2∗
                           4               qbp · (pcom
                                                   q    − pq ) = M > 0.
                             ∆V 1∗ + ∆V 2∗
Denoting x = µ/λ, the relative rate of change between culture and institutions, condition (16),
can be written as
                                      (−a + bx)2 < M x.                                    (17)

Simple examination of this condition reveals that (17) is satisfied when x ∈ (x− ; x+ ), with
                                                 q
                                  (2ab + M ) ±       (2ab + M )2 − 4(ab)2
                           x± =                                        > 0.
                                                   2b2
   As a consequence, non-monotonic dynamics of institutions and culture around the locally
stable steady state (β ∗ , q ∗ ) are obtained when institutions and culture are dynamic substitutes
and the relative rate of change between culture and institutions is neither too low, neither too
high.                                                                                           

Proposition 7. Proof. Assume that the steady state institutions, β ∗ , are locally stable when
culture remains constant at q = q ∗ along the institutional dynamics; and, conversely, assume that
the cultural steady state q = q ∗ is locally stable when the institutional context remains constant
along the cultural dynamics. Formally,
                                        h pcom −p i
                                           β     β
                                             pβ                  <0
                                                     (β ∗ ,q ∗ )     .                         (18)
                                       1 − [pq · qbp ](β ∗ ,q∗ ) > 0

   Suppose that conditions (18) are satisfied at an interior steady state (β ∗ , q ∗ ). Then with
enough regularity of the policy functions pcom and p, there exists a connected neighborhood of

                                                     54
                                          h pcom −p i
                                                   β
(β ∗ , q ∗ ) such that the trace T = λ β pβ           − µGq ∗ (1 − q ∗ ) [1 − qbp · pq ] does not change sign on
that domain. The Bendixson Negative Criterion precludes then, in this case, the existence of
local periodic orbits or limit cycles around (β ∗ , q ∗ ) in that domain.
      Note that when (18) are globally satisfied for all (β, q) ∈ [0, 1] × [0, 1] ,.it is not possible to
get globally periodic orbits and limit cycles for dynamical system (5,8). Indeed                  given
                                                                                          h pcom −p   i that in the
                                                                                                    β
simple connected domain D = [0, 1] × [0, 1].the sign of the trace T = λ                      β
                                                                                               pβ      + µGq ∗ (1 −
q ∗ ) [1 − qbp · pq ] is always strictly negative, the Bendixson Negative Criterion again precludes the
existence of periodic orbits of (11) in this domain.                                                             



Cultural Multiplier

Proposition 8. Proof. Recall the required normalizations:
                                 ∂p(β ∗ , q ∗ , γ)                  ∂P (β ∗ , q ∗ , γ)
                         pβ =                      > 0, pcom
                                                         γ   − pγ =                    >0                       (19)
                                     ∂β                                  ∂γ
    The comparative statics on (β ∗ , q ∗ ) on the parameter are then easily obtained by differentiation
of (??). After tedious computations,
                                                                    p
                                pcom     − pγ + pcom
                                                            
                    dβ ∗          γ                  q   − pq qbp 1−pγq qbp
                          =                   
                                                                    p
                     dγ         pβ − pcom        − pcom
                                                             
                                                         − pq qbp 1−pβq qbp
                                           β         q
                                                                               p
                                                pcom − pγ + pcom
                                                                           
                     dq ∗       qbp pβ           γ              q   − pq qbp 1−pγq qbp
                          =                  ·                                       .
                     dγ       1 − pq qbp        p − pcom − pcom − p qb
                                                                              pβ
                                                    β     β           q        q   p 1−pq qbp

Consider now the impact of a change in γ on institutional change, fixing q to its pre-shock value.
Differentiating the first equation in (??),
                                                pcom
                                   ∗                    
                                    dβ           γ   − pγ
                                             =            > 0.
                                     dγ q=q∗    p − pcom      β   β
                                                                          
The last inequality is a consequence of stability condition (12) pβ − pcom
                                                                       β     /pβ > 0 coupled with
condition (19). moreover,
                                                                 (pcom
                                                                   γ   −pγ )
                                               pcom
                                                                            p + pγ
                  dβ ∗        dβ ∗          − pq                            ) β
                                    
                                                q     qbp        (pβ −pcom
                                                                        β
                    =              +                                                     .
               dγ        dγ q=q∗       pβ − pcom   1 − pq qbp      (pcom
                                                                     q    −pq )     pβ
                                                              1 −               q
                                             β
                                                                   (pβ −pcom  ) p 1−pq qbp
                                                                                b
                                                                          β
                                                                                   ∗  ∗
Hence, the Cultural multiplier on institutional change µ, at (β ∗ , q ∗ ), m = dβ  dγ      / dβ
                                                                                              dγ                − 1,
                                                                                                        q=q ∗
is positive if and only if,
                                                          (pcom
                                                            γ   −pγ )
                               pcom
                                                                     p + pγ
                                q    − pq      qbp        (pβ −pcom
                                                                 β   ) β
                                                                                  > 0.
                                pβ − pcom   1 − pq qbp      (pcom
                                                              q    −pq )     pβ
                                                       1 −               q
                                      β
                                                            (pβ −pcom  ) p 1−pq qbp
                                                                         b
                                                                   β



                                                         55
                                                                        
The stability condition, coupled with (19), implies that pβ − pcom    β    > 0, 1 − pq qbp > 0, 1 −
   com                         com
 (pq −pq )     pβ            (pγ −pγ )                                        (pcom
                                                                                γ   −pγ )
           q p     > 0, and            pβ >  0. When  pγ > 0, it follows that             p + pγ > 0.
(pβ −pβ ) 1−pq qbp
       com                         com
                             (pβ −pβ )                                        (pβ −pcom ) β
           b
                                                                                    β
Therefore m > 0 if and only if pcom
                                             
                                     q   − pq qbp > 0, which is the condition for the dynamics of
institutions and culture to be dynamic complementary.                                             

Decomposition of the Cultural Multiplier on an aggregate variable A(p, q, a1 (p), a2 (p)).
The effects of a shock can be decomposed as follows:
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
    dA 
           
                                                                          q   p     dβ ∗
                                                                                   
                          1        2
                                                    1        2
                                                                       b p  β
        =      Ap + Aa1 ap + Aa2 ap pβ + Aq + Ap + Aa1 ap + Aa2 ap pq
    dγ                                                                  1 − pq qbp 
                                                                                    dγ
           ←−−−−−−direct
                       −−−−−−−−−−−−→
           
                                         ←−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−→
           
                            effect
                                                               indirect effect

The effect of γ on institutions will come from a direct effect as well as an indirect one. The
direct effect in turn will be composed of two terms: a direct effect of the policy change induced
by an institutional change pβ on the aggregate variable A (i.e., the term Ap ), and the impact of
changes in private actions a1 (p) and a2 (p) as induced also by the policy change pβ ), the term
  Aa1 a1p + Aa2 a2p pβ ). The indirect effect of cultural evolution will come from the compositional
                   

effect of changing the cultural group sizes (Aq ), plus again the change in policy and private actions
 Ap + Aa1 a1p + Aa2 a2p pq which such a cultural compositional change induces.
                         

    Furthermore,
                                                                   ∗
                           dA                      1        2
                                                                    dβ
                                    = Ap + Aa1 ap + Aa2 ap pβ ·                 .
                           dγ q=q∗                                     dγ q=q∗
                                                                             ∗             
                                                                      dβ ∗
Recalling that the cultural multiplier on institutions is m =          dγ     / dβ
                                                                                 dγ           −1 ,
                                                                                      q=q ∗


                                          Aq + Ap + Aa1 a1p + Aa2 a2p pq qbp pβ
                                                                    
              dA         dA
         mA =    /                    −1=                                       (1 + m);
              dγ         dγ   q=q ∗           Ap + Aa1 a1p + Aa2 a2p pβ 1 − pq qbp

and hence,                    "                         #
                                   Aq                        qbp
                     mA =                       + pq               (1 + m).                       (20)
                                     1        2
                           Ap + Aa1 ap + Aa2 ap           1 −  pq qbp




                                                    56
Appendix B: Extensions
We briefly discuss two main extensions to our analysis of the dynamics of culture and institutions
in the text. First of all we consider the case in which p(β, qt+1 ) is not necessarily monotonic, that
is, when Assumption 2 is not satisfied. Second, we consider a general society in which political
and cultural group are distinct, as delineated in Section 4 and in some of the example societies
studied in Section 5.

Non-monotonic p(β, qt+1 ).
Consider the case in which Assumption 2 is not imposed and hence p(β, qt+1 ) can be non-
monotonic. Then the dynamical system for β i is characterized by the following implicit difference
equation:
          
                          com i
           β
            " such that p (βt , qt+1 ) = p(β, qt+1 )                             if it exists,
  i                                    com  I
 βt+1 =        arg max p(β, qt+1 ) if p (βt , qt+1 ) > p(β, qt+1 ), ∀0 ≤ β ≤ 1                (21)
          
                                       com  I
                                                                                  else
               arg min p(β, qt+1 ) if p (βt , , qt+1 ) < p(β, qt+1 ), ∀0 ≤ β ≤ 1
          

    In this case it is straightforward to show that the institutional dynamics might be under-
                                                                             i
determined, that is, equation 21 might define an implicit map (βti , qt ) → βt+1 which is multi-
valued in an open set of the domain. Furthermore, in this case, the dynamics of institutions
can easily give rise to limit cycles. Consider for instance the example in Figure 1, with initial
condition β0 , where the path β1 − > β2 − > β1 constitutes such a limit cycle for a particular
selection of the solutions to P (β, q) = 0.




                                                 57
                 p




                                                                   p q
                                                                   p,



                                                              p com , q


                       1         0                     2                  

                        Figure A.3: Limit cycle ( ,  ) for p(,q) non-monotonic




Distinct political and cultural groups.
Consider the general society delineated in Section 4, where political and cultural groups are
distinct. We briefly indicate here how the concepts, Assumptions, and Propositions in the text
are extended to this society.
    The societal equilibrium given institutions β and cultural distribution q is a tuple {a, p} such
that:
                                         P i P ij ij ij                  
                            p ∈ arg maxp    i β     jq u     a , p; a, q
                                                                                               (22)
                            aij ∈ arg max uij aij , p; a, q i ∈ I, j ∈ J.
                                                           

    The societal commitment equilibrium given institutions β and cultural distribution q is a tuple
{acom , pcom }
             such that:

                 {acom , pcom } ∈ arg max i β i j q ij uij aij , p; a, q
                                           P     P                       
                                                                                               (23)
                                s.t. aij ∈ arg max uij aij , p; a, q , i ∈ I, j ∈ J
                                                                    

   Restricting to dychotomous groups, that is I = {1, 2} and J = {a, b} the societal equilibrium,
the societal commitment equilibrium, and the societal optimum can be denoted, respectively:
                                                                  h                         i
                [a(β, q), p(β, q)] ; [acom (β, q), pcom (β, q)] ; aef f (β, q), pef f (β, q)

Assumption 6 Utility functions are sufficiently regular so that
   a(β, q), p(β, q), acom (β, q), pcom (β, q) are continuous functions.

                                                       58
Assumption 7 Utility functions are sufficiently regular so that p(β, q) is monotonic in β.

   Adding an index t to denote time, institutions evolve as a solution to the following design
problem:

                                           ij
                        X           X
                              βti              uij aij (βt+1 , qt+1 ), p(βt+1 , qt+1 ); a(βt+1 , qt+1 )
                                                                                                       
                max                       qt+1                                                             (24)
                 βt+1
                        i∈I         j∈J


Proposition 9 Under Assumption 6-7, and given (qt , qt+1 ), the dynamics of institutions βti ,
i ∈ I, is governed by the following implicit difference equation:
                    
                         i            com
                     β
                       " such that p (β, qt+1 ) = p(βt , qt+1 )         if it exists,
            i                    com                                i
           βt+1 =          1 if p (βt , qt+1 ) > p(β, qt+1 ), ∀0 ≤ β ≤ 1                (25)
                    
                                 com                                i
                                                                         else
                           0 if p (βt , qt+1 ) < p(β, qt+1 ), ∀0 ≤ β ≤ 1
                    

   It is convenient to define P (β, q) := pcom (β, q) − p(β, q).

Proposition 10 Under Assumption 6-7, for any given q, the dynamics of institutions governed
by (25) have at least one stationary state. An interior stationary states β ∗ obtains as a solution
to P (β, q) = 0. The boundary stationary state β i = 1 obtains when P (β, q) |β i =1 > 0; while the
boundary stationary state β i = 0 obtains when P (β, q) |β i =0 < 0.

Proposition 11 Under Assumption 6-7, for any given q, in the continuous time limit, the dy-
namics governed by (25) satisfies the following properties:

 if P (β, q) > 0 for any β i ∈ [0, 1], then β i = 1 is a globally stable stationary state.

 if P (β, q) < 0 for any β i ∈ [0, 1], then β i = 0 is a globally stable stationary state;

 any boundary stationary state is always locally stable;
                                                                                   ∂P (β ∗ ,q)
 if an interior stationary state β ∗ exists, it is locally stable if                 ∂β i
                                                                                                 < 0.


   Cultural transmission implies:

                                              Pti,jj     = dij + (1 − dij )qtij
                                                     0
                                              P i,jj     = (1 − dij )(1 − qtij )


            V i,jj (βt+1 , qt+1 ) = uij aij (βt+1 , qt+1 ), p(βt+1 , qt+1 ); a(βt+1 , qt+1 ), qt+1
                                                                                                   
                                                                                                           (26)
                                         0                                                         
           V i,j6=j (βt+1 , qt+1 ) = uij aij (βt+1 , qt+1 ), p(βt+1 , qt+1 ); a(βt+1 , qt+1 ), qt+1        (27)



                                                              59
Let C(dij ) denote socialization costs. Direct socialization is then the solution to the following
parental socialization problem:
                                                                          0       0
               max −C(dij ) + Pti,jj V i,jj (βt+1 , qt+1 ) + Pti,jj V i,jj (βt+1 , qt+1 ), s. t. 1) .
             dij ∈[0,1]


Calling ∆V ij (βt+1 , qt+1 ) = V i,jj (βt+1 , qt+1 ) − V i,j6=j (βt+1 , qt+1 ), the cultural intolerance of trait
j in political group i, it follows that the direct socialization, with some notational abuse, has the
form:
                        dij = dij (qt , ∆V ij (βt+1 , qt+1 )) = dij (β, q), i ∈ I, j ∈ J                    (28)

Assumption 8 Utility and socialization cost functions are sufficiently regular so that
   dij = dij (β, q) is continuous.

Proposition 12 Under Assumption 8, and given βt+1 , the dynamics of culture qtij is governed
by the following difference equation:
                                                                          0
                                                                             
                                    ij
                                   qt+1 − qtij = qtij (1 − qtij ) dij − dij .                               (29)

evaluated at dij = dij (qt , ∆V ij (βt+1 , qt+1 )) satisfying (28).
                                                                   0
    It is convenient to define Dij (β, q) := dij (β, q) − dij (β, q).

Proposition 13 Under Assumption 8, for any given β, the dynamics of institutions governed by
(29) have at least the two boundary stationary states, q ij = 0 and q ij = 1. An interior stationary
states 0 < q ij∗ < 1 obtains as a solution to D(β, q) = 0.

Proposition 14 Under Assumption 8, for any given β, in the continuous time limit, the dynam-
ics governed by (29) satisfies the following properties:

 if Dij (β, q) > 0 for any q ij ∈ [0, 1], then qtij converges to q ij = 1 from any initial condition
     q0ij > 0;

 if Dij (β, q) < 0 for any q ij ∈ [0, 1], then qtij converges to q ij = 0 from any initial condition
     q0ij < 1;

 if Dij (β, 1) > 0, then q ij = 1 is locally stable ;

 if D(β, 0) < 0, then q ij = 0 is locally stable;
                                                        ∂Dij (β,q ij∗ )
 if an interior stationary state q ij∗ exists, and         ∂q ij
                                                                              < 0, it is locally stable.


    Consider the following assumprion:

                                                       60
Assumption 9 Socialization costs are quadratic:
                                                        1 ij 2
                                            C(dij ) =     d     .
                                                        2



We then obtain:

Corollary 2 Under Assumption 9,
                                                            0           0
                              Dij (β, q) = ∆V ij (β, q)q ij − ∆V ij (β, q)q ij ,

and hence interior steady states are characterized by solutions to:

                                           ∆V ij (β, q)        q ij
                                                             =                                         (30)
                                          ∆V ij 0 (β, 1 − q)   q ij 0

    Under Assumptions 6-8, the joint dynamics of institutions and culture is governed by the
system (25,29), which we report here for convenience:

                      
                      
                       "   β i such that pcom (β, qt+1 ) − p(βt , qt+1 )              if it exists,
             i                         com                                  i
            βt+1    =          1 if p (βt , qt+1 ) > p(β, qt+1 ), ∀0 ≤ β ≤ 1
                                                                                      else
                               0 if pcom (βt , , qt+1 ) < p(β, qt+1 ), ∀0 ≤ β i ≤ 1
                      
                                                 0
                                                    
       ij
      qt+1 − qtij   = q ij (1 − qtij ) dij − dij , with dij = dij (qt , ∆V ij (βt+1 , qt+1 )).

Proposition 15 Under Assumptions 6-8 the dynamical system (25,29) has at least one station-
ary state. Furthermore, if both the institutional and the cultural dynamics display an interior
stationary state, respectively, for all 0 ≤ q ij ≤ and all 0 ≤ β ≤ 1, then the dynamical system
(25,29) has at least one interior stationary state.




                                                      61
Appendix C: Assumptions on fundamentals
In this Appendix we translate Assumptions 1-2 into restrictions on fundamentals.

Sufficient conditions for the existence and monotonicity of the societal equilib-
rium p(β, q).
Without loss of generality, restrict p ∈ [0, 1]. The indirect utility function is

                                                      ui (ai , p; A, q);

where the individual private action ai ∈ [0, 1] and A is an aggregate population level index
A = A(a1 , a2 , p, q).
   Assume ui (.) is twice differentiable in (ai , p; A, q) and strictly concave in ai (ie. ui11 < 0).
Assume also that the aggregator function A(.) is differentiable in (a1 , a2 , p, q) and such that
the image of [0, 1]4 by A(.) is an interval [Amin ; Amax ] . Finally, assume the following boundary
conditions:

       ui1 (0, p; A, q) ≥ 0, ui1 (1, p; A, q) ≤ 0 for all (p, A, q) ∈ [0, 1] × [Amin ; Amax ] × [0, 1] .

These conditions and the fact that ui (.) is a strictly concave function in ai ensure that the
optimal individual behavior for a given value of p and A is characterized by a continuous function
ai (p, A, q) ∈ [0, 1] obtained from the First Order Condition:

                                                ui1 (ai , p; A, q) = 0.

For given values of p ∈ P and q ∈ [0, 1], a Nash equilibrium in private actions a1N , a2N and
aggregate index AN (p, q) is characterized by the solution of the following system:

                  aiN = ai p, AN , q          for i ∈ (1, 2) and AN = A(a1N , a2N , p, q),
                                         

which in turn translates into the following condition for AN :

                              AN = A(a1 p, AN , q , a2 p, AN , q , p, q).
                                                               
                                                                                                           (31)

The following sufficient conditions ensure the existence of a unique Nash equilibrium in private
actions a1N (p, q) , a2N (p, q) , AN (p, q):
                                             X              ui13
                                    1−               A0i           > 0 for all (a1 , a2, , A, p, q)
                                             i=1,2
                                                           −ui11

               A(a (p, Amin , q) , a (p, Amin , q) , q) > Amin for all (p, q) ∈ [0, 1]2
                   1                 2

              A(a1 (p, Amax , q) , a2 (p, Amax , q) , q) < Amax for all (p, q) ∈ [0, 1]2 .

                                                              62
The first condition ensures that the function Γ (x, p, q) = x − A(a1 (p, x, q) , a2 (p, x, q) , p, q) is
increasing for all (p, q) ∈ [0, 1]2 . The second and the third conditions ensure that Γ (Amin , p, q) <
0 < Γ (Amax , p, q); Together these conditions ensure the existence of a unique value AN (p, q)
satisfying (31) and thus correspondingly a unique Nash equilibrium profile a1N (p, q) , a2N (p, q).
    Moreover, differentiating,

                                                          uj
                                          Ap + j=1,2 A0j 12j
                                               P
                           dAN                           −u11
                                     =                       
                            dp                 P       0 uj13
                                            1 − j=1,2 Aj j
                                                               −u11

                                                                              uj
                                                              Ap + j=1,2 A0j 12j
                                                                   P
                           daiN            ui12       ui13                   −u11
                                     =            +                               .
                                          −ui11       −ui11
                                                              
                            dp                                     P       0 uj13
                                                                1 − j=1,2 Aj j
                                                                             −u11


   The condition for an interior societal equilibrium p(β, q) is obtained from the First Order
Conditions of the policymaker,

                            β u12 (a1 , p, A, q) + (1 − β) u22 a2 , p, A, q = 0.
                                                                           


After substitution of the Nash equibrium private actions a1N (p, q) , a2N (p, q) , AN (p, q), this
condition can be written as
                                       Ψ(p, q, β) = 0;                                        (32)

with

        Ψ(p, q, β) = β u12 (a1N (p, q), p, AN (p, q), q) + (1 − β) u22 a2N (p, q), p, AN (p, q), q .
                                                                                                  


Moreover a corner societal equilibrium p(β, q) = 0 (resp. p(β, q) = 1) obtains when Ψ(0, q, β) ≤ 0
(resp. Ψ(1, q, β) ≥ 1).
    A sufficient condition for the existence of a unique societal equilibrium p(β, q) consists in the
function Ψ(p, q, β) being decreasing in p for all q ∈ [0, 1]. Given the smoothness assumptions on
the functions ui (.) and A(.) this is satisfied when the following condition holds:

                                   dai               dA
                            ui12       + ui22 + ui23    < 0 for all i ∈ (1, 2) .
                                   dp                dp
In turn, in terms of the fundamentals, this conditions becomes:
                                                              
                                                       j
                                                    0 u12                               uj
                                                                        Ap + j=1,2 A0j 12j
                                          P                                  P
          ui12   i     i    Ap +            j=1,2 Aj −uj            i
                u12 + u13                                         u
                                                                + 23i 
                                                                                       −u
                                                                
                                                             11                           11
                                                                                             < 1;
         −ui22  −ui11 −ui11                            uj13       −u22                uj
                             1 − j=1,2 A0j                                           0
                                 P                                           P
                                                           j              1 − j=1,2 Aj j13
                                                       −u11                            −u11




                                                        63
or
                                                                              uj
                                                               Ap + j=1,2 A0j 12j
                                                                   P
                     2
                                                           !
              ui12
                   
                             ui12   ui13         ui23                        −u11
                         +                 +                                       < 1 for i ∈ (1, 2) ,
             ui22 ui11       ui22   ui11         −ui22
                                                              
                                                                   P       0 uj13
                                                                1 − j=1,2 Aj j
                                                                              −u11

with Ap = ∂A/∂p, and Aj = ∂A/∂aj ,. This condition is more likely to be satisfied when ui11
and ui22 are large enough.

    To obtain a condition ensuring the monotonicity in β of the societal equilibrium p(β, q), we
differentiate (6), obtaining
                                        ∂p   u1 − u22
                                           = 2        .
                                        ∂β    −Ψp
Thus p(β, q) is monotonic in β when u12 − u22 has a constant sign.
   This condition simplifies if the preferences structure is characterized by some degree of sepa-
rability:


                                     ui (a, p; A, q) = u(a, p; A, q, θi )
                                                           = v (a, p, θi ) + H(p, A)

and θ1 > θ2 . Such preferences lead to

                                           a1N     = a(p, θ1 )
                                           a2N     = a(p, θ2 )
                                           AN      = A(a(p, θ1 ), a(p, θ2 ), p, q).

A sufficient condition for the existence of a unique societal equilibrium, given that uj13 = 0, is
then                                                               
                  i
                     2                                         j
                 v12                HpA                X        v
            i           i +      i
                                                Ap +       A0j 12j  < 1 for i ∈ (1, 2) ,
            v22 + Hpp v11       −(v22 + Hpp )         j=1,2    −v11
       i = v” (a, p, θ ) . But
where vkl    kl       i


                         u12 − u22 = u2 (a1N , p, AN , q, θ1 ) − u2 a2N , p, AN , q, θ2
                                                                                              

                                      = v2 (a(p, θ1 ), p, θ1 ) − v2 (a(p, θ2 ), p, θ2 ) .

Thus a sufficient conditions for the monotonicity of the societal equilibrium p(β, q) is that vp (a(p, θ), p, θ)
                                                       vaθ
is monotonic in θ; or, after manipulations, that vap (−v aa )
                                                              + vpθ has a constant sign.
    Consider as an example the following preference structure:

                             u(a, p, A, q, θ) = (1 − p)a + θW (1 − a) + H(p, A);

                                                                  64
with W (.) a strictly increasing and concave function, A = qa1 + (1 − q)a2 , H(p, A) concave in p.
Then,

                                va = (1 − p) − θW 0 (1 − a), vp = −a
                               vap = −1, vaθ = −W 0 (1 − a)
                             −vaa = −θW ”(1 − a)
                               vpθ = 0, vpp = 0.

The sufficient condition for a well defined societal equilibrium p(β, q) can be written as
                                                           
                                         X
                      1            HpA                  1
                             +                   qj         < 1 text f ori = 1, 2.
                  Hpp θi W ”     −(Hpp )             θj W ”
                                              j=1,2

                                                      hP             i
                                                                  1
   When HpA > 0, given that −(Hpp ) > 0 and            j=1,2 j θj W ” < 0, this condition is satisfied
                                                            q
when Hpp θ1i W ” < 1, which in turn holds when 1 < Hpp W ”θ2 . This is satisfied when Hpp W ” is
sufficiently large; that is, with enough concavity of W and H, respectively, in a and p.
    When HpA < 0, this sufficient condition can be rewritten as
                                                      
                                   1          X     1
                                      − HpA      qj  < Hpp W ”,
                                   θi               θj
                                             j=1,2


which again will be satisfied when HpA is bounded from below on the relevant domain, [0, 1] ×
[Amin , Amax ] (i.e., HpA > −K, with K > 0) and Hpp W ” > (1 + K)/θ2 . This also is satisfied with
enough concavity of W and H, respectively, in a and p.
                                                                                            vaθ
   Finally, the monotonicity of the societal equilibrium function p (β, q) holds when vap (−v aa )
                                                                                                   +vpθ
has a constant sign. But
                                        vaθ             W0
                                  vap         + vpθ =        > 0.
                                      (−vaa )          −θW ”
Thus the societal equilibrium function is monotonically increasing in β.



Sufficient conditions for the existence of the societal commitment equilibrium
pcom (β, q).
The societal commitment equilibrium given institutions β and cultural distribution q is obtained
from the following maximization problem:
                                                            N           
                    max β u1 a1N , p; AN , q + (1 − β) u2 a2 , p; AN , q
                                            
                                                                             .              (33)
                    s.t. aiN = aiN (p, q) for i ∈ (1, 2) and AN = AN (p, q)


                                                  65
Let

                          Ω (p, β, q) = β u1 a1N (p, q) , p; AN (p, q), q
                                                                                            

                                                 +(1 − β) u2 a1N (p, q) , p; AN (p, q), q .
                                                                                         


The First Order Condition for an interior societal commitment equilibrium pcom (β, q) can be
written as

              Ωp (p, β, q) = β u12 (a1N , p, AN , q) + (1 − β) u22 a2N , p, AN , q
                                                                                                  

                                                                                                       dAN
                                      + β u13 (a1N , p, AN , q) + (1 − β) u23 a2N , p, AN , q
                                                                                                          dp
                               = 0.

      A sufficient (strong) condition is then,

                                            Ωpp (p, β, q) < 0, for all p ∈ [0, 1] .

Differentiating,
                                                    X        daiN                dAN
                          Ωpp (p, β, q) =                          + ui22 + ui23
                                                            β i (ui12                 )
                                                               dp                  dp
                                                    i=1,2
                                                       X          iN                 dAN
                                                                                    
                                                           i  i da        i       i
                                                    +     β u13       + u23 + u33
                                                                  dp                   dp
                                                        i=1,2
                                                        X                 d2 AN
                                                    +           β i ui3         .
                                                                           dp2
                                                        i=1,2

Thus a sufficient condition for Ωpp (p, β, q) < 0 is that, for i = 1, 2,

                   daiN                       dAN        iN               dAN       d2 AN
                                                                       
                                                    i da
              ui12        +   ui22   +   ui23    + u13         i     i
                                                            + u23 + u33       + ui3       < 0.
                   dp                         dp       dp                  dp        dp2

Recall
                                                                                        uj
                                                                        Ap + j=1,2 A0j 12j
                                                                             P
                                     daiN       ui12         ui13                      −u11
                                            =           +
                                                −ui11        −ui11
                                                                                           
                                      dp                                     P       0 uj13
                                                                          1 − j=1,2 Aj j
                                                                                           −u11

and
                                                                  uj
                                                  Ap + j=1,2 A0j 12j
                                                      P
                                             dAN                 −u11
                                                 =                  .
                                              dp                 uj
                                                   1 − j=1,2 A0j 13j
                                                      P
                                                                                    −u11




                                                                   66
Tedious manipulations show then that a sufficient condition for Ωpp (p, β, q) < 0 is that
                                                                                             j
                                  2                                       Ap + P     A  0 u12
                             ui12
                                  
                                                  i    i
                                              
                                                 u u                             j=1,2 j −uj
                 Di =                 + ui22 + 2( 13 i 12 + ui23 ) + ui33                     11

                             −ui11
                                                                                                
                                                  −u11                         P       0  uj
                                                                            1 − j=1,2 Aj j 13
                                                                                           −u11
                                                           2
                                                     j
                                                 0 u12
                                         P
                     ui13
                          2       A p +       A
                                          j=1,2 j −uj           2 N
                                                               id A
                                                      11 
                 +                                        + u3
                     −ui11
                                                        
                                                 uj
                                                                dp2
                                    1 − j=1,2 A0j 13j
                                        P
                                                     −u11


is negative for i = 1, 2. Because of the term in d2 AN /dp2 , this involves complicated conditions on
the third derivatives of the indirect preference functions. When preferences are separable, of the
form

                                      ui (a, p; A, q) = u(a, p; A, q, θi )
                                                     = v (a, p, θi ) + H(p, A),

the expression Di simplifies somewhat:
                                       i 2                                        j
                                          
                         i
                                      vap      i
                                                                         X
                                                                               0 vap
                     D       =           i
                                            + vpp + (2HpA + HAA ) (Ap +       Aj j )
                                      −vaa                                      −vpp
                                                                        j=1,2

                                           d2 AN
                                     +HA         .
                                            dp2

Therefore Ω (p, β, q) is strictly concave in p when v (a, p, θi ) is sufficiently concave in (a, p).




                                                            67
