                               NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                    A LETTER AND ENCOURAGEMENT:
DOES INFORMATION INCREASE POST-SECONDARY ENROLLMENT OF UI RECIPIENTS?

                                           Andrew Barr
                                           Sarah Turner

                                       Working Paper 23374
                               http://www.nber.org/papers/w23374


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                      April 2017




 For constructive comments, we would like to thank seminar participants at the University of
 Virginia, the Federal Reserve Bank of Richmond, the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve
 System, the Institute for Research on Poverty, the Stata Applied Microeconomics conference,
 West Point, the NBER Economics of Education group, and the Naval Postgraduate School. We
 are also grateful to John Anders, Nate Pattison, and Fran Murphy for research and editorial
 assistance. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the
 views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

 NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
 peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
 official NBER publications.

 © 2017 by Andrew Barr and Sarah Turner. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to
 exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
 including © notice, is given to the source.
A Letter and Encouragement: Does Information Increase Post-Secondary Enrollment of UI
Recipients?
Andrew Barr and Sarah Turner
NBER Working Paper No. 23374
April 2017
JEL No. I23,J18,J24,J64

                                           ABSTRACT

For individuals who experience job loss, enrollment in post-secondary programs may provide an
opportunity to improve future employment outcomes. However, decisions to enroll may be
hampered by insufficient information about the benefits and costs and the necessary steps and
assistance available to facilitate such investments. Using variation in the dissemination and
timing of letters sent to UI recipients containing this information, we find that individuals sent the
information are 40% more likely to enroll. These findings suggest that well-coordinated
information interventions delivered with institutional support may be more effective than raising
the generosity of existing government programs in increasing participation.


Andrew Barr
Department of Economics
Texas A&M University
4228 TAMU
College Station, TX, 77843-4228
abarr@tamu.edu

Sarah Turner
University of Virginia
Department of Economics
Monroe Hall, Room 237
248 McCormick Rd
Charlottesville, VA 22903
and NBER
sturner@virginia.edu
1       Introduction

        The sharp erosion of economic conditions associated with the Great Recession led to
a dramatic spike in job loss in the U.S., with the unemployment rate rising from 6.5% in
October 2008 to 10% in October 2009. Of the millions of individuals who lost their jobs,
those with low earnings potential and limited education were hit hardest by the recession.
As a result of their job loss, these individuals will likely face large and long-lasting reduc-
tions in income as well as increases in the likelihood of sickness and disability (Jacobson,
LaLonde, and Sullivan 1993; Couch and Placzek 2010). However, formal training may at-
tenuate these effects. Indeed, Jacobson, Lalonde, and Sullivan (2005a) find that completing
only a few courses at a community college results in higher earnings for displaced workers;
furthermore, the estimated returns to college remain high for young individuals.1 Despite
potential earnings gains, rates of post-secondary enrollment remain low for Unemployment
Insurance (UI) recipients. This may be efficient and represent optimal individual responses
if present costs outweigh future returns from enrollment for this particular population. Al-
ternatively, constraints such as access to credit to finance enrollment or family obligations
may limit post-secondary participation. Yet, the availability of substantial federal financial
aid in the form of grants and loans would suggest that credit constraints do not form a
complete explanation for limited enrollment among UI recipients. Evidence from a series of
recent behavioral interventions suggests an alternative explanation: perhaps UI recipients
are unaware of the costs and benefits of post-secondary attainment and the necessary steps
and assistance available to facilitate such investments.
        Workers who are unemployed, particularly those who lose their jobs, may face substantial
barriers in pursuing post-secondary enrollment. One concern is that the decision to pursue
    1
     “Displaced workers” are generally distinguished from all unemployed workers in the dimensions that they have not
been discharged for cause and they are permanently separated from their employer, with a long-standing attachment
to the former employer or industry (Jacobson, LaLonde, and Sullivan 2005a). In contrast, our study focuses primarily
on UI recipients. Jacobson, LaLonde, and Sullivan (2005a, 2005b) present two of the only studies on the return to post-
secondary enrollment among displaced workers. They find that an additional year of community college education
generates increases in long-term earnings of 7 to 10% among displaced workers. In contrast, the evidence on the
effects of informal short-term training provided through the Workforce Investment Act is less definitive (for example,
see Andersson et al. 2013 and Heinrich et al. 2009).


                                                          1
college enrollment, the aid application process, and the choice of a college program well
matched to prior achievement and aspirations, may represent difficult choices for imperfectly
rational individuals. This is particularly true for those choosing among the wide array
of post-secondary programs, which can be complicated to access and navigate, as well as
the application process for federal financial aid (Dynarski and Scott-Clayton 2008). These
barriers may be especially salient for the most vulnerable among the unemployed, resulting
in an exacerbation of inequality in long-term outcomes (Bertrand, Mullainathan, and Shafir
2004). We address these questions using state variation in the dissemination and timing of
information sent to UI recipients informing them of the expected benefits of post-secondary
enrollment, potential eligibility for financial aid, and the steps necessary to navigate the
application and enrollment process. As part of the informational outreach, the intervention
also engaged state employment services offices and local financial aid administrators, priming
them to assist UI recipients interested in pursuing enrollment.
    Our primary innovation is to study the impact of an informational outreach on the
post-secondary enrollment of unemployed individuals. This is important because these indi-
viduals generally start from the bottom quartiles of the income distribution and may have
few prospects for upward mobility without access to post-secondary education. Moreover,
workers with limited education and several years of full-time labor force participation may
lack the resources, such as guidance counselors and a large group of peers making similar
decisions, available to those on a more traditional college trajectory. In contrast to our study,
most of the existing literature has focused on high-school seniors, with mixed evidence on
the effectiveness of information-based interventions.
    In May 2009, at the height of the recession, the Department of Labor and the Department
of Education issued guidelines intended to encourage post-secondary enrollment among UI
recipients and to inform these potential students of their likely eligibility for financial aid in
the form of Pell grants. The ad hoc state decisions to send UI recipients a letter of notification
about the Pell grant and other training opportunities (“Pell Letter”) following the May 2009



                                                2
guidance provides a natural experiment through which we can address open questions about
the effect of information interventions at scale (more than 20 million individuals were sent
letters).2 The information sent to UI recipients facilitated engagement with a number of
intermediaries, including employment services offices and local financial aid administrators,
who were prepared to assist individuals responding to the letter. At question is whether this
very general informational intervention affected the enrollment behavior of those experiencing
unemployment.
       We find that the “Pell Letter” increased the likelihood of enrollment substantially; UI
recipients aged 20 to 40 who received the letter were four percentage points more likely to
enroll during the following six months. These estimates are robust to multiple specifications
and treatment definitions; furthermore, the results are similar across three datasets: the
SIPP, administrative data on FAFSA filings, and data from the Benefit Accuracy Measure-
ment (BAM) survey. We address endogeneity concerns related to the sending of the letters
using two placebo exercises which reveal no effect on enrollment or FAFSA filing for two
groups of potential students during the months the letter was sent. A back of the envelope
calculation suggests that the intervention resulted in an increase in enrollment of at least
half a million UI recipients.
       The effects are somewhat larger for women than for men. The effects were most pro-
nounced for UI recipients who were black or had lower earnings potential at baseline, sug-
gesting that differences in the accessibility of information about program benefits and how
to access them may contribute to inequality. Individuals exposed to the letter were also
less likely to be employed and more likely to draw UI over the following year. We observe
moderate effects on educational attainment, but the evidence on subsequent labor mar-
ket outcomes is inconclusive given the limited window of observation available in the data.
The broad takeaway is that low cost informational interventions may have large impacts on
behavior, particularly for the most disadvantaged; in our case, the effect of informational
outreach is larger than that of increasing annual aid by $1,000 per individual (Dynarski and
  2
      For context, this is roughly equivalent to all individuals who graduated from high-school over the last six years.


                                                            3
Scott-Clayton 2013).
       Our findings are consistent with prior research that suggests information may be par-
ticularly effective when it facilitates access to assistance or simplifies the process of uptake.
While some evidence suggests that information alone may be ineffective (Denning et al. 2017;
Bettinger et al. 2012), a number of studies in the higher education context find substan-
tial effects of information provision, particularly when it is paired with access to assistance
(Hoxby and Turner 2013; Castleman and Page 2015; Barr et al. 2017; Carrell and Sacerdote
2013).3 Most existing evidence related to how information-based interventions impact college
enrollment focuses on first-time students making the transition from high school to college.4
While focused on the distinct group of individuals sent the letters, the “Pell Letter” ini-
tiative similarly conveyed information alongside connections to counselors who were primed
to assist with the navigation of the enrollment process. That this “connection” occurred is
reflected in the volume of calls received by employment services offices in response to the
letter (NASWA 2010). The formal endorsement of the letters by the White House and state
and local agencies as well as the relatively low level of existing training information and
encouragement provided to most UI recipients may have magnified the effect of the letters.
       Our analysis begins with a detailed exposition of the “Pell Letter” policy, explaining
the implementation and the potential mechanism of effect along with the observed variation
across states. In Section 3, we provide an overview of the data and the descriptive results
in our analysis. In Section 4, we cover the estimation approach, which relies on variation in
“Pell Letter” implementation within states over time to identify the effects of the intervention
   3
       Hoxby and Turner (2013) find that customized information about college application and net price has a sub-
stantial effect on where high-achieving, low-income students choose to apply and enroll, with effects on application
to a peer institution of 12.2 percentage points (22.3%) and attendance at a peer institution of 5.3 percentage points
(18.5%). Castleman and Page (2015) found that text messages and counselor-based support increased transitions
to college in two of three experimental sites with effects in the range of 5-7 percentage points. Barr et al. (2017)
find effects of a similar texting intervention on student loan borrowing levels of 5 percent, growing to 14 percent
when focusing on the students sent the messages during a relevant time period (before the priority aid deadline).
Carrell and Sacerdote (2013) find that information is only effective when combined with assistance or mentoring,
with information combined with mentoring producing an impact of about 6 percentage points (14%) on enrollment.
    4
      The Bettinger, Long, Oreopoulos, and Sanbonmatsu (2012) is an exception in that they measure the treatment
effect of an intervention providing financial aid application guidance to adult students and find a college enrollment
effect of about 13%.




                                                          4
on enrollment. Section 5 concludes.


2     “Pell Letter” Guidance and Implementation

2.1    Enrollment of UI Recipients and the “Pell Letter” Initiative

      At the height of the fiscal crisis, the Executive Branch, the Department of Labor, and
the Department of Education worked together to encourage UI recipients to invest in train-
ing. With the May 2009 announcement that nearly 540,000 individuals lost jobs in the
prior month, President Obama announced a proactive effort to encourage post-secondary
investment and to improve the alignment of the Department of Labor and Department of
Education policies affecting the unemployed. In a speech on May 9, 2009, President Obama
noted:

       In a 21st century economy where the most valuable skill you can sell is your
       knowledge, education is the single best bet we can make not just for our individual
       success, but for the success of the nation as a whole. So if we want to help people
       not only get back on their feet today but prosper tomorrow, we need to take a
       rigorous new approach to higher education and technical training.

      The policy initiatives were multipronged and involved coordinated action from the De-
partment of Labor and the Department of Education. First, in a guidance letter, Secretary
of Labor Hilda Solis sent a letter to all states encouraging them to inform all UI recipients
of the benefits of post-secondary enrollment and opportunities for federal financial aid and
related post-secondary education options. Second, Department of Education Secretary Arne
Duncan sent a letter to all post-secondary financial aid officers encouraging them to facili-
tate the determination of aid eligibility for UI recipients. At the federal level, these efforts
were promoted through the new website, Opportunity.gov. In the words of higher education
policy expert Anthony Carnevale (2009), “[w]ith one quick opening step Obama crossed the
Mall between the DOE and the DOL.”

                                               5
       The federal guidance was in no way binding and states were given latitude to decide
whether to send a letter to UI recipients, when to send the letter, and to whom to send
the letter. Roughly forty states had sent or were in the process of sending these letters by
the end of 2009 (National Association of State Workforce Agencies 2010). The decision in
each state resided with the state employment office. Broadly, the letters sent by the states
included three general messages: (1) they encouraged UI recipients to seek training, (2) they
informed UI recipients about the Pell grant program and educational opportunities, and (3)
they suggested that UI recipients would be given special consideration for Pell grant receipt.
       Beyond information distributed by state employment agencies, the federal Department of
Education also provided guidance to colleges and universities which was intended to make it
easier for institutions to “use ‘professional judgment,’ to adjust aid awards for those workers
who had experienced job losses.”5 The guidance indicated that:

        [D]uring this period of economic hardship, you may use the letter from the state
        unemployment agency, or other evidence that a student is receiving unemploy-
        ment benefits, to document that the income earned from work of that student
        is zero for the purposes of adjusting data items for the student on the student’s
        federal financial aid application. For purposes of implementing this letter only,
        unemployment benefits can also be considered . . . Unemployed individuals will be
        able to present letters for 90 days from the date of issuance of those letters to an
        aid administrator for consideration under this guidance. (The letter should not be
        accepted if you know that an applicant already has obtained other employment.)
        Other verification of current receipt of unemployment benefits is an acceptable
        substitute for the state unemployment agency letter.6

In effect, those able to present information on eligibility for UI were to be treated as having
zero income for calculating eligibility for federal financial aid. While many aid administrators
   5
     While the letters to UI recipients merely mentioned “special consideration”, “professional judgment” (the process
by which aid administrators are allowed to adjust data elements on the FAFSA) was the “special consideration” given.
   6
     The full guidance letter is available at http://www2.ed.gov/policy/gen/guid/secletter/090512.html


                                                          6
were already adjusting income for UI recipients, the letter sent by state employment offices
to UI recipients served as an effective ticket for determination of financial aid eligibility. A
second feature of this guidance letter to financial aid administrators was assurance that the
use of professional judgment in the case of UI recipients would not affect the likelihood that
the college or university was selected for program review by the Department of Education.7
      The Department of Labor issued an update to the original guidance on July 8, 2009 in
which it recommended clarifying the correspondence with UI recipients to make clear the
need for beneficiaries to check to make sure any enrollment satisfied the states “approved
training” criteria.8 In addition, this guidance acknowledged a strong initial impact among
states that had sent letters within weeks of the initial mailing, noting that “[s]everal states
that have already sent their initial mailings have experienced a two to three percent response
rate.”


2.2      Information on State-Specific Initiatives

      We systematically (and repeatedly) contacted each state to inquire about whether the
state workforce agency sent a letter and, if so, the timing and incidence of the letter. Our ini-
tial requests were in the form of a survey sent via email (with follow-up). For non-respondent
states, we also sent a paper document by mail, followed up with several phone calls. For per-
sistent non-responders, we sent FOIA or public records requests as permitted by state rules
requesting a copy of the state’s letter (if one was sent) and other descriptive information on
the initiative (see Appendix A1 for additional information). We received responses from 46
states and the District of Columbia; we used a pre-existing survey to determine that three
states did not send letters; and we have been unable to obtain information from Tennessee.
      Figure 1 provides an overview of state participation in the initiative, with the period
    7
      The letter acknowledged the likely reluctance of aid administrators to employ professional judgment and the
expected modification in policy: “We know that many financial aid administrators have been reluctant to use pro-
fessional judgment because the Department has used the percentage of students for whom a professional judgment
determination has been made as part of its risk-based model to select institutions for program reviews. For the
2008-09 and 2009-10 award years, the Department will make appropriate adjustments to its risk-based model.”
    8
      See http://workforcesecurity.doleta.gov/dmstree/tegl/tegl2k8/tegl_21-08ch1.pdf



                                                       7
from May 2009 to March 2010 displayed across the columns.9 Shaded cells in each state and
month indicate that the state sent letters to UI recipients in that month. Overall, at least
40 states and the District of Columbia sent letters and, among those sending, there is wide
variation in sending patterns. For example, California and Oklahoma sent the letters for only
a short period, whereas others such as Missouri and Wyoming sent the letters repeatedly.
There is also variation in the timing of initial letter sending; although 3 states managed to
send letters promptly in June of 2009, the largest addition of states sending letters occurred
between July and August 2009, and some states did not send the letter until 2010. Anecdotal
evidence from an external survey suggests that variation in the timing of sending was largely
idiosyncratic, but we explore the potential endogeneity issues further in Section 6. Finally,
there is variation in the type of individual sent the letter. In some states and months (shaded
black), the letter was sent to all UI recipients, while in others (with diagonal shading), the
letter was sent only to new UI recipients. In two states (shaded with cross-hatch), letters were
sent only to individuals who began drawing UI after the announcement of the intervention
in May 2009. In these states, individuals who began receiving UI prior to May 2009 were not
exposed to the letters regardless of when the state workforce agency decided to send them.


2.3    Theoretical Channels and Mechanism of Impact

      UI recipients will enroll if the expected value of future benefits exceeds the costs. The
intervention may have affected either the real or perceived value of future benefits or costs.
First, the intervention may have affected the real monetary cost of pursuing enrollment by
increasing the financial aid available to UI recipients. Second, the intervention may have
affected the perceived value of future benefits or costs. Recent evidence from behavioral
economics suggests that the provision of simplified information may change perceived benefits
or costs when information frictions or deficits are present. Changes to perceived benefits or
costs may have resulted if the letters provided new information to UI recipients regarding the
   9
     Maine stopped sending the letters in December 2010 and Wisconsin and Wyoming stopped sending in January
2011. All other states sending the letters in March 2010 continued sending letters throughout the sample period.



                                                       8
availability of financial aid, the expected return to training, or the rules governing receipt
of UI benefits while enrolled. Finally, a more subtle reduction in real or perceived costs
may have been brought about if the intervention reduced the complexity or hassle of taking
pro-active steps towards enrollment.
    Following the above framework, there are several potential mechanisms through which
the intervention might affect behavior. UI recipients may be more likely to enroll due to real
increases in the financial aid available to them. While evidence on the effect of Pell eligibility
on enrollment is relatively weak, substantial evidence indicates that increases in financial
aid boost enrollment (Dynarski and Scott-Clayton 2013). Alternatively, the intervention
may address information deficits related to the costs and benefits of enrolling if it changed
individuals’ perceptions about the aid available, the expected return to training, or the
possibility of continuing to receive UI benefits while enrolled. Finally, the intervention may
reduce the complexity or hassle costs associated with navigating the enrollment application
and financial aid process by providing UI recipients with access to resources to help recipients
enroll and apply for financial aid. Whereas Carrell and Sacerdote (2013) and Bettinger et
al. (2012) find no effect of information alone, both studies find that providing access to
assistance can increase enrollment substantially. We use surveys of workforce agencies and
financial aid administrators, combined with empirical evidence, to inform our understanding
of how the intervention likely affected behavior.


2.3.1   Increases in Financial Aid

    As a component of the intervention, the Department of Education informed financial
aid administrators of the distribution of letters and encouraged them to make adjustments
to financial aid eligibility for UI recipients. If this guidance resulted in meaningful changes
in aid eligibility, UI recipients may have been induced to enroll by increases in the financial
aid available to them. While evidence on the effect of Pell eligibility on enrollment is rela-
tively weak, substantial evidence indicates that increases in financial aid boost enrollment



                                                9
(Dynarski and Scott-Clayton 2013).
     In practice, the anecdotal evidence suggests that there was little change in the financial
aid treatment of UI recipients as a result of the intervention, with a federal report about
the intervention indicating that “[o]verall, during our site visits, states reported little change
in policies or use of Pell grants” among those who participated in training.10 Discussions
with federal aid administrators also suggest that they were already adjusting UI recipient
income on the FAFSA prior to the intervention. This is consistent with the high level of Pell
eligibility (roughly 75%) for FAFSAs filed by dislocated workers prior to the intervention.
As we show more formally below, there is also no evidence in the data that FAFSAs filed by
UI recipients were more likely to be deemed Pell eligible after the intervention.


2.3.2    Information

     Mounting evidence suggests that low-cost information interventions can have large ef-
fects on behavior. Yet, there is still much uncertainty as to whether, how, and for who
information is effective in affecting college enrollment. In our setting, we focus on three
specific information deficits that the intervention may have addressed: perceptions about
the availability of financial aid, expectations about the return to training, and awareness of
the possibility of continuing to receive UI benefits while enrolled.
     While the intervention does not appear to have changed actual financial aid eligibility, it
does appear to have increased awareness of the Pell grant program. One state employment
commission noted that “[t]he initiative was successful in raising the profile of the Pell Grant
program and encouraging UI recipients to consider this option” (NASWA 2010). Further-
more, the direct statement of the amount of available aid —“Federal Pell Grant scholarships
cover up to $5,350 in education and training expenses” —may have made the information
about likely eligibility particularly salient to UI recipients considering training. This is
consistent with evidence from Bhargava and Manoli (2015) in which explicit statements of
  10
     See https://wdr.doleta.gov/research/FullText_Documents/ETAOP_2011-06.pdf. As we note below, while
the use of Pell grants conditional on enrollment does not appear to have changed, the number of individuals receiving
Pell grants did increase as more UI recipients enrolled.


                                                         10
expected EITC benefit amounts increased program takeup.
    On the benefit side, the intervention heightened the salience of potential returns to
college. Many of the states’ letters included language from the federal government’s suggested
letter about potential returns such as “[s]tudies have shown that workers with more education
and training have more secure jobs and higher wages.”
    Finally, the letter made clear that post-secondary education programs were, indeed,
allowable options with UI receipt. Because UI receipt is accompanied by the distribution of
rules about (1) work activities prohibited with benefit receipt, and (2) job search activities
required for benefit receipt, it is plausible that many UI recipients would have assumed
(incorrectly) that education and training were prohibited activities without the statements
in the letter. By clarifying that they would not lose their UI benefits, the letter may have
influenced the perceived costs of enrollment.


2.3.3   Access to Informed Assistance (Mediating Factors)

    Beyond the transmittal of information, the letters may have reduced the complexity and
“hassle” of taking pro-active steps toward enrollment as the letters provided contact infor-
mation for resources to assist in identifying a program and applying for aid. These resources
included both phone numbers and websites such as www.opportunity.gov and www.fafsa.gov,
as well as state-specific resources.
    A distinction in the implementation of the mailing of the letters to UI recipients from
many other informational interventions is that the initiative engaged a number of other inter-
mediaries including counselors at the employment services “One-Stop” offices and financial
aid administrators. In this sense, the mechanism of effect went beyond the “consumer side”
of affecting the behavior of UI recipients by also activating a number of mediators who were
positioned to magnify any potential impact of the basic letter. At the One-Stop employment
services centers, counselors were “primed” to provide information in response to the letters.
In addition, many of these centers introduced supplemental sessions such as seminars on how



                                                11
to complete the FAFSA.
    A survey of states conducted by the National Association of State Workforce Agencies
(NASWA, 2010) demonstrates that increased information and access to informed assistance
were both at play:

     Florida “many were calling with the following questions: What training programs
     are approved and available? How do I apply for training? How much money will
     we pay for school?”

     District of Columbia “Staff received training on the Pell Grant application pro-
     cess, and a Pell grant Call Center was established. The Career Centers arranged
     additional workshops to meet the demand.”

     NASWA Summary of State Actions - “The types of actions states took to imple-
     ment the initiative included: partnering with higher education to provide work-
     shops; bringing in community college personnel to give staff and customers a
     better understanding of the Pell Grant process; hosting a special phone line to
     answer general questions regarding school attendance and UI; hosting a desig-
     nated training session for local UI staff; contracting with a nonprofit to provide
     workshops and Pell Grants and financial aid through the Career One-Stops; and
     phasing the mailing of letters.”

    While there is little evidence that financial aid eligibility changed for UI recipients, it
is clear that the intervention altered the information provided. Despite the absence of a
formal experimental design, the “Pell Letter” was designed and distributed in a way that
addressed many of the information deficits and behavioral tendencies that have been the
focus of other successful information interventions. While our research design does not allow
for formal tests of the relative importance of the informational channels of impact identified
above, we hypothesize that the transmission of information about training eligibility and the
availability of financial aid in a form that was salient and authoritative, combined with the

                                              12
affirmative mediating role of state employment services offices (including the “One Stop”
centers) and local financial aid administrators, increased the propensity of UI recipients
receiving the letters to enroll in post-secondary programs.


3        Data and Descriptive Results

         Our primary source of data on individual behavior is the 2008 Survey of Income and
Program Participation (SIPP). The SIPP is a longitudinal survey conducted at 4-month
intervals, which contains month-by-month histories of school enrollment, employment, and
earnings. Unlike many other data sources, the SIPP has two features that make it particu-
larly well-suited for our study: (1) detailed information on the timing of UI receipt, and (2)
information on school enrollment.11
         We restrict the 2008 SIPP panel to individuals aged 20 to 40 who are initially observed
receiving UI between October 2008 and November 2010. Beginning in October 2008 allows
us to have equivalent information on all individuals prior to initial UI receipt.12 We further
eliminate any individuals enrolled in the month prior to initial UI receipt. We collapse the
data to the individual level so that it is a repeated cross-section; thus, for an individual
in the SIPP there is at most one observation in our sample corresponding to the year and
month of initial UI receipt.
         Table 1 presents descriptive characteristics for our primary sample. As with the popu-
lation of UI recipients more generally, individuals in the sample are more likely to be male
    11
      Other potential datasets either lack sufficient information on UI receipt, the timing of UI receipt, or enrollment.
For example, while the ACS cross-sections provide some information about the prior year, the survey includes UI
income in a catch all category “other income” and only for the entire year, with no information about the timing.
The CPS has limited (but imperfect) potential to link individuals across time, but only asks about UI earnings in
the prior year; furthermore, the CPS did not ask education questions to individuals above age 24 during our sample
period. Even administrative datasets are lacking. The IRS data only indicate UI receipt and tuition information
during the prior year, nothing about the timing of either measure. The LEHD, based on state UI data systems, only
contains quarterly measures of wages (not UI receipt) and has not been linked to later education measures. Existing
state data warehouses (such as the resource in Florida) that link educational outcomes to annual earnings derived
from UI systems do not record the timing of program participation.
   12
      We chose November 2010 as the end date because it provides a balance between sample size and our ability
to observe individuals many months after initial UI receipt. Results are robust to shifting the end date in either
direction (Table A1).



                                                           13
and less educated than the general population; whereas more than a quarter of individuals
in this age group have a bachelor’s degree, only 19% of UI recipients do. In contrast, ap-
proximately 90% of UI recipients have a high school degree.13 Looking at individuals in our
sample, about 10% of UI recipients enroll in school within six months of initial UI receipt,
while 13.5% enroll within twelve months.
     In our sample, about 40% of individuals were treated (i.e., received the “Pell Letter”
within 6 months of initial UI receipt). Figure 2 illustrates the essence of the intervention: the
enrollment rates of UI recipients are arrayed on the horizontal axis in terms of months since
initial UI receipt and the enrollment rates are show on the vertical axis, with the enrollment
rates of those who received the letter (light symbols) distinguished from those who did not
receive the letter (dark symbols). For both the population that received the letter and the
population that did not, enrollment rises steadily over the first 6 months of a spell before
leveling off. The plot makes clear the sharp divergence between the two groups with the
letter recipients enrolling at a rate about 4-5 percentage points greater than those who did
not receive the letter.
     We corroborate our findings with data from the Benefit Accuracy Measurement (BAM)
program data. The BAM is a random audit of UI claimants and is designed to determine
the accuracy of claims. BAM data are randomly selected from the 50 states, the District of
Columbia, and Puerto Rico.14 Each record is a snapshot of an individual during the current
week of UI receipt as well as information on the date of their initial UI benefit claim and
payment. Importantly, the BAM survey asks participants whether they are currently in
academic, vocational, or WIA training. Roughly 7.5% of individuals are in training during
the week they are surveyed. While broadly comparable with the SIPP, UI recipients in the
BAM data have lower levels of education and are more likely to be black. The larger sample
sizes and greater detail of the BAM data allow us to answer additional questions about
  13
     With some exceptions for “ability to benefit,” Pell eligibility is limited to those with at least a high-school degree
who have not received a BA degree.
  14
     Since 1997, allocated sample sizes range from 360 cases per year in the 10 states with the smallest UI workloads
to 480 cases in the remainder of the states. Several states have chosen to select larger samples.



                                                            14
program type and mechanism as well as explore whether the information is more or less
effective for different types of individuals.
    Finally, we use administrative data on FAFSA filings obtained from the Department of
Education for the 2009 filing cycle. The data provide counts of FAFSA filers by state, year,
month, and dislocated worker status. They are broken out separately by Pell eligibility,
program type (bachelors and academic associates or technical associates and certificates),
and age (whether or not the individual was over 30). We use these aggregate FAFSA data to
conduct complementary analyses that substantiate our main findings as well as allow us to
answer related questions about the types of programs marginal enrollees likely chose. These
data also allow for the examination of whether Pell eligibility for dislocated workers actually
appeared to change following the May 2009 announcement.
    Even as none of the data sets available provides the “ideal” measurement opportunity,
a strength of our analysis is that we are able to bring three independent resources to the
question. The combination of the survey data from the SIPP, administrative data in the form
of FAFSA filings from the Department of Education, and combined survey and administrative
data in the BAM from the Department of Labor lends credibility to our results.


4    Estimation and Empirical Results

    To estimate the effect of the “Pell Letter” on post-secondary outcomes, we use variation
between states over time, variation within states in the timing of the contact with UI recip-
ients, and variation in states’ decisions to contact all UI recipients or only new recipients.
Using the SIPP data, our primary outcome of interest is enrollment. We also explore longer-
term effects of the intervention on collegiate attainment, employment, and earnings. Each
individual in the SIPP contributes at most one observation to the sample and is distinguished
by the state and timing of initial UI receipt. Our basic specification is:


                           Eist = Xi β1 + αs + λt + γLetterist + ist                      (1)


                                                15
where Eist is a binary variable indicating whether an individual is enrolled at any point
during the six months following initial UI receipt; Xi are indicator variables for age, race,
and gender characteristics; and αs and λt are state and year-month fixed effects for the state
and month of initial UI receipt. Our primary measure of whether an individual was sent a
“Pell Letter” Letterist is whether a letter was sent to UI recipients with the same timing
and state of initial UI receipt in the six months subsequent to initial UI receipt.15 When
this variable is equal to one, we refer to individuals as being “treated,” with the associated
coefficient gamma representing the treatment effect.16 The variation in letter exposure is
driven by differences in (1) whether a state decided to send a letter, (2) in which months a
state decided to send a letter, and (3) whether or not a state decided to place restrictions
on sending based on the dates of initial UI receipt.17 Recall that Figure 1 provides an
illustration of this variation.


4.1     Baseline Enrollment Estimates

       Our baseline results in Table 2 indicate that treatment increased enrollment by four to
five percentage points, a large increase off a base of just less than 10%. We note, however,
that the 95% confidence intervals are large and include effects as small as 2 percentage points.
The estimates are robust to the inclusion of local labor market controls (state unemployment
rate18 ) in column (2), as well as controls for baseline education levels in column (3); these
controls include indicator variables for the attainment values contained in the SIPP. In
  15
     We chose six months as it corresponds to the standard duration of UI benefits; however, the results are robust
to using other intervals (Table A3).
  16
     This specification assumes that there is no interaction effect between treatment and the calendar month of initial
UI receipt, implicitly assuming that academic schedules have little effect on the enrollment decisions of UI recipients.
We believe this is reasonable because most UI recipients enroll in community colleges (or for-profits) which provide
much greater flexibility than traditional colleges (i.e., shorter terms and more start dates). Furthermore, and perhaps
as a result of this flexibility, the differences in the likelihood of enrollment across calendar months of initial UI receipt
are generally small and statistically insignificant, suggesting that the calendar timing of initial UI receipt is unlikely
to substantially magnify or attenuate the treatment effect.
  17
     Some states decided to send to all current UI recipients, some states decided to send to only new UI recipients,
and some states decided to make other restrictions on the date of initial UI receipt.
  18
     Although the specifications in the paper contain only the state unemployment rate, the estimates are similarly
robust to the inclusion of other measures of labor market conditions including the insured unemployment rate or new
jobless claims (Table A2).




                                                             16
column (4), we restrict the sample to individuals with at least a high-school degree but
less than a bachelor’s degree, education levels eligible to receive a Pell grant. The point
estimates are similar throughout and are also robust to different measures of treatment,
sample restrictions, and specification choices.19 The statistical significance levels of the
estimates are also robust to a procedure (randomization inference) in which we randomly
reassigned the timing of letter sending to states and re-estimated the specification 1000 times.
This process produced a similar, but slightly larger, p-value (0.053).20
       The second and third row of estimates indicate that the enrollment increases generated
by the intervention appear to be largely full-time enrollments. Whereas the point estimates
are negative or zero for part-time enrollment, treatment increases the likelihood of full-time
enrollment by five percentage points. This suggests that, in addition to shifting individuals
into college, the nudge may have led some UI recipients to dedicate more time to training.
       In the bottom panel of the table we present analyses using data from Benefit Accuracy
Measurement (BAM) program data, which indicate whether a UI recipient is enrolled in
training at the point of observation. The major limitation of the BAM is that the BAM
paid claims sampling frames consist of payments and therefore claimants have an increased
chance of being in the BAM samples the longer they are paid benefits. This is an issue for our
purposes if letter receipt has an effect on whether an individual continues UI receipt (and
thus is more likely to be in the sample). To address this concern, we restrict the window
of observation to individuals observed fewer than 75 days after initial receipt of UI benefits.
We find that under this upper bound, exposure to the letter has on no effect on UI receipt
  19
      We have explored the robustness of the results to different windows of “Pell Letter” receipt, examining the
effect of having a letter in the first four or five months from first UI receipt (Table A3). Estimates are similar across
specifications and are similarly robust to the inclusion of state by year trends (Table A4), the restriction of the sample
to individuals in states that ever sent a “Pell Letter” (Table A5), and the inclusion of baseline earnings controls (Table
A6). Placebo tests that assign the letters based on the counterfactual of moving an individual’s month of UI receipt
by 12 months in either direction (which affects only the assignment of treatment, not the underlying data used in
estimation) show no effect (Table A8).
   20
      To be explicit, we took the actual patterns of letter sending observed (in Figure 1) and randomly reassigned them
to states. So, in one iteration, Alaska’s pattern of sending might be assigned to Michigan, Arkansas to Ohio, and
so on. Alternative strategies (for example, randomly choosing start and stop months for letter sending within each
state) produce similar p-values.




                                                           17
duration.21
       We next turn to the effect of letter exposure on the training outcomes of interest. We
use similar specifications to those used with the SIPP. We find that exposure to the letter
increases the likelihood of enrollment in training by 2.5 percentage points, roughly 33%
(Table 2).22 Mean enrollment levels (7-8%) are somewhat lower than in the SIPP; this
is because we are only able to see a snapshot of enrollment behavior relatively soon after
initial UI receipt and not whether an individual enrolls at all during the six month period
after initial UI receipt. Indeed, when we construct a similar statistic in the SIPP, the mean
enrollment levels are much closer (5-6%).23 Despite these mean differences, the percentage
increase in enrollment in the BAM (33%) is quite similar to what we find in the SIPP (40%),
suggesting that the difference between the level effects is mainly a result of differences in
measurement.24
       One of the advantages of the BAM data is that they differentiate between types of
training, which is defined broadly to include enrollment in post-secondary programs. In
Table A12, we find that the effect on training is coming about both through an increase
in academic training and through an increase in vocational training (both increase by over
30%). In contrast, we find no effect on the share of individuals enrolled in WIA training.25
       These estimates may appear quite large for such a light touch intervention; recall that the
letter merely encouraged training, provided information about the Pell grant program and
  21
      We examine the effect of letter exposure on UI benefit duration using the following specification: Durationist =
Xi β1 + αs + λt + γLetterist + ist where Durationist is a continuous variable indicating how many days an individual
has been receiving UI benefits; Xi are indicator variables for age, race, and gender characteristics; and αs and λt are
state and year-month fixed effects for the state and month of initial UI receipt. Letterist is whether a letter was sent
to UI recipients of the individual’s type within the six months subsequent to initial UI receipt. The estimate of γ is
0.599 (s.e. 0.486).
   22
      As with the earlier results, we explored the robustness of the standard error estimates using randomization
inference (we randomly reassigned the timing of letter sending to states and re-estimated the main specification 1000
times). This process produced a similar, but slightly larger, p-value (0.015).
   23
      When we look at the fraction of individuals enrolled 2 or 3 months after initial UI receipt in the SIPP, the mean
is between .05 and .06, very close to the BAM statistic.
   24
      Thinking about this a different way, we can scale the SIPP estimates by multiplying them by the fraction observed
enrolled 2 to 3 months after initial UI receipt (.05 or .06) versus during the first six months after initial UI receipt.
This procedure implies estimates of around 0.02, very close to the BAM estimates.
   25
      We are hesitant to draw strong conclusions, but the lack of a WIA effect suggests that our estimates are not a
product of changes in WIA funding.




                                                           18
educational opportunities, and noted likely Pell grant eligibility for UI recipients. However,
comments from state workforce agencies at the time suggest the response may have been
quite large. For example, Washington noted “approximately a 20% increase in traffic” at its
colleges, Utah indicated that the number of UI approved training participants “increase[d]
169% for the 4 months since the state wide notification letters were sent,” Rhode Island noted
“a substantial increase in the number of claimants requesting approval to attend training,”
Missouri “had a tremendous increase in the number of claimants . . . that are receiving a Pell
grant,” and Florida noted “a dramatic increase in the number of inquiries to its call center”
(NASWA 2010). The letters were generally very simple, contained the authority implicit
in correspondence from state government, and contained easy and direct instructions on
how to proceed to pursue training and obtain a Pell grant. Given the existing training
information and encouragement provided to most UI recipients, this nudge might have been
quite important. Furthermore, the intervention not only provided information to potential
students, but also primed and informed advisers who were in place to help UI recipients
with this process. This last component of the intervention may have contributed greatly
to the observed shifts in behavior. Finally, the weak labor market during the period the
intervention was introduced may have produced a low opportunity cost of enrollment for UI
recipients, magnifying the effect of the intervention.


4.2    Effects on Financial Aid and FAFSA Filing

      One salient feature of the intervention was the direct reference to special consideration
for financial aid; this was presented alongside resources available to help individuals with
the application process.26 This emphasis on the availability of federal financial aid would be
expected to impact aid applications (filing the FAFSA) and Pell eligibility. The structure of
the SIPP data likely introduces considerable measurement error in the recording of federal
financial aid, including the Pell grant, so we turn to administrative data from the FAFSA
  26
     For example, the model letter presented by the Department of Labor notes “Colleges or One-Stop Career Centers
can also help you apply for Pell Grant scholarships and other federal financial aid. An application is also available
at www.fafsa.gov or by calling 1-800-4FEDAID.


                                                         19
to assess changes in aid receipt.27
       Administrative data on the counts of FAFSAs filed by dislocated worker status, state,
year, month, and Pell eligibility provide important information that corroborates the evi-
dence from the micro-level survey data available in the SIPP and the BAM administrative
data. Using a similar strategy as with the individual-level data, we regress the number of
FAFSA applications (a prerequisite to Pell receipt), specified in logs, on the “Pell Letter”
indicator with state and year-month fixed effects. In columns (1)-(5) of Table 3, we provide
supporting evidence for our earlier results. If the “Pell Letters” are driving the observed
increases in enrollment, we should see corresponding increases in FAFSA filing for dislocated
workers. The estimate in column (1) indicates that the sending of a “Pell Letter” in a
particular state and month increased the number of FAFSAs filed by dislocated workers by
roughly 10%.28 It is difficult to compare this result with the SIPP results for at least two
reasons: (1) it is not possible to determine the date of dislocation for individuals who are
filing FAFSAs, and (2) the population of dislocated workers (which includes the previously
self-employed, displaced homemakers, and spouses forced to quit due to relocation of an
active-duty spouse) is not equivalent to the population of UI recipients. However, under the
reasonable assumption that dislocated workers are equally likely to file their FAFSA during
each of the four months following dislocation, a back of the envelope calculation suggests that
the FAFSA “Pell Letter” estimate (9.9%) is in line with what we would expect (10%) based
on our enrollment results from the SIPP.29 More importantly, observing a contemporaneous
increase in FAFSA filings among dislocated workers lends credence to our main estimates
  27
     The Pell grant receipt question in the SIPP is only asked one time per wave, limiting our confidence in drawing
strong conclusions about how the intervention affected Pell receipt or financial aid administrators’ treatment of
dislocated workers’ FAFSAs. What is more, given that these questions may be answered by a spouse we expect that
responses about enrollment are well-recorded while recall on the names of specific aid programs, including Pell, may
be more limited. Consistent with this hypothesis, mean levels of Pell receipt are low (about 1/3) given the prevalence
of Pell receipt among independent undergraduates. Table A9 presents the baseline regression for Pell receipt in the
SIPP and the results show an increase of about two percentage points, substantially smaller than the enrollment
estimates in Table 2.
  28
     As with the SIPP estimates, we explored the robustness of the standard error estimates using randomization
inference (as described in greater detail above, we randomly reassigned the timing of letter sending to states and
re-estimated the specification 1000 times). This process produced a similar, but slightly larger, p-value (0.020).
  29
     Appendix B provides the details of this simple example that reconciles the disparity in magnitudes. We emphasize
that this is just one of many reasonable sets of assumptions that reconcile the disparity in magnitudes.


                                                         20
from the SIPP data.
       The intervention appears to have increased the total number of Pell eligible FAFSAs filed
by dislocated workers by about 8.3% (column (6)). That the relative increase in Pell eligible
cases is no larger than the increase in FAFSA filings suggests that financial aid administrators
may not have adjusted their treatment of dislocated workers. Estimated directly, the timing
of letter sending does not correspond with an increase in the share of dislocated worker
FAFSAs that are determined eligible. If the timing of the letter campaign was coordinated
with changes in the treatment of dislocated workers aid eligibility, we would expect the
share of dislocated worker FAFSAs that are Pell eligible to increase.30 Furthermore, there is
no discernible positive trend in the share of dislocated worker FAFSAs determined eligible
during 2009. To summarize, consistent with the anecdotal evidence presented above, the
empirical evidence suggests that there were limited changes in the financial aid treatment of
dislocated workers.
       The aggregate FAFSA data also allow us to learn more about the programs the marginal
enrollees likely pursued. In columns (2) and (3), we see suggestive evidence that more of
the marginal enrollment accrued at shorter-term certificate or technical associates programs.
Columns (4) and (5) suggest the intervention had a stronger percentage effect on older
individuals; this is consistent with estimates from the SIPP and the BAM, where similar
level effects translate into larger percentage effects for older UI recipients (Table A11).


4.3     Threats to Validity

4.3.1     Policy Endogeneity of “Pell Letter” Distribution

       Whereas the initial policy innovation was a direct federal response to rising unemploy-
ment, variation in the rollout of the policy occurred at the state level. Because we are
controlling for over time variation with year-month fixed effects, the concern is whether
  30
   The lack of an increase may be a result of an offsetting change in the composition of applicants (i.e., the letter
may have induced individuals who were ex-ante less likely to be Pell eligible to apply), but it is not clear why this
would be the case.



                                                         21
states happened to send “Pell Letters” in months in which new UI recipients were more
likely to enroll for some other reason. For example, states may have decided to send the
letters when labor market conditions were at their worst. If this were the case, we might
observe greater enrollment of UI recipients who received “Pell Letters” merely due to the
lower opportunity cost of enrollment. Other state policy changes such as adjustments in
appropriations or grant aid may occur annually within states; there is no evidence to suggest
that such changes are related to the intervention.
    The states’ own responses suggest that the timing and duration of letter sending was
largely idiosyncratic (NASWA 2010) and empirical evidence is consistent with this claim.
Were the intervention aligned with state-level changes that promote enrollment of UI recip-
ients, we would expect to see a trend in enrollment leading up to the “Pell Letter” dissem-
ination within states. The larger sample sizes and additional pre-intervention data in the
BAM provide us with an opportunity to explore this visually. Figure 3 plots coefficients for
indicator variables for each two month window of initial UI receipt relative to the first period
in each state during which treatment was equal to one. The event study figure illustrates
the lack of trends in enrollment prior to the initial sending of a letter in a state.
    We further address endogeneity concerns related to the sending of the letters using two
placebo exercises which reveal no effect for two groups of potential students during the
months the letter was sent. First, there is no significant increase in the total number of
FAFSAs filed when those filed by dislocated workers are excluded (column (7) of Table 3).
Second, we explore the existence of effects for unemployed individuals who do not report
receipt of unemployment benefits in the SIPP. While, a priori, we might expect some small
effect on these individuals as a result of measurement error in UI receipt, empirically we find
no effect (coef 0.007, se 0.020).
    Another potential concern is that states may have changed their approved training rules
at the same time that they began sending letters. To explore this, we collected information
from the United States Department of Department of Labor, Employment, and Training



                                               22
Administration’s 2008 through 2011 comparison of state UI laws. Because the information
is only available at a coarse (annual) level, we are unable to conduct regression analyses to
determine whether these changes are correlated with treatment. However, there were very
few changes in approved training rules during this time period. In contrast, a survey of state
workforce agencies in 2009 suggests some changes in the interpretation of approved training
rules may have taken place around the time of the American Recovery and Reinvestment
Act of 2009. In particular, four states began allowing enrollment in some four-year post-
secondary programs, and two states began allowing academic courses “not leading to a
specific occupation” as approved training. This is potentially a concern if the timing of
these changes was similar to the timing of “Pell Letter” sending. We address this concern by
simply excluding these states from the analysis; this leaves the estimates largely unchanged
(Table A14).


4.3.2   UI Receipt Endogeneity

    A final potential concern is the endogeneity of UI receipt. As UI receipt is a necessary
condition for receiving a “Pell Letter”, restricting the sample to UI recipients is a natural
way to focus the estimation on those individuals eligible for the treatment. However, UI
receipt is not entirely exogenous. If individuals with greater propensities to enroll increase
UI uptake, the results may be driven by selection into UI receipt and not by receipt of a
“Pell Letter”. Such effects might occur if there are informational spillovers about the letter
from friends or family which induce UI receipt with the intent of enrollment.
    One way to address this concern is to assign treatment based on the month of initial
unemployment spell for individuals experiencing layoffs instead of the month of initial UI
receipt. Because an individual does not choose to experience a layoff, assigning treatment
this way circumvents any potential selection concerns associated with using initial UI receipt.
We derive an individual’s first month on layoff as the first month experiencing any layoff
following at least two months with full month employment. We then assign treatment,



                                              23
expected “Pell Letter” receipt, analogously to how we used the first month of UI receipt
previously. As many of these individuals are not UI eligible and/or will not choose to receive
UI, we expect smaller treatment effects. In Table A17, we demonstrate that the effects using
this strategy are similar, but 20 to 50% smaller, than those in Table 2.


4.4     Examining Heterogeneity Using BAM Data

       Of interest is whether some subgroups were more responsive than others to the treatment
and, in turn, which groups accounted for the bulk of compliers. The BAM’s greater sample
size allows us to explore heterogeneity in effects. Table 4 summarizes these differences across
groups. Column (2) indicates the proportion of each subgroup enrolled and column (3) shows
the group-specific marginal effect obtained by interacting indicators for group membership
with the expected “Pell Letter” receipt variable (see Table A10 for full results).31 We find
larger level effects for blacks and women.32 While the larger effect for women is consistent
with some recent research on college interventions (Carrell and Sacerdote 2013, Barr et al.
2017), the larger effect for blacks has not been identified previously.33 As these individuals
tend to have lower earnings potential and experience longer unemployment spells, it may
be the case that the barriers addressed by the information and assistance are particularly
salient for those who are the most vulnerable. This is consistent with the pattern of results
observed when we interact our treatment indicator with the baseline hourly wage of UI
recipients; individuals with lower baseline hourly wages are more likely to be affected by the
intervention.34
  31
      The statistical power provided by the SIPP sample does not allow us to provide meaningful estimates of most
types of heterogeneity. Where we are able to produce comparable estimates, the SIPP and BAM estimates are not
statistically distinguishable at the 90% confidence level. However, in the case of the black interaction estimate the
confidence interval from the SIPP analysis is extremely large. The female effect is quite similar with a main effect of
0.018 (se 0.020) and an interaction effect of 0.032 (se 0.033).
   32
      While the level effect is only marginally larger for older individuals (those between 30 and 40), the proportional
effect is nearly twice as large, consistent with the SIPP and FAFSA results.
   33
      The larger point estimate for blacks is robust to specifications that interact black with state and year-month fixed
effects as well as the unemployment rate. We have also estimated our main specification using only black UI recipients
in the BAM. This results in a somewhat smaller point estimate (0.038, se 0.025) that is statistically indistinguishable
from the marginal effect for blacks derived from the estimates underlying Table A10.
   34
      Table A10 provides similar estimates using a continuous measure of wages. For minimum wage earners, the
treatment effect is estimated to be about 3.5 percentage points, but a $5 increase in baseline hourly wages reduces


                                                           24
      To understand the characteristics of the marginal individual affected by the treatment,
we consider the likelihood of treatment (Column (4) of Table 4), the fraction of enrollees who
were shifted into enrollment by the treatment (Column (5)), and the distribution of compliers
(Column (6)), by demographic group. There is little difference in the likelihood of treatment
across groups (Column (4)), so the distribution of complier characteristics is largely driven
by the heterogeneity in treatment effects (described above) combined with the demographics
of UI recipients. Despite accounting for 19% (black) and 25% (HourlyW age ≤ $10) of
UI recipients, our estimates suggest that half of compliers are black and earned low wages
at baseline. While these estimates suggest an outsized influence on these populations, our
confidence intervals are too large to draw strong conclusions.


4.5    Educational Attainment and Labor Market Outcomes

      One indicator of the return to the information policy is the persistence of enrollment, as
enrollees who do not even complete a term might be considered “mismatched” with college.
Although there are some issues with sample attrition, we investigate treatment effects on
the total number of months enrolled at several points after initial UI receipt (Table 5).35
We constructed these variables using the available enrollment. In Table 5, we see that
treatment results in a significant increase in the number of months enrolled.36 At 12 months
out from initial UI receipt, treated individuals have accrued an additional 0.34 months on
average. If we assume that the point estimate on full-time enrollment (0.05) captures the
shift into additional enrollment, the 0.34 estimate implies an additional (0.34/.05) 7 months
of enrollment per affected individual over the 12 months since initial UI receipt. The effect
is even larger at 24 months out. At this point, treated individuals have accrued about 0.6
the treatment effect by an entire percentage point.
  35
     As we look at outcomes further from initial UI receipt, sample attrition worsens. We interpret these results with
caution, but also note that the basic six-month enrollment results persist when we restrict the sample to individuals
who remain in the sample 12, 18, 24, 30, or 36 months. Furthermore, treatment has no effect on attrition using the
basic regression framework.
  36
     As we examine completion outcomes, we condition all regressions on baseline educational attainment levels. We
use two measures of baseline educational attainment: (1) the educational attainment variable contained in the SIPP
and used in previous specifications, and (2) baseline years of college education.



                                                         25
additional months on average, implying an additional 12 months of enrollment per individual
affected.37
       Given the shift to more and more intense training, we would expect that treated individ-
uals might remain unemployed and receiving UI longer. The estimates in Table 5 show that
this was the case; treated individuals are several percentage points more likely to receive UI
at 12 and 18 months after initial UI receipt. The effects on employment and earnings are a
mirror image with negative point estimates over the same period (Table 5).38 The confidence
intervals frequently include zero, but the point estimates suggest large reductions in earnings
for those affected by the intervention.
       Analogous point estimates for employment and earnings two to three years after initial
UI receipt indicate no significant difference for treated individuals (Table 5). Although point
estimates suggest that these individuals continue to be less likely to be employed and earn
less, we cannot rule out earnings increases of as much as 20%. Furthermore, we interpret
these results with caution due to the relatively large level of attrition observed towards the
end of the SIPP panel.39
       The earnings outcomes are consistent with the finding that the intervention caused UI
recipients to pursue additional post-secondary training. This training came at the expense
of lost earnings during at least the first 18 months following initial UI receipt. Furthermore,
these individuals were more likely to take advantage of Pell grants and remained on UI many
months following initial receipt, which represents an additional cost of the intervention. A
lingering question is whether this enrollment resulted in attainment gains that translated into
better labor market outcomes, and whether the improved outcomes are worth the associated
costs. Two to three years out, the evidence suggests moderate increases in college attainment
  37
      We also explore effects on the number of years completed, illustrating similar effects in Appendix Table A13.
  38
      Earnings are constructed in annual terms using any earnings observations available during the three months
following the period in question. More specifically, we multiply the average reported earnings in the following three
months (e.g., months 6, 7, and 8) by 12.
   39
      Appendix Figure 6 shows the trajectory of residualized earnings for treated and untreated individuals. Consistent
with the regression results, treated individuals have lower earnings in the 18 to 24 months after initial UI receipt at
the same time that they are more likely enrolled. By 36 months, their earnings appear to track closely with those of
untreated individuals.



                                                          26
and no significant gains in earnings. The point estimates suggest that the intervention
increased government expenditures without resulting in improved outcomes for individuals,
but the confidence intervals are too wide, and the window of observation too short, to rule
out meaningful positive effects on earnings.


5    Discussion and Conclusion

    Despite eligibility for considerable federal financial aid and low opportunity costs to re-
turn to school for the unemployed, relatively few do. We ask whether the low post-secondary
participation rates reflect limited information and hassle costs or, alternatively, expected re-
turns that are low. One concern is that the services available to the unemployed, specifically
those related to the enrollment and financial aid application process, are particularly difficult
to navigate (Babcock et al. 2012). These types of issues may be especially salient for the un-
employed because they lack the assistance and support services provided to those on a more
traditional college trajectory. We examine the extent to which informational outreach may
increase enrollment among UI recipients by providing cues and salient information consistent
with the lessons of behavioral economics.
    The “Pell Letter” initiative introduced by the federal government in May of 2009 presents
a source of variation in dissemination similar to a randomized control trial, but implemented
at scale (more than 20 million individuals were sent the letters). The idiosyncratic nature of
state action in response to this federal policy guidance creates an extraordinary experiment
and allows us to examine how an “informational nudge” affects decisions to pursue post-
secondary attainment among the unemployed. In addition to providing information about
the availability of financial aid and training options, the letters also facilitated engagement
with a number of intermediaries, including employment services offices and local financial
aid administrators, who were prepared to assist individuals responding to the letter.
    The overall enrollment effects are striking: we observe enrollment increases of four to
five percentage points, which are about 40% above the baseline. These results are all the


                                               27
more impressive because estimates from most prior research would suggest that among
recent high-school graduates it would take an increase in financial aid of between $1,000
and $1,500 to produce this magnitude of enrollment response (Dynarski and Scott-Clayton
2013).40 Given the scale of the letter intervention, which we estimate was sent to over 20
million UI claimants, we estimate it resulted in at least half a million additional individuals
enrolling in college in the year following initial UI receipt.41
       Evidence presented in this paper, as well as surveys of workforce officials and aid ad-
ministrators, suggests that the coordinated provision of information to both UI recipients
and those tasked to assist them contributed to substantial increases in post-secondary en-
rollment. These findings are consistent with prior research that suggests information may
be particularly effective when it facilitates access to assistance or simplifies the process of
uptake (e.g., Hoxby and Turner 2013; Castleman and Page 2015; Barr et al. 2017). The
effects are larger for women than men. We also find particularly large effects for black UI
recipients and UI recipients with relatively low earnings potential at baseline, suggesting
that differences in the accessibility of information about program benefits and the steps nec-
essary to access them may contribute to persistent inequality. The effects are also larger in
states and months in which labor market conditions are worse, suggesting that this type of
intervention is likely to be particularly effective during times when the opportunity cost of
pursuing training is relatively low. The broad takeaway in terms of policy is that it makes
more sense to implement this type of intervention when the opportunity cost of pursuing
training is relatively low.
       Of course, open questions remain about whether, even during a period of weak labor
market conditions, the intervention was likely to have generated substantial benefits for
  40
      More recent work estimating the effects of financial aid on older students (Barr 2015) suggests that a much larger
amount would be necessary.
   41
      Focusing on just our period of analysis, there were nearly 34 million initial claims for UI between June 2009
and November 2010. Using our survey information, we estimate that states sent letters to over 13 million of these
claimants. Statistics from the BLS indicate that roughly half of UI recipients are between 20 and 40. If we assume
that the letters had no effect on individuals outside of this age range and use a five percentage point effect of the
letters on enrollment, the back of the envelope estimate of the increase in enrollment is 13,000,000*.5*0.05 = 325,000.
If we extend the period to include 2011 and continue with these conservative assumptions, we estimate an increase
in enrollment of 570,000. Under either calculation, this corresponds to 2% of total enrollment in the affected states.


                                                          28
individuals or society. At the individual level, one must weigh the additional months of
UI benefits and discounted potential wage benefits from additional credit accumulation (and
potential degree receipt) against the net cost of schooling and the opportunity cost (foregone
wages) of enrolling. Two to three years out, the evidence suggests modest increases in
college attainment and no significant gains in earnings. However, the confidence intervals
are too wide to rule out meaningful positive effects on earnings; furthermore, two to three
years is likely too short a period for the average enrollee to realize higher earnings. If we
instead assume the estimated earnings effects in Jacobson, LaLonde, and Sullivan (2005a
and 2005b), the gains to displaced workers could be more clearly positive. Multiplying
the additional 0.1 years of college education by the assumed gain in earnings for a year of
community college (9 percent), the baseline annual earnings level ($25,000), and the number
of additional working years (32), and the average treated individual in our sample would
stand to earn an additional $7,200 over their lifetime, about $4,400 in present discounted
value. This estimate is conservative because it assumes a low estimate of earnings and a fixed
earnings level. Even under these conservative assumptions, the gain in earnings is roughly
equivalent to the average earnings lost over the two to three years since initial UI receipt.
Thus, individuals are likely better off if Jacobson, LaLonde, and Sullivan’ s estimates are
valid in this population. However, the gain to society is less clear. Although the cost of the
letter sending itself was quite low, the additional UI and financial aid costs imply that the
intervention may have been a net cost to society.
    Despite uncertain welfare implications, our findings suggest that well-coordinated in-
formation interventions may be substantially more cost-effective than raising the generosity
of existing government programs in increasing post-secondary participation. This analysis,
along with the growing and important body of research on the effects of financial aid on
the college enrollment and attainment, leaves open the important social welfare question of
whether interventions that induce college enrollment for non-traditional student populations
(like UI recipients) provide benefits in earnings and future employment in excess of costs.



                                             29
References

Andersson, F., H. J. Holzer, J. I. Lane, D. Rosenblum, and J. Smith (2013):
  “Does federally-funded job training work? Nonexperimental estimates of WIA training
  impacts using longitudinal data on workers and firms,” National Bureau of Economic
  Research Working Paper 19946.

Babcock, L., W. J. Congdon, L. F. Katz, and S. Mullainathan (2012): “Notes on
  behavioral economics and labor market policy,” IZA Journal of Labor Policy, 1(1), 1–14.

Barr, A. (2015): “From the Battlefield to the Schoolyard: The Short-term Impact of the
  Post-9/11 GI Bill,” Journal of Human Resources, 50(2).

           (2017): “Fighting for Education: Financial Aid and Degree Attainment,” Char-
  lottesville, VA: EdPolicyWorks Working Paper.

Barr, A., K. Bird, and B. Castleman (2017): “Prompting active choice among high-
  risk borrowers: Evidence from a student loan counseling experiment,” Charlottesville, VA:
  EdPolicyWorks Working Paper.

Barr, A., and S. Turner (2013): “Expanding enrollments and contracting state budgets:
  The effect of the great recession on higher education,” Annals of the American Academy
  of Political and Social Science, (650).

Barr, A., and S. Turner (2015): “Out of Work and Into School: Labor Market Policies
  and College Enrollment During the Great Recession,” Journal of Public Economics, 124,
  63–73.

Bertrand, M., S. Mullainathan, and E. Shafir (2004): “A behavioral-economics
  view of poverty,” The American Economic Review, 94(2), 419–423.

Bettinger, E. P., B. T. Long, P. Oreopoulos, and L. Sanbonmatsu (2012): “The
  Role of Application Assistance and Information in College Decisions: Results from the

                                            30
  H&R Block FAFSA Experiment,” The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 127(3), 1205–
  1242.

Bhargava, S., and D. Manoli (2015): “Psychological frictions and the incomplete take-
  up of social benefits: Evidence from an IRS field experiment,” The American Economic
  Review, 105(11), 3489–3529.

Carnevale, A. (2009): “Postsecondary Education Goes to Work,” Discussion paper.

Carrell, S. E., and B. Sacerdote (2013): “Why do college going interventions work?,”
  Discussion paper, National Bureau of Economic Research.

Castleman, B. L., and L. C. Page (2014): “Summer nudging: Can personalized text
  messages and peer mentor outreach increase college going among low-income high school
  graduates?,” Journal of Economic Behavior & Organization.

Couch, K. A., and D. W. Placzek (2010): “Earnings losses of displaced workers revis-
  ited,” The American Economic Review, pp. 572–589.

Dynarski, S., and J. Scott-Clayton (2008): “Complexity and targeting in federal
  student aid: A quantitative analysis,” Discussion paper, National Bureau of Economic
  Research.

          (2013): “Financial Aid Policy: Lessons from Research,” The Future of Children,
  23(1), 67–91.

Heinrich, C., P. R. Mueser, K. R. Troske, K.-S. Jeon, and D. Kahvecioglu
  (2009): “New estimates of public employment and training program net impacts: A non-
  experimental evaluation of the Workforce Investment Act program,” .

Hoxby, C., and S. Turner (2013): “Expanding college opportunities for high-achieving,
  low income students,” Stanford Institute for Economic Policy Research Discussion Paper,
  (12-014).


                                           31
Jacobson, L., R. LaLonde, and D. Sullivan (1993): “Earnings losses of displaced
  workers,” The American Economic Review, pp. 685–709.

Jacobson, L., R. LaLonde, and D. Sullivan (2005a): “Estimating the returns to
  community college schooling for displaced workers,” Journal of Econometrics, 125(1),
  271–304.

Jacobson, L., R. LaLonde, and D. Sullivan (2005b): “The impact of community
  college retraining on older displaced workers: Should we teach old dogs new tricks?,”
  Industrial & Labor Relations Review, 58(3), 398–415.

Kroft, K., F. Lange, M. J. Notowidigdo, and L. F. Katz (2014): “Long-term
  unemployment and the Great Recession: the role of composition, duration dependence,
  and non-participation,” National Bureau of Economic Research Working Paper 20273.

NASWA (2010): “NASWA survey on pell grants and approved training for UI,” Discussion
  paper.




                                           32
                               Figure 1: State “Pell Letter” Sending Patterns




Note: Data are from our survey of state workforce agencies (see Appendix A for additional information). The figure
presents information from the 40 states and the District of Colubmia that sent a Pell letter and responded to our
survey. Maine stopped sending the letters in December 2010 and Wisconsin and Wyoming stopped sending in January
2011. All other states sending the letters in March 2010 continued sending letters throughout the sample period.
We confirmed that eight states (Arizona, Alabama, Kansas, Nebraska, Nevada, New Hampshire, New Mexico, and
North Dakota) did not send a letter. Indiana’s survey response was inconclusive and Tennessee failed to respond to
our requests. In some states and months (shaded black), the letter was sent to all UI recipients, while in others (with
diagonal shading), the letter was sent only to new UI recipients. In two states (shaded with cross-hatch), letters were
sent only to individuals who began drawing UI after the announcement of the intervention in May 2009. In these
states, individuals who began receiving UI prior to May 2009 were not exposed to the letters regardless of when the
state workforce agency decided to send them.
                                                          33
                        Figure 2: Enrollment by Months Since Initial UI Receipt




Note: The figure plots the unweighted average enrollment rates of individuals against the number of months since
first UI receipt using the 2008 SIPP. Sample restrictions are detailed in the text. The vertical lines indicate 6, 12,
and 18 months after initial UI receipt.



                                    Figure 3: BAM Training Event Study




Note: The figure plots coefficients on indicator variables for each two month window of initial UI receipt relative
to the first two window in each state during which treatment was equal to one (for example, in states that sent
letters only to new UI recipients, the first month of letter sending). The dependent variable is whether an individual
is enrolled in any type of training program in the observed week. All specifications include age, race, and gender
indicator variables as well as state and year-month fixed effects. All regressions restricted to individuals aged 20-40
who first received UI between January 2008 and November 2010 and were observed within 75 days of initial UI
receipt. Data are from the BAM. Robust standard errors clustered at the state level.



                                                          34
 Table 1: Descriptive Statistics for Initial UI Recipients

Variables                                             SIPP     BAM

A: Characteristics at Initial UI Receipt (baseline)
Age                                                   31.00    30.24
White                                                 0.785    0.693
Black                                                 0.135    0.189
Male                                                  0.584    0.608
HS Degree +                                           0.900    0.865
Some College +                                        0.588    0.446
BA +                                                   0.192   0.135
Baseline Earnings (annualized)                        24,250    NA
Hourly Wage                                             NA     16.22

B: Education Outcomes
Enrolled Next 6 Months                                0.097     NA
Part-time Next 6 Months                               0.039     NA
Full-time Next 6 Months                               0.061     NA
Months Enrolled 24 Months Out                          1.39     NA
Months Enrolled 36 Months Out                          1.91     NA
In Training (snapshot)                                 NA      0.075

Observations                                          1,472    5,154

Note: Samples include individuals age 20-40. SIPP sample re-
stricted to individuals who first received unemployment compensa-
tion between November 2008 and November 2010 and were not en-
rolled in the month prior to initial UI receipt. Variables of type
“ Next X Months” (e.g., Pell Next 6 Months) are binary vari-
ables indicated whether the condition was true during any of the
six months following first UI receipt. Baseline earnings is an an-
nual measure generated using the three months prior to initial UI
receipt. BAM sample restricted to individuals who first received un-
employment compensation between November 2008 and November
2010 and were observed within 75 days of initial UI receipt. The
BAM training measure is the fraction of UI recipients in training at
the time of their participation in the Benefit Accuracy Measurement
(BAM) survey. See notes to Table 2 for additional sample restric-
tions.




                                 35
            Table 2: Effect of Pell Letter on Enrollment
                                 (1)          (2)        (3)         (4)
Variables

Panel A: SIPP
Enrolled (Next 6 Months)      0.041**       0.039**    0.039**    0.051***
                              (0.018)       (0.018)    (0.019)     (0.019)

    Mean                        0.097        0.097      0.097       0.110

 Full-time                    0.047***      0.046***   0.047***    0.054**
                               (0.015)       (0.016)    (0.016)    (0.020)

    Mean                        0.061        0.061      0.061       0.075

 Part-time                      -0.003       -0.005     -0.005      -0.001
                               (0.012)      (0.012)    (0.012)     (0.013)

    Mean                        0.039        0.039      0.039       0.039

Observations                    1,472        1,472      1,472       1,042

Panel B: BAM
In Training                   0.025***      0.025***   0.027***    0.025**
                               (0.008)       (0.008)    (0.008)    (0.011)

    Mean                        0.075        0.075      0.075       0.085

Observations                    5,154        5,154      5,154       3,764

Year-Month FE                     Y            Y          Y           Y
Unemployment Rate                              Y          Y           Y
Education Controls                                        Y           Y
Education Restrictions                                                Y

Note: Panel A presents estimates from the SIPP and Panel B presents
estimates from the BAM. Each cell represents a separate OLS regres-
sion. For Panel A, each observation corresponds to an individual’s first
spell of unemployment insurance receipt and the dependent variable is
whether an individual is enrolled within six months of the first month of
UI receipt. For Panel B the dependent variable is whether an individual
is enrolled in any type of training program in the observed week. The
explanatory variable of interest indicates whether a Pell letter was sent
in an individual’s state during any of the first six months since the first
month of UI receipt. All specifications include age, race, and gender indi-
cator variables as well as state fixed effects. “Education Controls” are in-
dicator variables for all attainment levels. “Education Restrictions” lim-
its the sample to individuals with at least a high-school degree, but less
than a bachelor’s degree at initial UI receipt. All regressions restricted
to individuals aged 20-40 who first received UI between November 2008
and November 2010. In Panel A, the sample is also restricted to individ-
uals who were not enrolled during the month prior to first UI receipt. In
Panel B, the sample is also restricted to individuals who were observed
within 75 days of initial UI receipt. Robust standard errors clustered at
the state level are in parentheses: * (p<0.10) **(p<0.05), ***(p<0.01).


                                       36
              Table 3: Effect of Pell Letter on 2009 FAFSA Submissions (in logs)
                      (1)            (2)             (3)          (4)         (5)         (6)          (7)

                                              Dislocated Individuals

                                Bachelor’s/     Certificate/                            Pell          Not
Variables             All      Acad. Assoc.     Tech. Assoc.     < 30        ≥ 30      Eligible    Dislocated

Pell Letter        0.099***       0.079***         0.109**       0.063     0.117***    0.083***      0.009
                    (0.032)        (0.027)         (0.045)      (0.024)     (0.039)     (0.030)     (0.018)

Mean (in levels)     2864           1326            1495          1043       1808        2079        14472
Observations          588           588             588           588         588         588         588


Note: Administrative FAFSA submission data provided by the Department of Education. Sample re-
stricted to 2009 FAFSA cycle and months 1-12 (January through December). Each cell presents a separate
regression. Each observation corresponds to a state and year-month. The dependent variable is indicated
by the column header. Dependent variables are in logs. For example, column (1) has the log of the num-
ber of FAFSAs filed by all dislocated workers and column (2) has the log of the number of FAFSAs filed
by dislocated workers for bachelor’s or academic associate’s degree programs. The explanatory variable of
interest indicates whether a Pell letter was sent in that state in that year-month. All specifications include
state fixed effects and year-month fixed effects. Robust standard errors clustered at the state level are in
parentheses: * (p<0.10) **(p<0.05), ***(p<0.01).




                                                     37
                   Table 4: Characteristics of Those Shifted by Letter (BAM Data)
                         (1)      (2)               (3)                (4)               (5)                    (6)
Group                     N     P(E=1)      Fraction Compliers     P(Letter=1)      P(Complier| E=1)        Fraction of
                                             (Marginal Effect)                                             All Compliers

All                     5154     0.075           0.025***              0.435               0.145                 1
                                                  (0.008)
Black                    976     0.084           0.062***              0.442               0.326               0.477
                                                  (0.017)
Female                  2019     0.098           0.044***              0.435               0.195               0.689
                                                  (0.015)
Age>30                  2708     0.058           0.029**               0.452               0.218               0.611
                                                  (0.011)
Hourly Wage ≤ $10       1138     0.081           0.057***              0.457               0.335               0.530
                                                  (0.017)

Note: Column (2) provides the proportion of each subgroup in training. Column (3) contains the marginal effect
of treatment (i.e., letter exposure) for each subgroup. See Appendix Table A10 for estimates underlying column
(3). Column (4) indicates the proportion of each subgroup that was treated (i.e., exposed to the letter). Column
(5) indicates the fraction of individuals in training who were there as a result of treatment, by subgroup. Column
(6) indicates the fraction of all compliers (i.e.,those shifted into training by the letter) with various characteristics.
Data are from the BAM.




                                                            38
 Table 5: Longer Run Effect of Pell Letter on Education and Labor Market Outcomes
                                       (1)           (2)                (3)            (4)            (5)
                              N      Enrolled   Months Enrolled      UI Receipt     Employment      Earnings

12 Months Out                1,151   0.065***        0.339**            0.068           -0.039        -1,966
                                      (0.019)        (0.144)           (0.048)         (0.044)       (2,369)

18 Months Out                1,057    0.039          0.502**           0.061*          -0.059*        -1,789
                                     (0.025)         (0.198)           (0.035)         (0.034)       (2,010)

24 Months Out                957      0.025          0.594**            0.026           -0.007        -8.62
                                     (0.027)         (0.248)           (0.022)         (0.041)       (2,489)

30 Months Out                839      0.034          0.703**            -0.007          -0.014        -79.1
                                     (0.028)         (0.312)           (0.024)         (0.037)       (2,379)

36 Months Out                698      -0.002         0.821**            -0.024          -0.031        1,112
                                     (0.024)         (0.359)           (0.035)         (0.049)       (2,300)

Mean   (12   Months   Out)            0.098           0.688             0.363           0.513         17720
Mean   (18   Months   Out)            0.110           1.045             0.217           0.605         21531
Mean   (24   Months   Out)            0.100           1.387             0.151           0.645         22328
Mean   (30   Months   Out)            0.098           1.695             0.082           0.714         25238
Mean   (36   Months   Out)            0.065           1.905             0.108           0.710         23964

Note: Each cell presents a separate regression. Each observation corresponds to an individual’s first spell
of Unemployment Insurance receipt. The dependent variable in columns (1), (3), (4), and (5) is a measure
corresponding to enrollment, UI receipt, employment, or earnings in a three month window beginning
12, 18, . . . , 36 months following initial UI receipt. For example, enrollment at 12 months is whether an
individual is observed enrolled in month 12,13, or14. UI receipt and employment are constructed anal-
ogously. Earnings is constructed in annual terms using any earnings observations available during the
three months following the time period in question. More specifically, we multiply the average reported
earnings in the following three months (e.g., months 12, 13, 14) by 12. The dependent variable in column
(2) is the total months an individual is observed enrolled over the relevant period. Estimates presented
are equivalent to those from main specification underlying column (2) in Table 2. The explanatory vari-
able of interest indicates whether a Pell letter was sent in an individual’s state during any of the first six
months since the first month of UI receipt. All regressions restricted to individuals aged 20-40 who were
not enrolled during the month prior to first UI receipt and first received UI between November 2008 and
November 2010. Data are from the 2008 SIPP. See Table 1 and Appendix Table A18 for means. Robust
standard errors clustered at the state level are in parentheses: * (p<0.10) **(p<0.05), ***(p<0.01).




                                                     39
6     Appendix A: For Online Publication

                                     Pell Letter Survey and Response


     We contacted the workforce agencies in all 50 states and the District of Columbia with a request

for information about each agency’s participation in the Pell letter initiative (we have attached a

copy of the survey below). Initially, we e-mailed this survey to the commissioner (or equivalent)

of each state’s workforce agency as well as the analogous leader of related state agencies (e.g.,

the Department of Labor). For states that did not respond to our initial request, we sent several

additional e-mail requests. We followed this with a paper mailing containing hard copies of the

survey and pre-paid addressed return envelopes. We followed this with phone calls to the relevant

states contacts where possible to encourage survey response. For the states remaining at this point,

we submitted public record and Freedom of Information Act requests where possible.

     In total, 46 states and the District of Columbia responded to the survey. We archived the

responses and Pell letters online.42 In a separate survey, an additional 3 states indicated that they

had not sent a Pell letter and had no intention of doing so (NASWA 2010). We have been unable

to obtain a conclusive response from Tennessee.



  42
     The archive can be accessed at http://people.tamu.edu/~abarr/Research.html. While 40 states and the
District of Columbia indicated that they had sent a letter, only 29 sent copies of their Pell letter with their response.




                                                           40
                                            State Survey

Our research team is evaluating how notification about the availability of educational
opportunities affects the post-secondary educational attainment of UI benefit recipients. As you
may know, the Department of Labor issued guidance on May 8, 2009:

       “To strongly encourage states to: (1) broaden their definition of approved training for
       Unemployment Insurance (UI) beneficiaries during economic downturns, (2) notify UI
       beneficiaries of their potential eligibility for Pell Grants and other student aid, and (3)
       help individuals apply for Pell Grants through One-Stop Career
       Centers.” [http://wdr.doleta.gov/directives/attach/TEGL/TEGL21-08acc.pdf]

Our interest is in understanding how [state] responded to this guidance. In particular, we are
interested in whether [state] sent a letter, the associated timing of the mailing, and the population
of UI recipients targeted to receive such communication. Our questions follow below:

Did [state] send a letter or other communication to individuals receiving unemployment
insurance in response to the federal Pell grant initiative on May 8 2009? Would you please send
us a copy as a pdf attachment to email or by regular mail?
        If YES:
   a. On what date did [state] first send this letter?
   b. Was the letter sent to all UI recipients or just new recipients at the time of distribution?

  ___ All UI recipients
  ___ New UI recipients

  c. Were there any other criteria determining which UI recipients received the letter?
  d. Was this a one-time mailing or has the mailing been repeated for new UI recipients after
May 2009?
      ___ One time
      ___ Repeated at
             ___ weekly
          ___ monthly interval

       If repeated, is this policy ongoing?
           ___ Yes             ___ No
        If no, when were the last letters sent out?




                                              41
                        Figure A1: Earnings by Months Since Initial UI Receipt




Note: Earnings is constructed in annual terms using any earnings observations available (including zeros) during
the three months following the time period in question. More specifically, we multiply the average reported earnings
in the following three months (e.g., months 6, 7, and 8) by 12. To construct the figure we regressed earnings for the
full 2008 SIPP sample (age 20-40) on state and year-month fixed effects. This removed constant variation in earnings
across states as well as variation in earnings generated by overtime changes in the severity of the recession. We then
restricted the sample using the restrictions outlined in the text and averaged the residuals by month since initial UI
receipt. We plot these averages for treated and untreated individuals.




                                                         42
Table A1: Enrollment in Six Months Following First Receipt of UI
                                   (1)         (2)        (3)        (4)
    Variables

    Nov. 2008 to May 2010        0.032*      0.032*     0.033*     0.034*
                                 (0.019)     (0.019)    (0.019)    (0.019)

    Nov. 2008 to Nov. 2010      0.044***     0.042**   0.042**    0.060***
                                 (0.016)     (0.016)   (0.016)     (0.018)

    Nov. 2008 to May 2011        0.039**     0.038**   0.038**     0.041**
                                 (0.017)     (0.017)   (0.018)     (0.018)

    Year-Month FE                   Y          Y          Y           Y
    Unemployment Rate                          Y          Y           Y
    Education Controls                                    Y           Y
    Education Restrictions                                            Y

    Note: Each cell represents a separate OLS regression. Each obser-
    vation corresponds to an individual’s first spell of unemployment in-
    surance receipt. Each row shows estimates using different sample end
    points. The dependent variable is whether an individual is enrolled
    within six months of the first month of UI receipt. The explana-
    tory variable of interest indicates whether a Pell letter was sent in
    an individual’s state during any of the first six months since the first
    month of UI receipt. All specifications include age, race, and gender
    indicator variables as well as state fixed effects. “Education Con-
    trols” are indicator variables for all attainment levels. “Education
    Restrictions” limits the sample to individuals with at least a high-
    school degree, but less than a bachelor’s degree at initial UI receipt.
    All regressions restricted to individuals aged 20-40 who were not en-
    rolled during the month prior to first UI receipt and first received
    UI between November 2008 and November 2010. Data are from the
    2008 SIPP. Robust standard errors clustered at the state level are in
    parentheses: * (p<0.10) **(p<0.05), ***(p<0.01).




                                        43
Table A2: Enrollment in Six Months Following First Receipt of UI (alternative labor market
condition controls)
                                                (1)          (2)       (3)       (4)
                   Variables

                   Pell Letter                0.041**      0.042**   0.041**   0.054***
                                              (0.018)      (0.018)   (0.019)    (0.018)

                   Observations                1,472        1,472     1,472     1,042

                   Year-Month FE                 Y           Y         Y          Y
                   New Jobless Claims                        Y         Y          Y
                   Education Controls                                  Y          Y
                   Education Restrictions                                         Y

                   Note: Each cell represents a separate regression. Each obser-
                   vation corresponds to an individual’s first spell of unemployment
                   insurance receipt. The dependent variable is whether an individ-
                   ual is enrolled within six months of the first month of UI receipt.
                   The explanatory variable of interest indicates whether a Pell let-
                   ter was sent in an individual’s state during any of the first four,
                   five, or six months since the first month of UI receipt. All speci-
                   fications include age, race, and gender indicator variables as well
                   as state fixed effects. “Education Controls” are indicator variables
                   for all attainment levels. “Education Restrictions” limits the sam-
                   ple to individuals with at least a high-school degree, but less than
                   a bachelor’s degree at initial UI receipt. All regressions restricted
                   to individuals aged 20-40 who were not enrolled during the month
                   prior to first UI receipt and first received UI between November
                   2008 and November 2010. Data are from the 2008 SIPP. Robust
                   standard errors clustered at the state level are in parentheses: *
                   (p<0.10) **(p<0.05), ***(p<0.01).




                                                      44
Table A3: Enrollment in Six Months Following First Receipt of UI
                                       (1)         (2)        (3)         (4)
  Variables

  Pell Letter (within 4 months)      0.049**     0.046**    0.045**    0.062***
                                     (0.021)     (0.021)    (0.021)     (0.020)

  Pell Letter (within 5 months)     0.044***     0.042**    0.042**    0.060***
                                     (0.016)     (0.016)    (0.016)     (0.018)

  Pell Letter (within 6 months)      0.041**     0.039**    0.039**    0.051***
                                     (0.018)     (0.018)    (0.019)     (0.019)

  Observations                        1,472       1,472      1,472       1,042

  Year-Month FE                         Y           Y          Y           Y
  Unemployment Rate                                 Y          Y           Y
  Education Controls                                           Y           Y
  Education Restrictions                                                   Y

  Note: Each cell represents a separate regression. Each observation cor-
  responds to an individual’s first spell of unemployment insurance receipt.
  The dependent variable is whether an individual is enrolled within six
  months of the first month of UI receipt. The explanatory variable of inter-
  est indicates whether a Pell letter was sent in an individual’s state during
  any of the first four, five, or six months since the first month of UI receipt.
  All specifications include age, race, and gender indicator variables as well
  as state fixed effects. “Education Controls” are indicator variables for all
  attainment levels. “Education Restrictions” limits the sample to individ-
  uals with at least a high-school degree, but less than a bachelor’s degree
  at initial UI receipt. All regressions restricted to individuals aged 20-40
  who were not enrolled during the month prior to first UI receipt and first
  received UI between November 2008 and November 2010. Data are from
  the 2008 SIPP. Robust standard errors clustered at the state level are in
  parentheses: * (p<0.10) **(p<0.05), ***(p<0.01).




                                        45
Table A4: Enrollment in Six Months Following First Receipt of UI (control for state trends)
                                                   (1)        (2)        (3)       (4)
                 Variables

                 Pell Letter                     0.053**    0.042*    0.042*      0.040
                                                 (0.024)    (0.025)   (0.025)    (0.026)

                 Observations                     1,472      1,472     1,472      1,042

                 State * Year-Month Trends          Y          Y         Y          Y
                 Unemployment Rate                             Y         Y          Y
                 Education Controls                                      Y          Y
                 Education Restrictions                                             Y

                 Note: Each cell represents a separate regression. Each observation
                 corresponds to an individual’s first spell of unemployment insurance
                 receipt. The dependent variable is whether an individual is enrolled
                 within six months of the first month of UI receipt. The explanatory
                 variable of interest indicates whether a Pell letter was sent in an in-
                 dividual’s state during any of the first four, five, or six months since
                 the first month of UI receipt. All specifications include age, race,
                 and gender indicator variables as well as state fixed effects. “Educa-
                 tion Controls” are indicator variables for all attainment levels. “Ed-
                 ucation Restrictions” limits the sample to individuals with at least a
                 high-school degree, but less than a bachelor’s degree at initial UI re-
                 ceipt. All regressions restricted to individuals aged 20-40 who were
                 not enrolled during the month prior to first UI receipt and first re-
                 ceived UI between November 2008 and November 2010. Data are
                 from the 2008 SIPP. Robust standard errors clustered at the state
                 level are in parentheses: * (p<0.10) **(p<0.05), ***(p<0.01).




                                                   46
Table A5: Enrollment in Six Months Following First Receipt of UI (exclude states that never sent
a letter)
                                                 (1)          (2)       (3)        (4)
                    Variables

                    Pell Letter                0.044**      0.043**   0.042**   0.053***
                                               (0.018)      (0.018)   (0.019)    (0.019)

                    Observations                1,363        1,363     1,363       956

                    Year-Month FE                 Y           Y         Y           Y
                    Unemployment Rate                         Y         Y           Y
                    Education Controls                                  Y           Y
                    Education Restrictions                                          Y

                    Note: Sample restricted to individuals who began drawing unem-
                    ployment benefits in a state that sent a letter at some point dur-
                    ing the sample period. Each cell represents a separate regression.
                    Each observation corresponds to an individual’s first spell of unem-
                    ployment insurance receipt. The dependent variable is whether an
                    individual is enrolled within six months of the first month of UI re-
                    ceipt. The explanatory variable of interest indicates whether a Pell
                    letter was sent in an individual’s state during any of the first four,
                    five, or six months since the first month of UI receipt. All speci-
                    fications include age, race, and gender indicator variables as well
                    as state fixed effects. “Education Controls” are indicator variables
                    for all attainment levels. “Education Restrictions” limits the sam-
                    ple to individuals with at least a high-school degree, but less than
                    a bachelor’s degree at initial UI receipt. All regressions restricted
                    to individuals aged 20-40 who were not enrolled during the month
                    prior to first UI receipt and first received UI between November
                    2008 and November 2010. Data are from the 2008 SIPP. Robust
                    standard errors clustered at the state level are in parentheses: *
                    (p<0.10) **(p<0.05), ***(p<0.01).




                                                       47
Table A6: Enrollment in Six Months Following First Receipt of UI (controls for baseline earnings)
                                                      (1)        (2)       (3)        (4)
                    Variables

                    Pell Letter                    0.047**    0.044*     0.040*     0.050**
                                                   (0.021)    (0.022)    (0.022)    (0.024)

                    Observations                     1,082     1,082      1,082       757

                    Year-Month FE                     Y          Y          Y          Y
                    Unemployment Rate                            Y          Y          Y
                    Education Controls                                      Y          Y
                    Education Restrictions                                             Y
                    Baseline Earnings Controls        Y          Y          Y          Y

                    Note: Each cell represents a separate regression. Each observation
                    corresponds to an individual’s first spell of unemployment insurance
                    receipt. The dependent variable is whether an individual is enrolled
                    within six months of the first month of UI receipt. The explana-
                    tory variable of interest indicates whether a Pell letter was sent in
                    an individual’s state during any of the first six months since the first
                    month of UI receipt. All specifications include age, race, and gender
                    indicator variables as well as state fixed effects and baseline earnings
                    (average earnings over a 3-month period 6 months prior to initial UI
                    receipt). “Education Controls” are indicator variables for all attain-
                    ment levels. “Education Restrictions” limits the sample to individ-
                    uals with at least a high-school degree, but less than a bachelor’s
                    degree at initial UI receipt. All regressions restricted to individuals
                    aged 20-40 who were not enrolled during the month prior to first UI
                    receipt and first received UI between November 2008 and November
                    2010. Data are from the 2008 SIPP. Robust standard errors clus-
                    tered at the state level are in parentheses: * (p<0.10) **(p<0.05),
                    ***(p<0.01).




                                                      48
                                 Table A7: Effect of Pell Letter on Enrollment (additional robustness)
                                               (1)         (2)        (3)        (4)         (5)         (6)        (7)         (8)         (9)
     VARIABLES

     Panel A: SIPP
     Pell Letter Next 6 Months               0.039**      0.030    0.057***    0.057**    0.044**       0.026     0.044*     0.039**     0.057***
                                             (0.018)     (0.019)    (0.020)    (0.021)    (0.020)      (0.017)    (0.023)    (0.018)      (0.021)

     Panel B: BAM
     Pell Letter                            0.025***    0.024**     0.019**    0.019**    0.024***    0.027***    0.024**    0.025***    0.025***
                                             (0.008)    (0.009)     (0.008)    (0.009)     (0.008)     (0.009)    (0.010)     (0.009)     (0.009)

     Covariates                                 Y          N           Y          Y          Y           Y           Y          Y           Y
     Year-Month FE                              Y          Y           N          N          N           Y           N          Y           Y
     Year and Month FE                          N          N           N          N          Y           N           Y          N           N
     State FE                                   Y          Y           Y          Y          Y           N           Y          Y           Y
     Alternative SE Cluster Year-Month          N          N           N          Y          N           N           Y          N           N
     Alternative SE Cluster State-Year          N          N           N          N          N           N           N          Y           N
     Weights                                    N          N           N          N          N           N           N          N           Y




49
     Note: Panel A presents estimates from the SIPP and Panel B presents estimates from the BAM. Each cell represents a separate OLS
     regression. For Panel A, each observation corresponds to an individual’s first spell of unemployment insurance receipt and the dependent
     variable is whether an individual is enrolled within six months of the first month of UI receipt. For Panel B the dependent variable is
     whether an individual is enrolled in any type of training program in the observed week. The explanatory variable of interest indicates
     whether a Pell letter was sent in an individual’s state during any of the first six months since the first month of UI receipt. Covariates
     include age, race, and gender indicator variables. All specifications include controls for unemployment rate and state fixed effects. All
     regressions restricted to individuals aged 20-40 who first received UI between November 2008 and November 2010. In Panel A, the sample
     is also restricted to individuals who were not enrolled during the month prior to first UI receipt. In Panel B, the sample is also restricted
     to individuals who were observed within 75 days of initial UI receipt. Unless otherwise noted, robust standard errors clustered at the
     state level are in parentheses: * (p<0.10) **(p<0.05), ***(p<0.01).
Table A8: Enrollment in Six Months Following First Receipt of UI (counterfactual assignments)
                                           (1)                     (2)
                      Variables     Assignment (t − 12)     Assignment (t + 12)

                      Pell Letter          -0.028                  0.006
                                          (0.039)                 (0.053)


                      Note: Columns (1) and (2) show estimates that assign the
                      letters based on the counterfactual of moving an individual’s
                      month of UI receipt by 12 months in either direction (which
                      affects the assignment of treatment, but not the underly-
                      ing data). Each observation corresponds to an individual’s
                      first spell of unemployment insurance receipt. The depen-
                      dent variable is whether an individual is enrolled within six
                      months of the first month of UI receipt. The explanatory
                      variable of interest indicates whether a Pell letter was sent
                      in an individual’s state during any of the first six months
                      since the first month of UI receipt (under the counterfactual
                      assumption of initial UI receipt being shifted 12 months in
                      either direction). All specifications include age, race, and
                      gender indicator variables as well as state fixed effects. All
                      regressions restricted to individuals aged 20-40 who were
                      not enrolled during the month prior to first UI receipt and
                      first received UI between November 2008 and November
                      2010. Data are from the 2008 SIPP. Robust standard errors
                      clustered at the state level are in parentheses: * (p<0.10)
                      **(p<0.05), ***(p<0.01).




                                                    50
Table A9: Pell Grant Receipt in Six Months Following First UI Receipt
                                         (1)       (2)        (3)       (4)
      Variables

      Pell Grant (Next 6 Months)       0.015      0.013      0.014     0.023
                                      (0.014)    (0.014)    (0.014)   (0.019)

      Observations                     1,472      1,472     1,472      1,042

      Year-Month FE                      Y          Y         Y          Y
      Unemployment Rate                             Y         Y          Y
      Education Controls                                      Y          Y
      Education Restrictions                                             Y

      Note: Each cell presents a separate regression. Each observation
      corresponds to an individual’s first spell of unemployment insurance
      receipt. The dependent variable is whether an individual received a
      Pell grant within six months of the first month of UI receipt. The
      explanatory variable of interest indicates whether a Pell letter was
      sent in an individual’s state during any of the first six months since
      the first month of UI receipt. All specifications include age, race, and
      gender indicator variables as well as state fixed effects. All regres-
      sions restricted to individuals aged 20-40 who were not enrolled dur-
      ing the month prior to first UI receipt and first received UI between
      November 2008 and November 2010. Data are from the 2008 SIPP.
      Robust standard errors clustered at the state level are in parenthe-
      ses: * (p<0.10) **(p<0.05), ***(p<0.01).




                                        51
 Table A10: Subgroup Effect of Pell Letter on Training Enrollment (BAM Data)
                                         (1)          (2)     (3)        (4)         (5)        (6)
Variables

Pell Letter                             0.014      0.012    0.022*     0.016*     0.049***     -0.019
                                       (0.008)    (0.010)   (0.012)    (0.009)     (0.014)    (0.028)
Pell Letter * Black                   0.048***
                                       (0.017)
Pell Letter * Female                              0.032*
                                                  (0.018)
Pell Letter * Age>30                                         0.006
                                                            (0.016)
Pell Letter * Hourly Wage ≤ $10                                        0.042**
                                                                       (0.018)
Pell Letter * Hourly Wage                                                         -0.002**
                                                                                   (0.001)
Pell Letter * State UR                                                                        0.005*
                                                                                              (0.003)

Observations                            5,154     5,154      5,154     5,154        5,153      5,154
Interaction Group Mean                 0.0840     0.0981     0.0583    0.0782        NA         NA

Note: Each column represents a separate regression. Each observation corresponds to an in-
dividual’s first spell of unemployment insurance receipt. The dependent variable is whether an
individual is enrolled in any training program in the observed week. The explanatory variable of
interest indicates whether a Pell letter was sent in an individual’s state during any of the first six
months since the first month of UI receipt. All specifications include age, race, and gender indi-
cator variables as well as state fixed effects. All regressions restricted to individuals aged 20-40
who first received UI between November 2008 and November 2010 and were observed within 75
days of initial UI receipt. Data are from the BAM. Robust standard errors clustered at the state
level are in parentheses: * (p<0.10) **(p<0.05), ***(p<0.01).




                                                 52
Table A11: Enrollment in Six Months Following First Receipt of UI (age heterogeneity)
                                            (1)          (2)       (3)         (4)
               Variables

               Age < 30                    0.044        0.040     0.052       0.052
                                          (0.033)      (0.034)   (0.035)     (0.041)

               Age ≥ 30                   0.041*       0.041*     0.040      0.055*
                                          (0.024)      (0.025)   (0.027)     (0.032)

               Observations               522/950      522/950   522/950    386/656

               Year-Month FE                 Y           Y          Y          Y
               Unemployment Rate                         Y          Y          Y
               Education Controls                                   Y          Y
               Education Restrictions                                          Y

               Note: Each cell represents a separate regression. Each row repre-
               sents a different sample restriction. Each observation corresponds
               to an individual’s first spell of unemployment insurance receipt.
               The dependent variable is whether an individual is enrolled within
               six months of the first month of UI receipt. The mean for individu-
               als less than 30 is 0.13 and the mean for individuals 30 and over is
               0.07. The explanatory variable of interest indicates whether a Pell
               letter was sent in an individual’s state during any of the first four,
               five, or six months since the first month of UI receipt. All spec-
               ifications include age, race, and gender indicator variables as well
               as state fixed effects. “Education Controls” are indicator variables
               for all attainment levels. “Education Restrictions” limits the sam-
               ple to individuals with at least a high-school degree, but less than
               a bachelor’s degree at initial UI receipt. All regressions restricted
               to individuals aged 20-40 who were not enrolled during the month
               prior to first UI receipt and first received UI between November
               2008 and November 2010. Data are from the 2008 SIPP. Robust
               standard errors clustered at the state level are in parentheses: *
               (p<0.10) **(p<0.05), ***(p<0.01).




                                                  53
Table A12: Training Type and Letter Exposure (BAM Data)
                                (1)        (2)       (3)       (4)
   Variables

   Academic Training         0.013*      0.013*    0.015**    0.010
                             (0.007)     (0.007)   (0.006)   (0.008)

   Vocational Training        0.008       0.008     0.008    0.012*
                             (0.005)     (0.005)   (0.005)   (0.007)

   WIA Training               -0.000      -0.000    -0.000    0.001
                             (0.001)     (0.001)   (0.001)   (0.002)

   Observations               5,154      5,154      5,154     3,764

   Year-Month FE                Y          Y         Y          Y
   Unemployment Rate                       Y         Y          Y
   Education Controls                                Y          Y
   Education Restrictions                                       Y

   Note: Each cell represents a separate regression. Each observa-
   tion corresponds to an individual’s first spell of unemployment
   insurance receipt. The dependent variable is whether an indi-
   vidual is enrolled in an academic, vocational, or WIA training
   program in the observed week. The means for the academic,
   vocational, and WIA training variables are 0.045, 0.022, and
   0.002 (slightly higher for column (4)). The explanatory variable
   of interest indicates whether a Pell letter was sent in an indi-
   vidual’s state during any of the first six months since the first
   month of UI receipt. All specifications include age, race, and
   gender indicator variables as well as state fixed effects. “Educa-
   tion Controls” are indicator variables for all attainment levels.
   “Education Restrictions” limits the sample to individuals with
   at least a high-school degree, but less than a bachelor’s degree
   at initial UI receipt. All regressions restricted to individuals
   aged 20-40 who first received UI between November 2008 and
   November 2010. Data are from the BAM. Robust standard er-
   rors clustered at the state level are in parentheses: * (p<0.10)
   **(p<0.05), ***(p<0.01).




                                    54
     Table A13: Effect of Pell Letter on Years of College Completed
                                                     (1)        (2)        (3)       (4)
Variables

Years of College Completed (18 Months Out)          0.042      0.075     0.039      0.060
                                                   (0.037)    (0.050)   (0.033)    (0.045)

Years of College Completed (24 Months Out)          0.068      0.104     0.070      0.082
                                                   (0.057)    (0.072)   (0.050)    (0.067)

Observations                                        1,168       827      1,168       827

Year-Month FE                                         Y          Y         Y          Y
Education Controls                                    Y          Y
Education Restrictions                                           Y                    Y
Years of College Controls                                                  Y          Y

Note: Each cell presents a separate regression. Each observation corresponds to an
individual’s first spell of unemployment insurance receipt. The dependent variables
related to years of college completion are constructed using various college enrollment
and attainment variables. For example, if an individual’s years of college completion
is set to one if an individual is observed enrolled in a second year of college or observed
with an educational attainment level of associates or greater. The explanatory vari-
able of interest indicates whether a Pell letter was sent in an individual’s state during
any of the first six months since the first month of UI receipt. All specifications in-
clude age, race, and gender indicator variables as well as state and year-month fixed
effects. All regressions restricted to individuals aged 20-40 who were not enrolled dur-
ing the month prior to first UI receipt and first received UI between November 2008
and November 2010. Data are from the 2008 SIPP. Robust standard errors clustered
at the state level are in parentheses: * (p<0.10) **(p<0.05), ***(p<0.01).




                                            55
Table A14: Enrollment in Six Months Following First Receipt of UI (remove states with approved
training changes)
                                                                (1)        (2)          (3)         (4)
          Variables

          No Changes to Yes/No Questions                      0.046**   0.044**      0.044**     0.058***
                                                              (0.019)   (0.019)      (0.019)      (0.019)

          No Implemented Changes in Free Response              0.040      0.041        0.040     0.069***
                                                              (0.024)    (0.025)      (0.025)     (0.020)

          Observations                                     1399/949     1399/949    1399/949      955/671

          Year-Month FE                                         Y           Y           Y            Y
          Unemployment Rate                                                 Y           Y            Y
          Education Controls                                                            Y            Y
          Education Restrictions                                                                     Y

          Note: Each cell represents a separate regression. Each row represents a different sample
          restriction. The first row restricts the sample to individuals initially drawing UI in a state
          that had no changes in its binary responses to questions about whether it allowed ”some 4-
          yr post-secondary programs” or ”academic courses not leading to a specific occupation” as
          approved training from before to after the ARRA. The second row restricts the sample to
          individuals initally drawing UI in a state that indicated that it had not implemented any
          changes with regards to approved training in a free response section (NASWA 2010). Each
          observation corresponds to an individual’s first spell of unemployment insurance receipt. The
          dependent variable is whether an individual is enrolled within six months of the first month
          of UI receipt. The explanatory variable of interest indicates whether a Pell letter was sent in
          an individual’s state during any of the first four, five, or six months since the first month of
          UI receipt. All specifications include age, race, and gender indicator variables as well as state
          fixed effects. “Education Controls” are indicator variables for all attainment levels. “Educa-
          tion Restrictions” limits the sample to individuals with at least a high-school degree, but less
          than a bachelor’s degree at initial UI receipt. All regressions restricted to individuals aged
          20-40 who were not enrolled during the month prior to first UI receipt and first received UI
          between November 2008 and November 2010. Data are from the 2008 SIPP. Robust standard
          errors clustered at the state level are in parentheses: * (p<0.10) **(p<0.05), ***(p<0.01).




                                                         56
Table A15: Assessment of Endogeneity of Letter Timing

          Variables

          State Unemployment Rate            -0.057
                                            (0.066)

          State UI Benefit Duration          -0.014
                                            (0.028)

          State Unemployment Ratet−3         -0.057
                                            (0.050)

          State UI Benefit Durationt−3       0.011
                                            (0.025)


          Note: Each cell represents a sepa-
          rate regression. Each observation corre-
          sponds to a state and year-month. The
          sample is restricted to year-months be-
          tween the first sending of a letter (June
          2009) and the last month observed in
          Figure 1 (November 2011). The depen-
          dent variable is a binary variable indi-
          cating whether a Pell letter was sent in a
          state during a particular month. All re-
          gressions include year-month and state
          fixed effects. The state unemployment
          rate is measured at the year-month level
          on a 1 to 100 scale and the state maxi-
          mum UI benefit duration is measured in
          weeks. Robust standard errors clustered
          at the state level are in parentheses: *
          (p<0.10) **(p<0.05), ***(p<0.01).




                             57
Table A16: Effect of Pell Letter on Enrollment of Unemployed Individuals Not Receiving UI
                                               (1)        (2)       (3)       (4)
                   VARIABLES

                   Pell Letter                0.007      0.007     0.010     -0.001
                                             (0.020)    (0.020)   (0.019)   (0.027)

                   Observations               1,793      1,793     1,793     1,184

                   Year-Month FE                Y         Y          Y         Y
                   Unemployment Rate                      Y          Y         Y
                   Education Controls                                Y         Y
                   Education Restrictions                                      Y

                   Note: Each observation corresponds to an individual’s first
                   spell of unemployment. The dependent variable is whether an
                   individual is enrolled within six months of the first month of
                   unemployment. The explanatory variable of interest indicates
                   whether a Pell letter was sent in an individual’s state during
                   any of the first six months since the first month of unemploy-
                   ment. All specifications include age, race, and gender indica-
                   tor variables as well as state fixed effects. All regressions re-
                   stricted to individuals aged 20-40 who were not enrolled during
                   the month prior to first month of unemployment and first ex-
                   perienced a spell of employment between November 2008 and
                   November 2010. Sample further restricted to individuals who
                   did not receive UI during the six months beginning with the
                   first month unemployed. Data are from the 2008 SIPP. Robust
                   standard errors clustered at the state level are in parentheses:
                   * (p<0.10) **(p<0.05), ***(p<0.01).




                                                  58
Table A17: Enrollment in Six Months Following First Layoff Experience
                                        (1)        (2)        (3)        (4)
      Variables

      Enrolled (Next 6 Months)        0.035**    0.035**    0.035**     0.026
                                      (0.017)    (0.017)    (0.016)    (0.022)

      Enrolled (Next 12 Months)       0.044**    0.045**    0.046**     0.028
                                      (0.020)    (0.020)    (0.020)    (0.024)

      Observations                     2,685      2,685      2,685      1,828

      Year-Month FE                      Y          Y          Y          Y
      Unemployment Rate                             Y          Y          Y
      Education Controls                                       Y          Y
      Education Restrictions                                              Y

      Note: Each cell represents a separate regression. Each observation
      corresponds to an individual’s first layoff spell after two months of
      full-time employment. The dependent variable is whether an indi-
      vidual is enrolled within six months of the first month experiencing
      layoff. The explanatory variable of interest indicates whether a Pell
      letter was sent in an individual’s state during any of the first six
      months since the first month experiencing layoff. All specifications
      include age, race, and gender indicator variables as well as state fixed
      effects. “Education Controls” are indicator variables for all attain-
      ment levels. “Educ. Restrictions” limits the sample to individuals
      with at least a high-school degree, but less than a bachelor’s degree
      at initial UI receipt. All regressions restricted to individuals aged 20-
      40 who were not enrolled during the month prior to the first month
      experiencing layoff and first experienced a layoff between November
      2008 and November 2010. Data are from the 2008 SIPP. Robust stan-
      dard errors clustered at the state level are in parentheses: * (p<0.10)
      **(p<0.05), ***(p<0.01).




                                         59
Table A18: Labor Market Outcomes for Initial UI Recipients (SIPP)

       Variables                                                Mean

       UI Receipt 6 Months Out                                   0.516
       UI Receipt 12 Months Out                                  0.367
       UI Receipt 18 Months Out                                  0.218

       Employed    6 Months Out                                  0.451
       Employed    12 Months Out                                 0.516
       Employed    18 Months Out                                 0.609
       Employed    24 Months Out                                 0.648
       Employed    30 Months Out                                 0.720
       Employed    36 Months Out                                 0.719

       Baseline Earnings (annualized)                           24,250
       Earnings 6 Months Out                                    16,537
       Earnings 12 Months Out                                   18,072
       Earnings 18 Months Out                                   21,761
       Earnings 24 Months Out                                   22,283
       Earnings 30 Months Out                                   25,384
       Earnings 36 Months Out                                   24,061



       Note: Sample includes individuals age 20-40 from the 2008
       SIPP panel. Sample restricted to individuals who first re-
       ceived unemployment compensation between November 2008
       and November 2010 and were not enrolled in the month prior
       to initial UI receipt. Variables of type “ X Months Out”
       (e.g., Employment 6 Months Out) indicate whether the condi-
       tion was true during any of the three months X months from
       date of first UI receipt (e.g., Employed 6 Months Out is 1 if
       an individual is employed in month 6, 7, or 8). Earnings is
       constructed in annual terms using any earnings observations
       available during the three months following the time period in
       question. More specifically, we multiply the average reported
       earnings in the following three months (e.g., months 6, 7, and
       8) by 12. Similarly, baseline earnings is an annual measure
       generated by using the three months prior to initial UI receipt.
       are binary variables indicated whether the condition was true
       during any of the six months following first UI receipt.




                                     60
7        Appendix B: Reconciling SIPP and FAFSA Estimates
      The goal of this section is to provide some intuition for how the SIPP and FAFSA estimate
magnitudes might differ as observed. To recap, the estimated effect of receiving a letter within six
months of initial UI receipt in the SIPP is 40 percent (a 4 percentage point increase) whereas the
estimated effect of a letter being sent in a particular state and month on the number of FAFSAs
filed by dislocated workers during that month is roughly 10 percent. Although these estimates
are not directly comparable, we provide a simple example to help clarify how these results can
differ as observed (Table B1). As mentioned in the main body of the paper, there are at least two
reasons why the estimates are likely to differ. First, the definition of dislocated worker used by the
FAFSA includes multiple categories of individuals who are not UI recipients. Second, our inability
to associate FAFSAs with an actual month of initial dislocation (or UI receipt) prevents us from
properly assigning treatment. We focus on this second issue in the example. The purpose of the
example is to show that under reasonable assumptions about the lag between the month of initial
UI receipt and the month of FAFSA filing, we obtain the effects observed in the data.
      In the example, we assume that UI recipients are equally likely to file their FAFSAs during
each of the four months following the month of initial UI receipt. Under this asusmption, letters
sent during June, July, and August 2009, will result in increased FAFSA filing between July and
December 2009. Our FAFSA specification essentially compares the average number of FAFSAs
filed in June, July, and August (11) to the number filed in months in which the letter was not sent
out (10).43 This timing issue results in a downward biased estimate of the effect of the letter on
the number of FAFSAs filed, resulting in an estimate of the treatment effect of 10 percent.44




    43
   This is a slight simplification for the purposes of clarity.
    44
   If there was a known and fixed pattern of FAFSA filing (relative to month of dislocation) we might back out a
more comparable estimate, but this is not feasible with the current data.


                                                      61
     Table B1: Reconciling SIPP and FAFSA Estimate Magnitudes (simple example)
             (1)        (2)             (3)                (4)              (5)          (6)         (7)

Month      Letter   # New UI       # Enr. Next      Share Enr Next      % Increase    FAFSAs     % Increase
                    Recipients    6 Mos. (SIPP)     6 Mos. (SIPP)        (SIPP)        Filed     (FAFSA)
Nov-08        0        100             10                 0.1                           10
Dec-08        0        100             10                 0.1                           10
Jan-09        0        100             10                 0.1                           10
Feb-09        0        100             10                 0.1                           10
Mar-09        0        100             10                 0.1                           10
Apr-09        0        100             10                 0.1                           10
May-09        0        100             10                 0.1                           10
Jun-09        1        100             14                0.14                           10
Jul-09        1        100             14                0.14                           11
Aug-09        1        100             14                0.14               40          12            10
Sep-09        0        100             10                 0.1                           13
Oct-09        0        100             10                 0.1                           13
Nov-09        0        100             10                 0.1                           12
Dec-09        0        100             10                 0.1                           11


Note: Table assumes constant number of new UI recipients (100) each month. Under normal circum-
stances, 10 out of 100 (10 percent) will enroll within 6 months. When letters are sent, 14 out of 100 (14
percent choose to enroll). This reflects a 40 percent increase in the likelihood of enrollment, equivalent to
our estimates in the SIPP. We assume that all UI recipients who enroll within 6 months will also file a
FAFSA. For the purposes of the example, we assume that these individuals will spread their FAFSA filing
evenly over the next four months (i.e., 2.5 a month). This results in a lag before the increase in enrollment
translates into an increase in FAFSAs.




                                                     62
