                               NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                PARENTAL WORK HOURS AND CHILDHOOD OBESITY:
EVIDENCE USING INSTRUMENTAL VARIABLES RELATED TO SIBLING SCHOOL ELIGIBILITY

                                      Charles Courtemanche
                                         Rusty Tchernis
                                           Xilin Zhou

                                       Working Paper 23376
                               http://www.nber.org/papers/w23376


                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                       May 2017




   We thank Barry Hirsh, Rachana Bhatt, Sara Markowitz, James Marton, Kurt Schnier, Darren
   Lubotsky, and seminar participants at the Southern Economic Association Annual Meeting and
   the Western Economics Association Annual Conference. We also thank Patricia Anderson for
   sharing parameter estimates from Anderson et al. (2003). This research was conducted using
   restricted data from the Bureau of Labor Statistics. The views expressed in this paper do not
   reflect those of the BLS. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not
   necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

   NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
   peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
   official NBER publications.

   © 2017 by Charles Courtemanche, Rusty Tchernis, and Xilin Zhou. All rights reserved. Short
   sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission
   provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Parental Work Hours and Childhood Obesity: Evidence using Instrumental Variables Related
to Sibling School Eligibility
Charles Courtemanche, Rusty Tchernis, and Xilin Zhou
NBER Working Paper No. 23376
May 2017
JEL No. I12,J22

                                          ABSTRACT

This study exploits plausibly exogenous variation from the youngest sibling’s school eligibility to
estimate the effects of parental work on the weight outcomes of older children in the household.
Data come from the 1979 cohort of the National Longitudinal Survey of Youth linked to the
Child and Young Adult Supplement. We first show that mothers’ work hours increase gradually
as the age of the youngest child rises, whereas mothers’ spouses’ work hours exhibit a
discontinuous jump at kindergarten eligibility. Leveraging these insights, we develop an
instrumental variables model that shows that parents’ work hours lead to larger increases in
children’s BMI z-scores and probabilities of being overweight and obese than those identified in
previous studies. We find no evidence that the impacts of maternal and paternal work are
different. Subsample analyses find that the effects are concentrated among advantaged
households, as measured by an index involving education, race, and mother’s marital status.

Charles Courtemanche                                   Xilin Zhou
Georgia State University                               Department of Economics
Andrew Young School of Policy Studies                  Andrew Young School of Policy Studies
Department of Economics                                Georgia State University
P.O. Box 3992                                          P.O. Box 3992
Atlanta, GA 30302-3992                                 Atlanta, GA 30302-3992
and NBER                                               xzhou10@gsu.edu
ccourtemanche@gsu.edu

Rusty Tchernis
Department of Economics
Andrew Young School of Policy Studies
Georgia State University
P.O. Box 3992
Atlanta, GA 30302-3992
and NBER
rtchernis@gsu.edu
I. Introduction

           The statistics on childhood obesity in the U.S. are alarming. From 1971 to 2014, the

childhood obesity rate rose from 5 percent to 17 percent (Fryar et al., 2016). The increase is

especially notable among school-aged children, as the obesity rate quadrupled for children ages 6

to 11 and tripled for those ages 12 to 19, compared to doubling for those ages 2 to 5 (Fryar et al.,

2016). The prevalence of obesity among children is considered a major public health concern

because of its immediate and long-term effects on health and well-being. According to the

Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC), obese children are at a higher risk of

developing cardiovascular disease, prediabetes, bone and joint problems, sleep apnea, and

psychological problems. Obese children are also likely to grow up as obese adults and therefore

face the risk of adult obesity-related health problems.1 Obesity imposes substantial costs on

society. As of 2005, the annual medical cost of treating childhood obesity was $14.1 billion for

prescription drugs, emergency room, and outpatient visit costs (Trasande and Chatterjee, 2009),

plus $237.6 million for inpatient costs (Trasande et al., 2009). Among adults, obesity leads to an

estimated $210 billion of annual medical expenses as well as indirect costs such as unfavorable

labor market outcomes (Cawley and Meyerhoefer, 2012; Cawley, 2004).

           Another remarkable trend in the second half of the 20th Century was increased

employment among women. From 1960 to 2013, the labor force participation rate (LFPR) of

women 16 years old and older increased from 38% to 57%. The male LFPR fell from 83% to

70% in response, but the overall LFPR combining both genders still rose, from 59% to 63%.

Similar trends were observed for those with children under age eighteen in the household.




1
    http://www.cdc.gov/healthyyouth/obesity/facts.htm

                                                        2
Between 1970 and 2013, the LFPR increased from 42% to 70% among mothers and declined

from 97% to 93% among fathers).2

           The concurrent nature of these trends in LFPR and childhood obesity has led researchers

to ask whether a causal connection is possible. Some important changes occur when mothers

increase their labor supply that could influence children’s weight. First, their children have less

supervision and watch more television than the children of stay-at-home mothers (Fertig,

Glomm, and Tchernis, 2009; Cawley and Liu, 2012). Second, working mothers spend less time

on cooking than other mothers, and their children eat more away-from-home meals (Cawley and

Liu, 2012). Next, more market work increases household income, which could affect children’s

weight in either direction. The loosening of the budget constraint could either mean more across-

the-board food purchases or a switch away from cheap processed foods toward more expensive,

healthier options. Finally, to the extent that fathers reduce work hours in response to mothers

entering the labor force, this could counteract whatever effects might otherwise occur. Indeed,

Cawley and Liu (2012) find some evidence of offsetting time use behaviors by fathers, but it is

not nearly enough to offset the changes by mothers.

           Several studies document a modest positive relationship between maternal employment

and children’s weight. Anderson et al. (2003) find that an extra ten hours worked per week

during weeks worked by a mother are associated with around a one percentage point increase in

the probability of a 3-11 year old child being obese. The impact is largest for high

socioeconomic status (SES) children. Similar magnitudes are obtained by Ruhm (2008) and

Courtemanche (2009). Fertig et al. (2009) estimate that a 10% increase in mothers’ work hours is

associated with approximately a 1.6 percentage point rise in the probability a child is obese. Liu

et al. (2009) find that full-time maternal employment raises a child’s body mass index (BMI) by
2
    These numbers are authors’ calculations from the Current Population Surveys.

                                                          3
about half a unit and probability of being obese by 12%. Morrissey et al. (2011) and Morrissey

(2012) estimate that every survey period in which a mother is employed increases her child’s

BMI Z-score by 0.02 and 0.03, respectively.

         Such analyses, however, are complicated by the endogeneity of maternal employment. A

mother’s unobserved characteristics likely affect both her labor supply and child care decisions.

For instance, greater intelligence might increase both the likelihood of a mother participating in

the labor force and her ability to develop effective strategies to prevent her children from

becoming obese. Similarly, highly conscientious mothers could be more likely than others to

both work outside the home and also to closely monitor their children’s behaviors. In either case,

associational estimates may underestimate the effect of maternal employment on childhood

obesity, potentially explaining the small magnitudes obtained by prior studies. On the other hand,

if entering the labor market reflects an underlying preference for income versus family time,

associational estimates could be overstated. Reverse causality is another possible concern.

Having a child with health problems may cause a mother to either exit the labor force to care for

the child or enter the labor force to obtain health insurance or extra income.3

         To address these endogeneity concerns, this study implements an instrumental variables

(IV) strategy based on the idea that the opportunity cost of working is substantially reduced

when one’s youngest child is attending school. Several studies have established that mothers

increase labor supply when their youngest child becomes eligible for or enrolls in public school

3
  Some of the papers in the literature have implemented panel data methods to control for unobserved heterogeneity
(Anderson et al., 2003; Courtemanche, 2009; Miller, 2011; Morrissey et al., 2011), but these methods do not account
for time-varying sources of bias or reverse causality. Anderson et al. (2003) also estimated an IV specification, using
as instruments state-level variables including unemployment rate, child care regulations, wages of child care
workers, welfare benefit levels, and the status of welfare reform in the state. However, these instruments were
relatively weak in terms of their predictive power on maternal work. They also relied on questionable exclusion
restrictions, as the instruments could influence childhood obesity through pathways besides maternal work. For
instance, unemployment rate and the generosity of a state’s welfare program could be associated with changes in
household disposable income or wealth even if mothers’ work hours do not change, and this in turn could affect
children’s weight.

                                                          4
(Gelbach, 2002; Cascio, 2009; Fitzpatrick, 2010; Morrill, 2011; Fitzpatrick, 2012). Morrill

(2011) used the youngest child’s kindergarten eligibility as an instrument to show that maternal

employment increases the probability of older children in the household experiencing

hospitalizations, asthma episodes, and injuries/poisonings. We utilize a related strategy to

examine the effects of parental work on childhood obesity.

       We begin by investigating how the age of the youngest child relative to the kindergarten

eligibility cutoff influences parental work. Data come from the National Longitudinal Survey of

Youth 1979 Cohort (NLSY79). We find that mothers’ work hours gradually increase as the age

of the youngest child rises, as opposed to jumping discontinuously when the child becomes

eligible for kindergarten. This is consistent with graphical evidence provided by Morrill (2011)

and Lubotsky and Qureshi (2016). The effect on mothers’ work occurs along both the extensive

margin (probability of working) and the intensive margin (work hours conditional on working).

In contrast, mothers’ spouses’ work hours do not exhibit a smooth trend across youngest child’s

age, but they jump discontinuously at kindergarten eligibility. This effect occurs completely

along the intensive margin of work rather than the extensive margin.

       Next, we leverage these insights to develop an instrumental variable (IV) model in which

plausibly exogenous variation in the youngest child’s age identifies the impact of parental

employment on the weight of older children in the household. Our first instrument is youngest

sibling’s relative age (with respect to the kindergarten eligibility cutoff), which predicts maternal

work in an approximately linear manner. Given the discontinuity observed for mothers’ spouses’

work hours, the second instrument is the interaction of an indicator for youngest sibling’s

kindergarten eligibility with mother’s marital status. Using this strategy, we show that greater

parental work hours lead to statistically significant increases in children’s BMI Z-score and



                                                  5
probabilities of being overweight and obese that are much larger than those observed in the

associational literature. While the estimates are imprecise, we are nonetheless able to rule out the

consistency of the ordinary least squares (OLS) estimator in most specifications. Also in contrast

to findings from the associational literature, we find no evidence that mothers’ and mothers’

spouses work hours differentially affect children’s weight outcomes. This result implies that the

contribution of the rise in maternal employment to the childhood obesity epidemic has largely

been offset by the resulting drop in paternal employment. Next, we conduct subsample analyses

and show that the effect of parental work hours on children’s weight is concentrated among

advantaged households, as measured by an index reflecting parents’ education, race, and

mother’s marital status. Finally, falsification tests using health behavior-related outcomes that

should not be affected by parental work provide evidence to support our model’s identifying

assumptions.

       Our study makes three main contributions. First, we present, to our knowledge, the first

evidence on the relationship between youngest child’s age and paternal, rather than just

maternal, employment. The investigation yields the interesting result that mother’s spouse’s

father’s) work does indeed respond to youngest child’s age, but in a much different manner than

mothers’ work: discrete (at kindergarten eligibility) rather than continuous, and along the

intensive rather than extensive margin. Second, we provide the first application of a youngest-

sibling’s-age-based IV strategy to study the impact of parental work on a chronic health

condition (obesity), as opposed to the acute conditions studied by Morrill (2011). Since chronic

conditions represent capital stocks, one might expect them to be less responsive than acute

episodes to changes in inputs to the health production function. Our finding that short-run

changes in parental work can still have large effects on children’s weight is therefore



                                                 6
noteworthy. Finally, our third contribution is to provide guidance for best practices when using

the youngest-sibling’s-age IV design. Specifically, using a kindergarten eligibility dummy

variable as an instrument for maternal work while omitting paternal work is likely to lead to

overstated magnitudes. A continuous age measure is a more appropriate instrument for mother’s

work, while a discrete measure is better suited to identify the effect of father’s work.


II. Data

         Data come from the restricted version of the NLSY79. The original sample of the

NLSY79 contains 12,682 individuals, half male and half female, who were between the ages of

14 and 21 in 1979. These individuals were followed annually from 1979 to 1994 and then every

two years thereafter. Starting in 1986, a supplemental survey, the NLSY79 Child and Young

Adult (NLSY79CYA), was conducted biannually which includes assessments of all biological

children of the female participants. Information was collected from either the mother or child,

and it can be linked to the main NLSY79 through the mother’s identifier.4 We use the paired

mother-children records from all waves in which both the NLSY79 and the NLSY79CYA were

available as of the writing of this paper, i.e. biannually from 1986 to 2010.

         There are three outcomes of interest, BMI z-score and indicators for overweight and

obesity, all of which are constructed based on children’s BMI.5 BMI is a commonly-used proxy

for body fat in adults. However, it is not a proper measure for children since their healthy weight

range varies by age and sex. Therefore, for children the CDC suggests using BMI z-score: a

standardized measure of BMI using age-and-gender specific BMI distributions from the 2000

growth chart (National Center for Health Statistics, 2002). The other two outcomes are also


4
  Before 1994, a mother reported information for all her children regardless of the age of children. After 1994,
children above 15 years of age answered interview questions by themselves.
5
  BMI is calculated as weight in kilograms divided by height in meters squared (kg/m2).

                                                          7
computed according to the 2000 growth chart. If a child’s BMI is above the 85th (95th) percentile

of the BMI distribution of the corresponding reference population, the child is considered

overweight (obese).

        Mothers’ and mothers’ spouse’s employment variables are fraction of weeks worked in

the past year, hours worked per week in weeks worked in the past year (undefined if no work

weeks), and hours worked per week over all weeks in the past year (zeros assigned in weeks not

worked). The first of these variables therefore reflects the extensive margin of employment, the

second reflects the intensive margin, and the third reflects overall work accounting for both the

extensive and intensive margins. Since the variables are one-year averages, the estimates will

capture relatively short run effects compared to some papers in the literature that measure

maternal work as averages over the course of the child’s entire life (e.g. Anderson et al., 2003;

Courtemanche, 2009; Ruhm, 2008). Our IV strategy – which relies on sharp discontinuities at a

particular age – is inherently better suited for the identification of short-run rather than long-run

impacts. It is therefore noteworthy that, despite this limitation, we will still obtain much larger

effects than these prior studies.

       A key component to this analysis is the use of instrumental variables. The restricted

NLSY79 has not only the date of birth (DOB) of all children but also their states of residence.

We first calculate the age in weeks for the youngest child in each household. Then the first IV,

proportion of kindergarten-eligible weeks in the last year, is given by the proportion of the

previous 52 weeks in which the youngest child has been over the state’s cutoff date to be eligible

for kindergarten. This discrete variable takes a value of zero if the child has not reached the

cutoff date during the whole past year, one if the child is at least 52 weeks older than the cutoff

date, and between zero and one for those less than 52 weeks older than the cutoff date. We use



                                                  8
the 52-week proportion rather than simply a dummy variable for being over the cutoff in order to

match the 52-week averages used for our employment variables. State cutoff dates come from

Evans et al. (2010). In practice, cross-state policy variation contributes very little to variation in

kindergarten eligibility; almost all the variation comes from youngest child’s age. The second

IV, relative age, is a continuous measure of youngest child’s age relative to the kindergarten

eligibility cutoff. This variable is equal to the difference, measured in number of weeks divided

by 52, between youngest child’s age and the date of the kindergarten eligibility cutoff.

Functionally, then, it is the number of years away from the cutoff, with fractions allowed.

        We also utilize the extensive information available in the NLSY79 and NLSY79CYA to

include a detailed array of control variables. The first set of control variables is for demographic

characteristics. The demographic variables taken from the NLSY79, which pertain to the mother,

are race/ethnicity (Hispanic and non-Hispanic black, with other as the reference group), family

size, age in years and its square, and an indicator for married and living with the spouse.

Demographic variables from the NLSY79CYA, which pertain to the focal child, are an indicator

for gender, age in months, and an indicator for close child-father attachment (equals one if the

biological father lives in the household, biological father lives within 10 miles, or child has seen

biological father at least once a week in the past year).

        The second set of control variables relates to parents’ human capital. These variables,

which all come from the NLSY79, are mother’s AFQT score as well as both mother’s and

mother’s spouse’s education (high school graduate, some college, and college degree or greater,

with less than high school degree being the reference group). We do not control for household

income since this is one of the pathways through which parental employment may affect

children’s weight. Nonetheless, results remain very similar if we include it.



                                                   9
        The third set of control variables is named “child’s health”. It includes four variables

from the NLSYCYA: whether the child had a high birth weight (> 8.8 pounds)6, whether the

child was breastfed, and whether height or weight are self-reported7. The latter two variables are

included because self-reported data on height and weight usually suffer from systematic

reporting error that leads to underestimation of the prevalence of obesity (Goodman et al., 2000;

Kuczmarski et al., 2001; Courtemanche et al., 2015).

        The regression sample is restricted to children who meet three criteria: 1) they are seven

to seventeen years old, 2) they have at least one younger sibling, and 3) their youngest sibling’s

schooling eligibility changed during the sample period. The first restriction ensures that school

eligibility does not change for the sample children. As discussed above, this eliminates the

obvious concern that one’s own school eligibility could affect one’s own weight for reasons

other than maternal employment. The second restriction is necessary for the use of IVs. The third

restriction is used to eliminate those whose mothers never receive the treatment induced by the

IVs.8

        The resulting sample includes 13,332 observations for 3,438 children of 2,220 mothers.

Table 1 presents descriptive statistics for this merged, child-level dataset, with all estimates

weighted by the children’s sampling weights. The average BMI z-score is 0.27, and 26% of the

children are overweight while 12% of them are obese. On average, mothers worked 66% of


6
  The threshold of high birth weight can be found http://www.cdc.gov/pednss/what_is/pednss_health_indicators.htm.
7
  The interview questions concerning the measurements of height and weight change frequently during the research
period. There were only two modes at the beginning: mother report and interviewer measure. The questions evolved
gradually and eventually there are four options: mother report, child report, interviewer measure, and others. In
addition, young adults who are above age 15 were interviewed independently since 1996. Their height and weight
data are all self-reported. To simplify the classifications, I create an indicator which represents all modes except
interviewer measure for height and weight data and call it self-reported mode.
8
  Other steps to improve data quality include dropping children with extreme BMIs (z-score exceeding +/-5),
children who have shrinking height from the previous interview, children who do not live with their mothers, female
children who are pregnant or ever have given birth, and those whose mothers do not have any valid employment
data.

                                                        10
weeks in the past year while spouses worked 93%. In weeks worked, average work hours were

35 for mothers and 47 for spouses. Across all weeks, including zeros for weeks not worked,

mothers worked an average of 24 hours compared to 43 for spouses.


III. Effect of Youngest Child’s Kindergarten Eligibility on Parents’ Work

       Our first objective is to identify the effect of the youngest child’s age relative to the

kindergarten eligibility cutoff on parents’ work hours. This investigation will both provide

interesting information on its own and help motivate the appropriate specification for the

instrumental variable analysis of the impact of parental work on childhood obesity. Since the

dependent variables in this section are measured at the parent rather than child level, we use a

version of the dataset that is at the mother-by-year level and includes only the control variables

from the NLSY79, omitting those from the NLSY79CS. This decision is not consequential for

the results, as we will see from the first stage of the IV results in the next section, which use

child-level data and include the controls for the focal child and lead to the same conclusions.

       Before discussing the regressions, we first present non-parametric plots of the

relationships between youngest child’s relative age and mothers’ (Figure 1) and mothers’

spouses’ (Figure 2) average hours worked per week over all weeks in the past year. In both

figures, the horizontal axis represents youngest child’s age relative to kindergarten eligibility,

with positive values indicating that a child is older than the cutoff and negative values meaning

the child is younger than the cutoff. In each figure, work hours are fit separately to the left and

right of a relative age of zero, allowing for a discontinuous break at the time of kindergarten

eligibility. For the sake of brevity, we only present the graphs for the hours worked per week

over all weeks, i.e. including zeros for weeks not worked, since these incorporate both the




                                                  11
extensive and intensive margins of employment. Graphs for the other work variables (fraction of

weeks worked, hours worked per week in weeks worked) are available upon request.

        Figure 1 shows that mothers’ work hours increase smoothly and gradually in youngest

child’s age, consistent with the observations of Morrill (2011) and Lubotsky and Qureshi (2016).

The graph also shows a small, discontinuous jump in work hours at the time of kindergarten

eligibility, but the magnitude of this increase is small compared to the gradual changes

throughout the rest of the child’s upbringing. Specifically, the discontinuous jump at the

kindergarten cutoff is less than 0.25 hours per week, whereas the overall rise in mothers’ weekly

work hours is from around 16 when the youngest child is a baby to around 31 ten years after the

child becomes eligible for kindergarten.

        Figure 2 shows a less clear pattern for the relationship of youngest child’s age relative to

kindergarten eligibility and mothers’ spouses’ work hours. This may be partly attributable to the

larger confidence intervals coming from the smaller sample size for spouses. We do, nonetheless,

observe some evidence of a gradual upward trend in the early years of the child’s life as well as a

discontinuity at kindergarten eligibility.

        In order to control for observable characteristics and specifically test whether changes in

work hours are better characterized by gradual upward trends or discontinuous breaks, we next

turn to regression analyses. The regression equations take the following form:

                                                                                                   (1)

where            is one of the work measures, i.e. fraction of weeks worked, hours worked per

week in weeks worked, and hours worked per week over all weeks, for parent i in year t.

is the discrete measure of proportion of kindergarten-eligible weeks for youngest child.

           is the continuous measure of youngest child’s relative age to the eligibility cutoff.



                                                 12
contains the control variables. We use three variants of controls in separate models: (i) includes

only the “demographic controls” pertaining to mothers, (ii) adds the “human capital controls”,

and (iii) further adds the baseline value of the outcome variable.     is a year fixed effect and

is the error term. In the regressions for spouse’s work outcomes, we restrict the sample to

mothers with spouses. Regressions for the intensive margin outcomes (mother’s/mother’s

spouse’s hours worked in weeks worked) drop mothers/mothers’ spouses with no work weeks.

       Ideally, we would also include mother fixed effects in equation (1). However, doing so

would lead to extreme multicollinearity, as the relative age variable would be almost completely

explained by the year and mother fixed effects. The collinearity is not perfect since there is some

additional variation in youngest child’s age relative to kindergarten eligibility coming from

differences in state eligibility laws, new births among mothers (which reset the age of the

youngest child), and the fact that relative age is measured in weeks rather than years. In practice,

though, these additional sources of variation are insufficient to estimate the coefficients of

interest with meaningful precision.

       Because of this inability to include mother fixed effects, we take a different approach to

controlling for unobserved heterogeneity, which is to include the baseline value of the work

outcome. This value is measured in the period immediately preceding the mother’s first entry

into the sample. Recall that mothers make their first entry into the sample when one of their older

children reaches 7 years old; therefore, the baseline value is usually from when this older child is

5-6 years old. If that particular value is missing, we use the preceding period (e.g. when the older

child is 3-4 years old). With all this said, it is unclear that unobserved heterogeneity will be of

consequence for this particular set of analyses since, conditional on having children, the age of




                                                  13
the youngest child is plausibly exogenous. Indeed, we will see that controlling for the baseline

work outcome will make almost no difference in the results.

           Table 2 reports the results for the coefficients of interest. Panel A shows the results for

mother’s work outcomes, while Panel B does the same for the mother’s spouse’s work outcomes.

Panel A reveals two key results. First, consistent with the graphical evidence, the impact of

youngest child’s relative age on mothers’ work is much better characterized as smooth and

gradual than as a discontinuous jump at kindergarten eligibility. In all models, coefficients on the

continuous measure of relative age are highly significant, while none of the coefficients on the

discrete measure of proportion of eligible weeks are significant. Second, the effect occurs along

both the extensive and intensive margins of employment. The former is shown by the positive

and significant effect of youngest child’s relative age on the fraction of weeks worked, while the

latter is illustrated by the positive and significant effect of youngest child’s relative age on hours

worked per week in weeks worked. Combining the extensive and intensive margins into the

overall work outcome, i.e. hours worked per week over all weeks, shows that each additional

year of youngest child’s relative age increases the mother’s weekly work hours by 0.9-1.2 hours

depending on the set of controls included.9

           Panel B shows that the results are quite different for mothers’ spouses. While mothers’

spouses’ labor supply does appear responsive to the relative age of the youngest child, as

evidenced by the existence of at least some positive and significant coefficients, the pattern of

responsiveness differs from that of mothers in two key ways. First, spouses’ responses appear to

occur discontinuously rather than gradually. We see this from the significant effects of the

discrete kindergarten eligibility variable compared to the lack of significance of the continuous

variable relative age. Specifically, the point estimates suggest that the youngest child switching
9
    The coefficient estimates are an order of magnitude smaller because the hours worked variable is in units of 10.

                                                           14
from ineligible to eligible for kindergarten increases mothers’ spouses’ work hours per week in

weeks worked by 1.9-2.2 and their work hours per week over all weeks by 2.0-2.1. A second key

difference compared to mothers is that the effect on spouses occurs completely along the

intensive, rather than extensive, margin. We see this from the significant effect on hours worked

per week in weeks worked compared to the lack of a significant impact on the proportion of

weeks worked. The absence of an effect along the extensive margin is consistent with the very

high sample mean for proportion of weeks worked by spouses: 0.93 for spouses compared to

0.65 for mothers. If most spouses work continuously throughout their children’s upbringing,

there is little opportunity for an increase in their labor force participation rate as the children get

older.

         One potential concern with the above analyses is that the sample selection criteria –

mothers with at least two children where the older ones are between seven and seventeen years

old – raise questions about generalizability. To address this issue, we re-estimate the models

using a broader sample of all mothers with any children seventeen or younger. The results for

this “unrestricted sample” from regressions with the full set of demographic and human capital

controls are shown in Table 3 alongside the results from the analogous specification in Table 2

(“main sample”). In spite of the fact that relaxing the selection criteria roughly doubles the

sample size, the results remain very similar.


IV. Effect of Parents’ Work on Childhood Obesity

Models

         We next leverage the insights gained from the previous section to develop an IV strategy

to estimate the causal effect of parental work on childhood obesity. Specifically, such a strategy

should incorporate the following features. First, since youngest child’s age influences the work


                                                  15
hours of both mothers and their spouses, instrumenting for only mothers’ work would likely lead

to a violation of the exclusion restriction. Thus, spouses’ work should be incorporated as well.

Second, since youngest child’s age influenced both mothers’ and their spouses’ work along the

intensive margin, the endogeneous work variable needs to incorporate intensity of work; simply

using a dummy for employment status would likely lead to a violation of the exclusion

restriction as well. Third, the continuous measure of youngest child’s relative age is a better

predictor of mothers’ work than the variable for proportion of eligible weeks, whereas the

reverse is true for mothers’ spouses’ work. This points toward using the continuous measure as

one instrument and the interaction of the discrete measure with mother’s marital status as

another. In other words, since the discrete measure has little to no predictive power over

mother’s work, it should only “turn on” if the mother is married. Similarly, since the continuous

measure has little predictive power over spouse’s work, interacting it with marital status would

serve little purpose.

        Given the inherent difficulties in obtaining meaningfully precise IV estimates with

multiple endogenous variables in datasets with modest sample sizes such as the NLSY79, our

main IV specification uses just one endogenous variable: parents’ hours worked per week over

all weeks in the past year. This is the sum of mothers’ and spouses’ weekly work hours, with

zeros assigned in cases of no work or no spouse. (Recall that our set of controls includes marital

status, allowing differentiation between mothers with no spouse and mothers whose spouses do

not work.) Accordingly, the IV model takes the following form:

                                                                                                  (2)

                                                                                                  (3)




                                                 16
where (2) is the first-stage regression for parental work (          ) and (3) is the second stage for

children’s weight status (        ). Since we now use the child-level dataset, there are three

indices: c for child, i for mother, and t for year.           and                         are the two

instruments; as discussed in the previous paragraph, the former strongly predicts the mother’s

hours component of              while the latter strongly predicts the spouse’s hours component.

          is one of the child-BMI-related outcome variables: BMI Z-score, overweight, and obese.

     is the set of mother- and child-level control variables. Again, we utilize multiple variants of

controls in separate models: (i) including only the “demographic controls”, (ii) adds the “human

capital controls”, (iii) further adds “child health controls”, (iv) adds also the baseline value of the

dependent variable, measured in the survey wave immediately prior to the child aging into the

sample.       and     are the year fixed effects in equations (2) and (3), and      and       are the

error terms. The coefficient of interest     provides the local average treatment effect of parents’

work hours on children’s weight outcomes – i.e. the effects of changes in work hours on older

children’s weight induced by youngest sibling’s kindergarten eligibility. We also estimate a

model that allows for differential effects of mothers’ and spouses’ work by instrumenting for

them both in one model – a model that is exactly identified because we have two instruments.

Results

          Table 4 reports the results from the IV models with parents’ work as the lone endogenous

variable. The three panels display the results for the three weight outcomes. The top row of each

panel contains OLS results for the sake of comparison. The second row present the second-stage

coefficient estimates of interest from the IV models. The remaining rows shows results from

three standard diagnostic tests of the IV models: the F test that the instruments are jointly

insignificant in the first stage, the test for endogeneity of parents’ work, and the


                                                      17
overidentification test. The columns show the sensitivity of the results to the gradual inclusion of

additional control variables.

         We begin by discussing the OLS results. Ten additional parental work hours per week are

associated with a statistically significant but small increase in BMI z-score of 0.025-0.03. The

estimates for the binary outcomes are also positive and small – 0.3-0.5 percentage points for

Pr(Overweight) and 0.3 percentage points for Pr(Obese) – but are statistically insignificant.

         The IV estimates are, in all cases, positive and substantially larger than the corresponding

OLS estimates. Ten additional parental work hours per week are predicted to increase BMI z-

score by 0.15-0.19 units, Pr(Overweight) by 6.6-8.1 percentage points, and Pr(Obese) by 4.9-6

percentage points. The impacts on overweight and obesity are statistically significant at the 5%

level in all specifications, while the effect on BMI z-score is only significant in the regression

with all controls. The first-stage F statistics are all around 11-12, slightly above the conventional

rule of thumb of 10. The endogeneity test rejects the null hypothesis that the OLS estimator is

consistent in all overweight and obesity regressions as well as in the BMI z-score regression with

all controls. The overidentification test never rejects the null hypothesis that our set of

instruments is valid.

         Further discussion is warranted regarding magnitudes. The IV point estimates are quite

large, as they represent 13%-22%, 15%-18%, and 15%-18.7% of the sample standard deviations

for BMI z-score, overweight, and obesity, respectively.10 However, we caution against a literal

interpretation of these point estimates since they are accompanied by fairly wide confidence

intervals – as evidenced by the fact that the estimates never reach the 1% level of statistical


10
  These calculations are based on dividing the coefficient estimates by the standard deviations reported in Table 1
and then multiplying by 100%. Note that the coefficient estimate for BMI z-score is not exactly interpretable as the
effect in standard deviations because z-score is based on the historical CDC growth charts rather than an in-sample
calculation.

                                                         18
significance despite their size. This is likely due to the relatively modest sample size of the

NLSY79 combined with the fact that the instruments, though technically strong enough to rule

out substantial weak instrument bias, are not overwhelmingly strong. Nonetheless, it is

noteworthy that, in spite of the relative imprecision of the IV estimates, we are still able to reject

the consistency of the OLS estimator in most cases. All things considered, our preferred

interpretation of the results is simply that they provide evidence that parental work increases

child weight and that the magnitude of the effect is understated if the endogeneity of weight is

ignored.

       Table 5 displays the results for the models that instrument for two endogenous variables

at the same time – mothers’ and their spouses’ work hours – and thus differentiate between the

effects of maternal and paternal work. The OLS estimates show that higher mothers’, but not

mothers’ spouses’, work hours are associated with small increases in child weight that are

significant at the 10% level or better in most cases. The magnitudes for the effects of ten

additional mothers’ work hours per week range from 0.03-0.04 units for BMI z-score, 0.7-0.8

percentage points for overweight, and 0.4-0.5 percentage points for obesity, while the

magnitudes for the effects of spouses’ work hours are all close to zero. These results are

consistent with those from the prior associational literature discussed in Section I. The IV results,

however, are quite different. The magnitudes of the effects increase considerably for both

mothers and spouses, as ten additional mothers’ work hours per week increase BMI z-score by

0.12-0.16 units, Pr(Overweight) by 6.1-7.3 percentage points, and Pr(Obese) by 4.7-5.7

percentage points, while ten additional spouses’ work hours per week increase BMI z-score by

0.3-0.35 units, Pr(Overweight) by 9.3-12.9 percentage points, and Pr(Obese) by 5.7-8.0

percentage points. Instrumenting for multiple endogenous variables puts considerable demands



                                                  19
on the data, so the estimates are only precise enough to reach statistical significance for 7 of the

24 IV coefficients. Nonetheless, the results provide reasonably convincing evidence that the

conclusion from prior literature that only mothers’ work hours matter for children’s weight no

longer holds after accounting for endogeneity. The estimated effects of mothers’ and spouses’

work hours are never statistically different in any of the IV specifications (see the equality test p-

values in the table), and the magnitudes are actually larger for spouses in all cases. This is an

important result, as it suggests that the decline in male labor force participation may have

partially offset the increase in childhood obesity from the rise in female labor force participation.

Specification Checks

       In this section, we discuss issues related to internal and external validity and provide

checks of the extent to which they are problematic. With regard to internal validity, the key

assumption in the IV model is that the instruments               and                         can be

excluded from the second-stage regression. In other words, conditional on the controls, youngest

sibling’s age is only related to older sibling’s BMI via parental work hours. One potential

concern is that the youngest child becoming eligible for kindergarten might relax parents’ time

constraints more generally, freeing up time not only for market work but also activities such as

exercise and food preparation that could conceivably affect the weight of their children. For

instance, if a mother begins an exercise program and develops enthusiasm for it, she may seek to

also increase the physical activity of her children. If she has more time to prepare home-cooked

meals, this would presumably decrease reliance on restaurant food and lead to healthier eating

habits for the entire family. While we cannot rule out such scenarios, it is important to note that

they both point in the direction of youngest child’s relative age reducing, rather than increasing,

children’s BMI. They would therefore cause us to underestimate the impact of parental work on



                                                 20
children’s BMI, meaning that the large effects documented in the preceding section would

actually be conservative.

       Another potential concern is that the youngest child aging into kindergarten likely

increases disposable income for at least some parents by reducing the need for paid child care.

This additional income could conceivably be spent on either health-promoting (e.g. fresh

produce) or health-detracting (e.g. junk food) items. However, we do not feel that this income

effect is likely to be consequential for our results. Household income is well known to be

negatively associated with childhood obesity (e.g. Singh et al., 2008), implying that the income

effect would work in the direction of making our IV estimates more conservative. That said,

whether this relationship is causal remains an open question, and it is also possible that earned

income might affect health differently than a reduction in expenditures, which is essentially

unearned income. To address both of these issues, we use our data to conduct an investigation of

the effect of income on child weight. We (at least partially) address the concern of causality by

including child fixed effects, and we address the issue of earned versus unearned income by

including not only household income but also benefits received from welfare/Temporary

Assistance for Needy Families (TANF). Results from regressions with the full set of controls for

each of the three outcomes are shown in Table 6. In OLS regressions that do not include child

fixed effects, we observe the expected negative relationship between household income and the

child weight outcomes, but no significant effects of welfare/TANF benefits. In the fixed effects

regressions, we observe no significant effects of either household income or welfare/TANF on

any of the child weight outcomes, and the magnitudes of the coefficient estimates are small (e.g.

an additional $1,000 of income reduces the probability of being obese by less than one one-

hundredth of a percentage point). In sum, the available evidence suggests that it is unlikely that



                                                21
the income effect is sufficiently large for the potential decline in child care expenses after the

youngest child becomes eligible for kindergarten to meaningfully influence child weight.

         An additional possible concern is that parental attitudes toward health may change

systematically with the youngest child’s age. For instance, if parents relax their emphasis on

healthy behaviors as their children age start to require less direct supervision, we might observe

an increase in child BMI even if the parents’ work schedules do not change. This would lead to

upward bias in the IV estimator. In Table 7, we present results from falsification tests designed to

rule out the possibility of confounding from such changes in attitudes toward health.

Specifically, we re-estimate our IV model using each one of four different outcomes that reflect

health attitudes but should not be causally affected by parental work: whether the mother is

currently trying to lose weight, the mother always or often reads nutritional information (as

opposed to sometimes, rarely, or never), the child had a well-patient doctor checkup in the past

year, and the child had a dental checkup in the past six months.11 The first two regressions

involve mother’s outcomes, so we utilize the mother-level dataset used in Tables 2 and 3. We use

the child-level dataset for the last two regressions as those feature children’s outcomes. If the IV

models reveal “effects” on these outcomes, this would suggest a violation of the exclusion

restriction that the youngest child’s age instruments only affect health-related outcomes via

parental work. Reassuringly, we find no evidence of any such effects, as the coefficient of

interest is insignificant in all cases.



11
  One might worry that these outcomes do not provide “pure” falsification tests since stories could be devised in
which they could plausibly be affected by parental work. We conducted additional analyses (results available upon
request) to rule out at least the most obvious of these stories. Specifically, a mother might gain weight herself after
returning to work, which could potentially increase her likelihood of making weight loss attempts or showing an
interest in nutritional information. We therefore verified that our results for these outcomes are robust to the
inclusion of mother’s BMI (or overweight or obesity status) as a control. For the child health care outcomes, perhaps
additional parental work could influence these by increasing income. We therefore verified that the results are robust
to the inclusion of income and/or health insurance status (which likely affects the income elasticity of health care).

                                                          22
        Regarding external validity, potential concerns mirror those from Section II, as results

from a sample of 7-17 year old children with at least one younger sibling might not generalize to

other children. To at least partially address this issue, we re-estimate the OLS models with a

broader sample of all children between the ages of 3 and 17 (the same age cutoffs used by

Courtemanche, 2009). The results, shown in Table 8, are virtually identical to those from the

main analysis sample. Since OLS estimates are not sensitive to restrictions based on age and

siblings, it seems reasonable to infer that IV estimates would also not be meaningfully sensitive

if it were possible to conduct the IV estimation with the unrestricted sample. Nonetheless, our

results are still susceptible to the usual critiques of LATEs in IV models, namely that effects of

increases in work hours induced by youngest child’s age may not be reflective of the effects of

work more generally. Further research using different identification strategies is necessary to

fully investigate this possibility.

Subsample Analyses

        We next conduct subsample analyses by parental education, race/ethnicity, and mother’s

marital status. The objective is to examine whether the effect of parental work on child weight

varies by a household’s relative level of disadvantage. Anderson et al. (2003) find that the

association between mothers’ work and childhood obesity is strongest for children in households

with a high income, with a highly educated mother, and with non-Hispanic white race/ethnicity.

Similarly, Ruhm (2008) finds that this relationship is strongest for white children, those with a

highly educated mother, and those where a spouse/partner is present. He also stratifies by an

overall “disadvantage index” that is based on the predicted value of a regression of household

income on mother’s age, score on the Armed Forces Qualifying Test (AFQT), mother’s

education, and presence of a spouse/partner. The advantage of stratifying by predicted rather



                                                23
than actual income is that it circumvents the endogenous sample selection problem caused by

income being a function of work hours. Ruhm (2008) finds that the association between maternal

employment and childhood obesity is stronger for those below the median (less disadvantaged)

of this index. Our objective is to test whether this finding that the association between work

hours and child weight is concentrated among advantaged households persists in IV analyses that

account for endogeneity.

         Table 9 presents the results for several subsamples. Columns (1) and (2) stratify by

education, with the sample divided into children in households where no parent has any college

education and those in households where at least one parent does. This division splits the sample

as evenly as possible. The IV estimates are positive in all cases for both subsamples, but the

effects on parental work on all three weight outcomes are larger for the higher education group –

by a factor of around three times for BMI z-score and overweight. Columns (3) and (4) divide

the sample by whether the mother is Hispanic or black.12 The effects are almost completely

concentrated among the non-Hispanic, non-black subsample, as the magnitudes are large and

statistically significant for all three weight outcomes for that group as opposed to small and

insignificant for the Hispanic/black group. Stratifying by mother’s marital status in columns (5)

and (6), we see that the impacts are large and significant for children whose mothers are married

and small and insignificant for those whose mothers are single. In columns (7) and (8), we

replicate the “disadvantage index” stratification of Ruhm (2008). The effects on all three

outcomes are again clearly concentrated among the more advantaged group.




12
   It may appear surprising that the sample size is slightly larger for the Hispanic/black group, but remember that the
NLSY79 intentionally oversampled minorities. Sampling weights are used in all regression estimates, but the sample
sizes reflect the unadjusted number of children in each group.

                                                          24
Implications for Future Research

       We close our empirical analyses by investigating the implications of our work for future

researchers who wish to implement youngest sibling’s age-based IV strategies to estimate other

effects of maternal employment. As discussed previously, two primary ways in which our IV

method differs from that of Morrill (2011) are that our method incorporates spouse’s work and

utilizes continuous variation in youngest sibling’s age in addition to discrete variation at the age

of kindergarten eligibility. Intuitively, using the discrete kindergarten eligibility as the only

instrument and maternal work as the only endogenous variable may lead to overstated results.

Such a specification would attribute the entire reduced-form effect of youngest sibling’s

kindergarten eligibility on childhood obesity to the change in maternal work. Given the evidence

presented in Section III that discrete kindergarten eligibility influences paternal work and earlier

in this section that paternal work influences childhood obesity, it seems likely that at least part of

the reduced-form effect actually operates through paternal work, in which case the estimated

impact of maternal work will be biased upward. Put differently, omitting spouse’s work would

lead to a violation of the exclusion restriction. However, recall from Section III that only discrete

kindergarten eligibility predicts spouse’s work; the continuous relative age variable does not.

This suggests that omitting paternal work might not lead to a violation of the exclusion

restriction if a continuous rather than discrete instrument if used for maternal work.

       In Table 10, we present results from IV models that test these predictions. For the sake of

comparison, the first column restates the estimated effects of parents’ work from the IV

specification with all controls from Table 4, while the second column does the same for the

maternal work results from Table 5. The results from the two models were very similar in

magnitude, with ten additional parents’/mothers’ work hours increasing BMI z-score by 0.16-



                                                  25
0.19 units, Pr(Overweight) by 6.1-6.6 percentage points, and Pr(Obese) by 4.7-4.9 percentage

points. In the third column we display results from a “naïve” specification in which discrete

kindergarten eligibility is the only instrument and mothers’ work is the only endogenous

variable. The sizes of the estimates increase substantially: ten additional hours of maternal work

is now predicted to increase BMI z-score by 0.31 units, Pr(Overweight) by 8.6 percentage points,

and Pr(Obese) by 7.6 percentage points. As predicted, relegating paternal work to the error term

appears to exaggerate the effects of maternal work. In the fourth column, we continue to exclude

spouse’s hours but use continuous youngest sibling’s relative age as the instrument rather than

discrete eligibility. Again as predicted, the estimated effects of mothers’ work shrink back down

closer to those from the models that include spouses’ work. These results could be of value to

future researchers who wish to leverage exogenous variation from youngest child’s age to

investigate the effects of maternal employment using datasets in which spouse’s work

information is not available. In such cases, our estimates suggest that continuous age relative to

kindergarten may be a valid instrument for maternal work even is discrete eligibility is not.

       A comparison of these magnitudes to those of Morrill (2011) is instructive. As discussed

in Section I, Morrill (2011) leverages youngest child’s kindergarten eligibility to investigate the

effect of maternal employment on children’s acute health episodes. Similarly to our “naïve”

specification, she uses discrete eligibility as the only instrument and maternal employment as the

only endogenous variable. She finds that maternal employment increases the probability of

hospitalization, injury, and asthma episodes by around 200% relative to the sample incidence

rates. Recall that our “naïve” IV regressions estimate that ten additional mother’s work hours

increase Pr(Overweight) by 8.6 percentage points and Pr(Obese) by 7.6 (third column of Table

10). Since the average working mother in our sample works 35 hours per week, we need to



                                                 26
multiply the coefficient estimates by 3.5 to facilitate a comparison with Morrill (2011). Doing so

means that maternal employment on average increases Pr(Overweight) and Pr(Obese) by 30.1

and 26.6 percentage points, or 114% and 227% of the respective sample means. These

magnitudes are broadly similar to those of Morrill (2011). In contrast, when we instrument for

both mothers’ and spouses’ work, the effects of ten additional maternal work hours on

Pr(Overweight) and Pr(Obese) fall to 6.1 and 4.7 percentage points, respectively. These imply

average effects of maternal employment of 21.4 and 16.5 percentage points, or 81% and 141% of

the respective sample rates. In short, allowing part of the effects of youngest child’s age on

children’s weight outcomes to occur via spouse’s work helps alleviate potential concerns about

plausibility to at least some extent. (That said, as discussed previously, even our preferred point

estimates are quite large, and their imprecision should be kept in mind when interpreting the

results.)


V. Conclusion and discussion

        This paper explores the causal effect of maternal employment on child weight. The

identification strategy exploits plausibly exogenous variation in parental labor supply coming

from the youngest sibling’s age. Using panel data from the NLSY79, we first show that both

mothers’ and mothers’ spouses’ work hours are responsive to the age of the youngest child.

Mothers’ work hours gradually increase as the age of the youngest child rises, with the effect

occurring along both the extensive and intensive margins of work. In contrast, spouses’ work

hours jump discontinuously when the child becomes eligible for kindergarten, with the effect

occurring only along the intensive margin. We leverage these insights in the design of our IV

model, which shows that the impacts of parental work on children’s weight outcomes are

positive and large – in most cases, significantly larger than the estimates obtained using OLS.


                                                 27
We find no evidence that the effects of maternal and paternal work are significantly different.

Together, these results suggest that the contribution of increased maternal employment to the rise

in childhood obesity is larger than the relatively modest estimates from the prior associational

literature would suggest, and also that the concurrent decline in paternal labor supply offsets this

contribution to some extent. Given the relative imprecision of our IV estimates and the dangers

of out-of-sample extrapolation, we are reluctant to estimate exactly how much of the trend in

childhood obesity can be attributed changing labor supply patterns. Nonetheless, our results

indicate that Courtemanche’s (2009) estimate that 10% of the rise in childhood obesity is due to

the rise in maternal employment may be conservative.

       The results should not be interpreted as discouraging parental labor supply, or as claiming

that the rise in female labor force participation has had a negative net impact on society. The

results instead highlight the importance of further investigation into the mechanisms through

which parental employment might affect children’s health. Possible mechanisms include the

changes in family routine, diet, and time allocation induced by mothers’ labor supply. Parental

employment is likely to reduce beneficial routines, such as regular family meals and physical

activities with children. At the same time, parental employment might lead to unhealthy routines,

such as television watching and restaurant meals. Prior research has found associations between

maternal employment and time use (Cawley and Liu, 2012; Fertig et al, 2009), but little causal

evidence on mechanisms exists. One exception is a new working paper by Coyer (2016), who

uses a similar identification strategy to us and finds that maternal employment increases

purchases of pre-prepared meals while decreasing fruit, vegetable, and milk purchases.

       Another possible mechanism is the child care setting. For example, if child care

subsidies, such as the child care and development fund (CCDF), encourage working mothers to



                                                 28
rely on center-based child care service, the use of non-parental child care may influence

children’s diet and activity to some extent (Blau and Tekin, 2007; Herbst and Tekin, 2010). In

addition, the availability of relative care, especially from grandparents, has substantial positive

effect on mothers’ labor supply (Compton and Pollak, 2014). Grandparents may put fewer

restrictions on their grandchildren’s diet and activities (Maher et al., 2008), thus increasing the

risk of children being obese.

       Understanding the mechanisms of the effects of parental employment on childhood

obesity is not only of academic interest, but it would also shed light on policies to help reverse

the obesity epidemic. For example, if supervision is an important mechanism, promoting after-

school programs could be a beneficial policy. Such programs not only increase children’s

physical activity level directly, they also help children to form healthy habits and promote health

education among parents (Annesi et al., 2007; Annesi, Moore, & Dixon, 2008). Alternatively, if

nutrition is the main mechanism, policies related to food labeling (Bollinger, Leslie, and

Sorensen, 2010; Tandon et al., 2010) and quality of school meals (Foster et al., 2007; Story,

Nanney, and Schwartz, 2009) could potentially have an effect. Understanding the relative impact

of each of the mechanisms would be the first step toward informing appropriate policy.




                                                 29
References

          Anderson, P.M., Butcher, K. F., Cascio, E. U., & Schanzenbach, D. W. (2011) Is being

school better? The impact of school on children's BMI when starting age is endogenous. Journal

of Health Economics, 30, 977-986.

          Anderson, P.M., Butcher, K. F., & Levine, P. B. (2003) Maternal employment and

overweight children. Journal of Health Economics, 22, 477-504.

          Annesi, J. J., Faigenbaum, A. D., Westcott, W. L., Smith, A. E., & Dixon, G. M.

(2007) Effects of the youth fit for life protocol on physiological factors, mood, self-appraisal,

voluntary physical activity, and fruit and vegetable consumption in children enrolled in YMCA

after-school care. Journal of Social, Behavioral, and Health Sciences, 1, 164-197.

          Annesi, J. J., Moore, J. C., & Dixon, G. M. (2008) Correlates of changes in voluntary

physical activity associated with the Youth Fit For Life intervention during after-school care.

Psychological Reports, 102, 911-919.

          Bishop, J. (2011) The effect of maternal employment on youth overweight in

Australia. Economic Record, 87, 92-104.

          Blau, D. & Tekin, E. (2007) The determinants and consequences of child care

subsidies for single mothers in the USA. Journal of Population Economics, 20, 719-741.

          Bollinger, B., Leslie, P., & Sorensen, A. (2010) Calorie posting in chain restaurants.

NBER working paper 15648, http://www.nber.org/papers/w15648.

          Brown, J. E., Broom, D, H., Nicholson, J. M., & Bittman, M. (2010) Do working

mothers raise couch potato kids? Maternal employment and children's lifestyle behaviors and

weight in early childhood. Social Science & Medicine, 70, 1816-1824.




                                                 30
           Bureau of Labor Statistics (2014) Women in the labor force: A databook. Retrieved

from http://www.bls.gov/opub/reports/cps/women-in-the-labor-force-a-databook-2014.pdf

           Cascio, E. U. (2009) Maternal labor supply and the introduction of kindergartens into

American public schools. The Journal of Human Resources, 44, 140-170.

           Cawley, J., & Liu, F. (2012) Maternal employment and childhood obesity: A search for

mechanisms. Economics and Human Biology, 10, 352-364.

           Cawley, J. (2004) The impact of obesity on wages. Journal of Human Resources, 39,

451-474.

           Cawley, J. & Meyerhoefer, C. (2012) The medical care costs of obesity: An

instrumental variables approach. Journal of Health Economics, 31, 219-230.

           Compton, J & Pollak, R. (2014) Family proximity, childcare, and women's labor force

attachment. Journal of Urban Economics, 79, 72-90.

           Courtemanche, C. (2009) Longer hours and larger waistlines: The relationship between

work hours and obesity. Forum for Health Economics and Policy, 12 (2), Article 5.

           Courtemanche, C., Pinkston, J., & Stewart, J. (2015) Adjusting Body Mass for

Measurement Error with Invalid Validation Data. Economics and Human Biology, 19, 275-293.

           Coyer, C. (2016) Into the Workforce and Out of the Home? Working paper, available

http://www.christinecoyer.com/.

           Duncan, G. J., Ziol-Guest, K. M., & Kalil, A. (2010) Early-childhood poverty and

adult attainment, behavior, and health. Child Development, 81, 306-325.

           Evans, W. N., Morrill, M. S., & Parente, S. T. (2010) Measuring inappropriate medical

diagnosis and treatment in survey data: The case of ADHD among school-age children. Journal

of Health Economics, 29, 657-673.



                                                31
          Fertig, A., Glomm, G., & Tchernis, R. (2009) The connection between maternal

employment and childhood obesity: Inspecting the mechanism. Review of Economics of the

Household, 7, 227-255.

          Foster, G. D., Sherman, S., Borradaile, K. E., Grundy, K. M., Vander Veur, S.,

Nachmani, J., ... , Shults, J. (2008) A policy-based school intervention to prevent overweight and

obesity. Pediatrics, 121, e794-e802.

          Fryar, C. D., Carroll, M. D., & Ogden, C. L. (2016) Prevalence of obesity among

children and adolescents aged 2-19 years: United States, 1963-1965 through 2013-2014.

Available at

https://www.cdc.gov/nchs/data/hestat/obesity_child_13_14/obesity_child_13_14.pdf

          Gelbach, J. B. (2002) Public schooling for young children and maternal labor supply.

The American Economic Review, 92, 307-322.

          Goodman, E., Hinden, B. R., & Khandelwal, S. (2000) Accuracy of teens and parental

reports of obesity and body mass index. Pediatrics, 106, 52-58.

          Greve, J. (2011) New results on the effect of mothers' working hours on children's

overweight status: Does quality of childcare matter? Labour Economics, 18, 579-590.

          Gwozdz, W., Sousa-Poza, A., Reisch, L. A., Ahrens, W., Eiben, G., Fernandez-Alvira,

J. M., ... , Bammann, K. (2013) Maternal employment and childhood obesity - A European

perspective. Journal of Health Economics, 32, 728-742.

          Herbst, C. & Tekin, E. (2010) Chid care subsidies and child development. Economics

of Education Review, 29, 618-638.

          Kuczmarski, M. F., Kuczmarski, R. J., & Najjar, M. (2001) Effects of age on validity

of self-reported height, weight, and body mass index: Findings from the third national health and



                                               32
nutrition examination survey, 1988-1994. Journal of the American Dietetic Association, 101, 28-

34.

          Liu, E., Hsiao, C., Matsumoto, T., & Chou, S. (2009) Maternal full-time employment

and overweight children: Parametric, semi-parametric, and non-parametric assessment. Journal

of Econometrics, 152, 61-69.

          Lubotsky, D. and Qureshi, J. (2016) The (Surprisingly) Smooth Rise in Mothers’

Employment as Children Age. Unpublished manuscript, University of Illinois at Chicago.

          Maher, E., Li, G., Carter, L., Johnson, D. (2008) Preschool child care participation and

obesity at the start of kindergarten. Pediatrics, 122, 322-330.

          Morrill, M. S. (2011) The effects of maternal employment on the health of school-age

children. Journal of Health Economics, 30, 240-257.

          Morrissey, T. W. (2012) Trajectories of growth in body mass index across childhood:

Associations with maternal and paternal employment. Social Science & Medicine, 95, 60-68.

          Morrissey, T. W., Dunifon, R. E., & Kalil, A. (2011) Maternal employment, work

schedules, and children's body mass index. Child Development, 82, 66-81.

          National Center for health Statistics (2002) Vital and Health Statistics Series 11,

number 246. Retrieved from http://www.cdc.gov/growthcharts/2000growthchart-us.pdf

          Neumark-Sztainer, D., Hannan, P. J., Story, M., Croll, J., & Perry, C. (2003) Family

meal patterns: Association with sociodemographic characteristics and improved dietary intake

among adolescents. Journal of the American Dietetic Association, 103, 317-322.

          Ruhm, C. (2008) Maternal employment and adolescent development. Labour

Economics, 15, 958-983.




                                                 33
           Singh, G., Kogan, M., Van Dyck, P., and Siahpush, M. (2008) Racial/ethnic,

socioeconomic, and behavioral determinants of childhood and adolescent obesity in the United

States: Analyzing independent and joint associations. Annals of Epidemiology, 18, 682-695.

           Story, M., Nanney, M. S., Schwartz, M. B. (2009) Schools and obesity prevention:

Creating school environments and policies to promote healthy eating and physical activity.

Milbank Quarterly, 87, 71-100.

           Tandon, P. S., Wright, J., Zhou, C., Rogers, C. B., & Christakis, D. A. (2010) Nutrition

menu labeling may lead to lower-calorie restaurant meal choices for children. Pediatrics, 125,

244-248.

           Trasande, L. and Chattejee, S. (2009) The impact of obesity on health service

utilization and costs in childhood. Obesity, 17, 1749-54.

           Trasande, L., Liu, Y., Fryer, G., and Weitzman, M. (2009) Effects of childhood obesity

on hospital care and costs, 1999-2005. Health Affair, 28, w751-60.

           Yeung, W. J., Linver, M. R., Brooks-Gunn, J. (2002) How money matters for young

children's development: Parental investment and family progresses. Child Development, 73,

1861-1879.

           Zhang, N., & Zhang, Q. (2011) Does early school entry prevent obesity among

adolescent girls? Journal of Adolescent Health, 48, 644-646.




                                                34
Table 1 – Summary Statistics for Parents and their Children Aged 7-17 Years Old
                                                                Source   Mean (Std. Dev.)
Dependent Variables
BMI z-score                                                  NLSY79CYA     0.274 (1.152)
Overweight                                                   NLSY79CYA     0.264 (0.441)
Obesity                                                      NLSY79CYA     0.117 (0.321)
Work Variables
Mother’s fraction of weeks worked in past year                 NLSY79      0.655 (0.431)
Mother’s hours worked/week (in 10s) in weeks worked in past    NLSY79      3.540 (1.401)
year (undefined if no work weeks)
Mother’s hours worked/week (in 10s) over all weeks in past     NLSY79      2.352 (1.906)
year (0 if no work weeks)
Spouse’s fraction of weeks worked in past year (undefined if   NLSY79      0.926 (0.212)
no spouse)
Spouse’s hours worked/week (in 10s) in weeks worked in past    NLSY79      4.657 (1.117)
year (undefined if no spouse or no work weeks)
Spouse’s hours worked/week (in 10s) over all weeks in past     NLSY79      4.315 (1.487)
year (undefined if no spouse, 0 if no work weeks)
Youngest Sibling Age Variables
Proportion of kindergarten eligible weeks in past year         NLSY79      0.519 (0.489)
Relative age (in years) to kindergarten eligibility cutoff     NLSY79      1.035 (3.638)
Demographic Control Variables
Mother is Hispanic                                             NLSY79      0.076 (0.266)
Mother is non-Hispanic black                                   NLSY79      0.153 (0.360)
Family size                                                    NLSY79      4.854 (1.240)
Mother’s age in years                                          NLSY79     36.470 (5.211)
Spouse’s age in years (0 if no spouse)                         NLSY79    28.289 (18.186)
Mother is married and lives with spouse                        NLSY79      0.724 (0.447)
Child is female                                              NLSY79CYA     0.487 (0.500)
Child’s age in months                                        NLSY79CYA 149.400 (37.134)
Attachment to biological father                              NLSY79CYA     0.775 (0.418)
Human Capital Control Variables
Mother’s AFQT score (2006 standardization)                     NLSY79    48.353 (28.423)
Mother’s education: high school graduate                       NLSY79      0.445 (0.497)
Mother’s education: some college                               NLSY79      0.237 (0.425)
Mother’s education: college degree or higher                   NLSY79      0.211 (0.408)
Spouse’s education: high school graduate (0 if no spouse)      NLSY79      0.287 (0.453)
Spouse’s education: some college (0 if no spouse)              NLSY79      0.143 (0.350)
Spouse’s education: college degree (0 if no spouse)            NLSY79      0.089 (0.285)
Child’s Health Control Variables
High birth weight                                            NLSY79CYA     0.107 (0.309)
Breastfed                                                    NLSY79CYA     0.575 (0.494)
Height is self-reported                                      NLSY79CYA     0.507 (0.500)
Weight is self-reported                                      NLSY79CYA     0.519 (0.500)
Note: Estimates are weighted by children’s sampling weights.


                                                       35
Figure 1 – Relationship between Youngest Child’s Age and Mother’s Work Hours
      3.5
   3.25
            3
   2.75
      2.5
   2.25
            2
   1.75
      1.5




                -6         -4       -2         0            2        4           6          8         10
                     Age of youngest child (in years) relative to kindergarten eligibility

Notes: Local polynomial smoother is used. Gray regions represent 95% confidence intervals. Observations are
weighted by mother’s sampling weights. Youngest child’s age is the relative age (in years) to kindergarten
eligibility. Mothers’ work hours are measured as the hours worked per week over all weeks in the past year.




                                                       36
Figure 2 – Relationship between Youngest Child’s Age and Mother’s Spouse’s Work Hours
    4.6
    4.5
    4.4
    4.3
    4.2
    4.1
          4




              -6     -4       -2         0         2          4        6         8                      10
                   Age of youngest child (in years) relative to kindergarten eligibility

Notes: Local polynomial smoother is used. Gray regions represent 95% confidence intervals. Observations are
weighted by mother’s sampling weights. Youngest child’s age is the relative age (in years) to kindergarten
eligibility. Mothers’ spouses’ work hours are measured as the hours worked per week over all weeks in the past
year.




                                                        37
Table 2 – Effects of Youngest Child’s Kindergarten Eligibility on Mother’s and Mother’s
Spouse’s Work

                                                                 (1)                 (2)                (3)
Outcome variable                     Youngest                Demographic         Add human          Add baseline
                                     sibling age               controls            capital             work
                                     variable                                     controls
                                           Panel A: Mother’s Work
Proportion of weeks                  Proportion of          0.018                    0.022              0.020
worked                               eligible weeks        (0.016)                  (0.016)            (0.016)
(N=10,243)                           Relative age to           0.019***           0.020***            0.024***
                                     kindergarten               (0.003)            (0.003)             (0.003)
Hours worked per week (in            Proportion of               -0.090              -0.085             -0.086
(10s) in weeks worked                eligible weeks             (0.065)             (0.065)            (0.063)
(N=7,747)                            Relative age to           0.040***           0.035***            0.057***
                                     kindergarten               (0.012)            (0.012)             (0.011)
Hours worked per week (in            Proportion of               0.003               0.021              -0.010
10s) over all weeks                  eligible weeks             (0.069)             (0.069)            (0.066)
(N=10,243)                           Relative age to           0.093***           0.092***            0.116***
                                     kindergarten               (0.014)            (0.014)             (0.012)
                                     Panel B: Mother’s Spouse’s Work
Proportion of weeks                  Proportion of         0.007                     0.009              0.009
worked                               eligible weeks       (0.009)                   (0.009)            (0.009)
(N=6,477)                            Relative age to             -0.001              0.001             0.00002
                                     kindergarten               (0.002)             (0.002)            (0.002)
Hours worked per week (in            Proportion of             0.212***           0.216***            0.194***
(10s) in weeks worked                eligible weeks             (0.061)            (0.061)             (0.058)
(N=6,196)                            Relative age to            -0.018*              -0.015             -0.015
(Mean=4.657, SD=1.117)               kindergarten               (0.010)             (0.010)            (0.009)
Hours worked per week (in            Proportion of             0.204***           0.214***            0.204***
10s) over all weeks                  eligible weeks             (0.074)            (0.074)             (0.074)
(N=6,477)                            Relative age to             -0.016              -0.008             -0.016
                                     kindergarten               (0.013)             (0.013)            (0.013)
Notes: Standard errors, which are heteroscedasticity-robust and clustered by mother, are in parentheses. ***
indicates statistically significant at 1% level; ** 5% level; * 10% level. The spouse’s work regressions exclude
children in households where no spouse is present. Year fixed effects are included. Child sampling weights are used.




                                                        38
Table 3 – Effects of Youngest Child’s Kindergarten Eligibility on Mother’s and Mother’s
Spouse’s Work; Comparison of Results from Main (Mothers of 7-17 Year Old Children
with Younger Siblings) and Unrestricted (Mothers with any Children 17 Years or
Younger) Samples

                                                                                (1)                     (2)
Outcome variable                             Youngest sibling               Main sample             Unrestricted
                                             age variable                                             sample
                                            Panel A: Mother’s Work
Proportion of weeks worked                   Proportion of                       0.022                 0.030**
(N=10,243 in main sample)                    eligible weeks                     (0.016)                (0.012)
(N=20,508 in unrestricted sample)            Relative age to                   0.020***               0.019***
                                             kindergarten                       (0.003)                (0.002)
Hours worked per week (in 10s)               Proportion of                       -0.085                 -0.004
in weeks worked                              eligible weeks                     (0.065)                (0.044)
(N=7,747 in main sample)                     Relative age to                   0.035***               0.026***
(N=15,770 in unrestricted sample)            kindergarten                       (0.012)                (0.007)
Hours worked per week (in 10s)               Proportion of                       0.021                  0.068
over all weeks                               eligible weeks                     (0.069)                (0.054)
(N=10,243 in main sample)                    Relative age to                   0.092***               0.090***
(N=20,508 in unrestricted sample)            kindergarten                       (0.014)                (0.010)

                                      Panel B: Mother’s Spouse’s Work
Proportion of weeks worked                 Proportion of               0.009                            0.001
(N=6,447 in main sample)                   eligible weeks             (0.009)                          (0.008)
(N=13,175 in unrestricted sample)            Relative age to                     0.001                  0.001
                                             kindergarten                       (0.002)                (0.001)
Hours worked per week (in 10s)               Proportion of                     0.216***               0.124***
in weeks worked                              eligible weeks                     (0.061)                (0.047)
(N=6,196 in main sample)                     Relative age to                     -0.015                 -0.008
(N=12,659 in unrestricted sample)            kindergarten                       (0.010)                (0.007)
Hours worked per week (in 10s)               Proportion of                     0.214***                0.121**
over all weeks                               eligible weeks                     (0.074)                (0.057)
(N=6,447 in main sample)                     Relative age to                     -0.008                 -0.001
(N=13,175 in unrestricted sample)            kindergarten                       (0.013)                (0.009)
Notes: Standard errors, which are heteroscedasticity-robust and clustered by mother, are in parentheses. ***
indicates statistically significant at 1% level; ** 5% level; * 10% level. The spouse’s work regressions exclude
children in households where no spouse is present. Year fixed effects and the demographic and human capital
controls are included. Sampling weights are used.




                                                         39
Table 4 – Effects of Parents’ Work Hours on Children’s Weight

                                                     (1)               (2)               (3)               (4)
                                                    Demo-          Add human          Add child            Add
                                                   graphic           capital            health           baseline
                                                   controls         controls           controls           weight
                                             Panel A: BMI z-score
OLS      Parents’ work hours                    0.027***       0.030***               0.030***          0.025***
         per week (in 10s)                       (0.009)        (0.009)                (0.009)           (0.008)
IV       Parents’ work hours                         0.164             0.154             0.152           0.189**
         per week (in 10s)                          (0.100)           (0.099)           (0.098)          (0.087)
         First stage F statistic                    11.856            11.767            11.775            12.076
         Endogeneity test p-value                    0.131             0.156             0.158             0.029
         Overidentification test p-value             0.276             0.344             0.360             0.318
                                              Panel B: Overweight
OLS      Parents’ work hours                       0.005        0.005                    0.005             0.003
         per week (in 10s)                        (0.003)      (0.003)                  (0.003)           (0.003)
IV       Parents’ work hours                       0.081**           0.071**           0.071**           0.066**
         per week (in 10s)                         (0.038)           (0.036)           (0.036)           (0.033)
         First stage F statistic                    11.856            11.767            11.775            11.876
         Endogeneity test p-value                    0.019             0.041             0.041             0.035
         Overidentification test p-value             0.499             0.634             0.666             0.660
                                                 Panel C: Obese
OLS      Parents’ work hours                        0.003        0.003                   0.003             0.003
         per week (in 10s)                         (0.003)      (0.002)                 (0.003)           (0.002)
IV       Parents’ work hours                       0.060**           0.053**           0.053**           0.049**
         per week (in 10s)                         (0.027)           (0.027)           (0.026)           (0.023)
         First stage F statistic                    11.856            11.767            11.775            11.190
         Endogeneity test p-value                    0.011             0.030             0.030             0.023
         Overidentification test p-value             0.688             0.867             0.935             0.856
Notes: Sample size is 13,332 in all regressions. Standard errors, which are heteroscedasticity-robust and clustered by
mother, are in parentheses. *** indicates statistically significant at 1% level; ** 5% level; * 10% level. Year fixed
effects are included. Child sampling weights are used. Parents’ work hours per week is the summation of mothers’
and mothers’ spouses’ hours worked per week over all weeks in the past year.




                                                         40
Table 5 – Effects of Mothers’ and Mothers’ Spouses’ Work Hours on Children’s Weight
                                          (1)            (2)        (3)          (4)
                                        Demo-       Add human  Add child         Add
                                       graphic         capital    health     baseline
                                       controls       controls   controls      weight
                                   Panel A: BMI z-score
OLS Mother’s hours worked per         0.038***       0.041***   0.040***     0.029***
       week (in 10s)                   (0.011)        (0.011)    (0.011)      (0.010)
       Mother’s spouse’s hours           0.002          0.007      0.007        0.015
       worked per week (in 10s)        (0.015)        (0.015)    (0.015)      (0.013)
       Equality test p-value             0.044          0.061      0.059        0.352
IV     Mother’s hours worked per         0.134          0.121      0.121        0.157
       week (in 10s)                   (0.111)        (0.112)    (0.110)      (0.100)
       Mother’s spouse’s hours          0.352*          0.309      0.297       0.347*
       worked per week (in 10s)        (0.208)        (0.190)    (0.184)      (0.181)
       Equality test p-value             0.307          0.366      0.381        0.344
                                   Panel B: Overweight
OLS Mother’s hours worked per           0.007*        0.008**    0.008**      0.007**
       week (in 10s)                   (0.004)        (0.004)    (0.004)      (0.004)
       Mother’s spouse’s hours          -0.004         -0.002     -0.002       -0.001
       worked per week (in 10s)        (0.006)        (0.006)    (0.005)      (0.005)
       Equality test p-value             0.067          0.107      0.107        0.156
IV     Mother’s hours worked per        0.073*          0.065      0.065        0.061
       week (in 10s)                   (0.042)        (0.041)    (0.041)      (0.037)
       Mother’s spouse’s hours           0.129          0.103      0.099        0.093
       worked per week (in 10s)        (0.080)        (0.072)    (0.070)      (0.067)
       Equality test p-value             0.513          0.639      0.670        0.664
                                     Panel C: Obese
OLS Mother’s hours worked per            0.004         0.005*     0.005*        0.004
       week (in 10s)                   (0.003)        (0.003)    (0.003)      (0.003)
       Mother’s spouse’s hours          -0.002        -0.0002    -0.0002        0.001
       worked per week (in 10s)        (0.004)        (0.004)    (0.004)      (0.004)
       Equality test p-value             0.124          0.187      0.192        0.410
IV     Mother’s hours worked per        0.057*         0.052*     0.052*       0.047*
       week (in 10s)                   (0.030)        (0.030)    (0.030)      (0.026)
       Mother’s spouse’s hours           0.080          0.061      0.057        0.057
       worked per week (in 10s)        (0.055)        (0.050)    (0.049)      (0.046)
       Equality test p-value             0.693          0.877      0.935        0.857
Notes: Sample size is 13,332 in all regressions. Standard errors, which are heteroscedasticity-robust and clustered by
mother, are in parentheses. *** indicates statistically significant at 1% level; ** 5% level; * 10% level. Year fixed
effects are included. Child sampling weights are used. Mothers’ and mothers’ spouses’ work hours are measured as
hours worked per week over all weeks in the past year. Equality test p-value is from t-test of equality of coefficients
on mothers’ and spouses’ work.

                                                          41
Table 6 – Effect of Different Income Sources on Children’s Weight
                                                       (1)                                           (2)
                                                       OLS                                   Child fixed effects
                                  Panel A: BMI z-score
Household income (in $1,000s)                      -0.0004*                                         -0.0002
                                                    (0.0002)                                       (0.0002)
Welfare/TANF benefits (in $1,000)                     -0.004                                        -0.0006
                                                     (0.003)                                        (0.002)
                                              Panel B: Overweight
Household income (in $1,000s)                                  -0.0001*                             -0.0001
                                                               (0.0001)                            (0.0001)
Welfare/TANF benefits (in $1,000)                               -0.0008                             -0.0006
                                                                (0.001)                             (0.001)
                                                 Panel C: Obese
Household income (in $1,000s)                                 -0.0001***                           -0.00003
                                                               (0.00004)                          (0.00004)
Welfare/TANF benefits (in $1,000)                                -0.0003                            0.0005
                                                                (0.0007)                           (0.0007)
Notes: Sample size is 13,175 in all regressions. Standard errors, which are heteroscedasticity-robust and clustered by
mother, are in parentheses. *** indicates statistically significant at 1% level; ** 5% level; * 10% level. Year fixed
effects and the demographic, human capital, and child health controls are included. Child sampling weights are used.




                                                         42
Table 7 – Falsification Tests of Parents’ Hours Worked per Week over All Weeks on
Various Health Attitudes Outcomes

                                                      (1)                (2)              (3)               (4)
                                                    Mother            Mother           Child had        Child had
                                                   trying to         always or           doctor            dental
                                                 lose weight        often reads       checkup in        checkup in
                                                  (n=2292)          nutritional        past year          past six
                                                                   information         (n=9493)           months
                                                                     (n=2287)                            (n=9492)
IV       Parents’ work hours                         0.033             -0.011            -0.007            0.062
         per week (in 10s)                          (0.050)           (0.045)           (0.037)           (0.040)
         First stage F statistic                     9.892            10.694            11.805            11.712
         Overidentification test p-value             0.869             0.820             0.968             0.088
Notes: Standard errors, which are heteroscedasticity-robust and clustered by mother, are in parentheses. ***
indicates statistically significant at 1% level; ** 5% level; * 10% level. Year fixed effects and the demographic and
human capital controls are included. Child health controls are also included in the child-level regressions in columns
(3) and (4). Child sampling weights are used. Parents’ work hours per week is the summation of mothers’ and
mothers’ spouses’ hours worked per week over all weeks in the past year.




                                                         43
Table 8 – Effects of Mothers’ and Mothers’ Spouses’ Work Hours on Children’s Weight:
OLS Estimates from Main (7-17 Year Old Children with Younger Siblings) and
Unrestricted (All Children Age 3-17 Years) Samples

                                                                       (1)                         (2)
                                                                   Main sample             Unrestricted sample
                                                                   (N=13,332)                 (N=33,217)

                                    Panel A: BMI z-score
Mother’s hours worked per week (in 10s)                 0.040***                                 0.040***
                                                         (0.011)                                  (0.008)
Mother’s spouse’s hours worked per week (in 10s)                        0.007                     -0.0005
                                                                       (0.015)                    (0.001)
Equality test p-value                                                   0.059                      0.000

                                    Panel A: Overweight
Mother’s hours worked per week (in 10s)                 0.008**                                  0.008***
                                                        (0.004)                                   (0.002)
Mother’s spouse’s hours worked per week (in 10s)                        -0.002                    -0.0002
                                                                       (0.005)                   (0.0003)
Equality test p-value                                                   0.107                      0.001

                                      Panel A: Obese
Mother’s hours worked per week (in 10s)                                0.005*                    0.006***
                                                                       (0.003)                    (0.002)
Mother’s spouse’s hours worked per week (in 10s)                       -0.0002                   -0.00005
                                                                       (0.004)                   (0.0002)
Equality test p-value                                                   0.192                      0.000
Notes: Standard errors, which are heteroscedasticity-robust and clustered by mother, are in parentheses. ***
indicates statistically significant at 1% level; ** 5% level; * 10% level. Year fixed effects and the demographic,
human capital, and child health controls are included. Child sampling weights are used. Mothers’ and mothers’
spouses’ work hours are measured as hours worked per week over all weeks in the past year. Equality test p-value is
from t-test of equality of coefficients on mothers’ and spouses’ work.




                                                        44
Table 9 – Effects of Parents’ Work Hours on Children’s Weight for Subsamples

                                        (1)             (2)              (3)               (4)           (5)              (6)               (7)            (8)
                                    Parents No       Parents At        Mother           Mother         Mother           Mother           Above           Below
                                      College          Least          Hispanic            Not         Unmarried         Married          Median          Median
                                     (n=7321)          Some           or Black         Hispanic       (n=4932)         (n=8400)        Disadvan-       Disadvan-
                                                      College         (n=7023)         or Black                                        tage Index      tage Index
                                                     (n=6011)                          (n=6309)                                         (n=6666)        (n=6666)
Parents’ work hours                    0.126          0.365*            0.012           0.288**          0.047          0.281**           -0.016        0.366***
per week (in 10s)                     (0.087)         (0.213)          (0.101)          (0.131)         (0.123)         (0.126)          (0.096)         (0.142)
First stage F statistic                11.225          3.0035           12.524           6.315           21.401           6.954           16.32           7.413
Overidentification test p-             0.562            0.696           0.819            0.510              --            0.688           0.129           0.927
value
Parents’ work hours                    0.037            0.126           0.021           0.082*           0.008          0.092**           -0.004         0.113**
per week (in 10s)                     (0.032)          (0.079)         (0.040)          (0.046)         (0.046)         (0.046)          (0.034)         (0.049)
First stage F statistic                11.068           2.933           12.460           6.185           21.337           6.823           16.19           7.344
Overidentification test p-             0.273            0.393           0.801            0.978              --            0.297           0.547           0.277
value
Parents’ work hours                   0.049**           0.058           0.013           0.065*           0.008          0.074**           0.007          0.079**
per week (in 10s)                     (0.024)          (0.052)         (0.031)          (0.034)         (0.034)         (0.035)          (0.026)         (0.036)
First stage F statistic                11.060           2.936           12.399           6.202           21.275           6.841           16.22           7.350
Overidentification test p-             0.859            0.813           0.945            0.786              --            0.553           0.494           0.332
value
Notes: Standard errors, which are heteroscedasticity-robust and clustered by mother, are in parentheses. *** indicates statistically significant at 1% level; ** 5%
level; * 10% level. Year fixed effects are included and the full set of controls, including the baseline dependent variable, are included. Child sampling weights are
used. Parents’ hours worked per week is the summation of mothers’ and mothers’ spouses’ hours worked per week over all weeks in the past year.




                                                                                 45
Table 10 – Impact of Omitting Spouse’s Work Hours on Estimated Effects of Mother’s
Work Hours from IV Regressions

Outcome          Estimated effect of Estimated effect of             Effect of mothers’        Effect of mothers’
variable            parents’ work       mother’s work                work hours using          work hours using
                  hours from Table     hours from Table                 proportion of          relative age as IV
                 4 (IV, all controls) 5 (IV, all controls)           eligible weeks as            and omitting
                                                                      IV and omitting           spouse’s hours
                                                                       spouse’s hours
BMI z-                  0.189**                    0.157                  0.310***                   0.191**
score                   (0.087)                   (0.100)                  (0.120)                   (0.097)
Overweight              0.066**                    0.061                   0.086**                    0.071*
                        (0.033)                   (0.037)                  (0.044)                    (0.037)
Obese                   0.049**                   0.047*                   0.076**                   0.052**
                        (0.023)                   (0.026)                  (0.034)                   (0.026)
Notes: Sample size is 13,332 in all regressions. Standard errors, which are heteroscedasticity-robust and clustered by
mother, are in parentheses. *** indicates statistically significant at 1% level; ** 5% level; * 10% level. Year fixed
effects and the demographic, human capital, child health, and baseline weight controls are included. Sampling
weights are used. Mothers’ work hours are hours worked per week over all weeks in the past year. Parents’ hours
worked per week is the summation of mothers’ and mothers’ spouses’ hours worked per week over all weeks in the
past year.




                                                         46
