                         NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                           HOUSEHOLD DISSOLUTION
                       AND THE CHOICE OF ALTERNATIVE
                            LIVING ARRANGEMENTS
                          AMONG ELDERLY AMERICANS




                             Axel Borsch-Supan




                          Working Paper No. 2338




                   NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                         1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                           Cambridge, MA 02138
                                August 1987




Mike Tamada and Winston Lin provided valuable research assistance. I appreciated
helpful comments by John Quigley and Angus Deaton. Financial support was
received from the National Institutes of Health, Institute on Aging, Grant
#1-PO1-AG05842-O1. The research reported here is part of the NBER's research
project on Aging. Any opinions expressed are those of the author and not
those of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
                                                   NBER Working Paper #2338
                                                   August 1987


           Household Dissolution and the Choice of Alternative
               Living Arrangements Among Elderly Americans


                                 ABSTRACT

     For the elderly, housing choices are more complex than merely the

choice of housing expenditure, dwelling size, and tenure. They also in-

clude the choice among alternative living arrangements such as living in

one household with their adult children or sharing accomodations with other

related or unrelated elderly.

     We first contrast living arrangements of elderly Americans with the

population under age 65 and describe the changes from 1974 to 1983. We

detect a growing discrepancy in household formation/dissolution patterns

between the elderly and the younger population: after a steady decline in

the 1970s, we observe a rapid increase in the rate of "doubled-up" young

families in the beginning of the 1980s. No such development can be found

among elderly Americans. Instead, the proportion of elderly living in-

dependently steadily increases from 1974 to 1983.

     To explain this discrepancy, we estimate a multinomial choice model

among living independently and six categories of alternative living ar-

rangements. The main finding is the predominance of demographic

determinants as opposed to economic variables. The difference in income

growth between the young and the elderly - -    real   income declined for the

young but increased for the elderly - -   can   explain only part of the dis-

crepancy in household dissolution decisions. The remaining discrepancy

must be attributed to inertia and low mobility rates.



                                          Axel Borsch-Supan
                                          John F. Kennedy School of Government
                                          Harvard University
                                          Cambridge, Mass. 02138
     1. Introduction1



    A significant segment of the housing market is governed by choices

and decisions made by the elderly. The importance of this segment will

be even greater in the future because the share of elderly Americans in

the total population will be steadily increasing. For elderly, housing

choices are more complex than the choice of housing expenditure, dwell-

ing size, tenure, etc. of their own   dwelling.   in particular for older

elderly, a potential alternative to living independently is to live in

one household with their adult children or to share accommodations with

other elderly. The decision to dissolve the household, and the conse-

quent choice of living arrangements, is the focus of this paper.



     The choice of living arrangements is an important aspect of the

well-being of the elderly and the economics of aging because of its

side-effects in the provision of care and the physical environment that

this choice implies. Sharing accommodations, in particular with adult

children, will not only provide housing but also some degree of medical

care and social support for the elderly. If elderly persons perceive

sharing accommodations as an inferior housing alternative and remain

living independently as long as their physical and economic means allow,

this social support and a larger amount of medical care have to be

picked up by society at large rather than the family or close friends.




     1Mike Tamada and Winston Lin provided valuable research assistance.
I appreciated helpful comments by John Quigley and Angus Deaton. Finan-
cial support was received from the National Institutes of Health, In-
stitute on Aging, Grant #l-POl-AG05842-Ol.
                                    -2-




       Household dissolution decisions also have obvious consequences for

the intergenerational distribution of housing. In particular in times

of tight housing market conditions with very high housing prices for

newly developed units, the elderly's willingness to move out of the

family home is an important parameter in the supply of more affordable

existing homes. There is also the subtle question of intergenerational

equity when elderly are perceived as being "overhoused," that is, live

in houses that are relatively more spacious than those of younger

families with children.



       This paper studies the economic and demographic determinants of the

elderly's decision to stay living independently or to choose some kind

of shared accommodations. The main questions being asked are:



  -    How many elderly live independently? Does this percentage exhibit

       a similar development as in the non-elderly population?



  -    Who are the elderly living independently? Are they younger, are

       they wealthier?



  -    How many elderly live with their children? If so, do they head the

       household, or are they "received" by their children?



   -   How many distantly related and unrelated elderly share accommoda-

       tions?
                                      -3-


 -    Are economic conditions (income, housing prices) important
      determinants for the choice between living independently or sharing

      accommodations? Or is the decision to give up an independent

      household simply determined by age and health?



  -   Do only the less wealthy and older elderly "seek refuge" in their

      childrens' homes?



  -   Who   are   the "hosts" for subfamilies? Do they tend to be richer

      (because they can afford supplying extra shelter) or do they tend

      to be poorer (because they cannot afford privacy)?



      The paper is organized in three parts. We first contrast living

arrangements of elderly Americans with the population under the age of

65 years, describe the changes from 1974 to 1983, and compare housing

choices in SMSAs with those in non-metropolitan areas and study regional

variations. Our main result in this descriptive analysis is the dis-

crepancy of the trends household formation/dissolution between the

elderly and the younger population: after a steady decline in the 1970s,

we observe a rapid increase in the rate of "doubled-up" young families

in the beginning of the 1980s. No such development can be found among

elderly Americans. The proportion of elderly living independently

steadily increases in our sample period from 1974 to 1983.



      In the second part, we estimate a formal choice model among living

independently and six categories of alternative living arrangements.

The main finding is the predominance of demographic determinants is op-

posed to economic explanations. This is not too surprising, but some-
                                   -4-



what frustrating for an economist. To our relief, the data indicates a

growing importance of income in this choice. We also discover a strik-

ing difference in the importance of income between the poor elderly and

the well-to-do.



     Finally, we employ these estimation results to explain the dis-

crepancy in the development of household formation/dissolution between

the young and the elderly.




     2. Data and Household Decomtosition



     Our analysis is based on the Linked National Sample 1974 to 1983 of

the Annual Housing Survey, now called American Housing Survey (MIS).

Our primary reason for employing the Al-IS is its very large sample size

that allows us to make inferences about infrequent choices and to con-

duct subgroup analyses. The careful recording of household composition

makes it possible to detect elderly living as subfamilies or as

"secondary individuals" in households headed by their children or other

younger persons. Another important advantage of the AilS for the study

of housing decisions is its inclusion of structural housing charac-

teristics that allow a precise definition of housing prices. Data sets

such as the Panel Study of Income Dynamics (PSID), and the Retirement

History Survey (RHS) allow only the construction of simple expenditure

measures uncorrected for quality differences.



     However, it should be pointed out that the Annual Housing Survey

has also several severe shortcomings. Though the dwelling units are
                                  -5-



linked over time, the households or individuals living in these units

are not. This prevents any dynamic analysis without stringent assunip-

tions on the transition probabilities. The analysis in this paper is

strictly cross-sectional and static, a limited dynamic version of the

model in the second part of this paper is the subject of a sequel to

this paper. The ABS does not contain a systematic record of the func-

tional health status of the elderly.2 We will depend on age as an in-

dicator also for health, relying on the fact that age-specific medical

cost and hospitalization patterns have been relatively stable for the

last two decades.3 Finally, the ABS includes all elderly that live in

regular housing units but not the institutionalized population. Hence

the choice among alternative living arrangements excludes the choice of

the continuum between congregate housing and nursing homes, alternatives

that are becoming increasingly popular.4



     Therefore, most housing data is collected on a household level,

with much information about individual household members subsumed in a

household total. This is the case in the Census, to some degree in the

Panel Study of Income Dynamics, and in the Annual Housing Survey.

However, once one realizes that many elderly do not live independently,

and that the choice between living independently and sharing accommoda-

tions is an important decision, one must view households as an outcome

of such decisions rather than an exogenously given sampling unit.      If




     2The 1978 National Sample contains a supplement on disabilities.

     3See Poterba and Summers (1985).

     4The ABS can be augmented with data from the National Nursing Home
Survey. This is a subject for further research.
                                   -6-



the alternative living arrangements are endogenous, the primary decision

unit in housing choice analysis must be smaller than the household, and

a fairly narrow definition of a family is more appropriate. A suitable

decision unit is the (family-) nucleus, defined as follows:



Definition (Nucleus):

A nucleus consists of a married couple or a single individual with all

their own children below age 18.



Households are formed as an outcome of living arrangement decisions made

by individual nuclei. In many cases, the household is formed by only

one nucleus. Typical examples of multi-nuclei-households are elderly

parents in the household of their children, adult children still living

in the household of their parents, or roommates. We can distinguish

four types of households:



     (1) Households consisting of only one nucleus,



     (2) Households composed of nuclei with family relations (in this

          household type, child-parent relationships are of particular

          interest),



     (3) Households composed of nuclei without family relations,



     (4) Complex households, that is a combination of the latter two

          types.
                                    -7-




    Therefore, our first step in analyzing the data is to create a

database in which the appropriate decision unit, the nucleus, is the

sampling unit. This is achieved by detecting elderly subfamilies in ex-

isting households and splitting up households of type (2) through (4)

into several nuclei. This household decomposition is based on the

demographic and financial information on individual household members

available in the Annual Housing Survey. Variables like income, nucleus

size, etc. are apportioned accordingly.5



    Our analysis will be based on 19,154 elderly nuclei. A nucleus is

considered elderly if at least one person in the nucleus is above the

age of 65 years. For some comparison, we also use a "control sample" of

19,938 younger nuclei. These samples were drawn as follows. The

original Annual Housing Survey database consists of dwellings that are

tracked through nine cross-sections from 1974 through 1983 (with the ex-

ception of 1982). First, we systematically sampled every fourth dwell-

ing from the original AHS. Of those, every dwelling in which at least

one elderly person lived was sampled, and every fourth of the remaining

dwellings. We then decomposed each household according to the above

rules into nuclei -   - cross-section   by cross-section.



     As was already mentioned, this analysis does not attempt to track

individual nuclei over time. Because the ARS cross-sections are linked

across time by dwelling only, households will appear and vanish in the




     5The creation of this data base is a large, mostly mechanical task
that is not particularly glamorous but devoured most of the work for
this paper.
                                      -8-



sample whenever they move. Hence, only a panel of stayer households

could be constructed. Tracking nuclei over time introduces additional

difficulties because nuclei must be identified in each cross-section and

then be matched over time. This matching is non-trivial because of

demographic changes (death or institutionalization) that are confounded

by the frequent occurrence of unreliable demographic data. Because we

treat observations of the same nucleus in separate years as independent

observations, the above 19,154 nuclei should more precisely be termed

"nucleus..years." We estimate that the elderly sample contains ap-

proximately 5,000 different nuclei.



3. Living Arrangements



      We will describe the choice of an elderly nucleus among the follow-

ing seven types of living arrangements:



-
    Living   independently (denoted by INDEP),



-   Parents living in one household with their adult children either as
    head of this joint household (denoted by PARE-H) or as subfamily in

    the household headed by the adult child (denoted by PARE-S),



-
    Living   with relatives other than adult children either as head of this

    joint household (denoted by DREL-H) or as subfamily in the household

    headed by the distant relative (denoted by DREL-S),
                                      -9-


-
    Living   with unrelated persons either as head of this joint household

    (denoted by NREL-H) or as subfamily in the household headed by the

    non-relative (denoted by NREL-S).6



       These seven types of living arrangements for the elderly are

depicted in Figure 1. Note that for elderly who do not live indepen-

dently we distinguish not only among three different relations to the

other household members (PARE, DREL, NREL), but also between two

headship categories (IIEAD and UBF). This is important because elderly

who dissolve their own household in order to live in their adult

childrens' household are living in an entirely different situation than

elderly who stay in their family home but provide shelter for some of

their adult children. In the first case, an explicit decision to move

and to dissolve the elderly's household has to be made, and the elderly

person gives up the economically important function as a homeowner (or,

more rarely, as a renter) to become a sublettee. In the second case,

the elderly person avoids the important psychic and physical moving

costs and keeps the status as homeowner.



       For the younger nuclei, two additional living arrangements become

relevant:



-   Adult   children living in one household with their parents either as

    head of this joint household (denoted by CHIL_H) or as subfamily in

    the household headed by the parent (denoted by CHIL-S).




     6Complex households are assigned to the above categories in the
stated order.
                                 -10-




    Table 1 presents the proportions in which these living arrangements

are chosen by the elderly. The data is once stratified by year of

cross-section (1974 through 1983, with the exception of 1982), by the

four census regions (Northeast, Midwest, South, and West), and by

whether the dwelling is located in an SMSA or a non-metropolitan area.

For comparison, Table 2 presents the same proportions for younger

nuclei. Based on more than 19,000 observations, the entries have a

standard deviation of less than .36 percent points.



     More than two-third of all elderly nuclei live independently, that

is either as a married couple or as a single person forming a household.

This proportion increases steadily from 1974 to 1983. More detailed

tabulations show that about 32.5 percent of all elderly nuclei are

elderly living together with their spouses, and about 38.5 percent

elderly living alone. Almost all of the increase in independent elderly

nuclei is generated by an increase in the single-person nuclei. A con-

tinuation of this trend will have serious consequences in the delivery

of health care and social support because elderly seem to become in-

creasingly isolated and detached from their traditional source of medi-

cal and social support.



     The percentage of elderly living independently is highest in the

western and midwestern region of the United States, lowest in the

Northeast, and is much higher in rural areas as compared to metropolitan

areas. The latter result is surprising and in contrast to common

beliefs about rural and non-rural living arrangements.
                                     -11-


     The growing number of independent nuclei is particularly sig-

nificant because it is not typical for the population at large. Compar-

ing the trend among elderly nuclei with the development among younger

nuclei (first column in Tables 1 and 2) yields a striking result: there

is a large discrepancy in the development of household formation and

dissolution between the elderly and the young. Whereas the percentage

of all elderly nuclei living independently rises from 69.3 percent in

1974 to 73.0 percent in 1983, the percentage of nuclei in the younger

part of the population that lives independently fluctuates around 55

percent throughout the second half of the seventies, and then markedly

declines to 52.4 percent in 1983.



     How does this discrepancy come about? In particular, why is there

no increase in alternative living arrangements in the early eighties?

This question will be the focus of the balance of this paper. Before

discussing potential explanations, we will analyse the importance of the

six dependent living arrangements.



     Living together with one's own adult children is the most important

alternative living arrangement. Of the 28.9 percent of those elderly

nuclei who share accommodations with other nuclei, about 60 percent live

in the same households as their adult children do. In most of theses

cases, the elderly nucleus is household head, not the adult child. Cor-

responding to the increasing proportion of elderly living independently

(in particular alone), parent-child households decline as alternative

living arrangements. However, the relative importance of being head or

subfamily in an elderly parent-adult child household shifts dramatically

(columns PARE-H and PARE-S): in 1974, about 64 percent of all elderly
                                   -12-



parent-adult child were headed by the elderly, in 1983, more than 73

percent. The percentage of parent-child nuclei is lower in the Middle-

West and the West of the United States, and markedly lower in non-

metropolitan areas as compared to SMSAs.



     The third and fourth column in Table 2 (labelled CHIL-H and CHIL-S)

represent the mirror image of elderly parent-adult child households, now

relative to the living arrangements chosen by younger nuclei. Column

three displays again the decline in headship-rates of adult children in

parent-children households. Note that the proportion of both elderly

parent-adult child living arrangements among all living arrangements

chosen by younger nuclei households stays approximately constant as op-

posed to the relative decline of this choice among elderly nuclei - -

reflecting   the changing age distribution in the United States towards a

higher proportion of elder Americans and a relatively declining "supply"

for joint households.



     About 8.7 percent of all elderly nuclei live doubled-up with

relatives other than their own children (categories DREL-H and DREL-S).

This percentage exhibits a similar declining trend as parent-child

households, from 9.8 percent in 1974 to 7.4 percent in 1983. Again,

this trend is in striking contrast to the younger population in which

the relative share of this kind of living arrangement increases from 7.0

percent in 1974 to 9.6 percent in 1983.



     Only a very small percentage of elderly nuclei (3.0 percent) share

the household with non-related household members (living arrangements

NREL-H and NREL-S in Tables 1 and 2). This percentage is more or less
                                  -13-



stable in 1974-83 and is slightly lower than the corresponding per-

centage in younger households (3.4 percent) where we observe a distinct

increase from about 2.5 percent in 1974-76 to about 4.5 percent in the

early eighties.



4. Determinants of Living Arrangements



     Who are the nuclei who live alone and who are the nuclei who share

accommodations? In this section, we will collect descriptive statistics

of the most important financial and demographic characteristics by

living arrangement: income, age, marital status, sex, and size of the

nucleus. These variables, among others, will influence the demand for

housing of each nucleus where housing choices are understood to also in-

clude the way in which accommodations are shared with other nuclei. In

the case of shared accommodations, these variable will also influence

the "supply" of living arrangements by the head nuclei. Short of

formulating some kind of demand-supply relationship of household

formulation,7 we will display some of these variables not only by

nucleus (as a determinant of demand), but also by each nucleus' respec-

tive head nucleus (as a determinant of supply).



    We will first concentrate on demand. Tables 3 and 4 tabulates the

income of each nucleus. Average nucleus income for elderly is $11,150

compared to $15,450 for non-elderly nuclei. (These dollar amounts cor-

respond to 1980 figures, and are deflated with the consumer price




     7See Becker's (1981) treatise or the paper by Ermisch (1981).
                                   -14-



index.) The respective household incomes are $14,100 for the elderly

population and $22,450 for the non-elderly. 87 percent of the income of

the non-elderly is transfer income; in turn, 80.1 percent of non-elderly

nuclei earn salary or wages as their predominant income source.



     The row averages in the last columns of tables 3 and 4 indicate the

income development from 1974 to 1983. Real income of elderly nuclei

went almost steadily up from $10,470 to $12,340, essentially due to

doubly-indexed transfer income. This is in stark contrast to the

general real income development. Real income of non-elderly nuclei es-

sentially stayed constant in our sample period -   - it   increased from 1974

to 1979, then decreased rapidly back to the 1974 level. If household

formation is income elastic, the diverging income distribution is a

formidable explanation for the discrepancy in household formation trends

between the young and the elderly. The choice model in Section 5 will

try to estimate this elasticity.



     The intergenerational income distribution exhibits also some in-

teresting regional variation: for both elderly and non-elderly, income

is highest in the West and higher in urban than in non-metropolitan

areas. In the North East where income of young nuclei is below the na-

tional average, elderly nuclei receive an above average real income.



     Not surprisingly, there is a large income gap between nuclei living

as head, and nuclei living as subfamilies. Head nuclei earn generally

about more than twice as much as subfamilies.      However, this difference

in income between subfamilies and head nuclei is less pronounced than

among younger nuclei (Table 4). Headship clearly has a strongly posi-
                                      -15-



tive income elasticity. Among younger nuclei, nuclei living in any kind

of shared accommodations have lower incomes than nuclei living indepen-

dently. Not only headship, but also living independently has a positive

income elasticity for younger nuclei. This is not necessarily the case

with elderly nuclei. Elderly parents who head a joint household with

their adult children exhibit larger average incomes than those living

independently, and their income rose dramatically from 1974 to 1983.

Hence, we observe not only an increasing share of elderly who live as

heads of two-generation households (Table 1), but also that these elder-

ly are very different from the nuclei we would expect are most likely to

"double-up."



     The above observation may be attributable to the demand for or the

supply of shared housing opportunities. The stratification by region

and urbanization in Table 3 may yield some clues to separate demand from

supply: in Metropolitan areas, in the North East, and in the West --

where housing prices rose most during the late seventies and early

eighties -   - this   income gap is largest; in non-metropolitan areas and in

the South - -   areas   less affected by housing market pressures -   - it   is

reversed. Elderly parents with an existing family home owned free and

clear seem to provide an increasing amount of housing for the younger

generation. Hence, this development may be a supply effect on the part

of the elderly and a demand effect on the part of the younger genera-

tion.



        This finding would also indicate that the supply elasticity for

shared accommodations is positive because those parent who are "host"

for the younger generation appear to be wealthier than average. In
                                  -16-



general, we may distinguish two contradictory hypotheses about the supp-

ly elasticity for shared housing. In addition to the hypothesis that

only a wealthy nucleus can afford being a "host" for another nucleus

(positive income elasticity of supply), it may also be reasoned that

only poor nuclei will offer to share accommodations with other nuclei,

since in this way they can save on housing costs by splitting them with

the "guest" nucleus (negative income elasticity of supply).



     Table 5 sheds some light on this question. It tabulates the income

of the head nucleus by living arrangement of each nucleus. Hence,

columns referring to head nuclei (labelled INDEP or ending in -H) are

identical to Table 3, whereas columns referring to subfainilies (labels

ending with -S) now indicate the income of the respective head nucleus.



     For distant relatives and non-relatives living with each other, in-

comes are roughly comparable (the yearly averages for these living

arrange-ments are based on cells with 25 to 150 observations and carry

large standard deviations). Income of both host and guest nucleus are

markedly lower than average. In these cases, the distinction between

supply and demand for shared living arrangements may be as artificial as

the distinction between head nuclei and subfamilies, and we observe the

in general declining tendency to double up when income is increasing.



     The situation is quite different among elderly parent-adult

children households. If elderly parents live in the same household as

their children, and the children are head of the household, then the

children have a markedly higher income ($20,140, third row of Table 5,

roughly corresponding to the income in the second column in Table 4, its
                                  -17-



mirror-image) than the average income of young nuclei ($15,450).

Conversely, if elderly parents head a two-generation household, they

earn more than the average elderly nucleus ($13,020 versus $11,150).

This pattern is true in all of the four census regions and in

metropolitan and non-metropolitan areas alike. This finding rejects the

hypothesis of a negative income elasticity of supply of living

arrangements when two-generation households are concerned.



     Stated differently, economic considerations such as saving housing

costs may well play a role when distantly related or unrelated nuclei

double-up. Not only the demand, but also the supply elasticity declines

with income. Among two-generation households, the mechanisms that

create two-generation households seem more complicated. Income clearly

indicates which nucleus plays the headship role and its ability to host

another nucleus. The data includes elderly parents who provide housing

for adult children constrained by the housing affordability crisis in

the late seventies and early eighties, and we observe adult children

with above average income who receive their elderly parents. To study

the economic incentives in these two-generation households more

carefully, we would need to know the elderly parents' health status.



     Tables 6 through 9 present the main demographic determinants of the

choice among living arrangements: age, nucleus size, and sex of nucleus

head, relevant mostly for single-elderly nuclei.8



     81f the nucleus consists of a married couple, age refers to the
average age of husband and spouse. Sex of nucleus head is a somewhat
ambiguous concept because the head of a nucleus is only well defined in
the trivial case of one-person nuclei or self-reported in one-nuclei
households. Otherwise, we assigned the head status to the male.
                                    -18-




    The right margin of Table 6 reflects the aging of the American

population. Average age increased from 69.2 years to 69.8 years in the

decade considered. It is important to realize that this change is more

pronounced in the category of elderly who live independently. Once

again, this points out the increasing burden of social support and

health care that has to be born by society at large rather than the

immediate family. Table 7 displays the corresponding age profile: only

after age 75 does the proportion of elderly Americans living

independently decline and is picked by living arrangements within the

immediate or more distant family.



     The columns in Table 6 represent the relation between multi-nuclei

living arrangements and age. Subfamilies tend to be older than head

nuclei, a finding, that may be explained by the health status of older,

therefore more dependent nuclei. In the case of elderly parents living

in the home of their adult children, the age of the parent nucleus is

particularly high (76.8 years).9 This relates back to the discussion of

the role of income in forming two-generation households and the

importance of the elderly parent's health status in that decision.



     Surprising, however, is the fact that elderly parents who head a

joint household with their adult children are not only younger than

average nuclei, but also became even more so in the time from 1974 to

1983. It is interesting to relate this finding to the ownership rates




     9A table similar to Table 5 indicates that the corresponding age of
the receiving child nucleus is quite young (52.8 years).
                                  -19-


in Table 10. These ownership rates represent the percentage of nuclei

who live in a dwelling that is owned by the head nucleus rather than

rented. Columns 2 and 3 in Table 10 show that the ownership rates of a

two-generation family home are virtually unchanged in our sample period.

However, the proportion of family homes owned by the elderly parent

increases, whereas the proportion of homes owned by the younger

generation declines.



     Furthermore, the age profiles in column 2 and 3 of Table 7 show the

reversal of roles with increasing age, the crucial age being 75 years

after which more elderly become subfamilies rather than heads and at

which the rate of independently living elderly nuclei peaks. Except for

the small category of NREL-S, the attractiveness of all other living

arrangements also strongly declines after the age of 75. In passing,

note the low ownership rates of living arrangements among non-relatives.

All age patterns exhibit little variation across regions and degree of

urbanization, see Table 6.



     Tables 8 and 9 shed more light on the demographic characteristics

of living arrangements, in particular two-generation households.

Elderly living in the household headed by their adult children are

almost always single and mostly female, whereas elderly parents who are

heads in a two-generation household are more often but by no means

exclusively couples. Living arrangements with non-relatives are most

frequently chosen by single male elderly persons, particularly in the

midwestern region of the United States.
                                      -20-




     5. A Multinomial Logit Model of the Choice Among Living

Arrangeiients



     The descriptive analysis in the previous Section pointed out some
important changes in the way elderly Americans live. In addition to the

intergenerational shift in ownership patterns among two-generation

households, the most striking change is the unexpectedly large increase

in the proportion of elderly Americans living independently as opposed

to the reversal of headship rates in the younger population.



     What factors are generating the difference in household formation!

dissolution patterns between the elderly and the young? There are

primarily two hypotheses. The first hypothesis could be termed the

"inertia hypothesis." Low mobility, caused by relatively higher

monetary and non-monetary moving costs for the elderly, creates a slow

adaptation of housing patterns to a changing economic environment among

the elderly. Market forces that may induce trends in the general market

will only very slowly shift consumption patterns of the elderly. With

an increasing share of the population becoming elderly, the proportion

of elderly living independently among all households will rise. A

relatively decreasing "supply" of younger households because of the

change in the age distribution will also increase the proportion of

elderly living independently among all elderly nuclei.



      The second hypothesis - -   we will term it "income distribution

hypothesis" - -   rests   on the observation that the economic environment

has actually changed much less for the elderly than for the younger
                                  -21-



population. Whereas real income rose in in the seventies and then

sharply declined in the beginning of the eighties for younger families,

this was not the case for the elderly. The same holds for housing

prices. Housing prices were rising drastically in the beginning of the

eighties, but most elderly were already sitting in houses owned free and

clear that have appreciated during that period but without a

proportional increase in cash-costs.



     In order to distinguish between both hypotheses, we need to

estimate the price and income elasticities of the proportions in which

living arrangements are chosen, as well as contrast these elasticities

with the influence of demographic variables. We will estimate a variant

of the multinomial logit model describing the choice among the seven

alternative living arrangements introduced in Section 3 and depicted

below in Figure 1.

     We consider the most frequent choice of living independently as the

base category and measure the attractiveness of the remaining six

choices relative to this category. We postulate that the attractiveness

or (dis-) utility of each alternative relative to living independently

can be decomposed into three additive components. The first component

describes the (dis-)utility of sharing accommodations either as head of

the joint household (denoted by HEAD) or as subfamily (denoted by SUBF).

The second component describes the attractiveness of the partners, that

is the (dis-)utility an elderly nucleus receives from living with

distant relatives (denoted by DREL) or with unrelated persons (denoted

by NREL). Living as elderly parents with its own adult children

(denoted by PARE) serves as the base category for shared living

arrangements.
                                      -22-




     These utility components are a deterministic function v of regional

housing prices (denoted by PRI), nucleus income (INC), age of nucleus

members (AGE), the size of the nucleus (PER), and the sex of the nucleus

head (SEX), comprised in the vector X. In addition, a random utility

component ej represents all unmeasurable factors that characterize each

alternative. Using the symbols in Figure 1, total (dis-)utility u

becomes



     UPEH -                 —   VHEJ(X)             +
                  UINDEP
              -                 VHEAD( + VDREL(X)   +
     UDRELH       UINDEP

(1) UELH - uINDEp               VHD(X) + VEL(X)     + E3,

                                                    +
     UPES     -
                  UINDEP        VSUBF(X)

     UDRELS
              -
                  UINDEP        VSUBF(X) + VDREL(X) +

                                                    + 66,
     UELS     -
                  UINDEP        VSUBF( + VNREL(X)


We assume that the         are mutually independent and logistically

distributed and specify functions v linear in the explanatory variables.

Hence, the probability of choosing the alternative with the highest

attractiveness is of the familiar multinomial logit form.1°



     Several comments are appropriate concerning the choice of this

model. First, all explanatory variables are nucleus-, but not

alternative-specific. An alternative model commonly used in this

situation is the logit model with alternative-specific coefficients

where for each relative utility component



     10McFadden (1973).
                                                  -23-




(2) u -        UINDEP       X'fli +   €,         i=l,   ..   ,6   or PARE-H,. . ,NREL-S.




Our specification simply economizes on the number of parameters by

imposing a set of linear restrictions on the



(3)        -
               2        -        and       l -                    -



In    addition, these restrictions reflect a non-hierarchical pattern of

similarities among the alternatives.



       This leads to the second comment. It would be desirable to allow

for a more flexible specification of the distribution of the unobserved

utility components e. Excluding a general multivariate normal

distribution because of its computational intractability, an obvious

choice is the generalized extreme value distribution leading to the

nested niultinomial logit (NMNL) model. However, the NMNL model is not

identified in the context of explanatory variables that do not vary

across alternatives 11



       A final comment regards the nature of the data. The data includes

repeated observations of the same nucleus, but treats each observation

independently. This assumption requires that all nucleus-specific time-

invariant utility components are included in the explanatory variables.

We are well aware that if in fact the unobserved characteristics




       There is no variation in the inclusive values to ide:tiy the
dissimilarity parameters.
                                  -24-



correlate over time, the logit model will produce inconsistent

estimates. It is possible to correct for this potential inconsistency

by conditioning on the time-invariant unobserved nucleus characteristics

(Chamberlain, 1980). However, with 9 cross-sections, this approach is

prohibitively costly. Little is known about the magnitude of this bias

in the coefficients.12 The longitudinal nature of the data will also

the deflate the standard errors. Assuming essentially unbiased

estimates, the correct standard errors should be approximately twice as

large as reported)3



     Table 1]. presents parameter estimates of the choice model. The

estimates are based on a choice-based subsample of all 19,154 nuclei.

The subsample includes all nuclei that live with non-relatives, a .05

percent random sample of independent nuclei, and intermediate sized

random samples of nuclei in other living arrangements. The subsample

includes 3,081 nuclei and substantially economizes the estimation, at

the same time including a sufficiently large number of observations for

each living arrangement to guarantee reliable estimation results. To

correct for the case-controlled or choice-based subsampling, the

estimation procedure re-weights each observation. The weights (the

ratio of the percentage of each alternative in the original sample over

the percentage in the subsample) vary by income class and cross-section.




     12See BOrsch-Supan and Pollakowski (1985) for an application and
sensitivity analysis using a panel of 3 cross-sections.

     l3 3081 observations in the estimation sample represent between
700 and 800 differnt nuclei.
                                  -25-


The estimation approach is a slight generalization of the WESML

estimator proposed by Manski and Lerman (1977)14.



     A striking result in Table 11 is the predominance of demographic

variables relative to economic determinants. The coefficients measuring

housing prices are insignificant, the income elasticities surprisingly

small.   In contrast, age, nucleus size, and sex of single person nuclei

determine most of the observed variation in choices among living

arrangements. The overall fit, measured as ratio of optimal over

diffuse likelihood value, is quite satisfactory.



     We will first discuss the age variables. Nucleus age refers to the

average age of nucleus head and spouse, its sample mean is about 70

years.' To be able to capture the important differences in housing

choices before and after age 75 discovered in Table 7, we include age

linearly (measured in years) as well as quadratically (measured in

squared years divided by 100). The probability of living as a subfamily

increases with old age, correspondingly, headship rates decline.

However, at ages below 75 years, becoming one year older still decreases

the log-odds of being a subfamily rather than living independently. The

probabilities of the HEAD alternatives decline uniformly in the relevant

age range, whereas the tendency to move as elderly parent in the home




     14See McFadden, Winston, and BOrsch-Supan (1985) for details, in-
cluding a derivation of the appropriate asymptotic covariance matrix.
The WESML estimation approach is not necessary to consistently estimate
the coefficients in the MNL model. Inclusion of alternative specific
constants would serve the same purpose. However, these constants are
highly collinear with PER and FEM which makes the WESML approach more
attractive.
                                  -26-



headed by the adult child increases steadily. All these patterns

correspond to simple intuition and the tabulations in Section 4. We

will compute these predicted age profiles in more detail further below.



     The variable PER or PERSONS represents the number of persons in the

nucleus, therefore also the marital status of its head (PER=l, if the

elderly person is widowed, divorced or never married, in general PER=2

otherwise15). Not surprisingly, elderly couples strongly prefer to live

independently. If they share housing, they prefer to head the joint

household, other things being equal. They regard doubling-up with non-

relatives as a strongly inferior alternative. The odds of preferring

such a living arrangement are about twelve times lower than for single

elderly.



      The variable FEM or FEMALE indicates that the head of the nucleus

is female which is relevant for one-person nuclei. After correcting for

differences in income and age between single male and single female

elderly, male are much more likely to live together with non-related

persons in one household, their odds of choosing this alternative being

3.6 times higher than among female persons.



     Of the economic variables, PRI or PRICE denotes a housing price

index of owner-occupied housing computed by Brown and Yinger (1986).

The index represents after-tax user-cost of a typical single-family home

and includes historical appreciation as well as the federal income tax




     15There are some cases of elderly nuclei with own children under
age 18.
                                  -27-


advantages of homeownership for the relevant income range. Because of

the very large ownership rates, an owner-oriented price index seems to

be the most appropriate index of housing costs for the elderly. The

index is computed from Annual Housing Survey tabulations. The index is

not SMSA-specific and varies only by the four Census regions Northeast,

Midwest, South, and West. However, regional and intertemporal price

variation is very large because the second half of our the sample period

encompasses the rapid rise in housing costs, starting in the West, then

picking up in the remainder of the United States. In spite of this

dramatic change in housing prices, virtually no price effect can be

found in our estimation.



     The variable INC or INCOME represents the nucleus' current income,

measured in $1000 per year deflated by the Consumer Price Index with

base year 1980. Its sample mean is about 10.0. The estimated

coefficients indicate a precisely measured, but surprisingly small

income effect in favor of living independently. The log-odds ratio of

choosing to live as a subfamily rather than independently decreases by

.1061 for an income increase of $1000. At first sight, these results

seem to reject the "income distribution hypothesis" in favor of the

notion that housing consumption of the elderly is very inert. Even if

the income of the elderly had declined as much as in the general

population, the lack of responsiveness of household dissolution

decisions to income changes would have predicted an essentially

unchanged housing consumption pattern.



    Because the author of the paper is an economist, not a demographer,

the paper would have ended at this point. However, believing in
                                  -28-


economics after all, we re-estimated the model in two   different   ways.

First, the sample was stratified into three income classes and each

income class estimated separately. Second, the pooled cross-sections

are decomposed into an early sample period (1974-76), a middle period

(1977-79), and a late period (1980-83).



     Table 12 presents the results stratified by income class. The

lower income class extends to $5,000 per year, and the upper income

class begins with a yearly income in excess of $10,000.



     Quite clearly, there are very strong differences between the income

classes. The statistical hypothesis that the estimated relationships

are homogenous with respect to income class can easily be rejected.16

Whereas the coefficients for housing prices and demographic variables

are essentially stable, most of this difference can be found in the

income variable. Low income nuclei are highly income responsive, about

five times as much as was estimated in the pooled regression in Table

11. Income responses among the other two income groups are essentially

insignificant, while a perverse sign characterizes the middle income

group)7 Low income elderly comprise almost half of the sample (1404

out of 3081). Hence, the aggregation error in Table 11 is considerable,

and we will use this disaggregate model for the applications in Section

6 below.




     16The likelihood ratio test statistic is 188.2 (the loglikelihood
of the constrained estimation is 3159.5 (Table 11), the likelihood of
the unconstrained model (Table 12) is 3065.4). The chi-squared value
for 50 degrees of freedom at .99 confidence is 76.2.

     i7 that the reported standard errors ignore intertemporal cor-
relations. Correct standard errors are approximately twice as large.
                                   -29-




     The result of high income elasticities among the poor elderly

corresponds to earlier findings that predicted very elastic household

formation rates for single elderly women participating in a general

housing allowances program)-8 It also revives the hypothesis that

without double-indexation of Social Security income the United States

may have experienced a much larger incidence of doubling-up among the

elderly than was actually the case. For more affluent elderly, economic

considerations appear to be irrelevant in the decision among living

arrangements.



     We performed a second sample stratification in order to investigate

whether tastes have changed from 1974 to 1983 and re-estimated the model

separately for the periods 1974-76, 1977-79, and 1980-83. This

decomposition also alleviates the econometric problems of pooling cross-

sections in the presence of unobserved nucleus-specific but time-

invariant utility components. Estimated coefficients are presented in

Table 13. The results are qualitatively unchanged from Table 11, and

the likelihood ratio test version of the Chow-test is insignificant. If

at all, the income elasticities show a rising tendency, both in terms of

magnitude and significance. The stability of the results is a fair

indication that the potential inconsistency of the logit results may not

be a severe problem in this data set.




     18Borsch-Supan (1986).
                                  -30-




    6. Simulations and   Applications   of the Model



    What do the magnitudes of the estimated coefficients imply? How do

living arrangement decisions vary by age and income? Are the estimated

income effects sufficiently large to explain the discrepancy between

declining headship rates among young nuclei and a rising proportion of

elderly living independently in the early eighties? We will try to

answer these questions by evaluating predicted choice probabilities

generated by the niultinomial logit models in Table 12 in various

scenarios.



     Table 14 presents predicted age profiles for the three income

classes. Clearly, poorer elderly not only have a lower tendency to live

independently but also give up this status earlier than elderly with

higher incomes. The reversal in the choice probability of living

independently occurs at 70.5 years for elderly nuclei with yearly

incomes below $5,000, at 75.5 years for the middle income group, and at

78.5 years for those elderly nuclei who receive more than $10,000

yearly.



     Once they dissolve their households, the upper income classes are

more likely to be received by their adult children or by more distant

relatives. The pattern is different for poorer elderly among whom a

large proportion stays head of a two-generation household. As opposed

to the low income strata, elderly nuclei with incomes above $5,000

become increasingly likely to also be received by distant or unrelated

persons. However, this trend is statistically insignificant.
                                     -31-




     Which living arrangements would elderly Americans have chosen in

the absence of the rise in real income generated by Social Security

indexation? Table 15 presents estimated changes that would have occurred

if the income of elderly nuclei had exhibited a similar development as

the income of younger nuclei. Using the observed income at 1974, we

computed the hypothetical elderly's income by using an income index

calculated from the sample of young nuclei. Columns 1 and 3 display the

changes between this and the baseline prediction, once for nuclei with

income below $5,000 and once for all nuclei. The differences are

substantial for poor nuclei, but there not large enough to explain a

similar decrease in headship rates among all elderly as was observed

among young nuclei. This is indicated in columns 2, 4, and 5, which

compare the yearly changes in the proportion of elderly living

independently with the actual changes in this category among the young

nuclei.



     We conclude that the divergence in the income development

substantially contributed to the steady increase in the proportion of

elderly living independently, but that this explanation in itself is not

sufficient to account for the entire discrepancy in choosing living

arrangements between young and elderly Americans.




     7. Summary   of   Conclusions



     1. About a third of all nuclei with at least one elderly person do

not live independently. As opposed to an increase in the proportion of
                                  -32-



doubled-up households in the general population in the early eighties,

this percentage has fallen among elderly Americans.



     2. The emerging discrepancy in living arrangement choices between

young and elderly can only partially be explained by the discrepancy in

the income development 1974 to 1983. The residual may be attributed to

inertia due to low mobility and slow adaptation to economic changes.



     3. More than 17 percent of all elderly nuclei live with their

adult children. In most of these cases, the parents head the common

household. If the children are household heads, the parent is mostly

single, old, and has only a small income.



     4. Within these two-generation households, important

intergenerational changes occurred from 1974 to 1983. An increasing

percentage of these households are headed by the parent generation

rather than the adult child. We speculate that this development can be

attributed to the housing affordability crisis among young first time

home buyers.



     5. Few elderly live with distant relatives (the proportion is less

than 9 percent), and very few elderly share the household with non-

relatives (about 3 percent).



     6. The choice probabilities among living arrangements are

predominantly determined by demographic variables. There is no

evidence, that they respond to an aggregate price index of owner-

occupied housing.
                                   -33-




     7. The "demand elasticity for shared accommodations" with respect

to income is strongly negative for elderly with low incomes. However,

for elderly nuclei with yearly incomes in excess of $5,000, the income

elasticity is insignificant after correcting for demographic variables.



     8.   In elderly parents-adult children household, there is some

evidence that the corresponding "supply elasticity for shared

accommodations" with respect to income is positive: children who

"receive" their parents have about twice than average nucleus income.
                                  -34-




REFERENCES



Becker, C. S., 1981, "A Treatise on the Family." Harvard University

     Press, Cambridge, Massachusetts.



BOrsch-Supan, A., 1986, "Household Formation, Housing Prices, and Public

     Policy Impacts." Journal of Public Economics 25.



BOrsch-Supan, A. and Pollakowski, H., 1985, "Estimating Housing

     Consumption Adjustments from Panel Data." Joint Center for Urban

     Studies of MIT and Harvard University Working Paper.



Brown, H. J. and Yinger, 3. M., 1986, "Hoineownership and Housing

     Affordability in the United States: 1963-1986." Joint Center of

     Housing Studies of MIT and Harvard University.



Chamberlain, C.., 1980, "Analysis of Covariance with Qualitative Data."

     Review of Economic Studies 47.



Ermisch, J., 1981, "An Econometric Theory of Household Formation."

     Scottish Journal of Political Economy 28.



Manski, C.F., and Lerman, S.R., 1977, "The Estimation of Choice

     Probabilities from Choice Based Samples." Econometrica 45.
                                  -35-



McFadden, D., 1973, "Conditional Logit Analysis of Qualitative Choice

     Behavior." in Zarembka, P. (ed.) "Frontiers in Econometrics."

     Academic Press, New York.



McFadden, D., Winston, C., and Borsch-Supan, A., 1985, "Joint Estimation

     of Freight Transportation Decisions under Non-Random Sampling," in:

     Daughety, A. "Analytical Studies in Transport Economics." Cambridge

     University Press.



Poterba, J. N. and L. H. Summers, 1985, "Public Policy Implications of

     Declining Old-Age Mortality." Paper prepared for Brookings

     Conference on Retirement and Aging.
Figure 1: ALTERNATIVE LIVING ARRANGEMENTS




                                                      I
         I


Living INDEPendently          Living Arrangements Shared with other Nuclei:


                                     I

                         Nucleus is HEAD _
                         of Joint Household
                                                                          _
                                                            Nucleus is SuBFamily
                                                            in Joint Household


                                                                                I
                          I                   I


                       Nucleus Nucleus Nucleus            Nucleus Nucleus Nucleus
                         js         is       is             is       is       is
                       PAREnt Distant Non-                PAREnt Distant Non-
                                  RELative RELative                RELative RELative


       INDEP           PARE-H      DREL-H NREL-H          PARE-S   DREL-S     NREL-S
Table 1: OBSERVED FREQUENCIES OF LIVING ARRANGEMENTS
           (Percentages of Elderly Nuclei)

YEAR      INDEP PARE-H PARE-S DREL-H DREL-S NREL-H NREL-S

1974      69.3    11.4   6.4    5.0    4.8    1.9      1.2   100.0
1975      70.4    11.8   5.9    4.6    4.4    1.8      1.2   100.0
1976      70.5    11.8   6.1    4.8    3.9    1.6      1.2   100.0
1977      70.5    12.4   5.7    4.9    3.9    1.5      1.1   100.0
1978      71.5    11.7   5.4    5.0    3.5    1.4      1.4   100.0
1979      71.5    11.2   5.3    4.9    3.9    1.5      1.6   100.0
1980      71.3    11.8   4.8    5.0    3.9    1.7      1.5   100.0
1981      71.5    12.5   4.1    4.4    4.3    1.9      1.4   100.0
1983      73.0    12.3   4.5    4.4    3.0    1.8      1.1   100.0

          71.1    11.9   5.4    4.8    3.9    1.7      1.3 100.0


REGION    INDEP PARE-H PARE-S DREL-H DREL-S NREL-H NREL-S

NO-EAST    64.6   13.8   6.7    6.1    5.2    1.8      1.7   100.0
MIDWEST    74.5    9.3   5.0    4.3    3.5    2.0      1.4   100.0
SOUTH      71.0   13.2   4.9    5.1    4.0    1.0       .7   100.0
WEST       74.8   10.5   5.0    2.9    2.7    2.4      1.7   100.0

           71.1   11.9   5.4    4.8    3.9    1.7      1.3 100.0


URBAN     INDEP PARE-H PARE-S DREL-H DREL-S NREL-H NREL-S

SMSA       68.5   12.7    6.3   5.1    3.9    2.0      1.4 100.0
NON-SMSA 75.0     10.5    3.8   4.3    3.9    1.2      1.1 100.0

           71.1   11.9    5.4   4.8    3.9    1.7      1.3 100.0
Table 2: OBSERVED FREOUENCIES OF LIVING ARRANGEMENTS
           (Percentages of Young Nuclei)


YEAR      INDEP pARE.HaCHILH Cl-IlL-S DREL-H DREL-S NREL-H NREL-S

1974       55.7   13.5    1.7   20.0    3.3    3.7     1.0   1.7    100.0
1975       55.2   13.3    1.5   19.9    3.9   4.3       .9   1.5    100.0
1976       55.5   12.6    1.9   19.4    4.2   4.5       .9   1.5    100.0
1977       55.3   12.5    1.4   19.5    4.0   5.1      1.2   1.7    100.0
1978       54.5   12.4     .9   20.0    4.0   4.9      1.7   2.6    100.0
1979       55.3   12.1     .8   20.1    4.4   5.0      1.2   1.7    100.0
1980       54.1   12.0     .9   19.2    4.7   5.5      1.7   2.8    100.0
1981       53.4   11.4    1.0   19.9    4.9    5.9     1.8   2.8    100.0
1983       52.4   12.9    1.0   20.8    4.4    5.1     1.8   2.5    100.0

           53.9   12.6    1.2   19.8    4.2    4.9     1.3   2.1 100.0


REGION    INDEP pAREHaCHILH CHIL-S DREL-H DREL-S NREL-H NREL-S

NO-EAST    50.2   14.2    1.9   23.8    3.4    3.8     1.4   1.9    100.0
MIDWEST    53.5   12.4    1.3   20.8    4.7    5.3     1.0   1.5    100.0
SOUTH      57.4   12.3     .9   19.2    3.6    4.4     1.3   1.9    100.0
WEST       56.5   11.3    1.1   15.2    5.3    6.4     1.8   3.3    100.0

           53.5   12.6    1.2   19.8    4.2    4.9     1.3   2.1 100.0


URBAN     INDEP pARE.HaCHILH CHIL-S DREL-H DREL-S NREL-H NREL-S

SMSA       52.0   12.8    1.4   20.8    4.5    5.4     1.5   2.4 100.0
NON-SMSA 59.8     12.1     .9   17.9    3.5    3.8     1.1   1.5 100.0

           53.5   12.6    1.2   19.8    4.2    4.9     1.3   2.1 100.0

Note: a About .4 percent nuclei in PARE-S are included in PARE-H.
Table 3: INCOME OF NUCLEI BY LIVING ARRANGEMENTS
         (Elderly Nuclei; Hundred 1980 Dollars)

YEAR     INDEP PARE-H PARE-S DREL-H DREL-S NREL-H NREL-S

1974     113.6   115.4   52.6   95.5   54.7   105.8    1.3   104.7
1975     114.5   111.4   52.3 102.2    44.9   119.7     .0   105.6
1976     116.6   119.7   55.3   82.1   52.6   110.6    1.4   107.6
1977     118.2   115.7   54.0   96.1   59.4   104.2   35.2   109.8
1978     120.2   131.1   46.2   91.5   53.2    96.6   48.7   112.3
1979     116.9   128.7   49.3   71.8   52.6    82.7   65.9   108.6
1980     116.2   141.9   45.8   89.1   50.5 121.9     48.6   111.0
1981     128.1   155.0   48.0   88.4   44.9    89.7   51.5   121.1
1983     128.3   152.7   54.2 102.4    52.8    91.3   78.3   123.4

         119.1 130.2     51.1   90.9   51.7 102.9     38.3 111.5


REGION   INDEP PARE-H PARE-S DREL-H DREL-S NREL-H NREL-S

NO-EAST 123.2 148.7      41.8 104.5    59.0 103.6     56.8   115.3
MIDWEST 111.8 119.3      57.1   91.7   45.6    91.5   25.8   105.0
SOUTH   110.6 109.6      50.0   72.9   48.9    99.2   32.6   102.4
WEST    141.3 161.8      61.7 111.2    52.4 120.1     31.8   133.9

         119.1 130.2     51.1   90.9   51.7 102.9     38.3 111.5


URBAN    INDEP PARE-H PARE-S DREL-H DREL-S NREL-H NREL-S

SMSA     129.3148.9      50.7   98.6   50.7 115.0     34.5 120.5
NON-SMSA 104.7  95.0     52.1   76.9   53.2    72.6   46.2   97.4

         119.1 130.2     51.1   90.9   51.7 102.9     38.3 111.5
Table 4: INCOME OF NUCLEI BY LIVING ARRANGEMENTS
         (Young Nuclei; Hundred 1980 Dollars)


YEAR     INDEpa CHIL-H CHIL-S DREL-H DREL-S NREL-H NREL-S

1974     191.1   184.6   35.9   136.0   23.4   124.4   11.9   148.3
1975     198.0   214.1   40.0   142.7   25.1   120.9    7.6   153.6
1976     200.2   237.0   38.7   132.9   31.0   104.7   10.2   155.2
1977     198.2   209.1   37.1   158.5   80.5   109.1   53.2   155.9
1978     201.2   238.1   43.4   158.3   76.9   139.7   59.1   157.5
1979     204.7   155.4   45.5   141.6   76.2   141.5   75.0   160.1
1980     202.7   148.0   41.8   140.4   78.9   139.8   59.3   156.5
1981     205.7   186.9   37.5   122.2   67.9   147.4   67.0   155.0
1983     197.1   174.6   31.8   136.1   70.9   123.4   56.3   148.5

         199.7 199.1     39.1 140.9     61.1 130.1     48.1 154.5


REGION   INDEpa CHIL-H CHIL-S DRE8-H DREL-S NREL-H NREL-S

NO-EAST 192.8 215.4      42.6   158.6   69.6   133.7   53.0   148.2
MIDWEST 204.7 187.8      41.5   139.6   58.9   132.5   47.9   156.6
SOUTH   186.6 182.9      36.9   134.2   56.9   121.4   55.8   147.1
WEST    221.5 210.9      32.8   137.8   63.5   135.4   38.1   170.5

         199.7 199.1     39.1 140.9     61.1 130.1     48.1 154.5


URBAN    INDEpa CHIL-H CHIL-S DREL-H DREL-S NREL-H NREL-S

SMSA     209.4 212.2     38.6 149.2     65.3 138.1     47.8 158.5
NON-SMSA 182.3 159.8     40.4 119.1     49.3 108.1     49.0 146.6

         199.7 199.1     39.1 140.9     61.1 130.1     48.1 154.5


Note: a INDEP category includes PARE-H category.
Table 5: INCOME OF HEAD BY LIVING ARRANGEMENT OF NUCLEUS
         (Head Nuclei of Elderly Nuclei; Thousand 1980 Dollars)


YEAR          INDEP PARE-H PARE-S DREL-H DREL-S NREL-H NREL-S

1974          113.6   115.4
                          179.7  95.5 102.8        105.8 151.9 116.9
1975          114.5   111.4
                          210.4 102.2 106.4        119.7  84.2 118.5
1976          116.6   119.7
                          220.0  82.1   95.8       110.6   64.8   120.1
1977          118.2   115.7
                          226.5  96.1 106.1        104.2   66.4   121.7
1978          120.2   131.1
                          217.8  91.5   97.7        96.6   62.4   123.4
1979          116.9   128.7
                          189.5  71.8   90.1        82.7   80.6   117.7
1980          1l62 141.9 202.9   89.1 100.1        121.9   94.5   121.2
1981          128.1 155.0 198.6  88.4   97.3        89.7   92.3   130.1
1983          128.3 152.7 162.2 102.4 113.0         91.3   85.3   130.1

              119.1 130.2 201.4      90.9 100.9 102.9      86.5 122.1


REGION        INDEP PARE-H PARE-S DREL-H DREL-S NREL-H NREL-S

NO-EAST 123.2 148.7           207.4 104.5  85.7 103.6 109.6 128.7
MIDWEST 111.8 119.3           197.6  91.7 107.4  91.5  63.5 114.7
SOUTH   110.6 109.6           188.1   72.9 96.3  99.2  69.5 111.4
WEST    141.3 161.8           221.5 111.2 142.9 120.1  96.7 145.4

              119.1 130.2 201.4      90.9 100.9 102.9      86.5 122.1


URBAN         INDEP PARE-H PARE-S DREL-H DREL-S NREL-H NREL-S

SMSA     129.3 148.9 215.2           98.6 108.7 115.0      92.1 134.0
NON-SMSA 104.7  95.0 166.1           76.9   88.7    72.6   74.9 103.5
         --
              119.1   130.2 201.4    90.9 100.9 102.9      86.5 122.1
Table 6: AVERAGE AGE OF NUCLEI BY LIVING ARRANGEMENT
          (Elderly Nuclei; Years)
YEAR      INDEP   PARE-H PARE-S DREL-H DREL-S NREL-H NREL-S

1974      68.7     66.2   77.8   67.9   72.2   68.8    70.7   69.2
1975      68.8     66.2   75.8   68.6   72.2   69.1    71.2   69.1
1976       69.1    66.4   75.8   67.9   72.3   71.0    71.3   69.3
1977       69.3    66.2   76.8   68.6   71.8   70.2    70.6   69.4
1978       69.3    66.8   77.0   68.4   72.1   70.0    71.5   69.5
1979       69.5    66.5   76.8   69.2   72.5   70.7    72.9   69.7
1980       69.6    66.2   77.2   68.6   72.8   68.4    71.2   69.6
1981       69.6    66.8   77.6   68.4   71.9   68.3    71.2   69.6
1983       70.0    65.5   77.4   69.3   72.0   69.8    71.0   69.8

           69.3    66.3   76.8   68.5   72.2   69.5    71.3   69.5


REGION    INDEP PARE-H PARE-S DREL-H DREL-S NREL-H NREL-S

NO-EAST    69.6    66.1   75.4   69.2   72.2   67.8    71.1   69.6
MIDWEST    70.0    67.7   77.6   68.7   74.4   70.5    72.1   70.3
SOUTH      68.7    66.2   76.9   68.6   71.2   68.5    71.7   68.9
WEST       69.1    64.9   78.3   66.0   70.8   71.0    70.3   69.2

           69.3    66.3   76.8   68.5   72.2   69.5    71.3   69.5

URBAN     INDEP   PARE-H PARE-S DREL-H DREL-S NREL-H NREL-S

SMSA       69.2    66.0   77.0   68.0   72.1   70.3    71.1   69.4
NON-SMSA 69.4      66.9   76.5   69.6   72.4   67.5    71.9   69.5

           69.3    66.3   76.8   68.5   72.2   69.5    71.3   69.5
Table 7: FREQUENCY OF LIVING ARRANGEMENTS BY AGE
         (Percentage of Elderly Nuclei)

AGE     INDEP PARE-H PARE-S DREL-H DREL-S NREL-H NREL-S
                                    --
< 65    68.3    21.9    1.1   5.1        1.9   1.0    .7   100.0
66-70   72.8    12.2    2.8   5.1        3.7   2.2   1.2   100.0
71-75   77.9     6.5    3.2   5.1        3.6   2.4   1.2   100.0
76-80   74.1     5.5    8.2   4.7        4.1   1.4   1.9   100.0
> 80    58.9     8.8   18.1   3.1        8.0   1.1   2.0   100.0
Table 8: SIZE OF NUCLEUS BY LIVING ARRANGEMENT
        (Elderly Nuclei; Number of Persons)

YEAR     INDEP   PARE-H PARE-S DREL-H DREL-S NREL-H NREL-S
                         -                     --
1974       1.6    1.7        1.0   1.6   1.1        1.2   1.0   1.5
1975       1.6    1.7        1.1   1.5   1.0        1.3   1.0   1.5
1976       1.5    1.7        1.1   1.4   1.1        1.3   1.0   1.5
1977       1.5    1.7        1.1   1.5   1.1        1.2   1.0   1.5
1978       1.5     1.7       1.0   1.5   1.1        1.3   1.0   1.5
1979       1.5     1.7       1.1   1.5   1.1        1.2   1.0   1.5
1980       1.5     1.7       1.0   1.5   1.0        1.3   1.0   1.5
1981       1.5     1.7       1.0   1.4   1.1        1.2   1.0   1.5
1983       1.5     1.7       1.1   1.4   1.1        1.1   1.0   1.5

           1.5     1.7       1.0   1.5   1.1        1.2   1.0   1.5
Table 9: SEX OF NUCLEUS-HEAD BY LIVING ARRANGEMENT
         (Elderly Nuclei; Percent Female)

YEAR          INDEP   PARE-H PARE-S DREL-H DREL-S NREL-H NREL-S

1974           38.6   37.1       79.7   38.9   66.7   47.6   52.0   42.7
1975           38.4   36.3       77.6   42.8   73.1   55.2   38.5   42.5
1976           39.3   37.0       76.5   50.5   64.4   50.0   44.4   43.1
1977           39.8   35.0       79.5   42.6   61.2   54.8   47.8   42.7
1978           39.5   36.2       82.5   37.1   67.6   63.3   48.3   42.8
1979           39.7   35.1       79.7   45.2   66.7   66.7   48.6   43.2
1980           41.5   35.2       84.0   43.6   68.6   63.1   42.4   44.4
1981           43.6   39.9       85.3   52.5   73.1   60.0   38.5   46.7
1983           41.5   34.5       80.6   53.5   66.2   53.7   46.2   44.0

              40.2    36.2       80.2   45.0   67.5   56.8   45.2   43.5


REGION        INDEP PARE-H PARE-S DREL-H DREL-S NREL-H NREL-S

NO-EAST       43.0    30.3       85.0   47.0   70.3   50.0   55.0   46.1
MIDWEST       43.1    43.1       83.7   46.1   77.4   63.6   20.0   46.5
SOUTH         39.1    39.8       70.8   46.8   62.3   69.7   45.7   42.5
WEST          34.1    28,7       83.9   30.1   55.2   44.2   63.0   37.2

              40.2    36.2       80.2   45.0   67.5   56.8   45.2   43.5


URBAN         INDEP PARE-H PARE-S DREL-H DREL-S NREL-H NREL-S
         --                  -

SMSA          40.1    35.7       82.5   45.6   68.0   62.1   47.9   44.2
NON-SMSA 40.3         37.1       74.3   43.8   66.8   43.5   39.5   42.5

              40.2    36.2       80.2   45.0   67.5   56.8   45.2   43.5
Table 10: OWNERSHIP RATES OF HEAD NUCLEI BY LIVING ARRANGEMENT
          (Elderly Nuclei; Percent Homeowners)


YEAR   INDEP PARE-H PARE-S DREL-H DREL-S NREL-H NREL-S

1974   70.3    79.0   89.1   75.9   67.6   61.9   68.0   72.5
1975   70.2    78.5   83.2   78.6   69.9   65.8   69.2   72.2
1976   70.1    75.9   83.8   78.5   72.4   66.7   55.6   71.9
1977   71.4    75.9   82.9   84.2   80.0   67.7   60.9   73.4
1978   71.0    79.3   83.3   86.7   74.3   70.0   62.1   73.4
1979   70.8    78.3   84.1   83.7   77.4   54.6   54.3   72.7
1980   71.5    79.7   84.9   80.0   72.1   57.9   57.6   73.1
1981   70.7    83.3   86.7   76.2   74.4   62.9   61.5   73.0
1983   73.6    84.7   83.5   74.3   76.5   61.0   65.4   75.2

        71.1   79.4   84.6   79.9   73.5   63.0   61.2   73.0
      Table 11: MULTINOMIAL LOCIT ESTIMATES OF LIVING ARRANGEMENT CHOICES


VARIABLE UTILITY COMPONENT           ESTIMATE      STD.ERROR T-STATISTIC
PRICE       SUBFAMILY                  -   .0185    .0266      -   .69
PRICE       HEAD                       -   .0043    .0233      -   .18
PRICE       DISTANT RELATIVE               .0274    .0212      1.29
PRICE       NON-RELATIVE                   .0197    .0262          .75

INCOME      SUBFAMILY                 - .1061       .0177     -5.97
INCOME      HEAD                      - .0013       .0044      -.31
INCOME      DISTANT RELATIVE          - .0421       .0079     -5.27
INCOME      NON-RELATIVE              - .0208       .0095     -2.17

AGE         SUBFAMILY                 -    .0300    .0125     -2.39
AGE SQ.     SUBFAMILY                      .0521    .0126      4.11
AGE         HEAD                      -    .0691    .0124     -5.53
AGE SQ.     HEAD                           .0374    .0138      2.70
AGE         DISTANT RELATIVE               .0616    .0121      5.07
AGE SQ.     DISTANT RELATIVE          -    .0671    .0124     -5.40
AGE         NON-RELATIVE                   .1136    .0137      8.24
AGE SQ.     NON-RELATIVE              -    .1144    .0145     -7.89

PERSONS     SUBFAMILY                -1.8548        .2159     -8.58
PERSONS     HEAD                           .6145    .1433      4.28
PERSONS     DISTANT RELATIVE          -    .7961    .1826     -4.35
PERSONS     NON-RELATIVE             -2.5076        .2248    -11.15

FEMALE      SUBFAMILY                 -    .0075    .1607      -   .04
FEMALE      HEAD                           .4760    .1732      2.74
FEMALE      DISTANT RELATIVE          -    .4730    .1543     -3.06
FEMALE      NON-RELATIVE             -1.2829        .1497     -8.56

LOGLIKELIHOOD AT OPTIMUM:                                   -3159.5
LOGLIKELIHOOD AT ZERO:                                      -5995.3
NUMBER OF OBSERVATIONS:                                        3081


Notes: Estimates are obtained by weighted exogenous sampling maximum

         likelihood. Standard errors are not corrected for intertemporal

         correlation.
     Table 12: MULTINOMIAL LOGIT ESTIMATES AFTER INCOME STRATIFICATION


                   INCOME       $5,000:        $5,000 -     $10,000:   INCOME > $10,000:

VARIABLE           ESTIMATE T-STAT.            ESTIMATE T-STAT.        ESTIMATE T-STAT.

PRI*SUBF            - . 0074        - .18       -.0299        -.60      - .0107        - .23
PRI*HEAD            -   .0230       - .55       -   .1036    -2.08          .0717     2.02
PRI*DREL                .0286           .92         .0797     1.67          .0037          .10
PRI*NREL                .0409       1.03            .0284       .54     -   .0086      -   . 19

INC*SUBF            -   .5191     -7.26             .1701     2.15      -   .0162    -1.18
TtTflSITT' A 1'.
uN L,               - . 11 O        1
                                  - .1..            .1765               -   niic     ..1   RL.
INC*DREL            - .0799       -1.69         -   .0755    -1.05      -   .0173    -1.93
INC*NREL            - .2780       -4.80         -   .1123    -1.42          .0112     1.13

AGE*SUBF                .0168           • 86    - .1489      -5.47      - .1068      -3.76
AG2*SUBF                .0204      1.12             .1534     6.04          .1370     4.45
AGE*HEAD            -   .0812     -4.06         - .0911      -2.88          .0005          .02
AG2*HEAD                .0617      3.06             .0475     1.50      -   .0600    -2.09
AGE*DREL                .0550      3.47             .0682     2.33          .0761     2.69
AG2*DREL            -   .0645     -4.12         -   .0721    -2.58      -   .0669    -2.22
AGE*NREL                .1381      6.70             .0871     2.80          .0537     1.89
AG2*NREL            -   .1380     -6.88         -   .0853    -2.87      -   .0223      -   .73

PER*SUBF           -2.1678        -5.70        -1.2889        -3.39    -1.9998        -5.10
PER*HEAD                .7366      2.61             .5017      1.90         .4561      1.88
PER*DREL            -   .4670     -1.71         - .8342       -2.99    -1.6117        -4.58
PER*NREL           -2.4771        -5.49        -1.6769        -4.54    -3.0806        -7.81

FEM*SUBF            - .2018         -   .87         .6367      2.01         .1913          .54
FEM*HEAD                .4550      1.64             .7059      2.16         .1121          .32
FEM*DREL            -   .3232     -1.61         -   .8141     -2.77     -   .7886     -2.13
FEM*NREL           -1.2613        -6.45        -1.1145        -3.40    -1.2541        -3.63

LLF AT OPT.:                    -1702.4                      -729.6                  -633.4
LLF AT ZERO:                    -2732.1                     -1562.6                 -1700.7
OBSERVATIONS                       1404                         803                     874


Notes: See Table 11.
   Table 13: MULTINOMIAL LOGIT ESTIMATES FOR THREE TIME PERIODS

                    1974 - 1976:              1977 - 1979:              1980 - 1983:

VARIABLE    ESTIMATE T-STAT.             ESTIMATE T-STAT.          ESTIMATE T-STAT.

PRI*SUBF            .0193          31         .0273          .54    -   .0134      -. 17
PRI *HEJ            .0335          57         .0094          .22    -   .1055     -1.54
PRI*DREL            .0863      1.68       -.0214         -.56           .1085      1.78
PRI*NREL            .0108          17     -.0532        -1.15           .1306      1.68

INC*SUBF        -.0923        -2.87       -.0988        -3.41       - . 1275      -4.43
INC*HEAD        - .0065        -   .91    - .0088       -1.05           .0095      1.23
                - .0204
INC*DREL                      -1.66       - .0440       -2.96       -   .0714     -4.37
INC*NREL        - .0415       -1.42       -.0047                    -   .0238     -1.69
                                                         -.32

AGE*SUBF        - .0472       -2.04       -   .0143      -   .66    -   .0365     -1.52
AG2*SUBF            .0737      3.22           .0399      1.81           .0464      2.03
AGE*HEAD        -   .0865     -3.82       -.0779        -3.46       -   .0401     -1.77
AG2*HEAD            .0539      2.22           .0509      1.99           .0073          .31
AGE*DREL            .0682      2.61           .0520      2.74           .0585      2.80
AG2*DREL        -   .0771     -3.19       -   .0577     -2.72       -   .0612     -2.91
AGE*NREL            .1207      5.19           .0868      3.38           .1216     4.81
AG2*NREL        -   .1255     -5.18       -   .0858     -3.17       -   .1225     -4.78

PER*SUBF    -1. 8601          -4.42      -2.3011        -6.20      -1. 3585       -3.98
PER*HEAD            .8139      2.85           .6307      2.60           .5294      2.27
PER*DREL    -1. 0270          -2.13       - .5433       -2.50       -   .9856     -3.60
PER*NREL    -2.2964           -6.23      2. 2766        -5.16      -2.9720        -7.61

FEM*SUBF            .0257          .09    -.1337         -.46           .2011          .73
FEM*HEAD            .6700      2.12           .3791      1.23           .4587      1.56
FEM*DREL        -   .4467     -1.45       - .4575       -1.84       -   .6428     -2.41
FEM*NREL    -   1.4096        -5.38       - .9965       -3.86      -1.4841        -5.41

LLF AT OPT.:                -1101.0                   -1045.4                    -998.5
LLF AT ZERO:                -2027.6                   -2006.2                   -1961.5
OBSERVATIONS:                  1042                      1031                      1008


Notes: See Table 11.
Table 14: HOUSEHOLD DISSOLUTION OF ELDERLY AMERICANS BY AGE AND INCOME


          Nuclei with Income      S5.000:

AGE   INDEP PARE-H PARE-S DREL-H DREL-S NREL-H NREL-S

60:    69.0    11.0     3.1    10.9     3.0      2.3    .6
65:    69.8    10.9     3.8     9.5     3.3      1.9    .7
70:    70.1    11.1     4.8     8.2     3.6      1.5    .7
75:    69.9    11.5     6.0     7.1     3.7      1.2    .6
80:    69.1    12.2      7.6    6.0     3.7       .8    .5
85:    67.6    13.2      9.5    5.0     3.6       .6    .4
90:    65.2    14.6     12.0    4.1     3.4       .4    .3
95:    61.9    16.3     14.9    3.4     3.1       .2    .2

         Nuclei   with Income S5.000 - $10.000:

AGE   INDEP PARE-H PARE-S DREL-H DREL-S NREL-H NREL-S

60:    73.2    12.3     1.6     8.6     1.1      2.8    .4
65:    76.2    10.9     2.1     6.8     1.3      2.3    .4
70:    78.3     9.8      2.8    5.3     1.5      1.8    .5
75:    79.2     8.9      4.2    4.0     1.9      1.3    .6
80:    78.5     8.1      6.4    2.9      2.3     1.0    .8
85:    75.7     7.3     10.4    2.0      2.9      .7   1.0
90:    69.5     6.4     17.4    1.4      3.7      .4   1.2
95:    58.9     5.4     28.9     .8     4.4       .3   1.4


              Nuclei with Income >    $lO.000:
AGE   INDEP PARE-H PARE-S DREL-H DREL-S NREL-H NREL-S

60:    73.6     16.9      .7    6.8       .3     1.6    .1
65:    79.6     12.6     1.1    4.9       .4     1.4    .1
70:    84.3      8.9     1.7    3.2       .6     1.1    .2
75:    87.3      6.0     2.7    1.9       .9      .8    .4
80:    87.9       3.8    4.7    1.1      1.3      .6    .7
85:    85.3       2.2    8.2     .5      2.0      .4   1.4
90:    78.2       1.2   14.7     .2      2.8      .2   2.6
95:    65.1        .6   25.4     .1      3.9      .1   4.8



Note: All predictions are based on the disaggregate model in Table 12.
Table 15: PREDICTED PROPORTIONS OF NUCLEI LIVING INDEPENDENTLY
          IF INCOME OF ELDERLY HAD DEVELOPED AS GENERAL INCOME
          (Changes;   Percentage   Points)


         LOW INCOME ELDERLY:          ALL ELDERLY NUCLEI:     YOUNG NUCLEI:

         predicted    predicted       predicted predicted     actual
         change       change          change      change      change
         versus       versus          versus      versus      Versus
         baseline     prev.year       baseline    prev.year   prev.year
1974        .0              .0               .0         .0            .0
1975      -1.1          -   .9           -.4        - .3          -   .5
1976      -1.2              .3           - .4           .1            .3
1977      -1.3              .2           - .4           .1        -   .2
1978       -.8          1.0              - .2           .3        -   .8
1979       -.6          -.5              -.2        -.2               .8
1980      -2.2         -1.2              -   .7     -.4          -1.2
1981      -3.6              .3          -1.1            .1        - .7
1983      -4.8          -   .7          -1.4        -   .2       -1.0


Notes: The entries in columns 1 and 3 represent the difference between

       baseline prediction (using the elderly's actual income) and alter-

       native prediction (deflating the elderly's income at the rate of the

       general income development). The entries in columns 2 and 4

       represent the yearly changes of the alternative prediction.

       Column 5 represents the yearly changes of the actual proportions

       among young nuclei (Table 2). All predictions are based on the

       disaggregate model in Table 12.
