NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

HOW DO THE U.S AND CANADIAN SOCIAL SAFETY NETS COMPARE FOR
WOMEN AND CHILDREN?
Hilary Hoynes
Mark Stabile
Working Paper 23380
http://www.nber.org/papers/w23380

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
May 2017

This paper was prepared for the NBER conference “Public Policies in Canada and the United
States” held October 27-28, 2016 in Ottawa. We thank Dorian Carloni, Diogo Machado, Melissa
Pogue, Krista Ruffini, and Darian Woods for excellent research assistance and conference
participants for helpful suggestions. Stabile acknowledges support from the Martin Prosperity
Institute where he is a Fellow. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not
necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.
© 2017 by Hilary Hoynes and Mark Stabile. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to
exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.

How do the U.S and Canadian Social Safety Nets Compare for Women and Children?
Hilary Hoynes and Mark Stabile
NBER Working Paper No. 23380
May 2017
JEL No. H24,I38
ABSTRACT
The past 25 years has seen substantial change in the social safety nets for families with children
in the US and Canada. Both countries have moved away from cash welfare but the US has done
so relying more exclusively on inwork benefits with work requirements. This paper examines this
evolution across the two countries and examines the effects on employment and poverty. In
particular, we focus on the two largest programs over this period: the U.S. EITC and the
Canadian NCB/CCTB. In light of these policy changes, we examine trends in employment and
poverty of the most affected families -- single mothers with less than a college degree -- across
the two countries. We find that employment improved substantially in both countries, absolutely
and relative to a control group of single women without children. The cross-country differences
in relative trends are mainly explained by differences in the labor market conditions. Poverty
rates for single mothers also declined in both countries with more of the decline coming through
market income in the U.S. and benefit income in Canada.

Hilary Hoynes
Richard & Rhoda Goldman School of Public Policy
University of California, Berkeley
2607 Hearst Avenue
Berkeley, CA 94720-7320
and NBER
hoynes@berkeley.edu
Mark Stabile
INSEAD
Europe Campus
Boulevard de Constance
77305 Fontainebleau
France
mark.stabile@insead.edu

I. Introduction
The past 25 years has been a period of active policy reform in the social safety nets
of both the United States and Canada. Perhaps more than any other area of social policy,
programs in both countries aimed at low-income families and children have evolved from
their pre-1990 form. In 1990 in the United States federal cash welfare was an entitlement,
the Earned Income Tax Credit was a modest program, and there was no Child Tax Credit.
Additionally, public health insurance for low income families with children was largely
limited to those receiving cash welfare. In Canada there was no National Child Benefit,
Canada Child Tax Benefit, or Working Income Tax Benefit, and most benefits took the form
of cash welfare. Today, the U.S. Earned Income Tax Credit and the Canadian National Child
Benefit (and its successor the Canadian Child Benefit) provide the backbone of the social
safety net for low income families with children in both countries. These changes to the
social safety net in the two countries have evolved in ways that are similar to one another,
and yet there are notable differences between programs that reflect distinctly different
policy goals. The purpose of this paper is to examine this evolution across the two
countries, and to provide and review evidence on how the programs have fared in
achieving their goals.
This paper focuses on single women of working age with children and the social
safety net that is provided to this group. Changes in labor supply and poverty for men and
for those without children over this period also provides for interesting study and while
not the subject of this paper we do provide some evidence on the changes in employment
and poverty for women without children as a comparison group. However, our focus is on
single women with children for several reasons. First, as we describe below, the major
1

changes in the social safety net over the past 25 years have focused on providing benefits
to low-income families; less assistance is available, and less change has occurred, for single
individuals. Second, a significant amount of research in the past two decades has focused
on the relationship between these safety net programs and the labor market performance
of women as well as the educational and health outcomes for children. Third, while many of
the current programs and policies are aimed at children, independent of family structure,
we focus on single mothers because of their greater disadvantage. Finally, while these
programs have increased in generosity over the past 25 years, a good deal of poverty in
both countries remains concentrated among this group.
Overall we find that the introduction and evolution of the EITC and NCB have had
positive effects on labor force attachment and poverty. Our findings suggest that
employment for single mothers without a college degree has increased over this period in
both countries and has caught-up to employment for childless women. While employment
for single women (with and without children) declined in the U.S. and not Canada after
2000, our findings show that this decline can be explained by differences in the labor
markets between the two countries (rather than changes in the social safety net).
Estimating a pooled difference in difference model controlling for local labor market
conditions, the relative changes in labor force participation for single mothers across the
two countries is statistically indistinguishable.
Our evidence also suggests that poverty rates, measured both using after tax and
transfer income and with private income, have declined with the introduction of the EITC
and NCB. By the end of the period, the overall incidence of poverty, however, is lower in
Canada compared to the U.S. reflecting the more generous system (and its stronger cash
2

welfare system). While the effects of these policy changes on poverty for single mothers are
qualitatively similar across the two countries, they also reflect the different policy choices.
The U.S. system, built on work requirements, leads to poverty improvements that reflect
relatively more gains in market wages while the Canadian system, mainly without work
requirements and more universal, leads to poverty improvements more through the
benefit system.
The remainder of the paper proceeds as follows. In section II we discuss the social
safety nets in the two countries and document the major changes that have taken place
over the past 25 years. In Section III we briefly discuss the previous literature examining
the effects of EITC and the NCB on employment and poverty. In Section IV we present
trends for women with children based on tabulations from the Current Population Survey
(for the U.S.) and the Survey of Labour and Income Dynamics (for Canada). In Section V we
present estimates from a pooled difference-in-difference model comparing single women
with kids to single women without kids in both Canada and the US. By combining data from
the two countries and controlling for the differing labor market conditions, we better
identify what is driving differences in employment and poverty. We conclude in Section VI.

II. Major changes in social safety net in the U.S. and Canada over the past 25 years
Changes in the United States
Over the past twenty-five years, the social safety net for families with children in the
U.S. has changed dramatically. The main changes in the cash or near-cash benefits include a
reduction in cash welfare (welfare reform), the expansion of the Earned Income Tax Credit
and the introduction and expansion of the Child Tax Credit.
3

Since 1935, a central feature in the U.S. safety net for families with children was a
cash welfare program known as Aid to Families with Dependent Children (AFDC). The
program was means-tested, requiring families to satisfy income and asset tests. The
benefits were structured in a manner typical for income-support programs: If a family had
no income, they received the maximum benefit (guarantee) and as earnings increased the
benefit was reduced by the benefit reduction rate. States set the overall generosity of AFDC,
by setting the maximum benefits. The benefit reduction rate was high—varying over time
between 67 percent and 100 percent--providing strong disincentives for work (Moffitt,
1983). AFDC provided an income floor, though a fairly low one: on the eve of welfare
reform the median state maximum benefit was 36 percent of poverty (U.S. House of
Representatives, 1996).
Concerns about disincentive to work and form two-parent families led to the reform
of the program. This began in the early 1990s, when about half of the states were granted
waivers to modify their AFDC programs. Following this, the Personal Responsibility and
Work Opportunity Reconciliation Act (PRWORA) was enacted in 1996, eliminating AFDC
and replacing it with Temporary Assistance for Needy Families (TANF). The key elements
of PRWORA include work requirements, lifetime time limits on the duration of welfare
receipt, financial sanctions for failing to adhere to the work requirements or other rules,
and enhanced earnings disregards. The time limit (statutorily limited at 5 years but set as
low as 2 years by some states) is an important provision in the law in that it eliminated the
entitlement nature of the program. The federal funding also changed from an (uncapped)
matching formula under AFDC to a (capped nominal) block grant under TANF. Under
TANF, states have enormous flexibility in how and on whom the block grant is spent. In
4

2014, on average only 26 percent of the block grant is used for cash benefits with about 10
states spend less than 10 percent of the block grant on cash (compared to nearly 100% for
AFDC). In 2014 only 26 of every 100 families with children in poverty receives cash
benefits, down from 72 of every 100 in 1996 (Bitler and Hoynes 2016a).
At the same time that out of work assistance (welfare) was contracting, in work
assistance through the Earned Income Tax Credit was expanding. The EITC began in 1975
as a modest program aimed at offsetting the social security payroll tax for low-income
families with children. The EITC is refundable so that a taxpayer with no federal tax
liability receives a tax refund from the government for the full amount of the credit.
Taxpayers receive the EITC as an annual payment as part of their federal taxes. Receipt of
the EITC requires earned income and at low levels of earnings the credit is a pure earnings
subsidy. At higher levels of income, the credit is phased out. EITC generosity increases with
number of children (capped at three or more children)1 and a very small credit exists for
individuals with no children. In 2017, a family with two children has a phase-in rate
(earnings subsidy) of 40% for earnings up to $14,040, beginning at $18,340 the credit is
phased out at a rate of 21.06% percent. The maximum benefit is $5,616 and at $45,007
they earn enough to be ineligible for the credit (Tax Policy Center 2016a).2 The EITC is
based on joint income; married couples have the same phase-in rate, maximum benefit, and
phase-out rate, but the phase-out region begins at a higher earnings level ($5,550 higher in

Qualifying children must be under age 19 (or 24 if a full-time student) or permanently
disabled and residing with the taxpayer for more than half the year.
2 In 2017, the parameters for other groups are as follows, for families with one child (three
or more children) the phase-in rate is 34% (45%), the maximum credit is $3,400 ($6,318)
and the phase-out range is from $18,340 to $39,617 ($18,340 to $48,340). For taxpayers
without children the subsidy rate is 7.65%, maximum credit is $510, and the credit is
phased out between $8,340 and $15,010.
5
1

2016).
Significant expansions to the EITC have taken place since 1990. In 1990 the credit
was expanded and in 1993 it was expanded more significantly. The 1993 law more than
doubled the maximum credit for families with two or more children (from $1,511 in 1993
to $3,556 in 1996) and increased by 50 percent for families with one child ($1,434 to
$2,152). The 1993 law also introduced a very small credit for taxpayers without children
(in 2017, a maximum credit of $510 compared to $3,400 for those with one child). In 2009
as part of the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act, the separate schedule for families
with three or more children was added. The EITC is received by 28 million tax filing units,
almost 20 percent of all tax filers and 44 percent of filers with children receive the EITC
(Internal Revenue Service 2016).3
The Child Tax Credit (CTC) was introduced in 1997. It is structurally similar to the
EITC, but more universal in design and less targeted on lower-income families. The
maximum credit is $1,000 per child less than 17. The phase in rate is 15%; with a very
large flat zone for the credit and a low phase-out rate (5%), the credit extends to families
with incomes as high as $150,000 for married couples ($115,000 for singles) for families
with two children. Unlike the EITC, the CTC is not inflation adjusted; the nominal maximum
credit has been unchanged at $1,000 per child since 2003.
The CTC, unlike the EITC, is not fully refundable. The refundable portion of the CTC
is known as the Additional Child Tax Credit (ACTC), and is limited to 15% of earned income

The EITC is federal, but states can and do include EITCs as part of the state income tax
system. As of 2016, twenty-six states offer state EITCs (Center for Budget and Policy
Priorities 2016), though they tend to be small add-ons to the federal credit, averaging
around 15-20% of the federal credit (Tax Policy Center, 2016b).
6
3

above a fixed threshold. This threshold was $11,750 (in nominal dollars) in 2007,
preventing most low income families from receiving meaningful CTCs. But in 2009, the
American Recovery and Reinvestment Act reduced the threshold to $3,000 (again
nominal). This allowed more taxpayers to claim the ACTC and increased the amount of
refundable credits, making the low-income portion of the schedule more similar to the
EITC.
In addition to the cash or near cash safety net, the two more important inkind
programs for low income families with children are food stamps and Medicaid. Food
stamps, now known as Supplemental Assistance for Needy Families or SNAP, is a meanstested program and benefits are based on maximum benefit level that is reduced with
additional earnings using a benefit reduction or phase-out rate. While the eligibility and
benefits are like cash welfare, it is a voucher that can be spent on (most) food items in the
grocery store. Benefits are adjusted for changes in prices each year. It is federal and has
little variation and little scope for rule-setting by states. The benefit reduction rate for
SNAP is relatively low for a welfare program (30 percent), the gross income eligibility
threshold is higher (at 130 percent of poverty) than other U.S. cash welfare programs, thus
the program serves the working and non-working poor. 4 It has largely remained
unreformed during this time period.
While not though the focus of our analysis, another important change during this

Welfare reform left Food Stamp rules relatively unaffected. However, beginning with
regulatory changes in 1999 and continuing with the 2002 Farm Bill, the USDA has allowed
states to make changes in how they implement the program’s rules to facilitate obtaining
access to benefits. This has led to a relaxation of asset requirements and expanded gross
income eligibility in what has been called broad-based categorical eligibility (U.S.
Government Accountability Office, 2007).
7
4

period is the expansion of public health insurance for low to moderate income children.
This began with expansions to Medicaid (between 1986 and 1990), followed by the
introduction of and expansions to the State Children’s Health Insurance Program
(introduced in 1997, expanded in the 2000s), and most recently with the Affordable Care
Act of 2010. The result is a dramatic decline in the share of children who are uninsured –
from 13% in 1990 to 6% in 2015 (Child Trends 2016). 5
Changes in Canada
The structure of the social safety net for families with children in Canada also
changed significantly since the early 1990s. Most significantly, in 1993 Canada introduced
the Canada Child Tax Benefit (CCTB), a refundable tax credit (replacing the former child tax
credit and family allowance) payable to families with children up to 17 years old. The
benefit is paid monthly from July to June based on reported income in the previous tax
year. The benefit increased with the number of children. Importantly, there was no work
requirement to receive the benefit (thus those with and without earned income received
the benefit). As of 2014-2015 the benefit phased out for family net income over $43,953 at
a rate of 2% for one child and 4% for two or more children. In 1998 Canada added the
National Child Benefit Supplement (NCB) to the CCTB, aimed, in part, at assisting parents in
transitioning from welfare to work. The benefit, based on the number of children, is paid in
addition to the CCTB and for net incomes over $25,584 (in 2014-15) it phased out more
sharply at rates of 12.2% for one child, 23.0% for the second child and 33.3% for the third.

The period has also seen a steady decline in real value of federal minimum wage. The
current rate of $7.25 has been fixed in nominal terms since 2009. In the recent period,
there have been many cities and states that are setting and expanding local minimum
wages above the (low) federal rate. This is not an element of the social safety net per se, but
is highly relevant for a social safety net built around work.
8
5

The NCB was a joint federal-provincial program and provinces could, at their discretion,
subtract NCB payments from their welfare programs and use the recovered funds for other
social programs. As a result, the benefits available through the NCB differ significantly
across provinces. Overall, the CCTB / NCB benefits phase out at higher earnings and less
steeply than cash welfare, leading to increases in the work incentives that single mothers
face.
In 2006 the Canadian government added a universal child care benefit of $100 per
month for each child under age 6. Unlike the CCTB this benefit is taxable and was paid
together with the CCTB and NCB. In 2007 Canada also added a Working Income Tax
Benefit (WITB), similar in structure to the EITC in that it supplements earned income. It is
available to low income earners (regardless of whether they have children or not) and, like
the CCTB and NCB, the amount payable has increased over time. It is paid separately
(quarterly from other benefits). At the federal level there are a few additional tax credits
available to families that are still available (the federal dependent children tax credit and
related credits).
Finally, as of July 2016 the government of Canada introduced the new Canada Child
Benefit (CCB) to replace the existing child benefit programs (the combined Canada child tax
benefit, national child benefit and universal child care benefit). The new CCB is $6400 (tax
free, unlike the universal child care benefit) for each child up to age 5 and $5400 for each
child ages 6 – 17. The benefit is phased out starting at $30,000 with a second kink point at
$65,000 family net income. The phase out rate depends on the number of children. 6 The

6

The reduction is calculated as follows: families with one eligible child: the reduction is 7% of the amount of
AFNI between $30,000 and $65,000, plus 3.2% of the amount of AFNI over $65,000. Families with two eligible
children: the reduction is 13.5% of the amount of AFNI between $30,000 and $65,000, plus 5.7% of the
amount of AFNI over $65,000. Families with three eligible children: the reduction is 19% of the amount of

9

benefit is paid monthly starting in July of each year. Given how new this change is, we note
the new program here but it is not included in our empirical analysis below.
The provinces also offer a variety of supports for low-income families including both
welfare programs and cash benefit income programs (for example, Ontario offers the
Ontario Child Benefit, similar in design to the National Child Benefit, which we include in
our hypothetical budget constraint below). Instead of describing these programs in detail
here we list the major provincial benefit programs in Appendix A. In general, programs
have evolved in a number of provinces alongside the federal benefits, toward families with
children and away from single individuals, although (smaller) welfare programs do remain.
Overall, Canada’s social safety net has evolved over the past two decades toward
providing more resources for families with children. In some cases these have replaced
some of the support that was previously available through social assistance/welfare
programs for families in the provinces. Traditional welfare benefits, on the other hand,
remain the primary source of support for individuals without children. Notably, the new
family benefits do not require labor market income to qualify (with the exception of the
WITB which makes up a fairly small portion of the overall support). Finally, the programs
work to reduce the welfare wall that exists in most social security programs with a gradual
phase out of benefits with earned income of approximately $15,000, particularly in those
provinces that integrated increased family benefits with declining welfare benefits.
Comparing the sources of support in Canada and the United States.
To summarize these programs, Figure 1 plots real per capita expenditures since

AFNI between $30,000 and $65,000, plus 8% of the amount of AFNI over $65,000. Families with four or
more eligible children: the reduction is 23% of the amount of AFNI between $30,000 and $65,000, plus 9.5%
of the amount of AFNI over $65,000.

10

1990 for AFDC/TANF, EITC, the CTC, and SNAP. Post welfare reform, cash welfare (TANF)
has declined dramatically. The EITC, on the other hand, has increased substantially. The
CTC has expanded recently and spending has almost reached the levels of the EITC and
SNAP.
While we are unable to report per capita expenditure by program in Canada, we
report aggregate per capita spending (including federal, provincial and local government
spending) over time in Canada in figure 1b. While there was an initial decline in per capita
social spending through the mid-1990s (Canada went through a major deficit reduction
exercise during this period beginning in 1995) it was followed by an increase in spending
to almost pre-1994 levels over the 2000s, in part generated by the introduction of new
federal programs and increased generosity of the NCB over this period.
Figures 2 and 3 show the cash and near cash sources of support for hypothetical
families in the U.S. and Canada. For each country we consider a single mother with two
children and simulate the benefits for a range of annual earnings; all benefits amounts and
earnings are in 2015 (Canadian or U.S) dollars.7 These figures show only positive elements
of the tax and transfer system (i.e. do not include income taxes paid).
Beginning with the U.S., we present the budget constraint for 1992 (Figure 2a) and
2015 (Figure 2b) for a single mother with two children living in Colorado. In 1992, welfare
is still an entitlement, the EITC has not been expanded, and the CTC has yet to be
introduced. Comparing the budget constraints in 1992 and 2015, we see striking evidence
of the shift in resources away from out of work to in-work. For example, in 1992 a single

For the U.S. calculations, we assume that the household spends $6,000 per year on child
care, $8,400 per year on housing, and that the children are ages 4 and 6. For Canada we
assume 2 children under the age of 18 living in Ontario.
11
7

mother with two children who is not working receives $12,600 (2015 USD) in assistance
(AFDC+SNAP), this falls by half to $6,132 (2015 USD) in 2015. In 2015 if the woman works
full time at the federal minimum wage (of $7.25) she would earn about $15,000. Benefits
for this minimum wage full time worker rises from about $5,206 in 1992 to $11,600 (both
in 2015 USD). This is a striking change. Also clear in these budget constraints are the high
implied tax rates faced by very low earning women in 1992 in contrast to the negative tax
rates for the same women in 2015.
The Canadian budget constraints illustrate the programs available for a single
parent family with two children in the province of Ontario. In 1992 (Figure 3a) the major
source of support was welfare provided through the provinces. Federal supports came
through a series of small tax credits. By 2015 (Figure 3b) welfare (labeled “Ontario
Works”) plays a much smaller role in the total support available, focused mainly on those
with very low incomes. Instead, the Canada Child Tax Benefit (taking the place of the
largest of the 1992 credits), National Child Benefit, Working Income Tax Benefit, and
Universal Child Care Benefit provide considerable support for a much larger share of the
population. The structure of benefits changes significantly over this period. Ontario works,
like most cash welfare programs, provides out of work benefits that are phased out sharply
even at the lowest earnings levels. In contrast, the CCTB and NCB phases out more slowly
and the phase out begins at much higher earnings levels (more than $20,000). In contrast
to the EITC, the CCTB and NCB are also available to those out of work. The WITB phases in
with earned income, like the EITC, and the UCCB is universal. A child benefit in Ontario
supplements the federal child benefits, operating in much the same fashion as the NCB.
Overall, several features stand out in these figures. First, there have been significant
12

changes in policy design in both countries over the past few decades. The nature of
support, the conditions required, and the generosity have all changed in both countries.
Second, for families with children, both countries have moved away from a welfarebased out-of-work benefit system with high phase-out rates that dominated both countries
in 1992. Figure 2a and 3a show that in 1992, welfare was the main source of support in
Canada (e.g. Ontario Works) and the U.S. (e.g. AFDC plus SNAP). Benefit levels were higher
in Canada, but both countries targeted the non-working poor and high phase-out rates
would be expected to discourage work. Both countries have introduced programs that
move away from pure out of work assistance. In the US, the EITC provides strong incentives
to enter work (and cash welfare was substantially reduced) and Canada implemented an
EITC-like in work credit (Working Income Tax Benefit) thereby lessening the work
disincentives of a welfare based support system. 8
Third, benefits in Canada start with universal (or near universal) child supports that
are not tied to work. This includes the universal child care benefit, the national child benefit
supplement, the child tax benefit as well as the provincial versions of these programs.
However, in contrast to cash welfare, the child supports have lower phase-out rates that
begin at higher earnings levels. The combined effect is to encourage work relative to before
these programs were implemented. In contrast, the U.S. is almost entirely based on a
system of benefits tied to work; the EITC and the child related tax credits all require wage
income in order to qualify and over the range that affects the poorest families, benefits
increase as wage income increases. The incentives to work embedded in the EITC are

The working income tax benefit, while similar to the EITC in design, makes up a much
smaller share of the total benefit available to families.
13
8

therefore stronger than those in Canada. Post-welfare reform. SNAP is only source of out of
work assistance, and thus while in work benefits have expanded the basic income floor has
decreased. We consider the difference in work requirement across the two countries one
difference that may matter.
Fourth, the level of generosity between the two sets of programs is quite different.
In both 1992 and 2015 Canada provides more support to low income families. For example,
in 1992, the maximum benefit in the U.S. (e.g. that received if not working), including cash
and near cash benefits such as food stamps (Figure 2a) was approximately $13,000 (2015
USD). This fell to a little over $6,000 (2015 USD) in 2015 (Figure 2b) primarily due to the
reform of cash welfare. The maximum cash benefit in Canada in 1992 is about $27,000
(2015 CDN) and fell to about $25,000 (2015 CDC) in 2015. (PPP across the two countries
over much of this period is approximately 1.22 although the exchange rate fluctuated
considerably9). At an earnings level of $20,000 in 2015, benefits are about $20,000 in
Canada compared to $12,000 in the US. Thus, clearly Canada provides a much higher level
of support, particularly so for those at very low or zero earnings. The difference in the
generosity of the social safety net is a second difference that may matter.
We include similar budget constraints for childless adults for both countries in
Appendix Figures 1 and 2. What is immediately evident is that the range of benefits
available for single individuals is considerably more limited in both countries. In Canada
the available benefits are welfare benefits and the small working income tax benefit. In the
U.S. benefits for childless individuals are SNAP and a small EITC. The Canadian out of work
benefits are more generous – the maximum benefit for a single person is $7,872 in 2015 in

9

World Bank (2017)
14

Ontario, Canada (the benefits are at the provincial level)_ compared to $2,000 in the U.S.
In order to understand how these changes in benefits coupled with income taxes
have affected the incentives to work in the two countries we calculate the average tax rate
(ATR) imposed by moving from (1) no work to part-time work, (2) no work to full-time
work, and (3) part-time work to full-time work. The ATR are calculated based on all of the
benefits modeled in the budget constraints above as well as ordinary income taxes. We
calculate average tax rates for single women with two children (as in the budget sets
above). We use the nominal minimum wage in each country in 201510 and the real value of
that wage in 1992 as a representative wage, along with 125%, 150% and 200% of the
minimum wage, and consider part time work as 20 hours per week and full time work as
40 hours per week. The results are reported in Table 1. The top panel presents the average
tax rates for the U.S. in both 1992 and 2015. The difference in the U.S. average tax rates
between 1992 and 2015 is striking. Whereas tax rates were almost always above 50% for
individuals moving from no work to work and part time to full time work in 1992, by 2015
they were negative for moving to part-time work in all four wage categories and remain
significantly smaller for movements into full time work. For example, a single mother with
two children working at 150% of the minimum wage faces a -9% average tax rate for
entering full time work in 2015 compared to 53% in 1992. For moving from part to full
time work the average tax rate has fallen from 45% to 26%. Overall the incentives to work
in the U.S. have risen dramatically over this period for single mothers in the U.S.
The average tax rates also declined across all wage and work levels in Canada
(bottom panel of Table 1). For example, a single mother with two children working at

10

This amounts to $7.25 USD in the U.S. and $11 CAD in Canada.
15

150% of the minimum wage faces a 52% average tax rate for entering full time work in
2015 compared to 83% in 1992. For moving from part to full time work the average tax
rate has fallen from 106% to 70%. This is a significant decline in average tax rates in
Canada which given the cumulative phase out of welfare and provincial benefits, could
exceed 100% in 1992. However, compared to the U.S. the average tax rates remain high –
average tax rates from moving between not working to part or full time work range from a
low of 24% to as high as 75%11. The differences between Canada and the United States
reflects the fact that, with the exception of the WITB, most of the benefits in Canada are at
their maximum at zero income, and while the phase out of the child benefits does not occur
with the first dollar of earnings, an individual working full time at minimum wage is well
into the phase out range. Appendix Table 1 shows the ATRs for single women without
children; it is evident that work disincentives for this group have not changed much over
time and remain quite high (in an absolute sense, and compared to single women without
children).
Our budget set and tax rate analysis suggests several predictions for the trends in
employment and poverty across the two countries. The changes in the social safety net
should lead to increases in employment for single women with children, relative to single
women without children, in both the U.S. and Canada. All else equal, employment should
rise by more in the U.S. than in Canada given the greater decline in average tax rate.
Poverty should decline in both countries, though the U.S. decline should reflect more
heavily gains in market income (due to the work requirement) while the Canadian decline

11

By 2015 Ontario had ended the clawback of welfare benefits from the NCB. Ignoring changes in income tax
rates, the change in average tax rates would have been even larger over some ranges had the clawback
remained in place.

16

should reflect more heavily gains in benefits (due to the universality of benefits). All else
equal, we would also expect that absolute level of poverty rates would be higher in the U.S.
compared to Canada, given the higher level of support in Canada (throughout the period).
Additionally, we expect deep poverty (those with income less than 50% of the poverty line)
to have risen in the U.S. relative to Canada given the reduction in out-of-work support postwelfare reform.12

III. Previous literature
There is a substantial amount of evidence about the effects of the U.S. EITC and
Canadian NCB on family and child wellbeing over the past two decades and we discuss only
some highlights of it here. For more comprehensive reviews of the effects of the changes in
the social safety net, see the studies on welfare reform (e.g., Blank 2001, 2002, Grogger and
Karoly 2005, Moffitt 2003, and Ziliak 2016) and the EITC (Hotz and Scholz, 2003, Nichols
and Rothstein 2016, Hoynes and Rothstein 2016, Eissa and Hoynes 2006). In particular,
studies show that the EITC leads to substantial increases in employment for single mothers
(e.g., Eissa and Liebman 1996, Meyer and Rosenbaum 2000, 2001, Hoynes and Patel 2015)
with little evidence that existing workers reduce hours worked.13 Many of these studies use
a difference-in-difference approach comparing single women with children to women
without children (who are eligible only for a very small EITC) in periods before and after an

A final difference that isn’t evident in the figures but that potentially affects the
effectiveness of the social safety net is how benefits are paid to recipients. In Canada, the
CCTB/NCB/UCCB are all paid monthly. The WITB is paid quarterly. In the U.S., the EITC and
the CTC is paid annually. (Food stamps are paid monthly.)
13 Some studies show that self-employed workers adjust to maximize the credit along the
phase-in region (Chetty, Friedman and Saez 2013, Saez 2010, Chetty and Saez 2013).
17
12

expansion in the EITC. The magnitudes are large – for example, Meyer and Rosenbaum
(2001) find that the EITC raised labor force participation by 7.2 percentage points for
single women with children relative to those without children between 1984 and 1996.
Hoynes and Patel (2015) find that the 1993 expansion increased employment of single
mothers with less than a college degree by 6.1 percentage points.14
Milligan and Stabile (2007) investigate the effect of the introduction of the Canadian
NCB, and the ability of provinces to choose to subtract NCB payments from social
assistance/welfare, on the labor force participation of single mothers. The findings suggest
substantial labor market effects from the integration of benefits and social assistance. A
$1000 increase in benefits deducted from social assistance payments is associated with a 34 percentage point decline in social assistance take up and an equivalent 3-4 percentage
point increase in employment. The effects are concentrated on the extensive margin of
labor force participation.
A handful of studies have estimated the effect of the EITC on poverty. Hoynes and
Patel (2015) use a difference-in-difference approach and find that the 1993 EITC expansion
led to a 7.9 percentage point reduction in poverty. Their finding suggest that ignoring the
indirect effects of the EITC (increased earnings net of changes in other income) leads to an
underestimate—by as much as a 50% --of the anti-poverty effects of the EITC. Earlier
studies examined the effect of state EITC supplements on poverty (Neumark and Wascher
2001, Gunderson and Ziliak 2004) finding qualitatively similar effects.

Eissa and Liebman (1996) examined the earlier 1986 expansion of the EITC and find that
labor force participation increased by 2.8 percentage points for single women with
children, relative to single women without children.
18
14

IV. Trends in demographics, employment and poverty
In this section we examine the trends across the U.S. and Canada in demographics,
female employment and absolute poverty. Our analysis uses data from the U.S. Current
Population Survey (CPS) and the Canadian Survey of Labour and Income Dynamics where
we have harmonized the sample, data and variables to maximize comparability across the
two countries. To focus on the working age population, for both countries we limit our
analysis to women aged 25-54. Because of our interest in the social safety net and the
disadvantaged, our core sample is single women who have less than a college degree. 15 To
highlight the trends for single mothers, we compare trends across two groups: single
women with children and single women without children. We use a time period that spans
the major changes in the social safety net that we describe above though the exact years
differ somewhat across the two surveys. We briefly describe the two surveys below; for
more details on our data and variable construction, see the Appendix B.
For the U.S. analysis, we use the Annual Social and Economic Supplement to the
Current Population Survey, administered to most households in March every year. The
CPS-ASEC is an annual survey of about 90,000 households (or about 175,000 persons) that
collects labor market, income, and program participation information for individuals for
the previous calendar year, as well as demographic information at the time of the survey.
Our sample uses the 1991 through 2012 CPS-ASEC surveys, corresponding to the 19902011 calendar years. Employment is measured as having any work during the calendar
year. We measure income and poverty at the household level, after dropping unrelated

This includes those with less than a high school degree, those with a high school degree
or GED, and those who have some college but less than a four year degree.
19
15

children (as does the Census Bureau). Our analysis is weighted using the March
supplement person weight.
For the Canadian analysis, we use the Survey of Labour and Income Dynamics
(SLID). The SLID is conducted annually by Statistics Canada with a stratified random
sampling of Canadians. As with the CPS, with survey weights, the data are nationally
representative. Our analysis uses public-use cross sectional individual and census family
files providing data for calendar years 1996 through 2011.16 The SLID provides
information on income and benefits received over the past year and detailed information
on demographics at the time of the interview. The survey consists of approximately 55,000
people per year, our sample of women ages 25-54 results in a sample of approximately
16,000 per year (considerably smaller than the corresponding sample in the CPS). For the
purpose of the Canadian analysis we treat individuals as married if they report being either
married or common law married and single otherwise.

Trends in demographics
We begin by examining trends in the demographics underlying our sample of single
women with children. Figure 4 presents the share of women 25-54 with less than a college
education who are single with children, in the U.S. and Canadian samples. Both countries
experienced increases in single parenthood, though the rate is much higher in the U.S. The
share that are single mothers in the U.S. rose from 17 percent in 1990 to 23 percent by the

The SLID replaced the Survey of Consumer Finances (SCF) as the major cross sectional
survey for labor market data as of 1996. Using previous years of the SCF or the longitudinal
SLID files that exist for the SLID in 1993 and 1994 produced inconsistent samples due to
questionnaire changes and collection and weighting changes that made results from
previous years misleading. Therefore we begin the Canadian data series in 1996.
20
16

end of the period for those with less than a college degree. The share that are single
mothers in Canada (among those with less than a college degree) rose from just over 11
percent in 1996 to 13 percent by the end of the period.
Trends in Employment
In Figure 5, we plot the share of women 25-54 with less than a college degree who
worked at all during the calendar year. For each country we show the share working for
single women with and without children; the figure pools this for both countries. While our
focus is on single women with children, we include women without children to highlight
the changes occurring for single mothers.
In the U.S., employment for non-college graduate single mothers increased sharply
between the early 1990s and late 1990s. For example, the share working at all last year
increased from 69 percent in 1992 to 82 percent in 2000. This increase closes the
substantial gap in employment rates between single mothers and single women without
children that existed in the beginning of the period. Beginning in 2000, both groups
experience a steady downward trend in employment rates dropping by 10 percentage
points over this period.
While the Canadian data start a few years later, we see a striking rise in the
employment rate of single mothers - rising from 62 percent in 1996 to 77 percent in 2001.
As with the U.S., this rise in employment closed the substantial employment gap (between
single women with and without children) that existed in the beginning of the period. In
contrast to the U.S., both groups experience steady employment through the end of the
period (2011) where the employment rates hover between 75 and 80%. Figure 6 presents
similar trends for full time work. Overall, these figures show similar patterns to those for
21

any work in Figure 5. Notable, though, among single mothers with less than a college
degree, full-time employment rates are higher in Canada – ranging from 60 to 67 percent
compared to the peak in 2000 in the U.S. at 62 percent.
Importantly, the post-2000 trends in Figures 5 and 6 differ significantly between the
U.S. and Canada. In the U.S., growth declined significantly after the historically strong labor
market of the late 1990s. This was punctuated by the Great Recession and the significant
downturn between 2008 and 2010. To illustrate the dramatic differences that emerge in
the macroeconomy over this period, Figure 7 presents the annual unemployment rate
series for both countries from 1990-2015. Historically, the U.S. unemployment rate has
been lower than Canada’s and the countries follow similar fluctuations. However, the U.S.
experienced a steady increase in unemployment in the 2000s along with a sharp increase
in the Great Recession. In contrast, while Canada’s unemployment rate was higher over the
1990s and early 2000s, Canada experienced a much smaller recession in 2008 followed by
a quicker recovery. This makes it quite difficult to derive conclusions about the role of the
social safety net by comparing trends across countries. We take a deeper dive into those
issues in the next section.
Trends in poverty
To broaden our analysis to examine family well-being, here we examine trends in
poverty across the two countries. To facilitate comparisons across countries, we adopt the
OECD definition of absolute poverty (Organisation for Economic Cooperation and
Development, 2015), also recently highlighted in a UNICEF series on child poverty in the
Great Recession (UNICEF 2014, Bitler, Hoynes and Kuka 2014). The main advantage of this
approach is that one does not have to grapple with a different absolute poverty threshold
22

across the two countries.17
We construct the poverty rates for each country using the following process. First,
we compute an after tax and transfer (ATT) income measure for the family or household.18
Second, we compute equivalized ATT income (i.e. ATT income / equivalized household
size; where equivalized household size is computed using the OECD modified scale19).
Third, we compute the median of the equivalized ATT income in our base year, 1996
(chosen because it is the first year in the SLID; we use the same for the U.S.). The absolute
poverty line for 1996 is then 60% of the median of equivalized ATT income for 1996 (in
each country). To compute the absolute poverty lines for the other years, we start from the
1996 poverty line just computed and adjust for inflation. We refer to these as the “country

Official poverty in the U.S. is determined by comparing total pre-tax family cash income
to poverty thresholds, which vary by family size, number of children, and presence of
elderly persons. The poverty thresholds reflect a basket of goods set in the 1960s and are
adjusted each year for changes in prices. For example, in 2015, the poverty threshold for a
family of three (one adult, two children) was $19,096. This measure has many drawbacks,
in particular is its omission of the key sources of support that we examine here: SNAP
(because it is inkind not cash), and the EITC and CTC (because they are taxes). The Census
now releases the Supplemental Poverty Measure along with official poverty in its annual
poverty reporting (Short, 2011). The SPM resource measure expands to include the cash
value of various in-kind transfers and nets out taxes (and deducts from income child
support payments, medical out of pocket expenditures, and work expenses including child
care). Additionally, the SPM family unit is modified to include cohabitors and their children
and poverty thresholds vary geographically. The Census SPM thresholds are defined to be
the average between the 30th and 36th percentiles of the distribution of consumer
expenditures on food, clothing, shelter, and utilities plus an additional 20 percent to
account for additional necessary expenditures. This makes the SPM a “quasi-relative”
poverty measure.
18 In the U.S. we use a “household” sharing rule, combining the income of all persons living
in the same household (excluding unrelated children). This allows for clear measurement
of inkind sources of income, including SNAP and energy assistance. See Bitler and Hoynes
(2016b) and Bitler, Hoynes and Kuka (2016) for more information on this measurement. In
the Canada we use the Census family (those related by birth and marriage). In practice in
the differences in outcomes for the Census and household income and poverty are minimal.
19 The OECD equivalized scale equals 1 for the head plus 0.5 for each additional adult [age
14+] plus 0.3 for each child [age < 14].
23
17

specific” absolute poverty rates.
In addition to computing poverty rates using country-specific poverty thresholds,
we also compute a pooled poverty threshold using a modification of the methodology
described above. First, we convert Canadian income in each year to U.S. dollars using
published OECD PPP values for that year and then calculating the 1996 absolute poverty
threshold as described above, but using the combined U.S.-Canada income distribution
(now all in U.S. dollars). The absolute poverty threshold is then adjusted each year using
the U.S. CPI. We refer to this as the pooled absolute poverty rate.
If the household (for the U.S.) or Census family (for Canada) has ATT equivalized
income below the equivalized poverty line, then they are assigned to be poor. In the case of
the combined US-Canada poverty threshold, we compare U.S. ATT income and Canadian
PPP adjusted ATT income to the combined threshold. To highlight the role of the labor
market versus the social safety net, we also construct a “private income” poverty measure.
Here the poverty thresholds remain the same. All that differs is the equivalized income
measure that is compared to the threshold. Private income is pre-tax and transfer income
and includes earned and unearned income. After tax and transfer income equals private
income plus cash transfers and the value of non-cash transfer payments, less payroll taxes
and net federal and state/provincial income taxes (including in-work benefits and child tax
benefits). For more information on income definitions for both countries see Appendix B.
Figure 8 shows the trends in absolute ATT poverty for women aged 25-54 with less
than a college degree using the country-specific poverty thresholds described above.
Several things are evident in this figure. In the U.S. poverty rates for single mothers fall
between 1993 and 2000 absolutely and relative to single women without children, though
24

throughout the period the poverty rate for single mothers remains higher than for single
women without children. Following the pattern for employment, beginning in 2000
poverty rates for both groups trend slowly up. In Canada, poverty rates for single mothers
throughout most of the period, falling dramatically relative to single women without
children. By the end of the period, the poverty rate for single mothers is below that for
single women without children (25% versus 33%).
To explore the role of the social safety net in these trends, in Figure 9 we compare
private income poverty for the two groups of single women with less than a college degree
in the two countries. For the U.S. poverty rates for single mothers based on private income
are only slightly higher than ATT poverty at the beginning of the period (53% for private
income poverty versus 49% for ATT poverty), both decline over the 1990s along with a
slightly more pronounced increase over the 2000s for private income than for ATT income,
particularly following the Great Recession. In Canada, there is a similar level effect with
rates for single mothers starting at 60% for private income poverty versus 51% for ATT
poverty, with a similar decline over the 1990s and 2000s. However, in Canada private
income poverty for single mothers remains higher than for single women without kids over
the entire period, whereas ATT poverty levels for single mothers fall below those for
women without kids as noted above. In both countries it would appear that while part of
the decline in poverty is due to changes in market income, a growing part of the decline in
poverty over the 2000s is due to the effects of taxes and transfers. This is particularly so
for Canada.
Figures 10 and 11 present trends in both ATT and private income poverty using a
pooled poverty measure across the two countries calculated using the combined income
25

distribution (as described above). Perhaps surprisingly, using the pooled poverty threshold
reveals very similar patterns despite differences in income distribution between the two
countries. In the U.S. the drop in poverty rates for single mothers over the 1990s remains
as does the uptick over the 2000s. For Canada, poverty rates for single mothers drop
significantly over the 1990s and then continue to drop over the 2000s, passing the U.S.
poverty rate in 2005 and the rate for single women without children in Canada in 2006.
Similarly, using private income the decline in both countries is smaller and the poverty rate
for single mothers in Canada crosses that of the U.S. in 2007 and remains always above that
for single women without children.
Summary and connection to policy changes
The trends in employment and poverty match the predictions of the policy changes,
discussed above. Single mothers in the U.S. and Canada increased employment closing the
historical employment gap between single women with and without children. Single
mothers also experienced reductions in poverty during this period, absolutely and relative
to single women without children. Consistent with the different models for reform, the U.S.
decline in poverty may be more driven by changes in market income while the Canadian
decline is more driven by changes in benefits. This reflect the work requirement in the U.S.
policies and a more universal approach in Canada. Additionally, by the end of the period,
absolute poverty rates in Canada are lower, consistent with the greater generosity in the
Canadian programs. On the other hand, given the work requirements in the U.S. and the
greater reductions in average tax rates embodied in the U.S. reforms (Table 1), we
predicted a larger increase in employment in the U.S.; the data is not consistent with that
prediction. One possible confounder is the difference in the macro labor market conditions
26

across the two countries. We turn to that next.

V. Relative Trends in Employment and Poverty Combining U.S. and Canadian Data
In order to better understand how much the different underlying labor markets
between the two countries drive the effects of the social safety net on single mothers we
use a regression framework where we combine the micro data from the two countries to
estimate models of employment and poverty rates. We combine the 1990 through 2011
data from the CPS and the 1996 through 2011 data from the SLID. Our sample consists of
all unmarried women ages 25 to 54 with less than college education in both countries. We
estimate a pooled difference-in-difference model while controlling for local labor market
conditions. In particular, the model includes fixed effects for the year*country,
year*country*single mother, state/ province as well as controls for the unemployment rate
(at the state/province x year level) and an interaction between the unemployment rate and
being a single mother20. We then plot the interaction terms for Canada * year * single
mother and US * year * single mother, using 1996 as a base year for both countries. This
allows us to examine the employment and poverty trends for single mothers relative to
single women without kids relative to the base year of 1996 for the two countries. We
present these results in figures 12 through 14.
Figure 12 shows the relative trends for employment. Relative to 1996 and

As specification checks we run these models a) excluding Quebec from the analysis as
Quebec launched a subsidized day care program in 1997 that may have had separate
effects on employment for single mothers and b) include a dummy variable for those
province/years in Canada where welfare payments were reduced by the amount of the
NCB payment for NCB recipients. Ontario, Alberta, Manitoba, Nova Scotia and Prince
Edward Island all began by clawing back welfare payments from NCB recipients at the start
of the program.
27
20

controlling for time trends and overall unemployment rates, employment for single
mothers (relative to single women without children) improved in both countries. While the
raw employment rates for single mothers presented in Figure 5 looked quite different for
the U.S. and Canada, once we normalize relative to the single women without children in
the country and control for difference in labor markets, the trends are remarkably
similar.21 The results are unchanged if we remove Quebec from the analysis and control for
the Canadian claw-back provinces.
Figures 13 and 14 present similar results for absolute poverty levels using after tax
and transfer (ATT) income as well as using just private income. For these comparisons we
use the pooled poverty measure across the two countries described in section IV above.
Absolute poverty rates for single mothers using ATT income fell in both countries relative
to 1996 and single women without children. Once again, the relative decline in the two
countries, once we control for labor market differences, appears to be quite similar with no
statistically significant differences between the two trends. On the other hand, looking at
private income (Figure 14) the relative decline in the U.S. over parts of the sample range is
slightly larger, although no different post the Great Recession22. This is again consistent
with a larger share of the effect of the U.S. social safety net for single mothers coming
through market income relative to transfer income.

For employment (figure 12), the changes relative to 1996 and relative to single women
without children are not statistically different between the two countries (see p-value for
joint test of equality across countries at the bottom of the figure). For poverty, as is clear
visually, we can’t reject joint equality.
22 The results remain unchanged when we exclude Quebec and control for clawback
provinces.
28
21

VI. Conclusion
The introduction of the EITC in the U.S. and the NCB/CCTB (and its successor) in
Canada represent a major change in the structure of the social safety net for single mothers
in both countries. The programs are striking in both their similarities and their differences.
They both reflect a move away from relying primarily on traditional welfare benefits. They
both encourage labor force participation either through having work requirements (EITC)
or lessening the welfare cliff with the introduction of child benefits that phase out at higher
levels (NCB) -- although clearly work incentives are stronger in the U.S. programs. The
evidence presented here suggests that these reforms have had positive employment effects
on single mothers – the group most targeted by the programs. We find that both sets of
programs are associated with a reduction in poverty rates among single women with
children. However, it appears that market income plays a larger role in the U.S. – consistent
with the stronger employment incentives inherent in the EITC – while benefit income may
play a relatively larger role in Canada.
Despite the similarities in outcomes, there are some significant differences between
the programs. Perhaps the largest of these differences is in the work requirements: the
EITC requires household to work while the NCB/CCTB does not. In theory, we expect this
difference to result in greater labor force attachment in the U.S. compared to Canada. Our
evidence does not reveal strong differences along these lines as single mothers in both
countries experienced labor market improvements. While employment for single mothers
without a college degree fell in the U.S. in recent years relative to Canada, the decline
(relative to single women without children) is due to the other differences in the labor
markets across the two countries.
29

Additionally, the generosity of the Canadian social safety net exceeds that of the U.S.
This is revealed in lower absolute poverty rates in Canada, particularly in the recent period.
However, once the weaker labor market in the U.S. beginning around 2000 is accounted for,
poverty declines across the two countries (relative to single women without children) are
quite similar. Finally, the lack of an out-of-work safety net in the U.S. suggests we would
expect higher rates of deep poverty compared to Canada. We find that more of the decline
in poverty in the U.S. is due to market income than in Canada which suggests that those
without market income are relatively better off in Canada. More could be done to
understand the broader impacts of the social safety net on the distribution of income and
inequality in the two countries.

30

References
Bitler, Marianne, and Hilary Hoynes. 2010. “The State of the Safety Net in the Post–Welfare
Reform Era.” Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, 71–127. Brookings Institution,
Washington, DC.
Bitler, Marianne, and Hilary Hoynes. 2015. “Heterogeneity in the Impact of Economic Cycles
and the Great Recession: Effects Within and Across the Income Distribution.” American
Economic Review: Papers and Proceedings 105 (5): 154–60.
Bitler, Marianne, and Hilary Hoynes. 2016a. “Strengthening Temporary Assistance for
Needy Families,” The Hamilton Project.
Bitler, Marianne, and Hilary Hoynes. 2016b. “The More Things Change, the More They Stay
the Same? The Safety Net, and Poverty in the Great Recession.” Journal of Labor Economics
34 (S1): S403–S444.
Bitler, Marianne, Hilary Hoynes, and Elira Kuka. 2017. “The Great Recession and Child
Poverty.” Journal of Policy Analysis and Management, Vol. 36, No. 2, 358–389 (2017)
Bitler, Marianne, Hilary Hoynes, and Elira Kuka. 2014. “Child Poverty and the Great
Recession in the United States,” UNICEF Framing Paper, Innocenti Working Paper No.201411, UNICEF Office of Research, Florence.
Blank, Rebecca. 2002. “Evaluating Welfare Reform in the United States.” Journal of
Economic Literature 40 (4): 1105–66.
Blank, Rebecca 2001. “Declining Caseloads/Increased Work: What Can We Conclude About
the Effects of Welfare Reform?” Economic Policy Review. Vol 7(2):25-36..
Center for Budget and Policy Priorities. 2016. “Policy Basics: State Earned Income Tax
Credits,” accessed 9/16/16 at http://www.cbpp.org/research/state-budget-andtax/policy-basics-state-earned-income-tax-credits.
Chetty, Raj, John N. Friedman, and Emmanuel Saez. 2013. “Using Differences in Knowledge
Across Neighborhoods to Uncover the Impacts of the EITC on Earnings.” American
Economic Review 103 (7): 2683–721.
Chetty, Raj, and Emmanuel Saez. 2013. “Teaching the Tax Code: Earnings Responses to an
Experiment with EITC Recipients.” American Economic Journal: Applied Economics 5 (1):
1–31.
Child Trends. 2016. “Data bank: Health Care Coverage”, accessed 9/16/16 at
http://www.childtrends.org/wp-content/uploads/2016/05/26_Health_Care_Coverage.pdf.
Eissa, Nada, and Hilary Hoynes. 2006. “Behavioral Responses to Taxes: Lessons from the
EITC and Labor Supply.” In Tax Policy and the Economy, vol. 20, edited by J. M. Poterba, 74–
110. Cambridge, Mass.: MIT Press.
Eissa, Nada, and Jeffrey B. Liebman. 1996. “Labor Supply Response to the Earned Income
Tax Credit.” The Quarterly Journal of Economics 11(2): 605–37.
Grogger, Jeffrey, and Lynn Karoly. 2005. Welfare Reform: Effects of a Decade of Change.
Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.
31

Gundersen, Craig, and James P. Ziliak. 2004. “Poverty and Macroeconomic Performance
Across Space, Race, and Family Structure,” Demography 41(1): 61–86.
Hotz, V. Joseph, and John Karl Scholz. 2003. “The Earned Income Tax Credit.” In Meanstested transfer programs in the United States, edited by Robert A. Moffitt, 141–197.
Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
Hoynes, Hilary W., and Ankur Patel. 2015. “Effective Policy for Reducing Inequality? The
Earned Income Tax Credit and the Distribution of Income.” Unpublished Working Paper,
July.
Hoynes, Hilary, and Jesse Rothstein. 2016. “Tax Policy Toward Low Income Families.”
Meyer, Bruce D., and Dan T. Rosenbaum. 2001. “Welfare, the Earned Income Tax Credit, and
the Labor Supply of Single Mothers.” Quarterly Journal of Economics 116 (3): 1063–1114.
Meyer, Bruce D., and Dan T. Rosenbaum. 2000. Making Single Mothers Work: Recent Tax
and Welfare Policy and Its Effects, National Tax Journal, 53:4: 1027-62.
Milligan, Kevin and Mark Stabile. 2011. “Do Child Tax Benefits Affect the Wellbeing of
Children?” American Economic Journal: Economic Policy, 3(3):175-205.
Milligan, Kevin and Mark Stabile. 2007. “The Integration of Child Tax Credits and Welfare:
Evidence from the Canadian National Child Benefit Program,” Journal of Public Economics,
91(1-2): 305-326.
Moffitt, Robert. 2003. “The Temporary Assistance for Needy Families Program.” In MeansTested Transfer Programs, edited by Robert Moffitt. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
Moffitt, Robert. 1983. An economic model of welfare stigma. American Economic Review
73(5): 1023-35.
Neumark, David and William Wascher. 2001. "Using The EITC to Help Poor Families: New
Evidence and a Comparison with the Minimum Wage," National Tax Journal, National Tax
Association, 54(2): 281-318.
Nichols, Austin, and Jesse Rothstein. 2016. “The Earned Income Tax Credit.” In Economics
of Means-Tested Transfer Programs in the United States, Volume I, edited by Robert
Moffitt. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
Organisation for Economic Cooperation and Development. 2015. In It Together: Why Less
Inequality Benefits All. Paris: OECD Publishing.
Saez, Emmanuel, 2010. “Do Taxpayers Bunch at Kink Points?” American Economic Journal:
Economic Policy 2 (3): 180–212.
Short, Kathleen. 2011. The Research Supplemental Poverty Measure: 2010. Current
Population Reports P60-241. Washington. DC: U.S. Census Bureau.
Steuerle, Eugene, and Caleb Quakenbush. 2015. Marginal Tax Rates and 21st Century
Welfare Reform. Washington, D.C.: Urban Institute.
Tax Policy Center. 2016a. “EITC Parameters,” Accessed on 9/16/16 at
http://www.taxpolicycenter.org/statistics/eitc-parameters.
32

Tax Policy Center. 2016b. “State EITC Based on the Federal EITC,” Accessed on 9/16/16 at
http://www.taxpolicycenter.org/statistics/state-eitc-based-federal-eitc.
Tweddle, Anne, Ken Battle, and Sherri Torjman. 2014. “Welfare in Canada, 2013,” Caledon
Institute of Social Policy, accessed 4/21/2017 at
http://www.caledoninst.org/Publications/PDF/1057ENG.pdf.
Tweddle, Anne, Ken Battle, and Sherri Torjman. 2015. “Welfare in Canada, 2014,” Caledon
Institute of Social Policy, accessed 4/21/2017 at
http://www.caledoninst.org/Publications/PDF/1086ENG.pdf.
UNICEF Office of Research. 2014. ‘Children of the Recession: The impact of the economic
crisis on child well-being in rich countries’, Innocenti Report Card 12, UNICEF Office of
Research, Florence.
U.S. Government Accountability Office. 2007. Food Stamp Program. GAO-07-465.
Washington, DC.
U.S. House of Representatives. 1996. “Background Material and Data on Programs within
the Jurisdiction of the House Committee on Ways and Means.” Committee on Ways and
Means, U.S. House of Representatives, U.S. Congress, Washington, DC.
U.S. Internal Revenue Service. 2016. U.S. individual income tax public use sample.
Washington, DC: Statistics of Income Division.
World Bank. 2017. “PPP Conversion Factor, GDP (LCU per international $”. Accessed on
4/21/2017 at http://data.worldbank.org/indicator/PA.NUS.PPP.
Ziliak, James. 2016. “Temporary Assistance for Needy Families.” In Economics of MeansTested Transfer Programs in the United States, Volume I, edited by Robert Moffitt. Chicago:
University of Chicago Press.

33

Table 1: Average tax rates from no work to part-time and full-time work
Single Mother, Two Children
Panel A-US
Hourly Wage
% of
minimum
wage
100%
125%
150%
200%

1992

2015

0--> PT

0 --> FT

PT --> FT

0--> PT

0 --> FT

PT --> FT

64%
68%
60%
53%

53%
51%
53%
52%

42%
35%
45%
51%

-46%
-47%
-43%
-34%

-34%
-20%
-9%
1%

-22%
6%
26%
35%

Panel B-Canada
Hourly Wage
% of
minimum
wage
100%
125%
150%
200%

1992

2015

0--> PT

0 --> FT

PT --> FT

0--> PT

0 --> FT

PT --> FT

45%
51%
59%
73%

73%
79%
83%
52%

101%
106%
106%
31%

24%
29%
34%
43%

43%
52%
52%
53%

63%
75%
70%
62%

Notes: Part-time (PT) defined as working 20 hours a week, 52 weeks a year. Full-time (FT) defined as working
40 hours a week, 52 weeks a year. Each cell shows the participation tax rate on cash and near-cash universal
state/provincial and federal transfers for a hypothetical single mother with two children moving out of work
into employment with wages equivalent to the 2015 minimum wage (adjusted for inflation using the CPI-U).
For the US, this example scenarios faced by a single mother two children ages 4 and 6 living in Colorado. For
Canada, this example illustrates scenarios for a single mother with two children younger than 18 living in
Ontario. See text for details.

34

Figure 1: Real per capita spending on key safety net programs
Panel A-US
Per Capita Expenditures on the Social Safety Net (2014 USD)
300

Food Stamps
250

200

EITC
Child Tax Credit

150

100

50

AFDC/TANF
0
1990

1995

2000

2005

2010

2015

Panel B-Canada
Per Capita Social Service Spending (2014 CAN)
5,200
5,100

5,000
4,900
4,800
4,700

4,600
4,500
4,400
4,300
4,200
4,100
1992

1994

1996

1998

2000

2002

2004

2006

2008

Notes: US: Total expenditures from Internal Revenue Service (EITC and CTC); Department of Agriculture
(Food Stamps); and Department for Health and Human Services (AFDC/TANF). All values in 2014 dollars,
adjusted by the CPI-U divided by the total population. CA: Social Service Spending from federal, provincial,
territorial and local governments (Statistics Canada). All values in 2014 CAN dollars, adjusted by the CPI and
divided by the total population.

35

Figure 2: US budget constraint, cash and near-cash universal programs (2015$)
Panel A: Single adult with two children, Colorado, 1992
30,000

25,000

20,000

15,000

10,000

5,000

0

SNAP
(Food
Stamps)
Aid to Families
with
Dependent
Children
(AFDC)
Earned Income
Tax Credit (EITC)
0

10,000

20,000

Child and Dependent Care Tax Credit
Dependent Exemption
30,000

40,000
50,000
60,000
Annual earnings (2015 USD)

70,000

80,000

90,000

100,000

Panel B: Single adult with two children, Colorado, 2015
30,000

25,000

20,000

15,000

10,000
SNAP
(Food
Stamps)

5,000

Child and Dependent Care Tax Credit
Earned Income
Tax Credit (EITC)

Child Tax Credit
Dependent Exemption

0
0

10,000

20,000

30,000

40,000
50,000
60,000
Annual earnings (2015 USD)

70,000

80,000

90,000

100,000

Notes: Estimated value of tax and transfer beneﬁts for a single parent with two children living in Colorado.
Program parameters from Internal Revenue Service and Tax Policy Center (EITC, CTC, Dependent Exemption,
Child and Dependent Care Tax Credit) and Ways & Means Green Book and Department of Agriculture (SNAP).
Based on data from Steuerle and Quakenbush (2015).

36

Figure 3: Canada budget constraint, cash and near-cash universal programs
Panel A: Single adult with two children, Ontario, 1992
30,000

25,000

20,000

Ontario Welfare

15,000

10,000
Provincial
Dependence
Children Tax
Reduction

5,000

Federal Equivalent-to-Married Amount
Federal Dependent Children Tax Credit

Federal Dependent Children Tax Credit
After-Tax Family Allowance

0
0

10,000

20,000

30,000

40,000
50,000
60,000
Annual Earnings (2015 CAN)

70,000

80,000

90,000

100,000

Panel B: Single adult with two children, Ontario, 2015
30,000

25,000

20,000
Ontario Works
15,000

Ontario Child Benefit

10,000
National Child Benefit Supplement

Provincial Eligible Dependent Tax Credit

5,000

Federal Eligible Dependent Tax Credit

Working Income Tax Benefit Credit

Canada Child Tax Benefit

After-Tax Universal Child Care Benefit
0

0

10,000

20,000

30,000

40,000
50,000
60,000
Annual Earnings (2015 CAN)

70,000

80,000

90,000

100,000

Notes: Estimated value of major tax and transfer programs for a single parent family with two children
in the province of Ontario in real (2015) CDN dollars. Program parameters from Department of Finance,
Canada and the Ontario Ministry of Finance.

37

Figure 4:

Notes: No college defined as less than a four-year degree. Data from Current Population Survey, Annual Social
and Economic Supplement (US), and Survey of Labour and Income Dynamics (CA). Sample includes women
25-54.

38

Figure 5:

Notes: No college defined as less than a four-year degree. Women are considered working if they worked at
least one week in the previous year. Data from Current Population Survey, Annual Social and Economic
Supplement (US), and Survey of Labour and Income Dynamics (CA). Sample includes women 25-54.

Figure 6:

Notes: No college defined as less than a four-year degree. Women are considered working full-time if they
reported usually working at least 35 hours a week and at least 50 weeks in the previous year. Data from
Current Population Survey, Annual Social and Economic Supplement (US), and Survey of Labour and Income
Dynamics (CA). Sample includes women 25-54.

39

Figure 7:

Annual Unemployment Rate, US and Canada, 1990-2015
12

10

CAN
8

6

US
4

2

0
1990

1995

2000

2005

2010

2015

Notes: Figure presents annual unemployment rate. Data from Bureau of Labor Statistics and Statistics Canada,
Labour Force Survey (CA).

40

Figure 8:

Notes: No college defined as less than a four-year degree. Absolute poverty defined as 60 percent of the
median equivalized after tax and transfer (ATT) income in 1996 for each country, adjusted for inflation. See
text for details. Data from Current Population Survey, Annual Social and Economic Supplement (US), and
Survey of Labour and Income Dynamics (CA). Sample includes single women 25-54.

Figure 9:

Notes: No college defined as less than a four-year degree. Absolute poverty defined as 60 percent of the
median equivalized after tax and transfer (ATT) income in 1996 for each country, adjusted for inflation. See
text for details. Data from Current Population Survey, Annual Social and Economic Supplement (US), and
Survey of Labour and Income Dynamics (CA). Sample includes single women 25-54.

41

Figure 10:

Notes: No college defined as less than a four-year degree. The absolute poverty threshold is defined as 60
percent of the median equivalized ATT income for US and Canada combined in 1996, adjusted for inflation.
The same threshold is used for private income poverty and ATT poverty, the measures differ only in what
resource measure is used. See text for details. Data from Current Population Survey, Annual Social and
Economic Supplement (US), and Survey of Labour and Income Dynamics (CA).

Figure 11:

Notes: No college defined as less than a four-year degree. The absolute poverty threshold is defined as 60
percent of the median equivalized ATT income for US and Canada combined in 1996, adjusted for inflation.
The same threshold is used for private income poverty and ATT poverty, the measures differ only in what
resource measure is used. See text for details. Data from Current Population Survey, Annual Social and
Economic Supplement (US), and Survey of Labour and Income Dynamics (CA).

42

Figure 12: Relative employment trends, using pooled country data (base year 1996)

Notes: Figure plots the coefficients on the interaction between single mother*year for each country for
regressions of employment on fixed effects for year*country, province/state unemployment rates, single
mother, single mother*year. Sample combines the 1990 through 2011 from the CPS and 1996 through 2011
from the SLID and consists of all unmarried women ages 25 to 54 with less than college degree. Test statistics
of joint hypothesis of equality between the US and Canadian interactions displayed below each graph.

43

Figure 13: Absolute pooled ATT poverty using pooled cross country data (base year 1996)

Figure 14: Absolute pooled private income poverty using pooled cross country data (base
year 1996)

Notes to Figures 13-14: Figure plots the coefficients on the interaction between single mother*year for each
country for regressions of poverty on fixed effects for year*country, province/state unemployment rates, single
mother, single mother*year. Sample combines the 1990 through 2011 from the CPS and 1996 through 2011
from the SLID and consists of all unmarried women ages 25 to 54 with less than college degree. Test statistics
of joint hypothesis of equality between the US and Canadian interactions displayed below each graph.

44

Appendix A: changes in social safety net and provincial programs, Canada23
TAX BASED BENEFITS
Federal:
The Canada Child Tax Benefit pays $1,446 per child in 2014-15. For family net
income over $43,953 it is phased out at a rate of 2% for one child; 4% when there are two
or more children. The benefit amounts and thresholds have been updated annually since
1997 for inflation, but otherwise not changed.
The National Child Benefit Supplement began in 1998. The rates for 2014-15 are
$2,241 for the first child, $1,982 for the second, and $1,886 for the third. The benefits are
phased out sharply at rates of 12.2%, 23.0%, and 33.3% for incomes over $25,584. It is
indexed annually for inflation. There were substantial additional increases in several years.
Between 1998 and 2001 the benefit levels more than doubled. There were also increases of
13% in 2003, 14% in 2005, and 13% in 2006.
The Universal Child Care Benefit began in 2006. It pays $100 per month for each
child under age 6 and is taxable in the hands of the lower income spouse.
The Working Income Tax Benefit began in 1997. It pays $500 to families with
children, phased in with income over $3,750 and then phased out for income over $20,921.
It was removed when the National Child Benefit Supplement was introduced in 1998. In
2007, the Working Income Tax Benefit began payments to adults. There was no
supplement for children in this benefit. The amount for singles in 2014 is $998, with
couples getting $1813. There are some differences across provinces, but for most provinces
it is phased in at 25% for income over $3,000, and phased out at 15% starting at $11,332
for singles and $15,649 for couples. For singles, it is completely phased out by $18,000—so
this benefit is very narrowly targeted.
Newfoundland and Labrador:
The Newfoundland Child Benefit was introduced in 1999 and is paid monthly. In
2014, the annual rate for a first child was $369, $392, for a second child, $421 for a third
child, and $451 for a fourth child. The clawback of these benefits was in the income range
$17,397 to $21,480. Increases through time followed inflation, except for a 25% increase to
the one-child rate in 2007. An additional supplement for children age zero was added in
2001.
Prince Edward Island:
No child benefit program.
Nova Scotia:
The Nova Scotia Child Benefit started in 1998 and is paid monthly. In 1998, the
payments ranged from $250 for the first child to $136 for a third (or higher) child. In 2001,
the payments for third and higher children increased substantially. In 2005, the payment
rates were $445 annually for a first child, $645 for a second, and $720 for a third. These
benefits are clawed back at high clawback rates for incomes over $16,000. Nova Scotia does
not update the benefit for inflation.
In 2010, the Affordable Living Tax Credit was introduced with a base benefit of $240
augmented by $57 per child. This is phased out at 5% for income over $30,000.
New Brunswick:
The New Brunswick Child Tax Benefit was introduced in 1997, before the national
NCB program reached its starting point. The annual benefit is $250 per child paid monthly,
23

This appendix draws heavily on Milligan, and Stabile (2011).
45

and has not changed since 1997. The benefit is clawed back at 2.5% or 5% for family net
income over $20,000. In addition, there is a Working Income Supplement of $250 annually
that is phased in at 4% for earned income over $3,750 and clawed back at a rate of 5% for
family net income over $20,921. These amounts have been the same since 1997 with no
updates for inflation.
Quebec:
Until 1997, residents of Quebec were eligible for a family allowance, an allowance
for young children, and an allowance for newborn children. These amounts increased with
the number of children in the family and did not depend on family income. In 1997, these
were combined into a new family allowance. The rates for the new family allowance were
$2,275 per child for a single parent family and $975 per child for a two-parent family.
These amounts were clawed back starting at incomes of $15,332 for singles and $21,825
for two-parent families. However, the clawback only took benefits down to a minimum
benefit level that was $80 annually for one and two child families and $975 for three child
families. But, for those with family net incomes higher than $50,000 these ‘minimum’
benefits were clawed back at a rate of 5%. In Quebec there was also an earned income
benefit called APPORT in place from 1988 to 2004. In 2004, this benefit was phased in for
earnings over $1,200 at a rate of 35% until an earnings level of $11,370 (two-parent) or
$7,790 (one-parent), and then clawed back at 43% after that. At the peak benefit level the
benefit amount was quite large, but take-up of this benefit was not high. In 2005 a new
Child Assistance program replaced the family allowance. The Child Assistance benefit in
2014 was $2,341 for the first child, $1,170 for the second and third children, and $1,755 for
the fourth or higher child. The phaseout rate is 4% for incomes over $33,944 (single) or
$46,699 (couple). The amounts have been updated annually for inflation. Benefit
distribution defaults to a quarterly schedule, although families can opt to receive the
benefit monthly.
Also in 2005, a new Work Premium replaced APPORT. It is phased in for incomes
over $2,400 (single) or $3,600 (couple) at 25% (couples) and 30% (single). After a
‘turnaround’ point, it is phased out at a rate of 10%. The turnaround point is $10,286
(singles) or $15,914 (couples).
Ontario:
Ontario introduced the Ontario Child Care Supplement for Working Parents in 1997,
and renamed as the Ontario Child Benefit in 2007. It pays out monthly. The initial rates
were $400 per child age 0 to 6, clawed back at 4% for net family income over $20,000. In
1998, the amounts were revamped and largely stayed the same until 2005. From 1998, the
amount was phased in with earned income over $5000, at a rate of 20% for 1998 and 21%
from 1999 to 2005. The 2014 benefit amount was $1,100 per child age 0 to 6 for a oneparent family and $1310 for a two-parent family. The clawback rate was 8% for incomes
over $20,000. These amounts did not change between 1999 and 2014, with no adjustments
for inflation. In 2010, a new Sales Tax Credit was introduced, paying $260 per member of
the family; phased out with income over $25,000 at a rate of 4%.
Manitoba:
Manitoba ran its own child benefit program called CRISP until 2008. In 2008, CRISP
paid $360 annually per child, with a clawback rate of 2.083% for incomes over $12,384.
These amounts had not changed in nominal terms since the 1980s.
Starting in 2009, a new Manitoba Child Benefit was introduced, with a rate of $420
per child, clawed back after income of $15,000 at rates of 7.73%, 15.46%, and 23.18% for
families of one, two, and three or more children respectively. The amounts have not been
updated for inflation.
46

Saskatchewan:
The Saskatchewan Child Benefit was introduced in 1998. In the first year, it paid
$900 annually to a one child family, $1,104 for a second child, and $1,176 for a third. It is
clawed back at high rates for family net incomes over $15,921. As the NCBS increased in
the following years, the Saskatchewan Child Benefit was decreased downward dollar for
dollar, so that by 2005 it paid only $7 annually for a 2nd child and $86 for a third. It was
cancelled in 2006.
Additionally, there is a working income supplement in Saskatchewan. In 2005 the
amount ranges from $2,385 for a one child family to $4,293 for a five child family. It is
phased in for earnings over $1,500 at rates between 25% and 45% and clawed back at a
20% rate for incomes over $14,640. There is a supplement for children under age 13 that
pays an extra 25% on top of the regular employment supplement. These amounts have not
been updated for inflation through time.
In 2000, Saskatchewan introduced the Saskatchewan Low Income Tax Credit,
paying $77 for each adult and $55 for each child. It was clawed back at 1% for incomes that
varied with family type. The amounts increased to $100 and $75 in 2003, then $216 and
$84 in 2008. The phased out rate was increased to 2%, and all family types faced the same
threshold of $28,335. These amounts have been updated annually for inflation and it is paid
quarterly.
Alberta:
Alberta has an employment-related child benefit that is paid monthly. It was
introduced in 1997 with a phase-in rate of 8% for earnings over $6,500 up to a maximum
of $250 for one child and $500 for two or more. The benefit is clawed back at a rate of 4%
for incomes over $25,000. Between 1998 and 2004, the benefit maximum was set at $500
for one child and $1000 for two or more children, but was otherwise similar to 1997.
The benefit changed again for the 2005 year. The new rates were $550 for one child, $500
for two children, $300 for three children, and $100 for four. These amounts were phased in
at 8% for earnings over $2,760, and then phased out on incomes of $25,000 or more at a
rate of 4%. These amounts have been updated for inflation each year since 2005.
British Columbia:
The BC Family Bonus was introduced in 1996, two years before the NCB program,
and is paid monthly. The Bonus rate was $1,236 per child and was clawed back at a rate of
8% for one child and 16% for two or more for incomes higher than $18,000. These
amounts were increased to $1,332, 9%, 18%, and $20,500 in 2001 and have remained
constant since. However, the NCBS is subtracted from the BC Family Bonus, rendering it to
zero by 2005 since the NCBS is now larger than the prescribed BC Family Bonus payments.
There is also a BC Earned Income Benefit that was introduced in 1998. It pays differing
amounts for each child and is phased in between earnings levels of $3,750 and $10,000. It
is clawed back for incomes higher than $20,921 at high rates. The amounts for 2005 are
$365 for the first child, $370 for the second, and $372 for the third or higher. Until 2003,
the amount for the first child was $605, with $405 for the second and $330 for the third.
After 2003, the BC Earned Income Benefit was diminished as the NCBS grew, leading it to
zero by 2013.
SOCIAL ASSISTANCE
Income support is provided by provincial/territorial governments in all 13
provinces and territories. The eligibility criteria differs by jurisdiction. In 2013, for
example, the basic welfare cut-off income for a single employable individual ranged
47

between $6,807 (NB) and $10,876 (SK), and the basic welfare cut-off income for a couple
with two children ranged between $20,724 (NB) and $26,690 (PEI) (Tweddle et al., 2014).
The benefit amount also differs by jurisdiction, and is generally tied to the family status,
income level, and financial need of the individual or family. For single employable
individuals, the basic welfare income provided by the province/territory ranges from
$6,807 (NB) to $17,343 (YK), and for a couple with two children, the basic welfare income
ranges from $20,724 (NB) to $37,733 (YK) (Tweddle et al., 2014).24
In British Columbia, Alberta, Saskatchewan, Ontario, Quebec, New Brunswick, and
Prince Edward Island, a separate social assistance program provides benefits for
individuals with a disability (Tweddle et al., 2015). In all provinces and territories, with the
exception of Newfoundland and Labrador, additional social assistance benefits are
provided in some form - either through a higher benefit as part of their general social
assistance program, or through separate program directed to individuals with disabilities
(Tweddle et al., 2014).
Appendix B: Data Appendix
United States: We use the CPS to construct private income (PI) poverty and after-tax-andtransfer (ATT) poverty. Private income includes earned income, asset income, and private
transfers (child support, alimony, private disability and retirement). After-tax-and-transfer
resource measure, developed in Bitler and Hoynes (2010, 2015), includes private income
plus cash transfers (AFDC/TANF, Social Security, SSI, Unemployment Compensation,
veterans payments and workers’ compensation), the cash value (as reported by the
household or imputed by the Census Bureau) of non-cash in-kind programs (food
stamps/SNAP, school lunch, housing subsidies, and energy subsidies), tax credits (the EITC,
child tax credits, and stimulus payments) and then subtracts payroll, federal, and state
income taxes. We use the NBER TAXSIM model for all tax variables.
Canada: We use SLID income variables to construct private income (PI) poverty and aftertax-and-transfer (ATT) poverty. SLID’s market income variable (private income) includes
earnings, investment income, private retirement pensions and support payments received,
such as alimony and child support. Moreover, SLID’s after-tax (and after-transfers)
income variable is defined by total income before taxes (market income plus federal and
provincial government transfers) minus federal and provincial income tax.

24

The welfare income for Nunavut is actually the lowest of all the provinces or territories, but the vast majority of
social assistance recipients reside in public housing, and have housing, and many other costs, covered.

48

Appendix Table 1: Average tax rates from no work to part-time and full-time work
Single Individual, No Children
Panel A-US
Hourly wages
% of
minimum
wage
100%
125%
150%
200%

2015

1992
0--> PT

0 --> FT

PT --> FT

0--> PT

0 --> FT

PT --> FT

14%
18%
23%
34%

34%
34%
34%
33%

54%
50%
44%
33%

-6%
-4%
2%
12%

12%
11%
10%
7%

30%
27%
17%
3%

Panel B-Canada
% of
minimum
wage
100%
125%
150%
200%

2015

1992

Hourly Wages
0--> PT

0 --> FT

PT --> FT

0--> PT

0 --> FT

PT --> FT

70%
76%
80%
67%

67%
58%
53%
47%

63%
41%
26%
27%

32%
42%
49%
45%

45%
41%
38%
34%

58%
40%
26%
23%

Notes: Part-time (PT) defined as working 20 hours a week, 52 weeks a year. Full-time (FT) defined as working
40 hours a week, 52 weeks a year. Each cell shows the participation tax rate on cash and near-cash universal
state/provincial and federal transfers for a hypothetical single individual with no children moving out of work
into employment with wages equivalent to the 2015 minimum wage (adjusted for inflation using the CPI-U).
For the US, this example scenarios faced by a single individual living in Colorado. For Canada, this example
illustrates scenarios for a single individual living in Ontario. See text for details.

49

Appendix Figure 1: US budget constraint, cash and near-cash universal programs (2015$)
Panel A: Single adult with no children, Colorado, 1992
14,000

12,000

10,000

8,000

6,000

4,000

2,000
SNAP (Food Stamps)

0
0

10,000

20,000

30,000

40,000
50,000
60,000
Annual earnings (2015 USD)

70,000

80,000

90,000

100,000

Panel B: Single adult with no children, Colorado, 2015
14,000

12,000

10,000

8,000

6,000

SNAP
(Food Stamps)

4,000

2,000

SNAP (Food Stamps)

Earned Income Tax Credit (EITC)
0
0

10,000

20,000

30,000

40,000
50,000
60,000
Annual earnings (2015 USD)

70,000

80,000

90,000

100,000

Notes: Estimated value of tax and transfer beneﬁts for a single parent with two children living in Colorado.
Program parameters from Internal Revenue Service and Tax Policy Center (EITC, CTC, Dependent Exemption,
Child and Dependent Care Tax Credit) and Ways & Means Green Book and Department of Agriculture (SNAP).
Based on data from Steuerle and Quakenbush (2015).

50

Appendix Figure 2: Canada budget constraint, cash and near-cash universal programs (2015$)

Panel A: Single adult with no children, Ontario, 1992
14,000

12,000

10,000

8,000

Ontario Welfare
6,000

4,000

2,000

0

0

10,000

20,000

30,000

40,000
50,000
60,000
Annual earnings (2015 CAN)

70,000

80,000

90,000

100,000

Panel A: Single adult with no children, Ontario, 2015
14,000

12,000

10,000

8,000
Ontario Works
6,000

4,000

2,000
Working Income Tax Benefit Credit

0
0

10,000

20,000

30,000

40,000

50,000

60,000

70,000

80,000

90,000

100,000

Annual earnings (2015 CAN)

Notes: Estimated value of major tax and transfer programs for a single individual with no children in the
province of Ontario in real (2015) CDN dollars. Program parameters from Department of Finance,
Canada and the Ontario Ministry of Finance.

51

