                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                  GLOBALIZATION AND EXECUTIVE COMPENSATION

                                        Wolfgang Keller
                                        William W. Olney

                                       Working Paper 23384
                               http://www.nber.org/papers/w23384


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                             May 2017, Revised June 2018




We are grateful to David Atkin, Andrew Bernard, Nick Bloom, Matilde Bombardini, Brian
Cadena, Gordon Hanson, Keith Head, Peter Kuhn, Rod Ludema, Terra McKinnish, Ferdinando
Monte, Nina Pavcnik, Steve Redding, Jan Schymik, Daniel Tannenbaum, Karen Helene Ulltveit-
Moe, and numerous other colleagues, as well as participants at a variety of presentations for
helpful comments and suggestions. This research was supported by NSF grant 1360207 (Keller).
The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the
National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2017 by Wolfgang Keller and William W. Olney. All rights reserved. Short sections of text,
not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Globalization and Executive Compensation
Wolfgang Keller and William W. Olney
NBER Working Paper No. 23384
May 2017, Revised June 2018
JEL No. F14,J3

                                           ABSTRACT

This paper finds that globalization is contributing to the rapid increase in executive compensation
over the last few decades. Employing comprehensive data on top executives at major U.S.
companies, we show that their compensation is increasing with exports and foreign direct
investment, as well as firm size and technology. Exogenous export shocks unrelated to
managerial decisions also increase executive compensation, and there is little evidence that this is
due to increasing market returns to talent. We do find that export shocks primarily affect
discretionary forms of compensation of more powerful executives at firms with poor corporate
governance, as one would expect if globalization has enhanced rent-capture opportunities.
Overall, these results indicate that globalization has played a more central role in the rapid growth
of executive compensation and U.S. inequality than previously thought.


Wolfgang Keller
Department of Economics
University of Colorado, Boulder
Boulder, CO 80309-0256
and NBER
Wolfgang.Keller@colorado.edu

William W. Olney
Department of Economics
Williams College
Williamstown, MA 01267
william.olney@williams.edu
1        Introduction

“American policy has allowed the winners to keep most of the spoils of trade and has given the losers

crumbs. This has exacerbated income inequality by raising the profits of big corporations and the salaries of

executives and other white collar professionals while leaving blue-collar and lower-skilled workers poorer”

New York Times Editorial April 2, 2016



    Globalization and income inequality are currently two of the most important economic issues, with

dissatisfaction about both shaping elections throughout the world. While there is a common perception

that these issues are related (as illustrated by the quote above), research has tended to focus on the impact

of globalization on blue-collar workers. However, it is high incomes, especially the top 1%, that appear to

drive U.S. inequality, as Figure 1 shows:1

                                                                                               FIGURE 1


                                                                                        U.S. Income Shares
                                                                     20
                            % of Total Income Accruing to Each Group




                                                                                                                Top 1%
                                               10          15




                                                                                                               50s Decile
                                   5




                                                                                                               10s Decile
                                                   0




                                                                          1978   1984   1990       1996      2002      2008   2014
                                                                                                  Year

                          Notes: Kernel-weighted local polynomial smoothed data from World Wealth and
                          Income Database (WID; website: wid.world).




    This paper examines the relationship between globalization and growing inequality by focusing on the

incomes of top business executives. By 2013, the typical top business executive of a Standard and Poor 500

Indexed firm earned $3.7 million a year, while Chief Executive Officers (CEOs) made $7.5 million a year,
    1
        We also show the evolution of all U.S. income deciles in Appendix A.1.




                                                                                                  2
putting both safely within the top 1% of all income earners.2 Moreover, non-finance business executives

are by far the largest share of the top 1% and are representative of the top 1% more generally (Bakija,

Cole, and Heim 2012, Kaplan and Rauh 2013). Furthermore, executive compensation is rising relatively

quickly, with CEO pay increasing more than eight times as fast as average worker pay over the last three

and half decades (Edmans, Gabaix, and Jenter 2017). We study business executives, but compensation in

other fields like entertainment and sports may be even more susceptible to globalization.3

    While the income trends of Figure 1 are well-documented and exist in most high-income countries,

the causes of this growth in inequality have remained controversial.4 A variety of explanations have been

proposed, but globalization has rarely been a focus (e.g. Bertrand 2009). Thus, our first goal is to examine

whether globalization is contributing to the rapid increase in top incomes. Figure 2 shows that over

the last seventy years there has been a rapid increase in both executive compensation and exports (we

will also analyze foreign direct investment and imports). While gross domestic product (GDP) is also

trending upwards, executive compensation is more closely associated with exports. This does not imply

causality, but it does suggest that the question of whether globalization has contributed to rising executive

compensation is potentially important.
   2
      The threshold depends to some extent on whether measures of total income or labor income are employed; Guvenen
and Kaplan (2017) discuss a number of major issues. Piketty, Saez, and Zucman (2017) note that $1.3 million is the average
pre-tax income of the top 1% in 2014, with the cutoff lower than that. Guvenen, Kaplan, and Song (2014) show that the 1%
wage and salary threshold in 2012 was $291,000 based on a 10% sample of Social Security Administration data, with wages
and salaries accounting for about 60% of total income for the top 1% individuals.
    3
      Entertainment and sports superstars have benefited from the ability to reach large global audiences (e.g. Gordon and
Dew-Becker 2008).
    4
      Appendix A.2 shows that the share of income going to the top 1% is increasing in most OECD countries. Gordon and
Dew-Becker (2008) and Edmans, Gabaix, and Jenter (2017) examine why the trend is quantitatively stronger in the US.




                                                            3
                                                                                                       FIGURE 2

                                                                                   Executive Compensation and Exports in Long Run




                                                                     5000




                                                                                                                                               1500
                            Median Executive Compensation (2000 $ k)




                                                                                                                                               Exports (2009 $ b), GDP (2009, $ 10b)
                                                          4000




                                                                                                                                                                       1000
                                               3000




                                                                                                                                                        500
                                    2000




                                                                                      GDP                                      Execu Comp
                         1000




                                                                                            Exports




                                                                                                                                               0
                                                                            1936   1946     1956      1966       1976   1986      1996      2006

                       Notes: Data on the median compensation of the three highest paid executives at the
                       50 largest U.S. firms comes from Frydman and Saks (2010). Total compensation
                       includes salary, bonuses, stocks, and options granted (valued using Black –
                       Scholes). Real U.S. GDP and export data comes from FRED (St. Louis Fed)




    To the extent that globalization matters for executive compensation, our second goal is to understand

why it increases executive pay. First, perhaps market forces reward talented executives who make strategic

decisions that expand their firm abroad. Such executives earn more because they successfully navigate

the logistics of selling to many markets, deal with the complexity of setting up production stages that

span numerous countries, and overcome bargaining and contractual issues in foreign countries. In this

case, globalization’s effect on pay is the result of the executive’s talent and actions. Pay increases can also

be due to market forces outside the executive’s control that increase the importance of top talent. For

instance, globalization can increase optimal firm size (Melitz 2003), and it may induce the reassignment of

the most talented managers to the strongest firms (Gabaix and Landier 2008, Terviö 2008). Globalization

may also increase pay because it generates new competition for managerial talent (Marin and Verdier

2012) or because it changes the firm’s organizational structure (Rajan and Wulf 2006, Caliendo, Monte,

and Rossi-Hansberg 2015). In short, globalization may alter the nature of the executive’s job, increase the

importance of top talent, and thus lead to higher pay (see Rosen 1981).5 We will refer to these components

of increasing executive pay as market returns.
   5
     In addition, there is evidence that executives now have better outside options because they are increasingly externally
recruited and have general, not firm-specific, skills (Murphy and Zabojnik 2006, Frydman 2016).



                                                                                                             4
    Second, globalization can increase executive pay through non-market channels. In particular, rent-

capture is an important determinant of executive pay (Bertrand and Mullainathan 2001, Bebchuk and Fried

2004, Bivens and Mishel 2013) and we investigate if globalization facilitates these activities. The sheer size

of global firms alone might enhance rent-capture opportunities, or international transactions might make

it harder for shareholders, board members, as well as regulatory and tax authorities to monitor executives.

Globalization induced rent-capture activities may be more feasible for certain types of pay, executives,

and firms. By intensifying competition for talent, globalization may also make very high salaries more

acceptable by shifting social norms (Piketty and Saez 2003, 2006), which facilitates future rent-capture.

Higher levels of competition may also encourage bench-marking executive pay to a relevant peer group,

which has been found to inflate corporate pay (Bizjack, Lemmon, and Nguyen 2011). We will refer to these

pay increases as non-market returns.

    Distinguishing between market and non-market returns is important because it influences society’s

willingness to tolerate inequality. If pay reflects market forces that optimally reward the executive’s talent

and actions, inequality will be less objectionable than if executive pay increases due to rent-capture. In

addition to the immediate distributional implications, executive compensation has been a controversial

topic with broader ramifications (see Bertrand 2009, Edmans, Gabaix, and Jenter 2017). Rising executive

pay, especially due to rent-capture, can lead to polarization and undermine social cohesion.6

    The relationship between globalization and top incomes is studied by examining the impact of exports,

imports, and foreign direct investment (FDI) on the compensation of executives over the years 1993 to

2013. Our analysis focuses on top executives at publicly traded U.S. firms from Compustat’s comprehensive

and well-known ExecuComp data set. We examine whether globalization is influencing top incomes, and

if so whether this relationship reflects market or non-market returns.

    In line with the simple correlation in Figure 2 our first finding is that firm-specific exports, identified

using detailed product level trade and firm sales data, have a significant positive impact on executive

compensation. An important contribution of our paper is that while firm size and technology investments

raise executive compensation, exports increase pay conditional on these and other firm characteristics.7 In

addition, a portion of export’s impact on executive pay operates through size and technology, indicating

that globalization affects pay through these market channels. Quantitatively, we find that the magnitude
    6
      On the impact of globalization on economic polarization, see Keller and Utar (2016). On the link between globalization
and political polarization, see Autor, Dorn, Hanson, and Majlesi (2016), Dippel, Gold, Heblich, and Pinto (2017), and Che,
Lu, Pierce, Schott, and Tao (2017) .
    7
      We also condition on a variety of other firm and industry characteristics, such as insider board relationships, markups, and
value added. We also explore whether top marginal tax rates influence executive compensation (Piketty, Saez, and Stantcheva
2014) although the available data is more limited.



                                                                5
of export’s impact on executive compensation is comparable to that of firm size and technology. Results

also show that exports increase executive pay more than average worker wages, and that compensation

increases more with foreign affiliate sales than with domestic sales. Overall, these results indicate that

globalization has been a more important force behind the increase in executive compensation and inequality

than generally perceived.

    Second, we examine why globalization is increasing executive compensation. We employ a Bartik (1991)

style shift-share instrument that identifies exogenous export shocks which are by construction independent

of the executive’s actions.8 The results indicate that a 10% exogenous export shock leads to a 3% increase

in the compensation of executives.9 Using a back-of-the-envelope calculation this estimate indicates that

exports can account for about a third of the observed increase in executive compensation over this period.10

Even though export shocks are not caused by managerial decisions they can nevertheless alter market

characteristics which in turn increase executive pay. For instance, a positive shock may encourage firms

to match with a better, more highly paid executive, or it may drive up the returns to talent by changing

the nature of the manager’s job. Consistent with assortative matching, we find that export shocks lead

to more executive turnover and higher pay for newly hired executives, however the magnitudes of these

effects are small. Furthermore, we find no evidence that export shocks lead to higher returns to more

skilled executives.11

    Lacking strong evidence for a market returns explanation, we turn to the non-market explanation of

rent-capture. Evidence of asymmetry, where executive compensation increases with positive shocks but

does not decrease with negative shocks, suggests that it might be important. We go further by first

exploiting the fact that some forms of compensation are set in a more discretionary way than others, and

thus are more susceptible to rent-capture. Export shocks are found to strongly increase bonus payments,

with little impact on less-discretionary forms of compensation like salary.12 Second, we exploit the fact
    8
      Our instrument is constructed using presample industry-level bilateral export flows and exogenous industry-level export
growth in other high-income countries. Examples of instrumental variables strategies based on other countries include Haskel,
Pereira, and Slaughter (2007), Autor, Dorn, and Hanson (2013), and Blanchard and Olney (2017). Similar results are obtained
using alternate instrument variable strategies based on world import demand and exchange rate fluctuations.
    9
      An added benefit of focusing on globalization is that it is easier to identify exogenous shocks that are unrelated to domestic
conditions. We suspect that domestic shocks may also influence executive compensation but it is more challenging to identify
these empirically.
   10
      Multiplying export growth (168%) and our point estimate (0.300), implies exports increased TDC1 by 50% from 1993 to
2013. This represents about a third of the observed increase in TDC1 (141%) over this period.
   11
      Related to this analysis is the concept of relative performance evaluation (RPE; Holmström 1979), which implies that
optimal contracts should only reward executives for relative performance differences. The lack of RPE is well documented
(Gibbons and Murphy 1990 and others). Under certain conditions, e.g. when there are constraints on the feasible set of
contracts, the optimal contract need not satisfy RPE (see Edmans, Gabaix, and Jenter 2017). We have examined this issue
and found little evidence that our results are driven by common explanations for why RPE would not hold (results available
upon request).
   12
      In principle, the stock-option innovation of the 1990s may have been important for diverting additional rents to top



                                                                 6
that rent-capture is more likely at poorly governed firms and indeed our results show that the impact

of exogenous export shocks is stronger at those firms with insider board relationships. Finally, we take

into account the fact that some executives have more managerial power to influence pay decisions than

others. In particular, we show that the effect of export shocks on bonuses is strongest for CEOs of poorly

governed firms. Together these results indicate that rent-capture associated with globalization has been

an important factor in the rise of executive compensation.

    We verify that the results are robust to (i) a wide variety of alternate specifications that account for un-

observed executive, executive-by-firm, and industry-by-year conditions, (ii) employing alternate measures

of firm size, (iii) addressing possible selection by using different samples, (iv) dealing with the potential en-

dogeneity of poor governance, and (v) examining the role of imports.13 Overall, we show that globalization

has contributed to the recent rise in top-incomes by increasing executive compensation.

    The paper makes a number of contributions. First, it speaks to important work assessing the impact of

globalization on inequality. Early studies concluded that skill-biased technical change may have been more

important than globalization in explaining rising inequality (Katz and Autor 1999, Feenstra and Hanson

1999). However, this literature tended to focus on the distinction between skilled and unskilled workers,

not the role of the top 1% of income earners. More recently there has been a growing consensus that rising

import competition, driven in part by China (Krugman 2008), has adversely affected blue-collar workers

(Autor, Dorn, and Hanson 2013, Pierce and Schott 2016). Our analysis complements this work by shifting

the focus to exports, foreign direct investment, and the gains experienced by high-income earners.14 This

is important because high-income earners, especially the top 1%, are arguably the most important drivers

of income inequality (see Figure 1, as well as Piketty and Saez 2003, 2006, Piketty, Saez, and Zucman

2017).

    Second, while anecdotal evidence indicates that globalization is contributing to rising executive com-

pensation, to date it has received little attention from researchers. Globalization is sometimes dismissed

as a potential explanation because it should be ubiquitous whereas the trends in top income shares across

countries differ (Alvaredo, Atkinson, Piketty, and Saez 2013, Piketty, Saez, and Stantcheva 2014).15 Oth-

ers argue that globalization should affect occupations differently whereas the trends in top incomes across

occupations are the same (Kaplan and Rauh 2013). In contrast, our analysis is based on longitudinal,
executives (Bebchuk and Fried 2004, Bertrand 2009); we will explore this dimension of the data in sections 5.2 and A.6.
   13
      Imports are found to have an insignificant impact on executive compensation (see Appendix A.7).
   14
      Hummels, Jorgensen, Munch, and Xiang (2014) study the impact of exports on wages, although they do not focus on top
incomes.
   15
      While there is certainly variation in top income growth rates across countries, Figure A2 shows a clear upward trend
across a diverse set of OECD countries (see Appendix A.2).



                                                            7
micro-level data that addresses many potential sources of spurious results. Globalization is a promising

long-run explanation for the changing pattern of executive pay over the last century. Any successful expla-

nation needs to deal with why executive pay was relatively flat prior to 1980 and has increased dramatically

thereafter (recall Figure 2). Insider board relationships is a prominent explanation for rising executive pay

(Bertrand and Mullainathan 2001), however by most measures corporate governance has strengthened,

not weakened, since 1980.16 Growth in firm size is another common explanation for the recent increase

in executive compensation (Gabaix and Landier 2008). However, firm size also increased from the 1940s

to the early 1970s when CEO compensation was virtually flat (Frydman and Saks 2010). In contrast,

globalization provides a compelling explanation for the evolution of executive compensation because the

time series variation in exports and executive compensation track each other closely before and after 1980

(see Figure 2).

    Third, we provide a unifying analysis of the executives’ market and non-market returns, which are

too often treated as mutually exclusive explanations. Our findings show that executive compensation is

increasing with market forces such as firm size and technology investments, consistent with Gabaix and

Landier (2008) and Garicano and Rossi-Hansberg (2006), respectively. A portion of globalization’s impact

on executive pay operates through size and technology, while another portion affects pay after holding size

and technology constant, a finding that is new to the literature.17 We find that executive pay increases

with shocks unrelated to executive action, as in Bertrand and Mullainathan (2001), and that market

returns explain only a small part of the observed relationship between export shocks and compensation.

Furthermore, evidence showing that positive shocks increase executive pay but negative shocks do not

decrease pay point to rent-capture.18 We confirm this by showing that export shocks disproportionately

increase discretionary pay to powerful managers at poorly governed firms. Overall, our findings show that

both market and non-market forces are important in explaining the rapid rise in executive compensation.

    The paper proceeds as follows. In the next section, we discuss the data sources employed in this

analysis, provide background information on executive compensation, and describe the main relationship

between executive pay and exports. Section 3 tackles our first key question of whether globalization is
   16
      For example, due to possible conflicts of interest the Security and Exchange Commission (SEC) started requiring firms in
2006 to disclose the role and identity of all paid compensation consultants, and in 2010 the Dodd-Frank Act strengthened this
to stipulate that only independent consultants can be hired. Indeed, Chhaochharia and Grinstein (2009) find strong decreases
in CEO compensation at firms affected by Sarbanes-Oxley-inspired legislation which required that the majority of a board’s
directors be independent. In fact, some argue that higher executive pay should be viewed as compensation for the hassle of
increased regulatory requirements (Hermalin 2005). See Murphy and Zabojnik (2004) and Edmans, Gabaix, and Jenter (2017)
for more discussion.
   17
      For instance, Ma (2015) finds no relationship between exports and executive pay once firm size is accounted for.
   18
      See also Bertrand and Mullainathan (2001) and Garvey and Milbourn (2006) on this asymmetry.




                                                              8
contributing to the rapid increase in executive pay. Confirming this to be the case, we then proceed to

our second question: why is this occurring? Specifically, in Section 4 we find that export shocks that are

orthogonal to executive actions and other domestic conditions nonetheless increase executive compensation.

Furthermore, the evidence that these export shocks increase market returns through assortative matching

or through increasing returns to talent is weak. We turn our attention to rent-capture in Section 5, finding

that export shocks increase discretionary pay to powerful managers at poor governance firms. We explore a

variety of extensions in both Section 6 and in the Appendix, which shed additional light on the relationship

between globalization and executive pay as well as demonstrates that the results are robust to alternate

specifications and samples.



2         Data

The empirical analysis utilizes executive compensation data, firm and executive level information, and

globalization data from the following sources.


2.1        Executive Compensation

Compensation information of the top five executives within each Standard & Poor (S&P) firm was obtained

from the Compustat ExecuComp data set. This is the most comprehensive publicly available data set on

executive compensation, with information about each executive, including their name and identifier as well

as their company’s name and identifier. Importantly, the data set has detailed administrative compensation

information based on company filings with the U.S. Securities and Exchange Commission (SEC).

     Our measure of executive compensation is ExecuComp’s TDC1, which includes total compensation

awarded to an executive in a given year. An alternative measure, TDC2, captures compensation realized

by an executive in a given year. Globalization may have a different impact on compensation realized and

compensation awarded, given that the executive has more influence over the former than the latter. By

employing the TDC1 measure we eliminate the possibility that executives strategically exercise their stock

options in response to positive shocks.19

     An appealing feature of this executive compensation data is that it also provides detailed information

on individual components of compensation, allowing us to examine how globalization affects more and

less discretionary types of pay. The five components of executive pay are salary, bonuses, stock options

awarded, stock awards, and other compensation. Salary is the executive’s base salary while bonuses includes
    19
         The results in Table A8 confirm this by showing that export shocks have a larger impact on TDC2 than TDC1.


                                                              9
bonuses and long-term non-equity incentive plans. Options give the value of stock options awarded, stocks

are the value of restricted stock granted, and other compensation includes personal benefits, 401k plans,

life insurance premiums, termination payments, and tax reimbursements, among other components. Note

that all nominal compensation values are converted to constant 2014 U.S. dollars using the Consumer Price

Index (CPI) provided by the Bureau of Labor Statistics.

                  On average in 2013, a top five executive in our sample earned $3.7 million which consisted of about

$0.6m of salary, $0.8m of bonuses, $0.6m of options, $1.4m of stocks, and $0.2m of other compensation

(in 2014 dollars). By comparison, CEOs earned $7.5m overall which consisted of $1.0m of salary, $1.7m

of bonuses, $1.5m of options, $3.0m of stocks, and $0.4m of other compensation. Our subsequent analysis

will exploit the fact that export shocks may affect these components of executive pay differentially.

                  The relative importance of these forms of compensation over time is presented on the left hand side

of Figure 3.20 Consistent with other findings, this figure shows that options represented a larger share of

compensation in the late 1990s, while stocks represent a larger share of pay more recently (see Frydman and

Jenter 2010, and Edmans, Gabaix, and Jenter 2017 for additional details). The growth in the importance of

stock options since the 1970s is often emphasized, however cash remunerations such as salary and bonuses

have been factors as well (Bertrand 2009).

                                                                                        FIGURE 3


                                   Executive Compensation Components by Year                                               Executive Compensation Components by Firm Type
                                                                                                           100
                100




                                                                                               Execu Comp Components (%)
   Execu Comp Components (%)




                                                                                                                      80
                          80




                                                                                                             60
                 60




                                                                                                      40
          40




                                                                                              20
  20




                                                                                                           0
                0




                               1993 1995 1997 1999 2001 2003 2005 2007 2009 2011 2013                                      S&P 500        MidCap         SmallCap        Other
                                      Salary   Bonuses   Options   Stocks      Other                                            Salary   Bonuses    Options    Stocks   Other




Notes: Salary includes the executive's base salary, Bonuses includes bonuses and long-term non-equity incentive plans, Options are the value of stock
options awarded, Stocks are the value of restricted stock granted, and Other is all other compensation received by the executive. Source: ExecuComp



                  The right hand side of Figure 3 examines the composition of pay across different firm types. Following

common distinctions in the literature, we focus on S&P 500 firms, S&P MidCap firms, S&P SmallCap firms,
        20
                       The SEC changed its reporting rules in 2006 and our analysis takes into account these definitional changes.


                                                                                         10
and Other firms. We find that salary, for instance, represents a somewhat lower share of compensation at

S&P 500 firms (13%) and a higher share at SmallCap firms (28%) on average in our sample. In contrast,

bonuses are fairly consistent across firm type at around 20% of total compensation. While there are some

differences, overall the composition of compensation is similar across firm type, which is line with other

evidence (see Edmans, Gabaix, and Jenter 2017). Appendix A.5 shows that our results are similar across

different samples of firms.


2.2    Globalization

Our main measure of globalization is international trade, given its excellent coverage and the fact that

it is often correlated with other forms of globalization. Detailed U.S. export and import data at the

Harmonized System (HS) ten-digit product level for the years 1989-2012 come from the U.S. Census Bureau

via Schott’s International Economics Resource Page (Schott 2008), since Compustat does not report firm

exports. These nominal trade flows are converted to constant 2014 U.S. dollars using the consumer price

index (CPI). An appealing aspect of this data set is that the HS ten-digit trade flows are linked to the

six-digit industry codes of the North American Industry Classification System (NAICS). This enables us

to merge this trade data with the ExecuComp data which reports the six-digit NAICS industries of the

executive’s firm. Furthermore, this data set reports detailed product level trade at the bilateral level (U.S.

flows to any particular foreign country), which is used in our instrumental variable analysis. While our

primary interest lies in how access to foreign markets via exports affect executive compensation, we also

cover the role of imports and foreign direct investment in our analysis.

    A firm-specific measure of exports is constructed as the weighted average of detailed product-level

exports, where the weights are the share of sales of the firm’s three largest business segments.21 Accounting

for the fact that many firms in our data set operate in several industries improves our ability to measure

exports and its impact on executive pay.22 Since the industry in which the firm operates may evolve

endogenously over time, we focus on the firm’s composition of sales in the presample years of 1990-1992.

This approach exploits the evolution of product-level exports over time which affects some firms more
  21
      This utilizes Compustat’s Business Segment data and focuses on business segments for which export data is available.
Findings are not sensitive to the number of business segments included in the analysis - results are similar using only the
firm’s top business segment (Table A8) or the top five business segments (unreported).
   22
      Firm-level export data would be more precise, however identifying a causal relationship between firm-level exports and
executive compensation is challenging given unobserved firm shocks. Furthermore, in practice executive pay is often bench-
marked against compensation at a relevant peer group of firms, which implies that industry-level global expansion is especially
important for executive compensation. Our firm-specific export measure strikes a balance between these considerations. Also,
we provide evidence on the relationship between executive compensation and a firm-level measures of globalization in our FDI
analysis (section 6.2).




                                                              11
than others based on their presample share of sales. Thus, we follow a long literature that uses industry

level trade exposure which disproportionately affects some plants, firms, and regions based on their initial

industry composition (e.g. Trefler 2004, Cuñat and Guadalupe 2009, Autor, Dorn, and Hanson 2013).

    Our analysis also employs an alternate measures of globalization, namely foreign direct investment of

U.S multinationals, measured using firm-level foreign affiliate sales data reported by Compustat. Results

show that foreign sales also increase executive pay which indicates that globalization broadly defined (i.e.

not just exports) is increasing compensation. Although there are data constraints, in terms of the years

covered, we find these additional results compelling and a valuable complement to our export findings.


2.3    Firm, Industry, & Executive Information

The ExecuComp data set is linked to the companion Compustat data set using a unique firm identifier

which allows us to merge executive compensation information with other firm-level measures in the larger

Compustat data set. In this way we can analyze the role of several factors that have been found to affect

executive pay.

    Following the insights of Gabaix and Landier (2008) and others, we include firm size as a predictor of

executive compensation. Our main measure of size is the firm’s number of workers. We prefer to utilize

employment rather than firm sales because the former is a stronger predictor of executive compensation

(see Table A4) and because sales mechanically includes exports.23 However, we show that our findings are

similar if we proxy for size using firm employment, sales, assets, costs, stock price, or market value (see

Table A4).

    Technological change, in particular in the form of information and communication technology, is likely

to affect executive compensation (see Antràs and Rossi-Hansberg 2009, Garicano and Rossi-Hansberg

2006). We measure technology investment using information on the capital expenditures of the firm, as

in Feenstra and Hanson (1999), and alternatively by R&D expenditures. As shown in Table A8 far fewer

firms report information on R&D, yet the estimated impact of exports on executive compensation remains

largely unchanged.

    By encouraging skimming or rent-capture, poor corporate governance may be an important driver

of executive compensation (e.g., Bertrand and Mullainathan 2001). Building on existing approaches, we

measure governance using information on the relationship between the executives and the board of directors
  23
     Furthermore, we prefer employment to market value because both market value and executive compensation are typically
a function of the firm’s stock price, and thus a positive correlation is not surprising (e.g., Himmelberg and Hubbard 2000).




                                                            12
of the company, whose tasks include making compensation decisions.24 Specifically, our interlock measure

is defined as a binary variable indicating whether any executive at the firm (in a given year) serves on

the board’s compensation committee, or serves on another company’s compensation board that has an

executive serving on their board. Firms that have executives determining their own compensation may be

more prone to rent-capture. Alternatively, we utilize a different measure of board composition, board, that

is defined as a binary variable indicating whether three or more executives serve on the board of directors.

This measure does not focus on the compensation committee per se, but rather captures the more general

influence of executives on the board of directors.25

    We recognize that the corporate governance of the firm may itself be endogenous. To assess the

importance of this we define alternate measures of insider board relationships which eliminate all short-run

potentially endogenous fluctuations in corporate governance. Employing these measures leads to similar

results (Table A6). Also note that the incidence of insider board relationships has declined towards the

end of the sample period due in part to the 2002 Sarbanes-Oxley Act and other legislation designed to

improve corporate governance.

    Executive compensation may also respond to firm markups, which have been steadily increasing since

1980 (De Loecker and Eeckhout 2017). Firms with higher markups are likely to be more profitable and

thus may be able to pay their executives more. We measure markups using information on total sales and

the total cost of goods sold, both from Compustat.26

    In addition to these firm characteristics, we also account for broader industry-level conditions that could

potentially influence the relationship between executive compensation and globalization. Specifically, we

include a measure of industry value added provided by the Bureau of Economic Analysis at approximately

the 3-digit NAICS level. In Appendix A.5 we also examine the impact of top marginal tax rates in the

firm’s headquarter state on executive compensation (see Piketty, Saez, and Stantcheva 2014).

    Finally, we include a number of executive characteristics in the analysis. While the availability of

executive-level variables is less comprehensive than firm-level data, we have information on experience,

education, and gender. Experience is defined as the number of years the individual has been a top five
   24
      There is scope for conflicts of interest because, for example, directors receive compensation for serving on the company’s
board. Bebchuk and Fried (2004) report that directors at the largest firms receive on average $152,000 annually.
   25
      We have also considered several corporate governance indices, including the“Governance Index” constructed by Gompers,
Ishii, and Metrick (2003) and the “Entrenchment Index” constructed by Bebchuk, Cohen, and Ferell (2008). However the
coverage of both of these variables is limited: they are only available every few years between 1990 and 2006. We lose three
quarters of our sample when these governance proxies are included and thus strong inferences are not possible. Findings in
Appendix A.8 use an alternate measure of poor governance, defined using the co-movement of executive pay and the firm’s
stock price, and show the results are similar.
   26
      Firm-specific markups are calculated as 0.85*(total sales / total costs of goods sold) following De Loecker and Eeckhout
(2017) page 37.



                                                              13
executive at any firm in the ExecuComp data set.27 Education is defined as whether the executive has

a doctorate degree. Another appealing feature of the data is that we can observe individuals entering

and exiting the top echelon of a firm. Executive turnover may be important for executive pay given the

predictions of competitive assignment models discussed in section 4.3.


2.4    Descriptive Statistics

Table 1 reports summary statistics of our key variables. For obvious reasons our analysis is restricted

to industries for which there is information on trade and foreign direct investment.28 Furthermore, the

handful of firms that report compensation information for fewer than five executives are dropped from the

analysis. For firms that report compensation information for more than five executives, only the top five

are included in the sample. This ensures that each firm in the sample has compensation information for

exactly their five highest paid executives.29

    Our sample includes approximately 48,000 observations and covers close to 11,000 executives, about 800

firms, 204 six-digit NAICS industries, and two decades (years 1993-2013). As we see in Table 1, the mean

natural log of executive compensation across all years is 7.38, which translates into pay of approximately

$1.6m per year (in 2014 dollars). For CEO’s, executive compensation averages $3.4m across all years (not

reported). Both findings are consistent with the 2013 compensation values discussed in section 2.1. We also

see that 6% of the sample has interlock relationships and 16% of the sample has three or more executives

on the board (board ). Executives have on average five years of experience as a top five manager, the large

majority of executives in our sample are male, and a small fraction have a doctoral degree.

    The compensation, trade, firm-level, and executive-level variables are similar across different samples

and as a consequence our results are robust to the use of alternate samples (see Table A5). Furthermore,

results from Figures 3 indicate that the executive compensation components in our sample are similar in

relative size to those found in the literature. We also confirm in Figure A3 that executive compensation

and globalization have both increased substantially over our sample period, with trends similar to those

seen in Figure 2, which provides additional external validity for our analysis.

    To gain further insight into the data, the left panel of Figure 4 plots the average executive compensation

at the firm against lagged exports. A significant positive relationship emerges (the dotted lines give the
  27
      The results are similar if experience is defined as the number of years that the executive has been at the firm or the
number of years the executive has been the CEO of the firm (see section 4.4).
   28
      For instance, services industries are excluded. Note that globalization may have an even stronger impact on service
industries such as finance and entertainment, than on the mostly manufacturing industries that are included in our analysis.
   29
      Section 5.4 examines whether globalization differentially affects executives within this group of top executives.




                                                            14
95% confidence interval), which is consistent with the hypothesis that firms that are more integrated into

global markets pay their executives more. However, this relationship could arise, for example, because both

variables are trending upwards or because unobserved firm characteristics are correlated with both exports

and executive compensation. To account for these and other confounding factors, the right panel controls

for both firm and year fixed effects and plots the residuals. Our baseline analysis exploits these within-firm

changes over time, and a significant positive relationship is evident.30 It is encouraging that this finding

emerges in such a raw cut of the data. The remainder of the paper examines several key aspects of this

relationship in a more rigorous econometric analysis.

                                                                                 FIGURE 4


                                       Executive Compensation and Exports                                               Executive Compensation and Exports (Controlling for FE)
                  12




                                                                                                       3           2
    ln(Executive Compensation)




                                                                                        ln(Executive Compensation)
                           10




                                                                                                          1
                 8




                                                                                         -1        0
     6




                                                                                                       -2
                  4




                                  15                      20                25                                         -4            -2              0              2             4
                                                   Lagged ln(Exports)                                                                        Lagged ln(Exports)


Notes: Average executive compensation (TDC1) versus lagged firm-specific exports is on the left; an analogous scatter plot is on the right after
controlling for firm fixed effects and year fixed effects.




3                                Impact of Exports on Executive Pay

This section tackles our first key question of whether globalization influences executive compensation.


3.1                              Approach

We adopt a simple framework to examine the relationship between executive compensation and exports,

given by the following equation:



(1) ln compif nt = β1 ln expf t−1 +β2 ln sizef nt−1 +β3 ln techf nt−1 +β40 Xf nt−1 +β50 Eif nt +γt +γf +γn +εif nt .
       30
                       We also consider within executive variation over time and find similar results (see Table 11).



                                                                                   15
The dependent variable is the total compensation (TDC1) of executive i, at firm f , in industry n, and in

year t. On the right side are firm specific exports (exp), firm size (size), and technology investments at

the firm (tech). The vector X includes other firm and industry level characteristics that may influence

executive compensation, including measures of corporate governance, markups, and imports. In addition,

the specification will include industry value added to control for shocks affecting compensation at the

industry level. The vector E includes our executive-level variables, experience, education, and gender.

    Equation (1) also includes fixed effects at the year, firm, and industry level (γt , γf , and γn respectively).

The inclusion of these fixed effects implies that identification comes from within-firm changes over time,

which is common in the literature (e.g., Bertrand and Mullainathan 2001) and is a natural starting point

given our interest in how firm-specific global shocks affect executive compensation. An alternative approach

is to exploit variation over time within a given executive or job spell, and thus we show that the results are

similar when executive fixed effects or executive-by-firm fixed effects are included (see Table 11).31 Robust

standard errors clustered at the industry level are reported throughout and estimation is by least squares.

    This section examines whether exports have a positive impact on executive compensation. To the

extent that they do, subsequent sections will investigate whether this is driven by market returns to talent

and actions or non-market returns such as rent capture. Growth in firm size may increase the scope of

the executive’s job and thus increase compensation accordingly. Similarly, new technology may enable

executives to direct a larger workforce, which could increase the importance of the executive, and may

raise compensation accordingly. Exports can increase firm size and lead to new technology adoption,

which means that a portion of the export effect on executive compensation could operate through these

firm characteristics. By including size and technology together with exports in equation (1), we ask whether

exports drive up compensation conditional on these and other firm characteristics.

    Rising imports have adversely affected employment opportunities of some lower-skilled U.S. workers.

While the implications for executives are less clear, we do want to include imports in this specification.32 A

large literature shows that executive compensation depends on firm governance, in particular on the com-

position of the board of directors and its relationship with top executives (see Bertrand and Mullainathan

2001). Thus, we include in equation (1) a measure of interlocked relationships between executives and the
  31
      There is less variation over time within an executive or a job spell because the majority of executives are a top manager
at only one firm in the sample and their tenure tends to be relatively short. Note that in some specifications we rely on a
time-varying measure of the firm’s industry, which means that including firm and industry fixed effects is important.
   32
      Import competition may adversely affect firm performance and thus lower executive compensation but imported inputs
may positively affect the firm and thus increase executive compensation. See Cuñat and Guadalupe (2009) for additional
details on imports and executive compensation. In our context, we find that imports and exogenous import shocks have no
impact on executive compensation (Appendix A.7).




                                                              16
compensation committee. Finally, our analysis includes measures of firm markups, industry value added,

and executive-level controls, all of which could influence executive compensation.


3.2    Findings

Table 2 reports the results from estimating equation (1). We begin by focusing on our measures of

globalization and then we sequentially include additional covariates. After accounting for fixed effects, we

find that exports have a significant positive impact on executive compensation, while the import coefficient

is close to zero (and insignificant), see column 1.

    Firm characteristics that are commonly found to affect executive compensation are also important in our

context, as shown in column 2. First, firm size enters with a positive coefficient, reflecting that as the firm

grows and the scope of the executive’s job expands, compensation rises accordingly. Second, we find that

technology investments also raise executive compensation (see column 2), indicating that new technologies

complement executives in the production process, increase their marginal product, and thus drive up their

compensation. Pivoting from explanations centered on the changing nature of the job to explanations

focused on corporate governance and the degree of competition, we see that both poor governance and

higher markups have a positive, although imprecisely estimated, impact on executive compensation.33

    Importantly, we see that after the inclusion of these firm characteristics, exports still positively impact

executive pay (column 2).34 This is an important empirical finding since it extends an existing result that

firm size explains all of the recent growth in executive compensation (Gabaix and Landier 2008). While

we confirm that firm size is important, our results show that globalization, as well as technology, affect

executive pay conditional on firm size. Moreover, this result holds irrespective of how firm size or technology

are measured (see Table A.4 for alternative firm size measures, including sales, stock price, and market

value, and Table A.8 for R&D as an alternative measure of technology). Interestingly, the export coefficient

drops by 38% from column 1 to 2, indicating that a portion of the impact of exports on executive pay

operates through firm characteristics such as size. This is not surprising, given the abundance of evidence

that shows trade liberalization increases firm size, and that firm size in turn influences executive pay.

    Executive compensation may also vary with broader conditions, such as industry-wide productivity or

price shocks. While our firm performance measures should partially account for these changing economic

conditions, we also include a measure of industry value added in column 3. The positive and significant point
  33
     Note that firm governance may be endogenous, which we address in Appendix A.6.
  34
     The fact that the results are significant conditional on a variety of firm characteristics indicates that the link between
exports and executive compensation is not simply due to a mechanical relationship where compensation contracts reward firm
performance.


                                                              17
estimate indicates that industry shocks do influence executive compensation. Meanwhile, the coefficient

on exports falls by another 32% (0.12 in column 2 to 0.08 in column 3), although it remains positive and

significant. Conditional on industry value added, exports are found to be an important driver of executive

pay.35

     The results remain largely unchanged when we add executive-level variables, specifically experience,

gender (male), and education (Dr.). All three positively affect executive compensation (column 4). Im-

portantly, globalization, size, technology, and value added continue to be significant predictors of executive

pay even after controlling for these executive characteristics. These results are both plausible and consis-

tent with existing research, which provides support for our empirical approach and makes our new export

findings all the more interesting.

     To more easily compare economic magnitudes, column 5 reports normalized (beta) coefficients for the

column 4 specification. We see that the export coefficient is similar in magnitude to the coefficients on size

and technology investment. This indicates that exports is just as important for executive compensation

as the relatively more common firm size and technology explanations. We also confirm these results are

not specific to exports but reflect globalization more generally by showing that executive compensation

is increasing with the firm’s foreign direct investment (see Table 10). Imports, on the other hand, are

found to be unimportant for executive compensation in Table 2, which likely reflects the competing effects

of imported intermediate inputs and rising import competition in final goods. We conclude that global-

ization, and in particular access to foreign markets, is playing an important role in the rise of executive

compensation.



4         Export Shocks and Market Returns

Our results indicate that exports are an important driver of executive pay, but can we say more on why

exports increase compensation? We are particularly interested in role of market versus non-market forces

in determining executive compensation. Pay may increase simply because the executive’s action leads to

firm expansion abroad, which clearly would be a market return to executive talent. This section tests this

hypothesis by examining whether executive pay responds to exogenous export shocks that are outside of

the executive’s control. We then consider the possibility that even exogenous export shocks alter market

conditions which in turn increases executive pay.
    35
         A variety of extensions confirm the robustness of this result, as shown in Table 11.




                                                                  18
4.1     Identification of Shocks

Our firm-specific export measure partially addresses endogeneity concerns by using presample business

segment shares at the firm and export growth of these products over time. However, it is still possible that

industry export growth could be affected by endogenous domestic conditions, which in turn are correlated

with executive compensation. Thus, we now identify an exogenous source of variation in industry exports

driven by conditions in the foreign importing country.

      Our strategy draws on the influential Bartik (1991) instrumental variable approach and applies it to

our global trade setting. The original Bartik instrument takes presample industry employment within a

city and assumes this grows at the same rate as industry employment at the national level. In line with

this approach, we use presample U.S. export flows for each detailed industry and allow these trade flows

to grow at an exogenous rate. Instead of using the aggregate U.S. growth rate, as suggested by Bartik’s

approach, we employ the more exogenous industry-level export growth in other high-income countries.36

Specifically, we multiply presample 1991 bilateral export flows for each detailed industry by the growth

in industry exports from eight other countries.37 These predicted bilateral export flows are then summed

across all foreign destination markets to obtain predicted U.S. exports abroad in a particular industry and

year:

                                                           X
(2)                                  bartik exp ivnt =           (expnc1991 ∗ (1 + gnt )),
                                                             c


where expnc1991 is bilateral exports to country c in industry n in 1991 and gnt the growth rate of exports

from other developed countries from 1991 to year t in industry n.38

      This approach identifies variation in U.S. exports stemming from common import demand shocks for

a particular good, as well as falling trade costs for this good. For instance, the growth of China would

typically lead to an increase in exports of a particular good from both the U.S. and from other high-income

countries. Importantly, by relying on variation that is unrelated to executive (or domestic firm or industry

characteristics), this method eliminates fluctuations in exports that are due to managerial decisions. If
   36
      This approach is preferred to employing aggregate U.S. export growth because patterns of globalization are highly
industry-specific.
   37
      The eight countries are Australia, Denmark, Finland, Germany, Japan, New Zealand, Spain, and Switzerland, as in
Autor, Dorn, and Hanson (2013).
   38
      One advantage of this instrument is that it can be constructed for sporadic years in which no bilateral export flows exist,
since it only relies on presample bilateral exports and the industry level growth from other developed countries. Thus, the
instrument is balanced and does not pick up extensive margin adjustments into or out of foreign destination markets which
can occur in the actual data set and could be endogenous. It is possible to further simplify equation 2 by pulling the g term
through the summation, but we prefer this notational form given subsequent instrumental variable approaches utilized in
section 6.4.



                                                                 19
executives are rewarded solely for their actions, then executive compensation will be unresponsive to

exogenous export shocks, and our export instrumental-variables (IV) coefficient will be zero. On the other

hand, if the export coefficient is positive, this will provide evidence that the executive is being rewarded

for something other than their actions. Below we will also consider the possibility that export shocks alter

other market conditions for executives which in turn influence their pay.

   One important threat to our identification strategy is that exports from the U.S. and other high-income

countries might be driven by common export supply shocks rather than common import demand shocks.

This would be problematic for our instrumental-variable approach to the extent that these domestic supply

shocks are also correlated with executive compensation. We address this concern in three ways. First, the

construction of the instrument relies on a sample of countries that reduce this risk. For instance, Canada

is not included in this comparison group, since the likelihood that it experiences similar export supply

shocks as the U.S. is comparatively high. Second, we explicitly control for several of the most plausible

domestic supply shocks, such as those related to scale, technological change, and industry shocks. Third, we

introduce alternate instrumental variable strategies that addresses this and other threats to identification.

One approach constructs an instrumental variable using fluctuations in world import demand, while another

approach exploits fluctuations in exchange rates. As shown in section 6.4, these alternate instrumental

variables are based on quite different identification strategies but generate similar results.


4.2   Export Shock Findings

Figure 5 illustrates a strong positive relationship between actual exports and the instrumental variable

after accounting for firm and year fixed effects:




                                                      20
                                                                        FIGURE 5


                                                    Exports and Bartik Export Instrumental Variable (IV)




                                   4
                                   2
                          Lagged ln(Exports)
                                  0-2
                                   -4




                                               -6          -4          -2              0            2      4
                                                                   Lagged ln(Bartik Export IV)


                        Notes: Lagged exports are plotted against the lagged Bartik export IV, controlling
                        for firm and year fixed effects.




More formally, the bottom panel of Table 3 reports the first-stage instrumental variable results. Consistent

with Figure 5, we see that the instrument is a strong predictor of actual export flows. The coefficient on the

export instrument falls when we include additional firm, industry, and executive characteristics, but the

instrument remains an important predictor of exports. Furthermore, the robust (Sanderson-Windmeijer,

SW) F-statistics on the excluded instrument indicates relatively strong first-stages.

    The upper panel of Table 3 reports the corresponding second-stage instrumental variable results. With

only exports and imports included in column 1, the coefficient on the former is 0.40 while the latter is

zero. The finding that exports increase executive pay while imports do not is the same pattern we saw in

the OLS results.39 Adding firm and industry characteristics reduces the export coefficient to about 0.3,

see column 2, and it stays this size when our executive-level measures are also included (column 3). By

construction this empirical approach identifies fluctuations in exports that are not driven by executive,

firm, or domestic industry characteristics.40 If executives are only rewarded for their actions, then their

compensation will be unresponsive to these exogenous export shocks. In contrast, the findings in Table 3
   39
      We have also explored an analogous instrumental-variable approach on the import side, but there is no evidence that
import shocks significantly affect executive compensation (reported in Appendix A.7).
   40
      These results are not sensitive to our firm size measure (employment). For instance, if sales is used to measure firm size
instead, the export coefficient is 0.279 (compared to 0.300 in column 3) and the firm size coefficient is 0.069 (compared to
0.099 in column 3).




                                                                            21
show that executives are rewarded for factors that are unrelated to their behavior. Furthermore, we find

that the effect is sizable: a 10% export shock leads to a 3% increase in executive pay (column 3).41

    If it is not returns to executive actions, then why do export shocks increase executive pay? One

possibility is that executives reap non-market returns; in particular the exogenous export shock provides

a rent-capture opportunity that savvy executives exploit. But this is not the only possible explanation.

Even if the export shock is not caused by executive actions, it may influence executive pay through other

components of what are broadly defined as market returns. For instance, a positive export shock may

cause the firm to match with a more talented and highly paid executive. Relatedly, a positive export shock

may cause the nature of the executive’s job to change which in turn drives up compensation. While we

control for some components of the executive’s job, including firm size and technology, it is still possible

that the nature of the job is changing in other, less observable ways. These channels will be explored in

the subsequent sections.

    Before proceeding, note that these instrumental variable point estimates are somewhat larger than the

analogous OLS coefficients in Table 2. Taken at face value, one possible explanation is that discrimination

against foreign-born executives results in lower pay but these executives are precisely the ones that are

more successful at expanding abroad given their familiarity with other countries. This would introduce

a spurious negative bias in the OLS coefficient, which is then addressed by identifying exogenous export

shocks unrelated to the executive. More generally, while it is tempting to make inferences about the relative

importance of returns to managerial decisions versus other types of returns by comparing the magnitudes

of the OLS and IV estimates, the instrumental variable approach eliminates not only the endogenous

returns but also measurement error and omitted variable bias. This complicates attempts to interpret the

difference between the OLS and IV results.


4.3     Market Returns through Re-Assignment

Assignment models predict positive assortative matching where talented workers are hired by better firms

(Sattinger 1975, Rosen 1981).42 Gabaix and Landier (2008) and Terviö (2008) have shown that the insights

from the assignment model are useful in explaining CEO compensation. While certainly important, we are

asking a more nuanced question about whether the impact of globalization on executive pay is driven by
   41
      In the context of the optimal-contracts literature, our instrumental-variables finding is at odds with the result that optimal
contracts should typically reward executives only for relative performance differences (relative performance evaluation, RPE;
Holmström 1979), because, by construction, the shock was not caused by the executive. While in principle pay-for-shocks
can be consistent with an optimal contractual compensation scheme (see Edmans, Gabaix, and Jenter 2017), our subsequent
results suggest this is not driving our findings.
   42
      For a recent analysis in the context of trade and inequality, see Monte (2011).


                                                                22
assortative matching.

      This section introduces elements of Gabaix and Landier (2008) to fix ideas about export shocks and

market returns in a multi-executive setting. Let there be a continuum of firms (n) and potential executives

(m) that are matched together. Low n denotes a larger firm and low m a more talented executive. Thus,

n and m can be thought of as the rank of the firm and the rank of an executive, respectively. Firm n has

size S(n) and executive m has talent T(m), where S’(n)<0, T’(m)<0. The executive’s talent increases

firm value according to:



(3)                                         V = S(n) + c × S(n)γ T (m),


where c > 0 is a constant. For present purposes, the key is that the multiplicative structure of firm size

S(n) and executive talent T(m) in equation (3) implies that the productivity of talent increases with firm

size.43 In our context this means that if a positive export shock increases firm size it leads to higher

executive pay because the productivity of talent has increased. This structure implies that, at any point

in time, a more talented executive should run a larger firm. Consequently, any changes in the relative size

of the firm should lead to executive turnover. Firms that see their exports grow relative to others should

attract top talent, while firms that expand more slowly should lose talented executives.44

      We begin by examining the frequency of executive turnover, which is an important element of the

assignment model hypothesis. Table 4 reports simple descriptive statistics, using all of the top executives

in the ExecuComp data set from 1992 through 2014. We see that the vast majority of executives (92%)

work at only one firm and less than one percent of executives work at three or more firms.45 These finding

are consistent with other studies that show top managers often stay at one firm for several years and rarely

move directly from the top position at one firm to another (Frydman and Jenter 2010; Edmans, Gabaix,

and Jenter 2017).

      While executive turnover is infrequent, the most important question for our analysis is, do export

shocks increase the likelihood of executive turnover in a way that influences our pay findings? As a point

of reference, the left hand side of Figure 6 shows the positive relationship between export shocks and

executive compensation. Then the right hand side of Figure 6 shows the relevant relationship between

export shocks and the share of new executives at the firm. While there is a slight positive relationship it
  43
      Gabaix and Landier (2008) show that if γ = 1 there should be a unit elasticity of firm size and CEO pay.
  44
      Note that our regression specification conditions on employment, so this mechanism would have to operate through a
broader notion of firm size.
   45
      If executives switch to or from firms outside this large Compustat sample, then these numbers will be different.



                                                          23
is less positive and less significant than the relationship between export shocks and compensation on the

left.46

                                                                               FIGURE 6


                        Compensation and Export Shocks (Controlling for FEs)                                         Share of New Execs and Export Shocks (Controlling for FEs)
           3




                                                                                                      1
           2




                                                                                                                .5
                                                                                          Share of New Executives
  Total Compensation
                1




                                                                                                     0
         0 -1




                                                                                        -.5
           -2




                                                                                                      -1
                       -6         -4          -2                  0   2        4                                     -6          -4          -2                  0    2           4
                                                   Exports (IV)                                                                                   Exports (IV)


Notes: Average executive compensation (left side) and share of new top executives at the firm (right side) are plotted against lagged exports (IV). Both
scatterplots control for firm and year fixed effects and plot the residuals.




           We test the impact of exports on executive turnover in column 1 of Table 5. We find that export shocks

increase the probability of a new top executive at the firm, after controlling for a wide variety of other

factors. However, this effect is relatively small; a ten percent export shock increases the probability of a new

executive by 0.5%. Column 2 re-reports our key results where we see a much larger impact of export shocks

on executive pay (which is also evident in Figure 6). Column 3 shows that new executives tend to earn less

than their more seasoned colleagues (see the New Exec coefficient), but importantly this has no bearing on

the estimated impact of exports. Column 4 tests the assortative matching prediction by examining whether

new executives hired after a positive export shock are more talented and thus earn more. The coefficient

on the Export*New Exec interaction term is positive and significant, indicating that executives hired after

an export shock earn more than other newly hired executives. However, the magnitude of this effect is

relatively small: a ten percent export shock leads to a newly hired executive earning 0.35% more while an

existing executive earns 3% more. The assignment model is important in many settings and there is some

evidence that it is playing a role in our context, however we conclude that it is not central in explaining

the observed relationship between export shocks and executive compensation.
    46
     It is possible that although executive turnover is quite rare, simply the threat of turnover may raise executive compensa-
tion. Formally, this contestable market argument would require an extension of the basic assignment model, where increasing
compensation is only forthcoming if the executive actually moves. Furthermore, the threat of leaving is only credible if the
executive has skills that are in demand at other firms, such as education or experience which we will explore in the next
section.


                                                                                   24
4.4      Market Returns through Changing Nature of the Job

Export shocks may also change the nature of the executive’s job, thereby altering the market returns to

executive talent. While we control for some key factors, such as size and technology, it is possible that

globalization could affect other, less observable conditions, including the complexity of the job, competitive

environment, or the organizational structure of the firm. These changing job characteristics are not driven

by the executive’s actions but they may nonetheless increase the demand for talented executives which will

raise compensation accordingly.

     The remaining columns of Table 5 provide evidence on this by examining whether global shocks dispro-

portionately raise the compensation of the more experienced and educated executives. While experience

and education do increase executive pay directly (unreported in Table 5), we do not find that export shocks

disproportionately increase pay to these types of workers. None of the export interaction terms in columns

5-8 are positive and significant.

     The limited evidence in Table 5 for increasing market returns in response to exogenous export shocks

shows that reassignment and returns to experience and education are not central to explaining our find-

ings.47 Of course, it is possible that export shocks alter other unobservable dimensions of executive talent.

For instance, perhaps the executives that benefit from export shocks are the ones that speak foreign lan-

guages, have connections abroad, or are familiar with foreign business practices. Another possibility is

that globalization increases executive compensation because of non-market forces which we examine in the

next section.



5        Export Shocks and Non-Market Returns

After finding that the impact of global shocks on executive pay is not primarily driven by market returns,

we are left with non-market returns, and in particular rent-capture, as a potential explanation. Perhaps

globalization is increasing the pay of executives precisely because these workers are well placed to benefit

from rent-capture opportunities. Distinguishing between market and non-market returns is important both

because it informs public attitudes about rising executive compensation and because the policy response

to these alternate explanations differs.
    47
     Additional results show that export shocks do not disproportionately increase the pay of executives at larger or more
technologically advanced firms (unreported).




                                                           25
5.1    Asymmetry

We know from Table 3 that executives are rewarded for external export shocks that are unrelated to their

actions. However, if positive export shocks and negative export shocks are equally likely and their impact

symmetric, then globalization alone can not explain rising executive compensation. It turns out that

positive export shocks are much more common than negative ones, in line with the increase in exports over

this period (see Figures 2 and A3).48 Furthermore, there is evidence that the response of compensation

to positive and negative export shocks is not symmetric. Figure 7 plots the percent change in firm-level

executive pay against the percent change in our export instrumental variable.49 There is an overall positive

relationship, consistent with the results from Table 3.50 However, this relationship differs depending on the

sign of the shock. The kinked fitted line in Figure 7 illustrates that positive export shocks have a stronger

impact on executive compensation than negative export shocks. In fact, there is no evidence that negative

export shocks lower compensation at all (the slope of this line is 0.035 and is not statistically different from

zero). Positive shocks, however, do significantly raise executive compensation (the slope is 0.081 with a

p-value of 0.02).

    This asymmetry raises the possibility that rent-capture is playing a role in the relationship between

exports and executive pay. In fact, executives benefiting from positive shocks but not suffering the con-

sequences of negative shocks is exactly what one would expect if rent-capture is important. Executives

successfully capture a portion of the proceeds associated with positive shocks but adverse shocks do not

lead to rent-capture opportunities and thus do not affect executive pay.
  48
      This is confirmed in Figure 7 below, where a disproportionate share of export shocks are positive (72%) compared to
negative (28%).
   49
      By using average firm-level executive pay, we address concerns that negative shocks could cause executives to exit the
sample due to termination.
   50
      While not shown in the figure, this relationship is positive and significant at the one percent level.




                                                            26
                                                                              FIGURE 7


                                                  The Asymmetric Effect of Export Shocks on Executive Compensation




                                   3        1.5
                      % Change in Compensation
                        -1.5       0
                                   -3




                                                   -6           -4           -2              0              2        4
                                                                 % Change in Exports (Instrumental Variable)


                    Notes: Annual percent change in average firm-level total compensation (TDC1)
                    plotted against the annual percent change in the export instrument. Fitted lines
                    show how compensation responds to positive and negative export shocks.




   Of course, this asymmetric finding does not prove rent-capture and thus in subsequent sections we

examine more formally whether non-market forces is contributing to the observed relationship between

globalization and executive compensation. We employ three approaches to shed light on rent-capture.

First, we examine whether exogenous export shocks disproportionately affect more discretionary types of

compensation that are conducive to rent-capture. Second, we ask whether the impact of export shocks on

executive pay is stronger at poor governance firms where rent-capture is more likely. Finally, we exploit

the fact that some executives, in particular CEOs, have more managerial power to influence pay decisions.


5.2   Discretionary versus Non-Discretionary Pay

We distinguish between the following compensation categories: salary, bonuses, options, stocks, and other

forms of compensation (as seen in Figure 3). We hypothesize that forms of compensation that can be

adjusted in the short-term in relatively discretionary ways will be more prone to rent-capture. Thus,

exogenous export shocks will tilt compensation towards less-structured and more discretionary components

of pay if rent-capture is important.

   Salaries are considered to be the “fixed component” in executive contracts (Murphy 1999), and in

comparison bonus payments are more flexible. In Murphy’s (1999) analysis the share of firms employ-


                                                                                  27
ing discretionary elements in their bonus payments was up to 52%, depending on industry (his Table 4).

Furthermore, even when bonuses are based on performance measures, performance can be subjective and

based on qualitative evaluations (Edmans, Gabaix, and Jenter 2017), boards can make discretionary ad-

justments to performance measures, boards also have discretion in allocating a fixed bonus pool across

executives, and there is discretion associated with which performance measure among several will be used

(Murphy 1999). Furthermore, rent-capture is common in termination payments (the ’golden handshake’)

and personal benefits (e.g. use of company aircraft for family travel). Both termination payments and

personal benefits are in our ’other compensation’ category. Overall, compensation arrangements are often

camouflaged to appear as if they reward performance when in practice they may not (Bivens and Mishel

2013).

    Table 6 reports results showing the impact of exogenous export shocks on different components of exec-

utive pay. For ease of comparison, column 1 re-reports the earlier results which use total compensation as

the dependent variable, while columns 2-6 decompose compensation into salary, bonuses, options awarded,

stocks, and other compensation. We see that exogenous export shocks have no impact on salary (column

2). In contrast, we find that exogenous export shocks have a strong positive impact on bonuses (column

3), with a coefficient almost twice as large as that for total compensation. Moreover, export shocks signif-

icantly increase other forms of compensation, including personal benefits, in column 6. Export shocks also

tend to positively affect options awarded and restricted stock grants, although these coefficients are not

significant at standard levels.51 Overall, these results are consistent with the hypothesis that export shocks

have a stronger impact on short-run, flexible forms of compensation that are more prone to rent-capture.

    Furthermore, we find that the presence of executives on the compensation committee (i.e. interlock )52

significantly increases bonus payments, while this has no impact on any of the other forms of compensation

(not reported due to space constraints). The fact that poor governance is associated with larger bonuses

strengthens the evidence that bonuses are more susceptible to rent-capture. It is possible that poor

governance may be correlated with unobserved firm characteristics that could influence executive pay.

However, after addressing the possibility that poor governance is endogenous, we find results that are

somewhat larger in magnitude (Table A6). This is consistent with an endogeneity bias that attenuates the

positive effect of poor governance.53
   51
      Export shocks tend to have a larger impact on options exercised compared to options awarded (0.709 - unreported versus
0.420 - in column 4), although the former coefficient is insignificant. This provides some evidence that the executive’s ability
to choose when to exercise options means that this component of pay is more sensitive to export shocks.
   52
      Or a reciprocal relationship with another firm.
   53
      Poor governance is likely correlated with poor firm performance which all else equal (i.e. in the absence of rent-capture)
will lower executive compensation. Thus, to the extent that endogeneity is an issue one would expect a negative bias in our



                                                              28
    Overall, these results indicate that the impact of export shocks on executive pay depends strongly

on the specific form of compensation. Discretionary pay categories such as bonuses are increasing in the

presence of export shocks, which is what one would expect if executives engage in rent-capture activities.

Of course there are other reasons discretionary pay may be especially responsive (i.e. they may be more

closely tied to performance measures), so additional tests for rent-capture are pursued next. Because we

find the strongest effect for bonus payments, we extend this analysis in the subsequent sections. Additional

results for other components of compensation are shown in Appendix A.6.


5.3     Poor Governance

If rent-capture is important, the impact of export shocks on bonuses should be stronger at firms with

poor corporate governance. This section examines this hypothesis as another means to assess whether

rent-capture is driving globalization’s impact on executive pay.

    To formally test this idea we interact export shocks with measures of poor corporate governance.

Recall that our measures of poor governance include whether a firm has an executive that serves on the

compensation committee (interlock )54 and whether a firm has at least three executives on the board of

directors (board ). The first of these measures more directly reflects the executive’s impact on the pay

process itself, while the second captures general executive influence over the board.

    Column 1 of Table 7 re-reports our earlier bonus result, while column 2 includes the interaction of

exports with interlock. We instrument for both exports and the export interaction term (using the interac-

tion of the export instrumental variable and interlock ). The positive and significant interaction coefficient

indicates that export shocks disproportionately increase bonuses at poor governance firms. A 10% export

shock raises bonuses by 5.7% in general, but at poor governance firms bonuses increase by about 7.2%. In

other words, the impact of export shocks on executive bonuses is much stronger at firms where rent-capture

is likely.

    Exogenous export shocks also disproportionately increase bonuses at firms where many executives are

on the board of directors, as seen in column 3. Specifically, a 10% export shocks raises bonuses by 7.2%

at these poor governance firms, compared to about 5.5% at other firms. Finally, column 4 shows that the

two poor governance measures are largely orthogonal to each other and both still positively influence the

relationship between export shocks and executive bonuses. We conclude that poor corporate governance

is important in understanding the relationship between export shocks and executive bonuses.
results, which would work against our findings.
   54
      Or a reciprocal relationship with another firm.


                                                        29
    One might be concerned that the composition and structure of the board of directors is endogenous.

We have two approaches to address this issue. First, we identify long-run averages of governance that break

the potential link between governance and short-run fluctuations in firm performance. In turns out that

estimates using this approach are similar to or actually slightly stronger than these results (see Table A6).

Second, we confirm these results with a poor governance measures that does not rely on board structure

at all but rather, in the spirit of the asymmetry finding of Figure 7, examines whether pay rises when the

firm’s stock price falls (see Table A8). Overall, these findings provide further evidence that rent-capture

plays a role in globalization’s impact on executive compensation.


5.4    Managerial Power

Our final piece of evidence on rent-capture focuses on whether more powerful executives are the ones that

disproportionately benefit from export shocks at poor governance firms. Relative to their less influential

colleagues, powerful managers, such as CEOs, should be well placed to capture the rents from unexpected

shocks.

    The results from this analysis are presented in Table 8. In columns 1 and 2, we begin by splitting the

sample into CEOs and non-CEOs and find that the linear coefficient on exports is larger for CEOs (0.73

versus 0.53).55 This indicates that managerial power matters in the context of global shocks.56 However,

we are also interested in whether export shocks at poor governance firms disproportionately affect CEO

pay. We see that the coefficient on the export*interlock interaction term is 0.38 for CEOs (column 1), which

is substantially larger than the 0.10 coefficient for non-CEOs (in column 2). In other words, a 10% export

shock increases CEO bonuses by 11% at poor governance firms but increases non-CEO bonuses by 6.3%

at these same firms. In columns 3 and 4, we use the alternative board measure of poor governance instead.

Again the results show that CEOs disproportionately benefit: a 10% export shock increases CEO bonuses

by almost 10% at poorly governed firms but increases non-CEO bonuses by only 6.5% at poorly governed

firms. This provides further evidence that it is powerful executives who benefit most from globalization,

due to their rent-capture opportunities.

    Interestingly, the magnitude of the interaction effect in columns 1 and 3 indicates that having an

executive on the compensation committee is more conducive to the CEO capturing rents than simply

having many executives on the board of directors.57 On the right side of Table 8, we compare results for
  55
      Note that non-CEOs are still among the top 5 highest paid executives at the firm.
  56
      This is not true for all firm characteristics; for example, CEOs benefit less from growth in firm size than non-CEOs
according to our results (unreported).
   57
      In unreported results, we find that both interaction coefficients remain positive and significant predictors of CEO pay


                                                             30
the highest-paid (rank 1) and the lowest-paid (rank 5) executive at the firm according to total compensation

(TDC1). We find that export shocks at interlocked firms have a larger impact on the top ranked executive

compared to the fifth ranked executive (the export*interlock interaction coefficient is 0.18 versus 0.12, with

the latter coefficient insignificant). The difference between the highest paid and fifth-highest paid executive

is larger when we employ the board measure of poor governance (see columns 7 and 8).

    In sum, our findings present compelling evidence that rent-capture is playing a role in the link between

globalization and executive compensation. First, we find in Table 6 that exogenous export shocks exclu-

sively increase more discretionary forms of compensation (in particular bonuses), which are more conducive

to rent-capture. Second, we see in Table 7 that the impact on bonuses is strongest at poor governance

firms where rent-capture is more likely. Finally, the results in Table 8 show that, at these poor governance

firms, it is the executives with more power that are the ones that disproportionately reap the rewards from

exogenous export shocks.



6     Extensions

6.1    Executive versus Average Worker Pay

Our results indicate that exogenous export shocks increase executive compensation, but broader implica-

tions for inequality hinge on executives disproportionately benefiting from globalization. To the extent

that exports increase the wages of other workers at the firm in the same way, then there would be no effect

on within-firm inequality (see work by Song, Price, Guvenen, Bloom, and von Wachter 2015). Of course

not all firms are equally exposed to globalization, but those that are would experience little within-firm

inequality growth. One way to address this issue is by studying whether exports increase executive pay by

more than average worker pay.58

    Since firms are not required to report non-executive compensation in SEC filings, Compustat does not

include a direct measure of wages. We therefore define average wages at the firm as labor expenses per

employee, as in Bertrand and Mullainathan (1999). Unfortunately, not all firms in Compustat report labor

expenses. In cases where this variable is missing, we use average labor expenses per employee at other

similar firms within the same industry and year.59 This approach takes advantage of the fact that firms
when included simultaneously, with the export*interlock coefficient again being larger in magnitude.
   58
      Furthermore, if globalization is influencing executive pay through rent-capture, as our findings suggest, then focusing on
average worker pay represents a quasi-placebo test. Unlike executives, rank and file workers do not have managerial power
or insider relationships that will allow them to personally benefit from globalization. Thus, to the extent that rent-capture is
important, it should only influence executive compensation, which provides another check of our results.
   59
      Specifically, if firm-level average wage is missing then we use average wages at other firms within the same six-digit NAICS



                                                               31
in the same year and within an industry tend to pay similar wages. While this is not a perfect method, it

provides an opportunity to maintain a consistent sample of firms in light of data constraints.

    Our starting point is the instrumental variable specification from before which estimates the impact

of export shocks on total compensation (column 1 of Table 9). We then ask whether average worker

compensation within the firm responds to globalization in the same way. Column 2 shows that export

shocks have no significant impact on the average wages of workers at the firm. Finally, in column 3 we use

as the dependent variable the ratio of executive to average worker compensation. The export coefficient is

positive, which confirms that executives disproportionately benefit from exogenous export shocks relative to

the average worker.60 In other words, globalization is leading to within-firm inequality and thus inequality

between executives and the population at large.

    The firm size and technology results in Table 9 are also noteworthy. Consistent with the existing

literature, we find that larger firms tend to pay their executives more (column 1). However, we also find

that larger firms pay their workers more too (column 2) and thus firm size does not raise the executive to

worker pay ratio (column 3). These results show that while firm size increases the pay of executives, it does

not lead to within-firm inequality because they also pay higher average wages too. In contrast, we find that

capital expenditures increase executive compensation but decrease average worker compensation, which

is consistent with skill-biased technical change complementing skilled workers and substituting for less-

skilled workers. As a result, technology is found to increase the executive to worker pay gap (see column

3). Overall, these findings support our earlier results and show that both globalization and technology

increase within-firm inequality.


6.2    Foreign Direct Investment

Given the availability of detailed trade data, we have thus far focused on exports and imports as our

measures of globalization. Another component of globalization that may affect executive compensation is

foreign direct investment (FDI). Firms may offshore production to foreign affiliates and thus foreign affiliate

sales allow multinational firms to sell to their foreign customers without exporting.61 Unfortunately, data on

foreign sales in Compustat is limited in terms of the years covered and the destination of these sales (which

makes it impossible to identify foreign sales shocks using our instrumental-variable approach). However,
industry and year. If this industry-level wage is also missing, then we use average wage at the five-digit NAICS industry and
so forth. Of the estimated average wage data, 22% use the six-digit NAICS average, 16% use the five-digit average, 7% use
the four-digit average, 33% use the three-digit average, and 22% use the two-digit average.
   60
      Note that the results could be attenuated because executive pay is also included in the average worker compensation in
the denominator.
   61
      There is no data on offshoring to foreign arms-length suppliers in Compustat.


                                                             32
Compustat does measure foreign sales at the firm-level from 2000-2013, and data coverage becomes much

better post-2010. Given the importance of FDI in the global economy, we investigate the link between

foreign affiliate sales and executive compensation using this data.

   Table 10 reports the relationship between foreign affiliates sales and executive compensation. The

results in column 1 show that after accounting for a full set of controls and fixed effects, foreign sales

raise executive compensation. The relationship between foreign affiliate sales and executive compensation

strengthens when we include domestic sales (column 2). Interestingly the point estimate for foreign sales

(0.038) is four times larger than the point estimate for domestic sales (0.009). Earlier results showed

that global expansion increases executive compensation conditional on firm size, and the results in Table

10 provide further evidence that executive compensation is more sensitive to foreign expansion than to

domestic expansion. Finally, we see that foreign affiliate sales have a stronger impact on discretionary

pay categories, such as bonus payments (see column 3). Due to data constraints, these results should

be interpreted with caution. However, they provide another piece of evidence that globalization, broadly

defined, is indeed playing a role in the growth of executive compensation.


6.3   Executive and Industry Fixed Effects

Our analysis so far has exploited within-firm changes over time to identify the impact of globalization

on executive compensation. This section examines the sensitivity of our results to alternate identification

strategies that exploit different sources of variation. This includes pursuing estimation strategies that

account for unobserved executive, executive-by-firm, and industry-by-year characteristics.

   For comparison purposes, column 1 of Table 11 reports our previous estimates on the impact of export

shocks on executive compensation. We drop firm fixed effects in favor of executive fixed effects in column

2. This not only changes the identifying assumptions but it also substantially increases the number of

fixed effects (11,000 executives versus 800 firms). With only about four years of data for each executive, a

specification with executive fixed effects is demanding and limits the variation over time used to identify

the impact of globalization on executive pay. Nonetheless, in column 2 we see that export shocks have a

significant positive impact on executive pay after accounting for unobserved executive characteristics. A

ten percent export shocks leads to a 2.3% increase in executive pay which is similar to the 3% increase

estimated in column 1.

   Next, we include firm and executive fixed effects simultaneously. We find that exogenous export shocks

significantly increase executive pay in column 3. If anything the estimated impact is now larger, with a



                                                    33
ten percent export shock leading to a 4.6% increase in executive pay.62 Another approach is to exploit

variation within each job spell, by including firm-by-executive fixed effects. Since executive turnover is

limited and the vast majority of executives work for only one firm (see Table 4), the results including

firm-by-executive fixed effects in column 4 are similar to those reported in column 3. Overall, these results

show that exploiting variation within an executive over time leads to a similar estimated effect of exports

on compensation.

   Our analysis so far has dealt with potentially confounding industry conditions by controlling for industry

value added and identifying variation in exports that is unrelated to domestic conditions. In column 5, we

go one step further by including industry-by-year fixed effects, where the industry is defined at the 3-digit

NAICS level. The export coefficient remains positive and significant at the one percent level. Furthermore,

the magnitude of this effect is similar to that found in column 1 (0.221 versus 0.300). We conclude that there

is little evidence that industry-by-year conditions, not captured by industry value added, are important

for our results. In column 6, we combine executive fixed effects with industry-by-year fixed effects. The

export coefficient falls to about 0.17, but remains positive and significant.

   Overall, Table 11 explores a variety of different identification strategies that utilize a number of different

fixed effects approaches. The export coefficient varies somewhat across specifications but the range of point

estimates is narrow and precisely estimated (0.17 to 0.46). We conclude that our results are robust to

employing alternate empirical specifications.


6.4      World Import Demand and Exchange Rate IV Results

This section examines the robustness of our results to two alternate methods of measuring exogenous

export variation. While these additional approaches are conceptually distinct from our earlier instrumental

variable, they all share the common goal of identifying exogenous variation in exports that is uncorrelated

with executive behavior.

   Our first alternate instrumental-variable approach uses world import demand (WID) shocks to identify

an exogenous source of variation in U.S. exports (similar to Hummels, Jorgensen, Munch, and Xiang 2014).

This method exploits the fact that shocks in a particular country likely affect the demand for goods from

both the U.S. and other foreign countries. These shocks could include changes in foreign demand (due to

evolving preferences or input use) or productivity shocks that alter the countries comparative advantage.

Specifically, this instrument is constructed by allowing presample bilateral U.S. exports to grow at the
  62
       However, the first-stage becomes weaker due in part to the large number of fixed effects.




                                                               34
exogenous rate at which non-US imports into a foreign country increased within an industry. Like the

Bartik instrument this approach identifies shocks to U.S. exports driven by changing foreign conditions

but it identifies these shocks in a different way using different data.63 Details about the construction of

this WID instrument are discussed in Appendix A.9.

    Findings using this WID instrument are reported in column 1 of Table 12. The first-stage results,

reported in the bottom panel, show that world import demand shocks are a positive predictor of actual

U.S. export flows. The first-stage F-statistic on the excluded instrument is 9 and the associated p-value

is less than one percent. The second-stage results, reported above, show that exogenous export shocks,

driven by world import demand fluctuations, have a significant positive impact on executive compensation.

Furthermore, the export point estimate (0.355) is similar to that obtained using the Bartik instrument

(0.300).

    Our second alternate instrumental-variable approach uses exchange rate variation to construct an export

instrument (similar to Bertrand and Mullainathan 2001 and Bertrand 2004). This method exploits the fact

that exchange rates fluctuate over time, defined here as the foreign country’s currency per U.S. dollar.64

Furthermore, based on presample bilateral export flows, some industries will be more exposed to exchange

rate fluctuations in a particular foreign country than other industries. Details about the construction of

this exchange rate instrument are discussed in Appendix A.9. An advantage of this instrumental-variable

approach is that exchange rate fluctuations may be harder for executives to anticipate compared to foreign

import demand shocks. However, a drawback is that exchange rates may be responsive to domestic U.S.

conditions, which in turn could be correlated with executive compensation.

    With these considerations in mind, column 2 of Table 12 presents the instrumental variable results using

this exchange rate export instrument. The first-stage results, reported in the bottom panel, show that the

coefficient on the exchange rate instrument is negative and significant. As expected, an increase in the

exchange rate, reported as the foreign currency per U.S. dollar, makes U.S. goods more expensive abroad

and thus reduces exports.65 The second-stage results, reported above, show that exogenous export shocks

driven by exchange rate fluctuations have a significant positive impact on executive compensation. The

magnitude of this effect is similar to our earlier results. Overall, the findings in Table 12 are reassuring since
  63
     The Bartik instrument uses UN Comtrade data on exports from 8 high-income countries while the WID instrument uses
UN Comtrade import data reported by the foreign country.
  64
     Nominal exchange rate data is obtained from the World Bank (WB) for numerous countries spanning the years 1990-2015.
Unfortunately, the World Bank does not report exchange rates for EU countries post 1999, so instead for these EU countries
we use the OECD exchange rate data that spans the entire sample. For non-EU countries that are present in both the WB
and the OECD data sets, the exchange rate data are identical.
  65
     Although the first-stage F-statistic on the instrument is weaker (7), the associated p-value is less than one percent.




                                                            35
they indicate that our results are confirmed using a variety of different methods of identifying exogenous

export shocks.


6.5   Additional Results

The online appendix reports a number of additional results, which due to space constraints we do not

discuss in detail here. Specifically, Appendix A.1 shows the evolution of all U.S. income deciles over the

last four decades, while Appendix A.2 shows that the increase in the top 1% observed in the U.S. is

also qualitatively occurring in other OECD countries. The time-series variation in exports and executive

compensation over our sample period is shown in Figure A3. We address concerns about the measurement

of firm size by showing that our results are robust to a wide variety of other size definitions, including

sales and market value, in Appendix A.4. Section A.5 examines the effect of top marginal tax rates on

executive pay and reports results using a balanced sample of firms. Appendix A.6 shows how other types

of compensation respond to exports at poor governance firms. This section also addresses concerns about

the endogeneity of corporate governance. Findings presented in Appendix A.7 show that import shocks,

constructed in an analogous way as export shocks, have no impact on executive compensation. Results

using alternate measures of the firm’s main industry, an alternate measure of total compensation, an

alternate rent-capture measure, and an alternate technology measure are reported in section A.8. Finally,

Appendix A.9 presents additional details on the alternate instrumental variable approaches.



7     Conclusion

We construct a panel data set spanning thousands of executives working at hundreds of major U.S. firms

over the last twenty years to examine the influence of globalization on the rising compensation of business

executives. Our analysis generates a number of key findings. First, through the growth in top incomes,

globalization is playing a more important role in inequality than previously thought. We show that rising

exports and foreign direct investment, along with firm size and technology investments, have a positive

impact on executive compensation. While past studies have focused on imports or dismissed globaliza-

tion’s impact on top incomes based on cross-country or cross-occupation comparisons, we show using a

comprehensive data set and a rigorous empirical analysis that globalization is one of the more important

drivers of the recent growth of executive compensation.

    Second, this finding is not simply due to talented executives successfully expanding their firms abroad

and thus being more highly compensated in return. Our instrumental-variable results demonstrate that

                                                    36
even export shocks, which by construction are unrelated to managerial decisions, significantly increase

executive pay. There is some evidence that export shocks increase pay by improving the executive-firm

match (although the magnitudes are small) and no evidence that export shocks increase the returns to

talent. The observed relationship between globalization and executive pay cannot simply be explained by

changing market returns.

   Third, we find that rent-capture plays a role in the impact of globalization on executive compensation.

Exogenous export shocks primarily affect discretionary, less-structured forms of compensation (especially

bonuses), which are more conducive to rent-capture. In addition, export shocks have a larger effect on

executive bonuses at poor governance firms where rent-capture is prevalent. Finally, at these poor gov-

ernance firms, it is the more powerful executives, especially CEOs, that disproportionately benefit from

export shocks.

   Our finding that recent globalization trends have increased U.S. inequality by disproportionately raising

top incomes represents an important step forward. At the same time, our results might help to explain

the apparent gap between the public perception of globalization and research on globalization. In re-

cent elections, anger about globalization has led to a populist resurgence. To the extent that top income

earners disproportionately benefit from globalization in poor governance settings, these attitudes are un-

derstandable. However, our findings should not be interpreted as a rationale for protectionist policies since

globalization has generated large increases in the overall standard of living. The key question for policy

makers is to devise ways to address the distributional implications of globalization, such as those identified

in this paper, without compromising aggregate welfare gains.




                                                     37
References

 [1] Alvaredo, Facundo, Anthony B. Atkinson, Thomas Piketty, and Emmanuel Saez. 2013. ”The Top 1 Percent in
    International and Historical Perspective.” Journal of Economic Perspectives, 27(3): 3-20.
 [2] Antràs, Pol, and Esteban Rossi-Hansberg. 2009. ”Organizations and Trade”, Annual Review of Economics 1,
    43-64.
 [3] Autor, David H., David Dorn, and Gordon H. Hanson. 2013. ”The China Syndrome: Local Labor Market Effects
    of Import Competition in the United States.” American Economic Review, 103(6): 2121-68.
 [4] Autor, David H., David Dorn, Gordon H. Hanson, and Kaveh Majlesi. 2016. ”Importing Political Polarization?
    The Electoral Consequences of Rising Trade Exposure”, NBER Working Paper # 22637, September.
 [5] Bakija, Jon, Adam Cole, and Bradley T. Heim. 2012. ”Jobs and Income Growth of Top Earners and the Causes of
    Changing Income Inequality: Evidence from U.S. Tax Return Data.” Williams College Working Paper #2010-22.
 [6] Bartik, Timothy. 1991. Who Benefits from State and Local Economic Development Policies?, W. E. Upjohn
    Institute for Employment Research, Kalamazoo, MI.
 [7] Bebchuk, Lucian, Alma Cohen, and Allen Ferrell. 2008. “What Matters in Corporate Governance?” The Review
    of Financial Studies, 22(2): 783-827.
 [8] Bebchuk, Lucian, and Jesse Fried. 2004. “Pay Without Performance: The Unfulfilled Promise of Executive
    Compensation.” Harvard University Press, Cambridge
 [9] Bernard, Andrew B., J. Bradford Jensen, Stephen J. Redding, and Peter K. Schott. 2007. “Firms in International
    Trade.” The Journal of Economic Perspectives, 21(3): 105-130.
[10] Bertrand, Marianne. 2009. ”CEOs”. Annual Review of Economics, 1: 121-150.
[11] Bertrand, Marianne and Sendhil Mullainathan. 2001. ”Are CEOs Rewarded for Luck? The Ones without
    Principals Are.” The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 116(3): 901-932.
[12] Bertrand, Marianne and Sendhil Mullainathan. 1999. ”Is There Discretion in Wage Setting? A Test Using
    Takeover Legislation” RAND Journal of Economics, 33(3): 535-554.
[13] Bivens, Josh and Lawrence Mishel. 2013. “The Pay of Corporate Executives and Financial Professionals as
    Evidence of Rents in Top 1 Percent Incomes.” Journal of Economic Perspectives, 27(3): 57-78.
[14] Bizjak, John, Michael Lemmon, and Thanh Nguyen. 2011. “Are All CEOs above Average? An Empirical
    Analysis of Compensation Peer Groups and Pay Design.” Journal of Financial Economics, 100(3): 538-55.
[15] Blanchard, Emily and William W. Olney. 2017. ”Globalization and Human Capital Investment: Export Com-
    position Drives Educational Attainment.” Journal of International Economics, 106: 165-183.
[16] Caliendo, Lorenzo, Ferdinando Monte, and Esteban Rossi-Hansberg. 2015. ”The Anatomy of French Production
    Hierarchies.” Journal of Political Economy 123(4): 809-852.
[17] Che, Yi, Yi Lu, Justin Pierce, Peter K. Schott, and Zhigang Tao. 2017. ”Did Trade Liberalization with China
    Influence U.S. Elections?”, Working Paper, Yale University, April.
[18] Chhaochharia, Vidhi, and Yaniv Grinstein (2009), “CEO Compensation and Board Structure.” Journal of


                                                        38
    Finance 64(1): 231-261.
[19] Cuñat, Vicente and Maria Guadalupe. 2009. “Globalization and the Provision of Incentives inside the Firm:
    The Effect of Foreign Competition.” Journal of Labor Economics, 27(2): 179-212.
[20] De Loecker, Jan and Jan Eeckhout. 2017. “The Rise of Market Power and the Macroeconomic Implications.”
    Working Paper.
[21] Dippel, Christian, Robert Gold, Stephan Heblich, and Rodrigo Pinto. 2017. “ Instrumental Variables and Causal
    Mechanisms: Unpacking The Effect of Trade on Workers and Voters.” NBER Working Paper No. 23209.
[22] Feenstra, Robert C. and Gordon H. Hanson. 1999. “The Impact of Outsourcing and High-Technology Capital
    on Wages: Estimates for the United States, 1979-1990.” The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 114(3): 907-40.
[23] Frankel, Jeffrey A. and David Romer. 1999. ”Does Trade Cause Growth?” American Economic Review, 89(3):
    379-399.
[24] Frydman, Carola. 2016. ”Rising Through the Ranks: The Evolution of the Market for Corporate Executives,
    1936-2003”. Forthcoming, Management Science.
[25] Frydman, Carola and Dirk Jenter. 2010. “CEO Compensation.” Annual Review of Financial Economics, 2:
    75-102.
[26] Frydman, Carola and Raven E. Saks. 2010. “Executive Compensation: A New View from a Long-Term Per-
    spective, 1936-2005.” The Review of Financial Studies, 23(5): 2099-2138.
[27] Garicano, Luis, and Esteban Rossi-Hansberg. 2006. ”Organization and Inequality in a Knowledge Economy”,
    The Quarterly Journal of Economics 121(4): 1383-1435.
[28] Gabaix, Xavier, and Augustin Landier. 2008. ”Why has CEO Pay Increased so Much?” The Quarterly Journal
    of Economics, 123(1): 49-100.
[29] Garicano, Luis and Esteban Rossi-Hansberg. 2006. “Organization and Inequality in a Knowledge Economy.”
    The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 121(4): 1383-1435.
[30] Garvey, Gerald T., and Todd T. Milbourn. 2006. ”Asymmetric Benchmarking in Compensation: Executives are
    Rewarded for Good Luck but not Penalized for Bad”. Journal of Financial Economics 82:197–225
[31] Gibbons, Robert, and Kevin J. Murphy. 1990. ”Relative Performance Evaluation for Chief Executive Officers.”
    ILR Review 43(3): 30-51.
[32] Gillan, Stuart L., Jay C. Hartzell, and Robert Parrino. 2009. “Explicit versus Implicit Contracts: Evidence from
    CEO Employment Agreements.” Journal of Finance, 64(4): 1629-1655.
[33] Gompers, Paul, Joy Ishii, and Andrew Metrick. 2003. “Corporate Governance and Equity Prices.” The Quarterly
    Journal of Economics, 118(1): 107-156.
[34] Gordon, Robert J., and Ian Dew-Becker. 2008. ”Controversies about the Rise of American Inequality: A Survey”.
    NBER Working Paper #13982, May.
[35] Guvenen, Fatih and Greg Kaplan. 2017. “Top Income Inequality in the 21st Century: Some Cautionary Notes.”
    NBER Working Paper No. 23321.



                                                         39
[36] Guvenen, Fatih, Greg Kaplan, and Jae Song. 2014. “The Glass Ceiling and The Paper Floor: Gender Differences
    among Top Earners, 1981-2012.” NBER Working Paper No. 20560.
[37] Haskel, Jonathan E., Sonia C. Pereira, and Matthew J. Slaughter. 2007. “Does Inward Foreign Direct Investment
    Boost the Productivity of Domestic Firms?” The Review of Economics and Statistics, 89(3): 482-496.
[38] Hermalin, Benjamin E. 2005. “Trends in Corporate Governance.” The Journal of Finance, 60(5): 2351-2384.
[39] Himmelberg, Charles P., and R. Glenn Hubbard. 2000. “Incentive Pay and the Market for CEOs: An Analysis
    of Pay-for-Performance Sensitivity,” mimeo, Columbia University.
[40] Holmström, Bengt. 1979. “Moral Hazard and Observability.” The Bell Journal of Economics, 10(1): 74-91.
[41] Hummels, David, Rasmus Jorgensen, Jakob Munch, and Chong Xiang. 2014. “The Wage Effects of Offshoring:
    Evidence from Danish Matched Worker-Firm Data.” American Economic Review, 104(6): 1597-1629.
[42] Katz, Lawrence F., and David Autor. 1999. ”Changes in the Wage Structure and Earnings Inequality.” In
    Handbook of Labor Economics, Vol. 3A, edited by Orley Ashenfelter and David Card, 1463-555. Amsterdam:
    Elsevier Science.
[43] Kaplan, Steven N., and Joshua Rauh. 2013. ”It’s the Market: The Broad-Based Rise in the Return to Top
    Talent” The Journal of Economic Perspectives, 27(3): 35-56.
[44] Kaplan, Steven N., and Joshua Rauh. 2010. ”Wall Street and Main Street: What Contributes to the Rise in the
    Highest Incomes?” The Review of Financial Studies, 23(3):1004-1050.
[45] Keller, Wolfgang, and Hale Utar. 2016. ”International Trade and Job Polarization: Evidence at the Worker
    Level”, NBER Working Paper # 22315, June.
[46] Keller, Wolfgang, and Stephen R. Yeaple. 2009. “Multinational Enterprises, International Trade, and Produc-
    tivity Growth: Firm-Level Evidence from the United States.” The Review of Economics and Statistics, 91(4):
    821-831.
[47] Krugman, Paul R. 2008. ”Trade and Wages, Reconsidered.” Brookings Papers on Economic Activity (1): 103-38.
[48] Ma, Lin. 2015. “Globalization and Top Income Shares.” National University of Singapore, mimeo.
[49] Melitz, Marc J. 2003. ”The Impact of Trade on Intra-Industry Reallocations and Aggregate Industry Produc-
    tivity.” Econometrica, 71(6): 1695-1725.
[50] Monte, Ferdinando. 2011. “Skill Bias, Trade and Wage Dispersion.” Journal of International Economics, 83(2):
    202-218.
[51] Murphy, Kevin J. 1999. “Executive Compensation.” in Handbook of Labor Economics, Vol. 3b, Orley Ashenfelter
    and David Card, eds. (New York/Oxford; Elsevier Science/North Holland).
[52] Murphy, Kevin J., and Jan Zabojnik. 2006. ”Managerial capital and the market for CEOs.” Working Paper,
    University of Southern California.
[53] Murphy, Kevin J., and Jan Zabojnik. 2004. ”CEO pay and appointments: a market-based explanation for recent
    trends.” American Economic Review 94:192–96.
[54] Pierce, Justin R. and Peter K. Schott. 2016. “The Surprisingly Swift Decline of US Manufacturing Employment.”



                                                       40
    American Economic Review, 106(7): 1632-62.
[55] Piketty, Thomas, and Emmanuel Saez. 2003. ”Income Inequality in the United States, 1913-1998.” The Quarterly
    Journal of Economics, 118(1): 1-41.
[56] Piketty, Thomas, and Emmanuel Saez. 2006. ”The Evolution of Top Incomes: A Historical and International
    Perspective” American Economic Review, 96: 200-205.
[57] Piketty, Thomas, Emmanuel Saez, and Stefanie Stantcheva. 2014. ”Optimal Taxation of Top Labor Incomes: A
    Tale of Three Elasticities.” American Economic Journal: Economic Policy, 6(1): 230-271.
[58] Piketty, Thomas, Emmanuel Saez, and Gabriel Zucman. 2017. ”Distributional National Accounts: Methods and
    Estimates for the United States.” NBER Working Paper No. 22945.
[59] Rajan, Raghuram, and Julie Wulf. 2006. ”The Flattening Firm: Evidence From Panel Data on the Changing
    Nature of Corporate Hierarchies.” Review of Economics and Statistics 88(4): 759–773.
[60] Rosen, Sherwin. 1981. ”The Economics of Superstars.” The American Economic Review, 71(5): 845-858.
[61] Sattinger, Michael. 1975. “Comparative Advantage and the Distribution of Earnings and Abilities.” Economet-
    rica, 43(3): 455-68.
[62] Schott, Peter K. 2008. ”The Relative Sophistication of Chinese Exports.” Economic Policy: 5-49.
[63] Song, Jae, David J. Price, Fatih Guvenen, Nicholas Bloom, and Till von Wachter. 2015. “Firming Up Inequality.”
    NBER Working Paper No. 21199.
[64] Terviö, Marko. 2008. ”The Difference That CEOs Make: An Assignment Model Approach.” The American
    Economic Review, 98(3): 642-668.
[65] Trefler, Daniel. 2004. “The Long and Short of the Canada-U.S. Free Trade Agreement.” The American Economic
    Review, 94(4): 870-895.




                                                        41
                                           TABLE 1
                                      Summary Statistics


                                        Obs                  Mean               Std. Dev.
Compensation Variables:
ln (Executive Compensation)            48,705                7.38                  1.02
ln (Salary)                            48,705                6.10                  0.62
ln (Bonus)                             48,705                5.03                  2.24
ln (Options)                           48,705                4.90                  2.80
ln (Stocks)                            48,705                2.64                  2.98
ln (Other Compensation)                48,705                3.56                  1.67

Independent Variables:
ln (Exports)-1                         48,705                21.84                 1.56
ln (Imports)-1                         48,218                22.07                 2.23
ln (Employment)-1                      48,355                8.40                  1.66
ln (Capital Expenditure)-1             48,245                18.17                 1.88
Interlock                              48,705                0.06                  0.24
ln (Markups)-1                         48,665                0.95                  0.33
ln (Ind Value Added) -1                48,092                11.89                 0.64
Board                                  48,705                0.16                  0.36
Experience                             48,705                4.67                  3.64
Male                                   48,705                0.96                  0.19
Dr.                                    48,705                0.03                  0.17

# of Executives                        10,953
# of Firms                              798
Notes: Total Executive Compensation (TDC1) includes Salary, Bonus + Long Term Incentive Plans
(LTIP), Options Awarded, Stocks, and Other types of compensation. Firm Specific Exports are
constructed using the firm's presample business segments and 6-digit NAICS export data.
Employment, Capital Expenditure, Interlock, Markups, and Board are measured at the firm level.
Imports and Value Added are measured at the NAICS level (6-digit and 3-digit respectively).
Experience, Male, and Dr. are measured at the executive level.




                                                42
                                              TABLE 2
                           The Impact of Exports on Executive Compensation

                                            Executive Compensation                         Beta Coeff.
                             (1)              (2)            (3)                 (4)             (5)


Exports-1                 0.190***         0.117***         0.079***         0.081***         0.124***
                           [0.044]          [0.033]          [0.030]          [0.031]          [0.047]
Imports-1                   0.020            0.010            0.007            0.011            0.023
                           [0.013]          [0.011]          [0.010]          [0.011]          [0.023]
Employment-1                               0.135***         0.134***         0.104***         0.171***
                                            [0.021]          [0.022]          [0.022]          [0.036]
Capital Expenditure-1                      0.100***         0.091***         0.079***         0.146***
                                            [0.016]          [0.016]          [0.016]          [0.030]
Interlock                                    0.031            0.022            0.023            0.005
                                            [0.039]          [0.040]          [0.041]          [0.010]
Markups-1                                    0.054            0.053            0.042            0.014
                                            [0.057]          [0.056]          [0.050]          [0.016]
Ind Value Added   -1                                        0.201***         0.215***         0.135***
                                                             [0.054]          [0.045]          [0.028]
Experience                                                                   0.068***         0.244***
                                                                              [0.002]          [0.008]
Male                                                                         0.150***         0.028***
                                                                              [0.026]          [0.005]
Dr.                                                                          0.118**          0.019**
                                                                              [0.048]          [0.008]
Year FE                      Yes              Yes              Yes              Yes              Yes
Firm FE                      Yes              Yes              Yes              Yes              Yes
Industry FE                  Yes              Yes              Yes              Yes              Yes

Observations                48,218           47,433           47,198           47,198           47,198
R-squared                   0.541            0.553            0.554            0.600            0.600
Notes: The dependent variable is the log of total compensation (TDC1) of the executive. Estimation by
OLS. Exports, imports, employment, capital expenditure, markups, and industry value added are all in
logs. Column 5 reports the Beta Coefficients after standardizing all variables to have a mean of 0 and a
standard deviation of 1. Robust standard errors clustered at the industry level in brackets. *** p<0.01,
** p<0.05, * p<0.1.




                                                      43
                                       TABLE 3
                The Impact of Export Shocks on Executive Compensation

                                              Executive Compensation
                                    (1)                 (2)                    (3)

Exports-1                        0.399***             0.289***             0.300***
                                  [0.057]              [0.072]              [0.062]
Imports-1                          0.000               -0.004                0.000
                                  [0.011]              [0.010]              [0.010]

Firm Controls                       No                   Yes                  Yes
Industry Controls                   No                   Yes                  Yes
Executive Controls                  No                   No                   Yes
Year FE                             Yes                  Yes                  Yes
Firm FE                             Yes                  Yes                  Yes
Industry FE                         Yes                  Yes                  Yes

Observations                      46,828                46,068               46,068
R-squared                         0.536                 0.549                0.595

First Stage Results:

Export IV-1                      0.403***             0.281***             0.280***
                                  [0.072]              [0.055]              [0.055]

SW F-Stat on Instrument            31.55                26.40                26.35
SW F p-value                       0.000                0.000                0.000

Notes: First and second stage of two-stage least squares regressions. The dependent
variable in the second stage is the log of total executive compensation (TCD1) and in
the first stage it is lagged log exports. Exports, imports, employment, capital
expenditure, markups, and industry value added are all in logs. Robust standard errors
clustered at the industry level in brackets. *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1.




                                            44
                                        TABLE 4
                                    Executive Turnover

# of Employers per Executive           # of Executives               Percent of Sample

              1                            38,024                           92.07
              2                            2,888                            6.99
              3                             329                             0.80
              4                              47                             0.11
              5                              9                              0.02
              6                              2                              0.00
                                           41,299                           100

Notes: This table shows the number of S&P firms that each of the executives in the full
ExecuComp sample have worked at.




                                             45
                                                                        TABLE 5
                                   Impact of Export Shocks on Executive Compensation - Turnover and Returns to Talent

                                      New Exec                                             Executive Compensation
                                        (1)             (2)            (3)           (4)             (5)          (6)            (7)           (8)

     Exports-1                         0.049**       0.300***       0.301***      0.295***        0.311***     0.313***       0.307***      0.301***
                                       [0.022]        [0.062]        [0.062]       [0.063]         [0.058]      [0.077]        [0.073]       [0.060]
     Exports-1*New Exec                                                           0.035***
                                                                                   [0.006]
     Exports-1*Experience                                                                         -0.005**
                                                                                                   [0.002]
     Exports-1*Firm Experience                                                                                  -0.001
                                                                                                                [0.001]
     Exports-1*Firm CEO Experience                                                                                              0.001
                                                                                                                               [0.002]
     Exports-1*Dr.                                                                                                                            -0.066
                                                                                                                                              [0.050]
     New Exec                                                      -0.037***      -0.794***
                                                                     [0.011]        [0.143]




46
     Firm Controls                       Yes            Yes           Yes            Yes            Yes           Yes           Yes            Yes
     Industry Controls                   Yes            Yes           Yes            Yes            Yes           Yes           Yes            Yes
     Executive Controls                  Yes            Yes           Yes            Yes            Yes           Yes           Yes            Yes
     Year FE                             Yes            Yes           Yes            Yes            Yes           Yes           Yes            Yes
     Firm FE                             Yes            Yes           Yes            Yes            Yes           Yes           Yes            Yes
     Industry FE                         Yes            Yes           Yes            Yes            Yes           Yes           Yes            Yes

     Observations                       46,068         46,068        46,068        46,068          46,068       46,068         46,068        46,068
     R-squared                          0.229          0.595         0.596          0.596          0.596         0.580         0.612          0.595
     SW F-Stat on Instrument            26.35          26.35         26.34         26, 198         44, 88       39, 129        89, 99        34, 142
     Notes: Second stage of two-stage least squares regressions. Column 1 uses 'New Exec' as the dependent variable, which is a binary variable
     identifying whether the individual is a new top 5 executive at the firm this year. Columns 2-8 use as the dependent variable the log of total
     executive compensation (TDC1). Column 2 re-reports results from column 3 of Table 3. Columns 3 includes New Exec and column 4 includes the
     interaction between the export IV and New Exec. Column 5 includes the interaction between the export IV and experience (measured as the number
     of years the executive has worked for any S&P firm). Columns 6-7 instead measure experience as the number of years the executive has been at the
     firm and the number of years the executive has been CEO at the firm, and includes the analogous interaction terms. Finally, column 8 includes an
     interaction between exports and education (measured as whether the executive has a doctorate). Exports, imports, employment, capital expenditure,
     markups, and industry value added are all in logs. Robust standard errors clustered at the industry level in brackets. *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, *
     p<0.1.
                                                                TABLE 6
                                    The Impact of Export Shocks on Alternate Compensation Measures

                                 Total Comp.          Salary           Bonus        Options Awarded         Stocks            Other
                                      (1)              (2)              (3)                (4)                (5)              (6)

     Exports-1                     0.300***           0.054           0.579**              0.420             0.245           0.266*
                                    [0.062]          [0.061]          [0.267]             [0.322]           [0.297]          [0.142]

     Firm Controls                   Yes               Yes              Yes                Yes               Yes               Yes
     Industry Controls               Yes               Yes              Yes                Yes               Yes               Yes
     Executive Controls              Yes               Yes              Yes                Yes               Yes               Yes




47
     Year FE                         Yes               Yes              Yes                Yes               Yes               Yes
     Firm FE                         Yes               Yes              Yes                Yes               Yes               Yes
     Industry FE                     Yes               Yes              Yes                Yes               Yes               Yes

     Observations                   46,068            46,068           46,068             46,068            46,068            46,068
     R-squared                      0.595             0.490            0.392              0.350             0.563             0.467
     SW F-Stat on Instrument        26.35             26.35            26.35              26.35             26.35             26.35
     Notes: Second stage of two-stage least squares regressions. Column 1 re-reports the baseline results from column 3 of Table 3.
     Columns 2-6 use salary, bonuses+long term incentive plans, options (awarded), stocks, and other compensation as the dependent
     variable (in logs). Exports, imports, employment, capital expenditure, markups, and industry value added are all in logs. Robust
     standard errors clustered at the industry level in brackets. *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1.
                                              TABLE 7
                  The Impact of Export Shocks on Bonuses at Poor Governance Firms

                                                         Executive Bonuses
                                    (1)                 (2)              (3)                 (4)

Exports-1                        0.579**            0.566**            0.547**            0.540**
                                 [0.267]            [0.263]            [0.267]            [0.264]
Exports-1*Interlock                                 0.155**                                0.124*
                                                    [0.068]                               [0.068]
Exports-1*Board                                                        0.171**            0.162**
                                                                       [0.070]            [0.073]

Firm Controls                      Yes                  Yes              Yes                Yes
Industry Controls                  Yes                  Yes              Yes                Yes
Executive Controls                 Yes                  Yes              Yes                Yes
Year FE                            Yes                  Yes              Yes                Yes
Firm FE                            Yes                  Yes              Yes                Yes
Industry FE                        Yes                  Yes              Yes                Yes

Observations                      46,068               46,068           46,068            46,068
R-squared                         0.392                 0.392           0.392              0.392
SW F-Stat on Instrument           26.35                27, 238          26, 81          27, 319, 102
Notes: Second stage of two-stage least squares regressions. Dependent variable in all columns is the
log of bonuses. Exports and the interaction terms are instrumented throughout using the Bartik style
instrument and the interaction of this instrument and the poor governance variables. Exports,
imports, employment, capital expenditure, markups, and industry value added are all in logs. Column
3 includes uniteracted Board instead of Interlock and column 4 includes both Board and
Interlock . Robust standard errors clustered at the industry level in brackets. *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05,
* p<0.1.




                                                  48
                                                                            TABLE 8
                                           The Impact of Export Shocks on Powerful Managers at Poor Governance Firms

                                                                                    Executive Bonuses
                                    CEOs          Non-CEOs          CEOs         Non-CEOs       Rank #1            Rank #5         Rank #1         Rank #5
                                     (1)             (2)             (3)            (4)            (5)               (6)             (7)             (8)

     Exports-1                    0.727**          0.526**         0.698**         0.505*          0.697**         0.519**         0.661**          0.507*
                                   [0.327]         [0.263]         [0.342]         [0.266]         [0.276]         [0.257]         [0.284]          [0.262]
     Exports-1*Interlock          0.379***          0.103*                                          0.179*          0.121
                                   [0.123]         [0.060]                                         [0.091]         [0.083]
     Exports-1*Board                                              0.278***         0.148**                                        0.282***           0.096
                                                                   [0.074]         [0.074]                                         [0.098]          [0.073]




49
     Firm Controls                   Yes             Yes             Yes             Yes             Yes             Yes             Yes             Yes
     Industry Controls               Yes             Yes             Yes             Yes             Yes             Yes             Yes             Yes
     Executive Controls              Yes             Yes             Yes             Yes             Yes             Yes             Yes             Yes
     Year FE                         Yes             Yes             Yes             Yes             Yes             Yes             Yes             Yes
     Firm FE                         Yes             Yes             Yes             Yes             Yes             Yes             Yes             Yes
     Industry FE                     Yes             Yes             Yes             Yes             Yes             Yes             Yes             Yes

     Observations                   8,850          37,196           8,850           37,196          9,278            9,004          9,278           9,004
     R-squared                      0.430           0.400           0.429           0.400           0.419            0.447          0.419           0.447
     SW F-Stat on Instrument       27, 228         27, 239          26, 79          26, 82         27, 243          27, 229         26, 81          26, 81
     Notes: Second stage of two-stage least squares regressions. Dependent variable in all columns is the log of bonuses. Exports and the interaction terms
     are instrumented throughout using the Bartik style instrument and the interaction of this instrument and the poor governance variables. Exports,
     imports, employment, capital expenditure, markups, and industry value added are all in logs. Columns 3, 4, 7, and 8 include Board instead of Interlock .
     Robust standard errors clustered at the industry level in brackets. *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1.
                                             TABLE 9
            The Impact of Export Shocks on Executive and Average Worker Compensation

                                Execu Comp           Avg Worker Comp       Exec / Worker Ratio
                                    (1)                      (2)                    (3)

Exports-1                         0.300***                  -0.401                 0.703*
                                   [0.062]                  [0.339]                [0.372]
Employment-1                      0.099***                0.148***                  -0.049
                                   [0.022]                  [0.036]                [0.048]
Capital Expenditure-1             0.066***                -0.142***               0.211***
                                   [0.015]                  [0.035]                [0.045]

Other Firm Controls                 Yes                      Yes                     Yes
Industry Controls                   Yes                      Yes                     Yes
Executive Controls                  Yes                      Yes                     Yes
Year FE                             Yes                      Yes                     Yes
Firm FE                             Yes                      Yes                     Yes
Industry FE                         Yes                      Yes                     Yes

Observations                           46,068                    9,201                  45,683
R-squared                              0.595                     0.288                  0.431
SW F-Stat on Instrument                26.35                     26.23                  26.13
Notes: Second stage of two-stage least squares regressions. Dependent variable is the log of total
executive compensation (TDC1) in column 1, the average worker compensation at the firm in
column 2, and the ratio of total executive compensation (TDC1) to average worker compensation in
column 3. Average worker compensation is measured as the firm's labor expenses per employee,
and if this data is missing, by the detailed industry average of compensation per employee.
Exports, imports, employment, capital expenditure, markups, and industry value added are all in
logs. Robust standard errors clustered at the industry level in brackets. *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, *
p<0.1.




                                                50
                                       TABLE 10
            The Impact of Foreign Affiliate Sales on Executive Compensation

                                    Executive Compensation                    Bonuses
                                    (1)                 (2)                     (3)

Foreign Sales-1                  0.025**               0.038***                0.106**
                                 [0.012]                [0.013]                [0.047]
Domestic Sales-1                                       0.009***               0.043***
                                                        [0.003]                [0.017]

Firm Controls                      Yes                    Yes                   Yes
Industry Controls                  Yes                    Yes                   Yes
Executive Controls                 Yes                    Yes                   Yes
Year FE                            Yes                    Yes                   Yes
Firm FE                            Yes                    Yes                   Yes
Industry FE                        Yes                    Yes                   Yes

Observations                      11,633                 11,633                11,633
R-squared                         0.683                  0.684                 0.492
Notes: Dependent variable is log total executive compensation (TDC1) in columns 1-2,
and log executive bonuses in column 3. Estimation by OLS. Years included are 2000-2013
based on available foreign sales data (pre-2010 data is more limited). Foreign sales,
domestic sales, employment, capital expenditure, markups, and industry value added are
all in logs. Robust standard errors clustered at the industry level in brackets. *** p<0.01,
** p<0.05, * p<0.1.




                                             51
                                                                      TABLE 11
                                  The Impact of Export Shocks on Executive Compensation - With Different Fixed Effects

                                                                               Executive Compensation
                                       (1)                  (2)                 (3)               (4)                    (5)                 (6)

     Exports-1                      0.300***            0.230***             0.464***            0.459***            0.222***             0.166***
                                     [0.062]             [0.063]              [0.131]             [0.118]             [0.077]              [0.061]

     Firm Controls                     Yes                 Yes                 Yes                  Yes                 Yes                 Yes
     Industry Controls                 Yes                 Yes                 Yes                  Yes                 Yes                 Yes
     Executive Controls                Yes                 Yes                 Yes                  Yes                 Yes                 Yes
     Year FE                           Yes                 Yes                 Yes                  Yes                 No                  No




52
     Firm FE                           Yes                 No                  Yes                  No                  Yes                 No
     Industry FE                       Yes                 No                  Yes                  Yes                 Yes                 No
     Executive FE                      No                  Yes                 Yes                  No                  No                  Yes
     Executive*Firm FE                 No                  No                  No                   Yes                 No                  No
     Industry*Year FE                  No                  No                  No                   No                  Yes                 Yes

     Observations                    46,068               43,800              43,798               43,628              46,068              43,800
     R-squared                       0.595                0.806               0.807                0.806                0.61               0.819
     SW F-Stat on Instrument         26.35                31.85                6.71                 8.21               13.54               22.10
     SW F p-value                    0.000                0.000               0.010                0.005               0.000               0.000

     Notes: Second stage of two-stage least squares regressions. Dependent variable in all columns is the log of total executive compensation (TCD1).
     Industry*Year fixed effects are measured at the NAICS 3-digit level. Exports, imports, employment, capital expenditure, markups, and industry
     value added are all in logs. Robust standard errors clustered at the industry level in brackets. *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1.
                                                 TABLE 12
       The Impact of Export Shocks on Executive Compensation - Alternative Instrumental Variable Models

                                     World Import Demand IV                           Exchange Rate IV
                                               (1)                                          (2)

Exports-1                                     0.354***                                      0.368*
                                               [0.097]                                      [0.206]

Firm Controls                                   Yes                                          Yes
Industry Controls                               Yes                                          Yes
Executive Controls                              Yes                                          Yes
Year FE                                         Yes                                          Yes
Firm FE                                         Yes                                          Yes
Industry FE                                     Yes                                          Yes

Observations                                   44,894                                       44,894
R-squared                                      0.595                                        0.594

First Stage Results:

WID IV-1                                      0.047***
                                               [0.016]
Ex Rate IV-1                                                                              -0.027***
                                                                                            [0.010]
SW F-Stat on Instrument                         8.95                                         7.00
SW F p-value                                    0.003                                        0.009

Notes: First and second stage results of two-stage least squares regressions. The dependent variable in the
second stage is the log of executive compensation (TCD1) and in the first stage it is the lagged log of exports.
Column 1 utilizes an instrument that is constructed using world import demand (excluding U.S. imports) and
presample bilateral export flows. Column 2 utilizes an instrument that is constructed using exchange rate variation
and presample bilateral export flows. Firm exposure to export shocks is measured in their main business segment
industry. Exports, imports, employment, capital expenditure, markups, and industry value added are all in logs.
Robust standard errors clustered at the industry level in brackets. *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1.




                                                         53
ONLINE APPENDIX FOR REFEREES ONLY




                      54
A     Appendix Table of Contents - Overview

A.1 Evolution of All U.S. Income Deciles

    • Extension of Figure 1

A.2 Top 1% in Other OECD Countries

    • Rising Top 1% income share across a variety of countries

A.3 Time-Series Variation

    • Changes in executive compensation and exports over our sample

A.4 Measuring Firm Size

    • Results with employment, sales, assets, stock price, and market value

A.5 Top Tax Rates and Sample Selection

    • Results including state top marginal tax rates and a balanced sample of firms

A.6 Poor Governance Details

    • Impact of export shocks on compensation components at poor governance firms

    • Results that eliminate endogenous short-run changes in board structure

A.7 Import Shocks

    • Evidence on whether executive pay responds to import shocks

A.8 Additional Sensitivity Findings

    • Trade exposure definition

    • Alternate measures

A.9 Additional Instrumental Variable Details




                                                   55
A.1    Evolution of All U.S. Income Deciles

Figure 1 illustrates a dramatic increase in the share of total U.S. income going to the top 1% of earners

over the last four decades, while the other two deciles remain essentially flat. To ensure these relationships

are not an artifact of the income groups selected, in Figure A1 we report all the U.S. income deciles. We

see that the share of income going to the top decile of U.S. earners has increased from about 30% to almost

50% over the last forty years. The other nine deciles all have income shares that are well below 20% and

they have experienced a similar decline over the last forty years. We conclude that regardless of how one

calculates it, growth in inequality in the U.S. is driven by the rapid increase in top incomes.

                                                                                        FIGURE A1


                                                                                  U.S. Income Deciles
                                             50
                       % of Total Income Accruing to Each Decile
                             10        20    0  30       40




                                                                   1978   1984   1990       1996        2002   2008   2014
                                                                                            Year


                     Notes: Kernel-weighted local polynomial smoothed data from World Wealth and
                     Income Database (WID; website: wid.world).



A.2    Top 1% in Other OECD Countries

Our analysis examines why top incomes in the U.S. have increased so dramatically, as illustrated in Figure

1. This section provides some evidence on trends in top incomes in other high-income countries.

   Employing data from the World Wealth and Income Database (WID: Alvaredo, Chancel, Piketty, Saez,

and Zucman), the evolution of the top 1% fiscal income shares for a variety of OECD countries is shown

in Figure A2. The share of income going to the top 1% has increased in all ten of these countries.66
  66
    We focus on OECD countries that have available data, that are similar to the U.S., or that have been examined for
comparison purposes in the literature (Piketty and Saez 2006; Alvaredo et al. 2013).


                                                                                           56
While the share of income going to top earners has evolved in different ways across these countries, a clear

upward trend is evident in Figure A2. In particular, the share of income going to the top earners ranged

from 4-10% early in the sample but by the end of the sample it was in the 8-14% range. The growth in

top incomes is not a phenomenon specific to the U.S. and while there are institutional differences across

countries, we see little reason to believe that the forces that affect the relationship between globalization

and executive compensation identified in this paper do not apply to other countries as well.

                                                                                      FIGURE A2


                                                                          Top 1% in Other OECD Countries
                                       14
                    % of Total Income Accruing to Top 1%
                                                   12




                                                                                         GBR                 DEU
                                                                                                     CAN
                                        10




                                                                                               JPN

                                                                                        CHE

                                                                                FRA
                                 8




                                                                               ITA

                                                                         IRL                   AUS
                      6




                                                                               SWE
                                       4




                                                           1978   1984         1990       1996             2002    2008   2014
                                                                                          Year


                 Notes: Kernel-weighted local polynomial smoothed data from World Wealth and Income
                 Database (WID; website: wid.world).




A.3    Time-Series Variation

Figure A3 examines the relationship of interest between executive composition and globalization using

our data. Clearly, both executive compensation and exports have increased substantially over our sample

period, 1993-2013. Reassuringly, these results are very similar to the trends seen in Figure 2, which provides

additional external validity for our analysis.




                                                                                         57
                                                                        FIGURE A3


                                                             Executive Compensation and Exports




                                                                                                           22.5
                                    7.8
                                                                                  Exports




                                              7.6
                      ln(Executive Compensation)




                                                                                                           22
                                                                                     Execu Comp




                                                                                                              ln(Exports)
                                    7.4




                                                                                                           21.5
                         7.2        7




                                                                                                           21
                                                    1990   1995      2000        2005        2010   2015


                    Notes: Average executive compensation (TDC1) and average exports over time.
                    Compensation data for top 5 executives is obtained from the Compustat ExecuComp
                    data set. U.S. industry-level export data for firms in the ExecuComp data set are
                    obtained from the U.S. Census Bureau via Schott's International Economics
                    Resource Page (Schott 2008).




A.4    Measuring Firm Size

This section demonstrates that our findings are not sensitive to alternate measures of firm size. As in

Edmans, Gabaix, and Jenter (2017, Table 2), we examine the relationship between firm size and executive

compensation using an OLS specification that includes executive characteristics and year fixed effects.

Instead of industry fixed effects, to be conservative we utilize firm fixed effects. Columns 1-6 of Table A4

show how executive compensation varies with a variety of firm size measures, in particular employment,

sales, assets, costs, stock price, and market value. All variables enter with a positive and significant

coefficient and the magnitudes are similar (with a narrow range of 0.15 to 0.25 across six measures). Note

that the latter two measures have the largest coefficients, which is consistent with the observation that

executive compensation and these two size proxies are closely related to the firm’s stock price.

   Next we examine whether exports matter for executive compensation above and beyond firm size. We

begin by including exports without controlling for size (see column 7), finding that a ten percent increase

in exports is associated with a 0.8% increase in executive compensation. In columns 8 to 13 we add one size

measure at a time to the specification. Including exports and other firm characteristics in the specification



                                                                            58
causes every one of the size coefficients to fall (compare columns 1 to 8, 2 to 9, etc.). Furthermore, the

inclusion of the size measures often causes the export point estimate to decrease too (compare columns 7

to 8, 7 to 9, etc). These results provide additional confirmation that a portion of globalization’s effect on

executive pay operates through firm size.

   Importantly the magnitude of the export coefficient is remarkably stable after the inclusion of a variety of

different proxies for firm size. Specifically, there is no statistical difference between the export coefficients

using any of the size measures. The fact that the export coefficient is positive, significant, and similar

in magnitude in every specification indicates that our finding that globalization increases executive pay

conditional on size is robust. We conclude from Table A4 that all measures of firm size generate similar

results.




                                                       59
                                                                                TABLE A4
                                               The Impact of Firm Size on Executive Compensation - Without and With Exports

                                                                                     Executive Compensation
                              (1)        (2)        (3)        (4)        (5)        (6)       (7)       (8)           (9)       (10)       (11)       (12)       (13)

     Exports-1                                                                  0.084*** 0.081*** 0.077*** 0.072** 0.076** 0.088*** 0.066**
                                                                                 [0.029] [0.031] [0.029] [0.030] [0.029] [0.028] [0.026]
     Employment-1         0.201***                                                       0.104***
                           [0.017]                                                        [0.022]
     Sales-1                       0.155***                                                       0.079***
                                    [0.033]                                                        [0.028]
     Assets    -1                           0.240***                                                       0.164***
                                             [0.018]                                                        [0.019]
     Costs-1                                         0.154***                                                       0.088***
                                                      [0.031]                                                        [0.033]
     Stock Price-1                                            0.238***                                                       0.199***




60
                                                               [0.018]                                                        [0.017]
     Market Value-1                                                    0.253***                                                       0.227***
                                                                        [0.017]                                                        [0.018]

     Firm Controls           No         No          No        No         No          No         Yes        Yes        Yes        Yes        Yes        Yes        Yes
     Industry Controls       No         No          No        No         No          No         Yes        Yes        Yes        Yes        Yes        Yes        Yes
     Executive Controls      Yes        Yes         Yes       Yes        Yes         Yes        Yes        Yes        Yes        Yes        Yes        Yes        Yes
     Year FE                 Yes        Yes         Yes       Yes        Yes         Yes        Yes        Yes        Yes        Yes        Yes        Yes        Yes
     Firm FE                 Yes        Yes         Yes       Yes        Yes         Yes        Yes        Yes        Yes        Yes        Yes        Yes        Yes
     Industry FE             Yes        Yes         Yes       Yes        Yes         Yes        Yes        Yes        Yes        Yes        Yes        Yes        Yes

     Observations           48,355     48,670      48,675    48,665     48,483     47,819      47,498     47,198     47,498     47,498     47,498     47,306     46,647
     R-squared              0.590      0.589       0.594     0.589      0.603      0.609       0.599      0.600      0.600      0.602      0.600      0.610      0.615
     Notes: Dependent variable is log of total executive compensation (TDC1). Estimation by OLS. Exports, employment, sales, assets, costs, stock price, market
     value, imports, capital expenditure, markups, and industry value added are all in logs. Robust standard errors clustered at the industry level in brackets. ***
     p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1.
A.5    Top Tax Rates and Sample Selection

Recent work indicates that top marginal tax rates are an important driver of executive compensation.

For example, a lower top marginal tax rates may provide incentives for the executive to bargain more

aggressively over pay (Piketty, Saez, and Stantcheva 2014). Using data from the Taxsim database we

measure top marginal income tax rates in the state in which the firm is headquartered. While all executives

in our data set face the same marginal federal (U.S.) income tax rate, many also pay state income taxes

which can vary significantly across states and over time. For instance, the top marginal income tax rate

has increased in California from 9.3% in 1990 to 14.1% in 2014, has remained at 0% in Texas, and has

decreased from 8.5% to 5.1% in New Mexico. We examine whether these changes in top marginal state

tax rates can explain part of the growth in top incomes.

   As a point of reference, columns 1-2 of Table A5 re-report our main results that include approximately

46,000 observations and do not include top marginal tax rates. Then in columns 3-4, we include our top

marginal tax rate variable, which due to limited information on the headquarter state of the firm restricts

the sample to 28,000 observations. We find that the top marginal tax rate has a negative impact on total

compensation (column 3), which supports the idea that as top marginal tax rates fall executives have more

incentive to bargain for higher compensation (Piketty, Saez, and Stantcheva 2014). However, top tax rates

have an insignificant impact on bonuses (columns 4). Importantly the inclusion of Top Tax Rate and the

associated loss of observations has no qualitative effect on the export coefficients of interest which remains

positive and significant.

   Columns 5-6 then go one step further by only including firms that span the entire 21 years of the

sample. This alleviates concerns that firm entry or exit from the sample may be influencing the results. By

restricting the sample in this way, the number of observations falls to approximately 15,000 observations.

Despite the loss of sample size, the export coefficients of interest remain positive and significant. If anything,

the impact of export shocks on executive bonuses at poor governance firms is now larger (0.384 versus 0.155

in column 2). Again we see that the top marginal tax rate has a negative impact on total compensation

but no impact on executive bonuses. Overall Table A5 sheds light on the role of top marginal tax rates

and it indicates that our export results are consistent across a variety of different samples.




                                                       61
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           A.6
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 TABLE A5
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           The Impact of Export Shocks on Executive Compensation -Tax Rate and Alternate Samples

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Main 46k Sample                  28k Sample (w/ Tax Rate)        Balanced 15k Sample (w/ Tax Rate)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  Total Comp        Bonus              Total Comp         Bonus            Total Comp         Bonus
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      (1)             (2)                  (3)              (4)                (5)              (6)

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Exports-1                     0.300***           0.566**            0.221**           0.443**            0.231*             0.381
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    [0.062]           [0.263]            [0.085]           [0.218]            [0.137]           [0.303]




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           Poor Governance Details
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Exports-1*Interlock                              0.155**                              0.211*                               0.384**
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       [0.068]                              [0.109]                              [0.164]
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Top Tax Rate-1                                                      -0.212*             0.057           -0.319**            -0.256
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         [0.116]            [0.250]           [0.153]            [0.323]




62
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Firm Controls                    Yes               Yes                Yes               Yes                Yes               Yes
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Industry Controls                Yes               Yes                Yes               Yes                Yes               Yes
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Executive Controls               Yes               Yes                Yes               Yes                Yes               Yes
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Year FE                          Yes               Yes                Yes               Yes                Yes               Yes
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Firm FE                          Yes               Yes                Yes               Yes                Yes               Yes
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Industry FE                      Yes               Yes                Yes               Yes                Yes               Yes

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Observations                     46,068               46,068              28,378            28,378            15,135          15,135
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     R-squared                         0.595                0.392              0.594              0.360            0.572           0.303
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     SW F-Stat on Instrument           26.35               27, 238             14.76             15, 53            10.31           11, 47
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Notes: Columns 1-2 use the main sample with 46k observations. Columns 3-4 include the Top Marginal Tax Rate variable which has
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     more limited coverage. Columns 5-6 also include Top Marginal Tax Rates but uses a balanced sample (i.e. restricts the sample to firms
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     that span all years). Exports and the interaction terms are instrumented throughout using the Bartik style instrument and the
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     interaction of this instrument and interlock. Exports, imports, employment, capital expenditure, markups, and industry value added are
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     all in logs. Robust standard errors clustered at the industry level in brackets. *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1.




     Furthermore, we investigate whether there is any evidence that poor governance itself is endogenously
                                                                                                             section examines whether export shocks effect other types of compensation at poorly governed firms.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                   focused more carefully on this important component of discretionary compensation (see Tables 7-8). This
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             Given that export shocks have a positive impact on executive bonuses (see Table 6), our subsequent analysis
related to unobserved firm characteristics.

    Column 1 of Table A6 shows that export shocks increase total compensation but this effect is not

stronger at poorly governed firms. The export point estimates is positive and significant, but the interaction

of export shocks with interlock relationships is insignificant. In column 2 we find that export shocks have no

impact on less-discretionary salaries, regardless of corporate governance. Column 3 re-reports our previous

results showing that export shocks lead to higher executive bonuses and this effect is stronger at poorly

governed firms. We find no impact of export shocks on options awarded or on stocks in columns 4 and 5,

regardless of the quality of corporate governance. While we do find in column 6 that export shocks increase

other types of compensation, there is no evidence that this relationship is stronger at poorly governed firms.

Ultimately, we find that poor corporate governance only influences the relationship between export shocks

and discretionary bonuses, which is consistent with rent-capture being important.

    We also examine whether poor governance is correlated with unobserved firm characteristics. If these

firm characteristics are in turn correlated with executive compensation, this could influence our results.

We address this potential issue by constructing measures of poor governance that are less susceptible to

endogeneity. Specifically, we calculate firm-level averages of our interlock and board variables over time

in order to break the potential link between governance and short-run fluctuations in firm performance.67

The results from interacting these alternate poor-governance measures with export shocks are reported

in columns 7 and 8. Consistent with the results in column 3, we find that exogenous export shocks

disproportionately increase executive bonuses at poor-governance firms. The interaction point estimates

are in fact larger in magnitude when defining poor governance using the interlock average (column 7) or

the board average (column 8). The important message is that the potential endogeneity of poor governance

does not seem to be a main driver of our findings.
  67
     Firm-level averages over the entire sample are time-invariant and thus subsumed by the firm fixed effects. We split the
sample into thirds by taking seven year averages of interlock and board over the periods 1993-1999, 2000-2006, and 2006-2013.
The results are similar using different definitions.




                                                             63
                                                                          TABLE A6
                                          The Impact of Export Shocks on Compensation Types at Poor Governance Firms

                                   Total Comp.        Salary         Bonus       Options Awarded        Stocks          Other         Bonus           Bonus
                                        (1)            (2)            (3)               (4)               (5)            (6)           (7)             (8)

     Exports-1                       0.298***          0.054         0.566**           0.420             0.246         0.264*         0.553**         0.515*
                                      [0.061]         [0.060]        [0.263]          [0.322]           [0.303]        [0.143]        [0.263]         [0.274]
     Exports-1*Interlock               0.024          -0.007         0.155**           0.007            -0.010          0.029
                                      [0.028]         [0.016]        [0.068]          [0.105]           [0.173]        [0.042]
     Exports-1*Interlock Average                                                                                                       0.234*
                                                                                                                                       [0.137]
     Exports-1*Board Average                                                                                                                         0.416***
                                                                                                                                                      [0.157]




64
     Firm Controls                      Yes            Yes             Yes              Yes              Yes            Yes             Yes            Yes
     Industry Controls                  Yes            Yes             Yes              Yes              Yes            Yes             Yes            Yes
     Executive Controls                 Yes            Yes             Yes              Yes              Yes            Yes             Yes            Yes
     Year FE                            Yes            Yes             Yes              Yes              Yes            Yes             Yes            Yes
     Firm FE                            Yes            Yes             Yes              Yes              Yes            Yes             Yes            Yes
     Industry FE                        Yes            Yes             Yes              Yes              Yes            Yes             Yes            Yes

     Observations                     46,068          46,068         46,068            46,068           46,068         46,068          46,068         46,068
     R-squared                         0.596          0.490           0.392            0.350            0.563           0.467          0.392           0.392
     SW F-Stat on Instrument          27, 238         27, 238        27, 238          27, 238           27, 238        27, 238        27, 300         25, 63
     Notes: Second stage of two-stage least squares regressions. The dependent variable in column 1 is the log of total executive compensation (TCD1) and in
     the remaining columns it is various compensation types. Exports and the interaction terms are instrumented throughout using the Bartik style instrument
     and the interaction of this instrument and the poor governance variables. In column 7 and 8 exports are interacted with Interlock and Board averaged over
     a seven year period. Exports, imports, employment, capital expenditure, markups, and industry value added are all in logs. Robust standard errors
     clustered at the industry level in brackets. *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1.
A.7     Import Shocks

Our analysis has focused on the impact of exports on executive compensation, while adding imports as

a regressor throughout. Import competition may adversely affect firm performance which in turn could

reduce executive compensation. However, imported inputs may increase firm profits and thus increase

executive compensation. While recent studies have found an adverse impact of imports on workers, this

may not be the case for top-level executives (Cuñat and Guadalupe 2009). This section extends our analysis

by examining the impact of exogenous import shocks on executive compensation.

    We construct an analogous Bartik style instrumental variable for imports. Specifically, this import

instrument is constructed using presample bilateral import flows and the growth in industry-level imports

in other high-income countries.68 Column 1 of Table A7 reports our main results that instrument for

exports. Column 2 then instruments for imports instead, using a Bartik inspired import IV analogous to

equation (2). While the import instrument successfully predicts actual import flows (the SW first stage F-

statistic is large), the second stage coefficient on imports is close to zero, indicating that exogenous import

shocks have no effect on executive compensation. Notice that the uninstrumented export coefficient remains

positive, significant, and similar in magnitude to the uninstrumented export coefficient from column 4 of

Table 2. Column 3 then simultaneously instruments for both exports and imports and finds that both first-

stages are strong. However, in the second-stage, only the export coefficient is statistically significant and

the magnitude of this coefficient increases relative to column 1. Imports have a negative point estimate, but

in our analysis it is not significantly different from zero. Overall, we find that exports and export shocks

both significantly increase executive compensation, while imports and import shocks have little effect on

top incomes.
  68
     Note that we prefer not to construct import exposure using business segment data, since doing so would cause exports
and imports to be highly correlated due to mechanical reasons (i.e. they both would be functions of the same underlying
business segment shares). Results are similar if both export and import exposure are measured at the main industry level (see
Appendix A.8).




                                                             65
                                                      TABLE A7
                           The Impact of Export and Import Shocks on Executive Compensation

                                           Export IV                   Import IV            Export and Import IV
                                              (1)                         (2)                        (3)

        Exports-1                           0.300***                    0.067*                    0.332***
                                             [0.062]                    [0.034]                    [0.082]
        Imports-1                             0.000                      0.049                     -0.040
                                             [0.010]                    [0.039]                    [0.047]

        Firm Controls                         Yes                         Yes                        Yes
        Industry Controls                     Yes                         Yes                        Yes
        Executive Controls                    Yes                         Yes                        Yes
        Year FE                               Yes                         Yes                        Yes
        Firm FE                               Yes                         Yes                        Yes
        Industry FE                           Yes                         Yes                        Yes

        Observations                         46,068                     46,058                      46,058
        R-squared                            0.595                      0.599                       0.594
        SW F-Stat on Instrument              26.35                      104.7                       44, 19
        Notes: Second stage of two-stage least squares regressions. Column 1 reports the baseline export IV
        results. Instead, column 2 instruments for imports using an analogous Bartik style import instrument.
        Finally, column 3 instruments for both exports and imports simultaneously. Exports, imports, employment,
        capital expenditure, markups, and industry value added are all in logs. Robust standard errors clustered at
        the industry level in brackets. *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1.




A.8    Additional Sensitivity Findings

Table A8 presents a number of additional sensitivity checks. Column 1 re-reports our earlier results from

the main text for comparison purposes. Columns 2-4 then explore alternate ways of defining exports and

export shocks. Specifically, column 2 uses product level exports in the firm’s main industry (which is

defined by ExecuComp) rather than using firm-specific exports which is constructed as the weighted share

of exports across the firm’s top three business segments. The export coefficient is now estimated to be

0.22 (versus 0.30 from column 1). It is possible that the additional information on the business segments

of the firm allow us to more clearly estimate the pay responses to exogenous export shocks. Despite this

alternate method of constructing exports, we see that the results are similar.

   Returning to our preferred firm-specific export measure, column 3 explores an alternate method of

linking the firm to industry-level export shocks. Specifically, in the baseline analysis each firm is exposed

to industry export shocks in its time-invariant main industry as defined by ExecuComp. In contrast,

column 3 uses a time-varying measure of the firm’s main NAICS industry from Compustat. The benefit of

using this time-varying industry shock is that it accounts for the possibility that a firm’s primary industry


                                                            66
may change over the sample. The downside is that potentially small changes in a firm’s composition of

production, which shift it from one NAICS primary industry to another, could translate into large changes

in measured global exposure. This may generate noisy swings in the data, when in fact the firm’s switch

from one NAICS industry to another may represent a rather small readjustment of the firm’s activities.69

Column 3 uses this time-varying measure of the firm’s export shock, it includes time-varying industry fixed

effects, and we see that the impact of export shocks on compensation remains largely unchanged.

   Column 4 also uses our firm-specific export variable, but defines the firm’s time invariant main industry

using business segment sales rather than using the ExecuComp definition. As we see, the coefficient on

exports remains similar. Overall, columns 2-4 indicate that the results are not sensitive to how export

exposure is defined.

   Our preferred measure of total compensation (TDC1) includes options awarded to an executive in a

given year. Column 5 utilizes an alternate measure of total compensation (TDC2), which includes stock

options exercised rather than awarded. Comparing the export point estimate in columns 1 and 5, we find

that export shocks have a more positive impact on TDC2, which is consistent with the idea that executives

strategically exercise their options after a positive global shock.

   Rather than relying on board-based measures of poor governance, column 6 uses an entirely different

measure based directly on the co-movement of the firm’s stock price and executive compensation. Specif-

ically, we define the binary variable rent to equal one if the firm’s stock price fell but average executive

compensation at the firm rose in a given year. In a sense, this is an ex-post measure of poor governance.

The results indicate that defining poor governance in this way also generates a significant positive coeffi-

cient and does not alter the export coefficient of interest. Thus, we see that our results are robust to using

a measure of poor governance that is not based on the structure and composition of the board of directors

at the firm.

   Column 7 employs an alternate measure of technology investment. Rather than including capital

expenditures which are used elsewhere in our analysis, we now include R&D expenditures. Unfortunately

the data coverage of the R&D variable is limited and thus we lose almost a quarter of the observations.

Nonetheless, R&D expenditures have a significant positive impact on executive compensation. Importantly

the inclusion of R&D and the subsequent loss of sample size does not alter the export coefficient of interest.

   We also examine whether globalization increases executive pay by increasing the complexity of an

executives job. We measure complexity using the number of destination markets that the firm’s main
  69
       See Keller and Yeaple (2009) on the consequences of this in the context of FDI spillovers.




                                                               67
industry exports to, with the idea that a manager’s job is more complex if they serve more foreign markets.

In column 8, we find that complexity has little bearing on executive pay, while the impact of export shocks

remains an important predictor of compensation.




                                                    68
                                                                                     TABLE A8
                                                         The Impact of Export Shocks on Executive Compensation - Sensitivity

                                    Baseline       Non-BS Exports NAICSt Exports BS Main Exports                TDC2                Rent               R&D            Complexity
                                      (1)               (2)           (3)             (4)                        (5)                 (6)                (7)              (8)

     Exports-1                     0.300***                              0.273***           0.262***           0.368***           0.297***          0.308***           0.305***
                                    [0.062]                               [0.073]            [0.063]            [0.074]            [0.062]           [0.074]            [0.064]
     Main Industry Exports-1                          0.222***
                                                       [0.052]
     Rent Capture                                                                                                                 0.069***
                                                                                                                                   [0.013]
     R&D-1                                                                                                                                           0.049**
                                                                                                                                                     [0.024]
     Complexity-1                                                                                                                                                         0.012
                                                                                                                                                                         [0.077]
     Firm Controls                    Yes                Yes                Yes                Yes               Yes                Yes                Yes                Yes




69
     Industry Controls                Yes                Yes                Yes                Yes               Yes                Yes                Yes                Yes
     Executive Controls               Yes                Yes                Yes                Yes               Yes                Yes                Yes                Yes
     Year FE                          Yes                Yes                Yes                Yes               Yes                Yes                Yes                Yes
     Firm FE                          Yes                Yes                Yes                Yes               Yes                Yes                Yes                Yes
     Industry FE                      Yes                Yes                Yes                Yes               Yes                Yes                Yes                Yes

     Observations                    46,068              46,068             43,839             44,894           46,068              46,068             35,924             44,817
     R-squared                        0.595              0.595              0.604              0.598             0.551               0.596              0.594             0.595
     SW F-Stat on Instrument          26.35              12.43              50.72              61.78             26.35               26.35              71.39             23.72
     Notes: Second stage of two-stage least squares regressions. Column 1 reports the baseline results. Column 2 uses exports in the firms main industy rather than a weighted
     average of exports using the business segments of the firm. Column 3 uses a time-varying measure of the firm's main NAICS industry to allocate export shocks. Column 4
     uses the business segment data to identify the firm's main industry rather than relying on the Execu Comp definition. Column 5 uses as the dependent variable TDC2
     instead of TDC1. Column 6 uses a measure of rent-capture that equals one in a given year if the firm's stock price fell while the average compensation of executives rose,
     rather than interlock. Column 7 uses R&D rather than capital expenditures to identify technology. Column 8 includes a measure of complexity based on the average number
     of foreign markets the industry sells to. Exports, R&D, and complexity are in logs. Robust standard errors clustered at the industry level in brackets. *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05,
     * p<0.1.
A.9      Additional Instrumental Variable Details

This section provides additional details on the construction of the world import demand and exchange

rate instrumental variables. First, the World Import Demand (WID) instrument identifies variation in

U.S. exports using information on foreign import demand conditions. This instrument is constructed by

allowing presample bilateral U.S. exports to grow at the exogenous rate at which non-US imports into a

foreign country increased within an industry. Formally, the WID instrument is constructed in the following

way:



                                                        X
                                                                                W ID
(4)                                W ID exp ivnt =           (expnc1991 ∗ (1 + gcnt  )).
                                                         c


Like the Bartik approach, we use presample 1991 U.S. bilateral export flows in industry n and to foreign

country c (see equation 2). The difference is that now we multiply presample export flows by the growth

rate of world imports of good n into country c between 1991 and year t. To ensure that we are identifying

an exogenous source of variation in world imports, we exclude any imports coming from the U.S. Unlike the

Bartik instrument, this WID instrument uses an exogenous growth rate g that varies by foreign country

c.70 The final step is to sum across foreign trade partners to generate an industry-year specific World

Import Demand instrument.

      Second, our exchange rate instrument identifies variation in U.S. exports arising from the fact that

some industries will be more exposed to exchange rate fluctuations in a particular foreign country than

other industries. Specifically, the instrument is constructed in the following way:



                                                        X
                                                                                ex
(5)                                   ER exp ivnt =          (expnc1991 ∗ (1 + gct )).
                                                         c


We use presample 1991 U.S. bilateral export flows in industry n and to foreign country c, as before. The

difference is that now we multiply presample export flows by the percent change in the exchange rate in

country c between 1991 and year t. The exchange rate is defined as the foreign country’s currency per U.S.

dollar. Like the WID instrument the exogenous growth rate g varies by foreign country c but unlike the
  70
     Similar to the Bartik IV, we can construct the instrument for years in which there are no bilateral trade flows in an
industry (assuming of course that bilateral exports exist in the presample year). However, world import demand growth rates
(g) do need to be restricted to country-industry pairs that span all the years in the sample to ensure that the instrument is
based on a balanced sample. The firm’s main industry n is defined using business segment data at the 4-digit NAICS level.


                                                             70
two other instruments it does not vary by industry n.71 Then we sum across trade partners to generate an

industry-specific export instrument that relies on variation in exchange rates that affect some industries

more than others based on presample export flows.




  71
     We focus on the top 100 U.S. trading partner countries and can construct the instrument for years in which there are
no bilateral trade flows in an industry. Thus, this instrument is balanced and does not capture extensive margin adjustments
into or out of foreign destination markets which could be endogenous. The firm’s main industry n is defined using business
segment data.


                                                            71
