                               NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




            HOW TRANSACTION COSTS OBSTRUCT COLLECTIVE ACTION:
                 EVIDENCE FROM CALIFORNIA’S GROUNDWATER

                                        Andrew B. Ayres
                                        Eric C. Edwards
                                        Gary D. Libecap

                                       Working Paper 23382
                               http://www.nber.org/papers/w23382


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     May 2017




We acknowledge excellent research assistance provided by Jennifer Laws as well as helpful comments
from Zeynep Hansen, Gabe Sampson, Sherzod Akhundjanov, Ryan Abman and participants at the
2016 IWREC Annual Meetings, the 2016 Southern Economics Association Meetings, and the 2016
Western Economic Association International Annual Meetings. This research was funded by a grant
through the UC Office of the President: MR-15-328650, Legal and Economic Data and Analysis of
Environmental Markets and through UAES Project UTA01197. The views expressed herein are those
of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2017 by Andrew B. Ayres, Eric C. Edwards, and Gary D. Libecap. All rights reserved. Short sections
of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
How Transaction Costs Obstruct Collective Action: Evidence from California’s Groundwater
Andrew B. Ayres, Eric C. Edwards, and Gary D. Libecap
NBER Working Paper No. 23382
May 2017
JEL No. K11,N52,P48,Q15,Q25,Q58

                                                ABSTRACT

Collective action to remedy the losses of open access to common-pool resources often is late and incomplete,
extending rent dissipation. Examples include persistent over-exploitation of oil fields and ocean fisheries,
despite general agreement that production constraints are needed. Transaction costs encountered in
assigning property rights are an explanation, but analysis of their role is limited by a lack of systematic
data. We examine governance institutions in California’s 445 groundwater basins using a new dataset
to identify factors that influence the adoption of extraction controls. In 309 basins, institutions allow
unconstrained pumping, while an additional 105 basins have weak management plans. Twenty of these
basins are severely overdrafted. Meanwhile, users in 31 basins have defined groundwater property
rights, the most complete solution. We document the critical role of transaction costs in explaining
this variation in responses. This research adds to the literatures on open access, transaction costs, bargaining,
and property rights


Andrew B. Ayres                                            Gary D. Libecap
Bren School of Environmental Science                       Bren School of Environmental Science
and Management and Economics Department                    and Management and Economics Department
University of California, Santa Barbara                    University of California, Santa Barbara
Bren Hall 4412                                             Bren Hall 4412
Santa Barbara, CA 93106-5131                               Santa Barbara, CA 93106-5131
aayres@bren.ucsb.edu                                       and NBER
                                                           glibecap@bren.ucsb.edu
Eric C. Edwards
Applied Economics Department
Utah State University
eric.edwards@usu.edu
   I.      Introduction

        Common-pool resources are subject to excessive exploitation and rent dissipation due to

the absence of economic property rights (Gordon, 1954; Coase, 1960; Hardin, 1968; Cheung,

1970; Ostrom, 1990). Remedies often are implemented late and are incomplete. Distributional

conflicts among actors over property rights and the corresponding allocation of benefits and

costs raise transaction costs, impeding more timely and complete collective action. We define

transaction costs as the costs of defining and enforcing property rights (Allen, 1991, 2000).

        Wiggins and Libecap (1985) find that agreement on oil field unitization to avoid

competitive drilling and extraction is constrained by the number and heterogeneity of firms.

Libecap and Smith (1999, 545) argue that output on the giant Prudhoe Bay field in Alaska went

into premature decline in 1988, not because of waning deposits, but because of a failure of the

parties to implement complete unitization. Wild-ocean Atlantic Bluefin Tuna, perhaps the

world’s most valuable fish, has long been overharvested, depleting stocks, but relevant fishing

countries have been unable to agree upon a sustainable total annual allowable harvest and the

distribution of catch shares within it (Bjørndal and Brasão 2006, 193-7; Ellis 2008; Webster,

2010, 328; Korman 2011, 701-3, 740). Finally, water is critical for life and also as an input into

production, but groundwater commonly is exploited under open access with excessive pumping

and depletion worldwide, despite evidence of serious losses (Konikow and Kendy, 2005; Zekri,

2008; Giordano, 2009; Barlow and Reichard, 2010; Aeschbach-Hertig and Gleeson, 2012).

        There have been few opportunities to empirically examine how transaction costs arise

and affect collective responses to such common-pool problems. Using a novel, newly assembled

dataset, we examine varying governance institutions across California’s 445 groundwater basins

to identify factors that influence the adoption of extraction controls: The default institutional


                                                                                                     1
regime, retained in 309 basins, allows unconstrained pumping by surface property owners, and in

105 basins users have adopted weak groundwater management plans. Twenty of these basins

with limited or no controls are severely overdrafted. Meanwhile, users in 31 basins have defined

groundwater property rights through costly court adjudication, which is the most complete

solution. We exploit this variation in analyzing the factors affecting when any controls will be

implemented and when property rights will be assigned. We find that agents are more likely to

agree on pumping limits where aggregate benefits exceed transaction and implementation costs.

Benefits rise as the resource becomes more common, as cross-well impacts become more severe,

and as groundwater values rise. Costs rise with basin size and the number and heterogeneity of

users.

          Our analysis proceeds with an ordered-logit model to uncover the determinants of

aggregate benefits. We then examine the impact of transaction costs on the variation in

management arrangements by comparing the characteristics of adjudicated and critically

overdrafted basins, which serve as counterfactuals for one another. We also investigate the

determinants of how long it takes to agree to a property rights distribution and the sources of

fragmentation of groundwater management plans that would otherwise be more effective as a

single unit.



    II.        Background

    A. Bargaining over Property Rights to a Common Pool

          Institutional remedies mitigate common-pool losses. In Kansas, for example,

groundwater management districts were implemented in the early 1970s to control well spacing

and pumping in order to address growing local depletion (Edwards, 2016). In Nebraska,




                                                                                                   2
groundwater rights and markets were developed to reduce pumping in areas where declining

groundwater levels reduced surface water flows (Kuwayama and Brozovic, 2013). Collective

action to adopt such arrangements requires agreement by users on resource access and extraction

rules, monitoring, and enforcement. An efficient response to the losses of open access occurs

when aggregate benefits exceed costs (Demsetz, 1967), but even where there appear to be

positive net gains, agreement may not be forthcoming (Leonard and Libecap, 2015). Some users

who do well under the status quo may rationally oppose the transition from unconstrained

exploitation (Grainger and Costello, 2015; Sutherland, 2016), and the costs to bring them on

board may be very high (Johnson and Libecap, 1982; Wiggins and Libecap, 1985).

       Conflicting positions arise when users perceive different private net returns from

mitigation. When the resource stock is large, migratory, and heterogeneous, information about

and perception of rent dissipation varies, leading to different assessments about the need for

corrective action. Additionally, when there are large numbers of agents who differ in asset

values, production costs, exploitation rates, and open-access losses, there are varied incentives to

support constraints (Adhikari and Lovett, 2006; Ruttan, 2008). Under these circumstances,

monitoring and enforcement costs for any adopted arrangement rise, lowering expected net

returns from any agreed-upon remedy.

   B. Groundwater as a Common-pool Resource

       Groundwater users share a finite, often renewable, amount of water that migrates across

an aquifer according to subsurface conductivity. Each pumper’s use can reduce the water

available to neighboring wells and raise pumping costs. Each well creates a cone of depression,

or local drawdown, within a radius around it, encouraging water migration from elsewhere in the

formation (Brederhoeft et al., 1982; Brozovic et al., 2010; Guilfoos et al., 2013; Edwards,




                                                                                                   3
2016).4 These cross-well effects depend upon well proximity and hydraulic conductivity, the

measure of the degree to which the aquifer is held in common. Cross-well interference rises with

greater well density, higher conductivity, and more rapid pumping rates. In addition, excessive

pumping can compact subsurface formations, a process known as subsidence, which

permanently reduces storage capacities and disrupts surface landscapes and the roads, structures,

and farmland upon them. Finally, where basins border the ocean, as the water level falls,

seawater enters the formation, rendering groundwater unfit for agricultural uses and increasing

treatment costs for drinking water (Zekri, 2008; Barlow and Reichard, 2010).

        Because pumpers recognize these externalities, they have an incentive to more rapidly

drill and drain the basin than would be optimal with a sole owner (Brozovic et al., 2010;

Koundouri, 2004).5 Capital investment increases, storage of future water supplies is foregone,

water tables decline, and pumping costs rise (Famiglietti et al., 2011; Scanlon et al., 2012; Farr et

al., 2015). As rents are dissipated, pumpers in aggregate are better off with pumping restrictions,

but no user faces a unilateral incentive to reduce extraction, so collective action is required to

implement group restraints. Users become more aware of these losses as water tables drop,

raising perceived benefits of implementing controls (Nachbaur, 2014). In areas of low

precipitation, surface water is limited and aquifer recharge is low, increasing the value of

groundwater and the returns from conserving it (Edwards, 2016). Higher expected water values

and associated benefits from storage and reallocation across time also encourage controls (Brill

and Burness, 1994). Higher conductivity and exposure to collateral impacts do the same.




4
  This is true of an unconfined aquifer. In a confined aquifer, pumping creates a cone of depression in the
potentiometric surface, the pressure at which the water is confined. The effect on other wells is similar.
5
  In large, homogeneous groundwater basins with spaced pumpers, externality costs can be small with open access
the first-best outcome (Gisser and Sanchez, 1980).


                                                                                                                  4
    C. Options for Groundwater Management in California

         Historically, groundwater extraction in California has been molded by the correlative

rights doctrine, whereby all landowners overlying an aquifer pump water relatively

unconstrained. Other parties, such as water utilities, hold subordinate appropriative water rights

that allow them to pump and transport water for use elsewhere. Although the current institutional

framework restricts the number of pumpers to those who hold either correlative or appropriative

rights, it does not effectively cap the number of wells drilled or aggregate pumping rates.

         Options for greater control include, in order of restriction: (1) groundwater property

rights implemented via court order through adjudication; (2) the formulation of groundwater

management plans that generally do not constrain pumping, but may assign spacing rules to limit

cross-well externalities; and (3) the de facto system of correlative and appropriative water rights

that allows for additional wells and competitive extraction.

Adjudication

         Adjudication is the most complete remedy for over-extraction because groundwater

property rights are assigned to well owners. In the adjudication process, agents come before a

state court to request a cap on all extraction that is consistent with the annual safe yield of the

basin.6 Safe yield is estimated and distributed among existing pumpers, usually as a share based

on historical extraction, thereby grandfathering overlying and appropriative users. A third-party

water master is identified by the court to enforce the new system of economic property rights.

Groundwater rights can be transferable, allowing for gains from trade as well as the voluntary

consolidation and closing of wells. Because agents may disagree on their shares of the new total

allowable extraction, adjudication can be costly and take considerable time. Despite legal

6
  Safe yield typically refers to a rate of aggregate pumping that should maintain existing water table elevations in the
long term.


                                                                                                                       5
precedents for adjudication starting in the 1940s and 1950s, only 25 adjudications have been

completed, covering 31 groundwater basins out of the 445 in California.7

Groundwater Management Plans

        A lower-cost and less-complete option is a groundwater management plan (GMP). GMPs

do not define groundwater rights nor generally restrict individual well pumping. Rather, they

monitor the number of active and abandoned wells, may establish well spacing requirements,

install infrastructure to limit seawater intrusion and to import surface water to offset overdraft,

and remediate pollution. Authorized since the early 1990s, GMPs are voted on by a majority of

basin landowners, often with little opposition (McGlothlin, 2016). If a basin-wide GMP does not

receive majority support, then it must be abandoned, at least for a year. Although a single GMP

would most effectively address basin-wide externalities, in many cases, users have chosen to

adopt multiple, more narrow partial-basin plans.

De facto Open Access

        Absent adjudication or a GMP, correlative and appropriative water rights holders

generally extract water without constraint, adding wells and adjusting pumping rates as

individually desired.

        Accordingly, there is considerable variation in the response to potential open access

losses in groundwater; we examine the factors that underlie that variation. Figure 1 shows

governance regimes for the 445 groundwater basins in the state. The 309 grey-lined basins are

not formally managed, and are found largely in remote areas. The 131 blue-lined polygons

identify groundwater management plan areas. One hundred and five of these have multiple


7
  The first adjudications were the Raymond Basin and the Upper Los Angeles River Basin. Adjudication can be
initiated either by lawsuit or by cooperative negotiations among users. DWR identifies 430 groundwater basins, but
when the largest, San Joaquin, is divided into subbasins, the number is 445, which we use here.


                                                                                                                     6
GMPs, covering different parts of a basin, such as the 63 GMPs above the San Joaquin Valley

basin. The 25 purple-lined and cross-hatched polygons designate adjudicated areas, covering 31

groundwater basins. These are primarily in more arid, urban southern California. Finally, the 20

red-lined basins are designated as critically overdrafted. Of these, some have no governance

regimes, while most have limited GMPs. These GMPs have not prevented critical overdraft. 8

Figure 1: Locations of California’s Groundwater Management Institutions




8
  Of the 20 critically overdrafted basins, 2 have adjudicated portions: the Salinas Basin (Seaside, 2006) and the
Santa Clara Valley Basin (Santa Paula, 1996). In addition, the Los Osos Valley Basin (2015) was adjudicated too
recently to determine the resulting changes in overdraft.


                                                                                                                    7
   III.    Analytic Model

       We model the behavior of groundwater users, primarily agriculture and utilities providing

water service to municipalities. We assume that the goal of each is to maximize profits, defined

as the benefits of water use, minus the costs of pumping. Heterogeneity across user benefits and

costs affect transaction costs and the type and timing of governance adopted.

       Consider the decision problems faced by any groundwater user. The pumper must choose

how many wells to drill, where to site them, and the rate of pumping. The number of wells and

place are constrained by the physics of pumping and the cost of building a new well. For a sole-

owner of land above an aquifer, a new well is typically drilled to access water at a different

location. Pumping effects are additive, so two small wells are constrained in the same manner as

a single, large well. We assume that wells are placed by a sole-owner when the benefits of

pumping water in a given area equal or exceed the fixed costs of drilling plus the variable costs

of pumping. When ownership of the land is fragmented and users profit privately from

extraction, however, wells may be drilled in closer proximity as landowners compete to access

ground water.

Framework for Analyzing Aggregate Benefits of Pumping Controls

       Consider land overlying an aquifer that could be broken into n parcels,                   . For

simplification we assume there is a low fixed cost to drilling, so wells can exist on all potential

parcels. Each well has a net benefit function,           , where revenues are increasing in a

concave manner in the amount of water pumped,         , and costs decrease with the height of the

water table,    , and increase with   . Rapid pumping at one well can cause water to flow towards

the pumper’s parcel from neighbors, effectively lowering their water levels. Resource movement

away from well is modeled as follows: the flow to other users,        , is                   , where



                                                                                                      8
the transfer coefficient   is a hydrological constant determined by aquifer rock. If

     , the entire expression is negative and water flows from      to .

        With multiple owners, water is pumped according to individual owner benefits. Without

governance controls, user maximizes an individual value function,         , by choosing the pumping

path wit that is the solution to the problem:



                                                                                               (1)



where time arguments have been suppressed to simplify notation. The state equation shows that

the change in the elevation of water is equal to local recharge, ri, minus water extracted by the

user on parcel , wi, minus the water that flows away from . If is a net recipient of water,

inflow increases local water table elevation.

        For a sole owner, the pumping decision includes all the parcels. For instance, if parcels

are too closely spaced, the sole owner can choose not to extract water from certain parcels. The

dynamic optimization problem for the entire basin is:



                                                                                               (2)



where      is the value of all pumping over time. The sole owner chooses the rate of pumping for

every parcel,    , that solves this problem. The owner fully internalizes all well externalities and

maximizes the private rental value of the reservoir. Additional insight is gained by using Darcy’s

law to approximate the movement of water under a hydraulic gradient, where:




                                                                                                       9
and k is hydraulic conductivity, the rate at which water can move underground. The gradient is,

in part, determined by , the distance between parcel and other extractors.

        Most groundwater basins, however, are exploited by multiple surface owners with

potential cross-well externalities. The benefits of governance institutions are maximized where

they mimic the behavior of a sole owner. Therefore, it is useful to compare the solutions to Eqs.

(1) and (2). The first-order condition for aquifer level, , and extraction,   , for each parcel

under open access conditions is:

                                                                                                  (3)

while the condition for optimal management is:

                                                                                                  (4)

        Delta represents the discount rate from the initial value function equations. Eqs. (3) and

(4) represent the equalization of marginal benefits of pumping with private and social costs,

respectively. Due to the concavity of the profit function with respect to pumping, the larger right-

hand side expression in Eq. (4) implies a lower rate of pumping under a sole owner, than that

under open access, reflected in Eq. (3).

        We express the aggregate gains from adopting management as the sum of the differences

in the individual value functions under open-access versus a socially optimal pumping regime.

The present-value of profits for any parcel under competitive pumping are         , the value

obtained when conditions in Eq. (3) are implemented, and aggregate profits under open access

are             . The maximum value provided by a pumping-control regime characterized by

Eq. (4) is   , where           . Let                 be the gain or loss of profits in parcel with

governance relative to open access. Although aggregate welfare is increased under management,



                                                                                                        10
individuals may gain more or less, depending upon their reservoir placement if water tables,

conductivity, well-density, recharge, and water values vary.

        We introduce 5 predictions regarding which users benefit more from strict controls and

hence are more likely to support the definition of groundwater rights:

   i.   For otherwise identical users and , if               , then         .

 ii.    For otherwise identical users and , if            , then        .

 iii.   For otherwise identical users and , if               , then         .

 iv.    For otherwise identical users and , if                 , then           .

        Finally, low water tables impose an additional cost on users, , due to seawater intrusion

or subsidence. If the benefit function includes this term,                  where benefits are

decreasing in    then:

  v.    For otherwise identical users and , if            , then            .

        All told, individual benefits of strict controls increase, ceteris paribus, with hydraulic

conductivity, aridness (lack of recharge), local well density, the individual’s marginal product of

water, and exposure to collateral effects, such as subsidence.

Framework for Analyzing the Transaction Costs of Implementing Pumping Controls

        Even when there are aggregate net benefits from implementing management regimes that

constrain individual pumping, not all parties perceive individual net gains. Therefore, some may

resist collective action. In this event, management regimes may not be adopted, be adopted late,

or be modified with more limited constraints. As an example, consider the disparate value

positions faced by urban water utilities and farmers. Utilities tend to have longer planning

horizons and a higher marginal product of water than do agricultural users. As a result, they will




                                                                                                     11
benefit more from management structures that keep water levels high and ensure long-term

resource access. In contrast, farmers prefer the flexibility of groundwater pumping and benefit

from drawdown when surface water sources are limited during drought.

          Institutional factors also play a major role. In California, agricultural users typically hold

high-priority correlative groundwater rights, while urban utilities have subordinate appropriative

rights. Basin adjudication for formal groundwater rights sometimes leads to restrictions on

individual pumping and a flattening of the priority hierarchy. Accordingly, basins with a larger

mix of agricultural and urban users will have higher transaction costs in adjudication efforts than

will those where either type dominates, all else equal.

          We posit an explicit form of transaction costs, , that inhibit the formation of formal

management institutions. Let total benefits of pumping controls be the sum of individual gains or

losses:            . Generally, action to implement extraction restrictions will be undertaken when

        . Transaction costs take the form

                                                                                                  (5)

          where       is a function of the dispersion of   , such as aggregate variance,

                  . The function       is monotonically increasing in the dispersion of the     ’s.


          Based on this analytic framework, we add three additional predictions. In comparing two

basins that are otherwise identical:

 vi.      Basins with a larger number of users are less likely to have stronger pumping controls.

vii.      Basins with more heterogeneity in pumper benefits,       , are less likely to have stronger
          pumping controls.

viii.     Larger basins are less likely to have stronger pumping controls.




                                                                                                        12
       Prediction (viii) follows because large basins generally have more pumpers, greater

hydrological variation, higher measurement costs, and greater disparity in pumper assessments of

benefits.



   IV.      Data

       Data on basin and user characteristics were collected for 445 basins as shown in Table 1.

Variable details are in Appendix A. Mean annual precipitation and its spatial variance are

constructed from historical precipitation data from Oregon State University’s PRISM Climate

Group. Data on other physical attributes of basins are compiled from California Department of

Water Resources (DWR) data. Basin boundary shapefiles are from DWR, and GIS is used to

compute the relevant statistics. A coastline dummy is equal to 1 if the basin’s boundary touches

the coast at any point. Well yield, a measure of physical capacity that does not depend on well

size or type, proxies for hydraulic conductivity and is available from DWR for 197 basins.

County-level farm statistics are from USDA Agricultural Censuses. The number of farms is

calculated as an average over the period 1940-1959 to capture the period during which center-

pivot irrigation was introduced but before adjudications went into effect, which limits

endogeneity concerns. Urban population numbers are from the California Department of

Finance, and urban growth rates are calculated for 1950-2010. Finally, whether a basin has a

State Water Project (SWP) connection for supplemental surface water is determined by the

authors (Appendix A). State Water Project connections to a basin provide alternative surface

water, potentially lowering the benefits of groundwater extraction controls. On the other hand,

such connections often are provided in areas with high water values due to urban population

growth.




                                                                                                  13
       The dataset also includes the number of wells in a basin, the proportion by use category,

and the proportion within 1000m of the coast. These are calculated from well-completion reports

collected by DWR. In addition, well heterogeneity is defined as

              , and the variable ranges from 0 to .25. Well data for number of wells, types, and

related spatial statistics are incomplete for 31 basins, primarily in the San Joaquin Valley. To

address this problem, we first drop all basin observations with missing well data, but doing so

may introduce bias if missing data are not random. Second, we use a multiple imputation

procedure, whereby we regress the variables for which there are missing values, drawing from

complete observations, on all covariates in the analysis. The estimated coefficients are used to

generate distributions of the number of wells, agricultural wells, and wells near the coast, and

then imputed values are drawn for the relevant 31 basins (Appendix B). From these imputed

values we calculate well density and the necessary proportions of user types.

Table 1: List of Variables
Variable                                                   Units                      Source
Mean Precipitation (1950 - 2014)                     Millimeters (100s)               PRISM
Precipitation Spatial Variance (1950 - 2014)     Millimeters (100s, squared)          PRISM
Basin Surface Area                                     Acres (1000s)               DWR/Author
Coastline Dummy                                           Dummy                    DWR/Author
Well Yield                                                Gal/min                      DWR
Number of Farms (1940-1959)                            Count (100s)                   USDA
Number of Wells                                        Count (100s)                    DWR
Agricultural/Non-Agricultural Wells                 Count or Percentage                DWR
Well Density                                            Count/Acre                 DWR/Author
Number of Wells within 1000m of Coast               Count or Percentage            DWR/Author
Well Heterogeneity                                 (% Ag) x (% Non-Ag)                Author
                                                 Average Decadal Growth             CA. Dept of
Urban Population Growth (1950 - 2010)
                                                            Rate                  Finance/ Author
State Water Project Connection                            Dummy                       Author
Number of GMPs                                            Number                       DWR
Adjudication of Groundwater Rights                        Dummy                       Author
Management Regime                                       Categorical                DWR/Author
Critically Overdrafted Basin                              Dummy                        DWR
Length of Adjudication Process                             Years                      Author
GMP Fragmentation                                          Ratio                   DWR/Author


                                                                                                   14
        In our analysis of the benefits of pumping constraints, the dependent variable identifies

which regime has been adopted: no constraint, GMP (as designated by the DWR), or

adjudication. Basins are assigned a value: (1) if they have no GMP or property rights

adjudication; (2) if the basin has at least one GMP, but no adjudication; or (3) if the basin has

been adjudicated.



   V.      Benefits and Determinants of Collective Action

   A. Empirical Strategy

        Given our discussion of the varying costs of implementing pumping controls of increased

stringency, we infer latent benefits   for groundwater basin i from observed choices: (1) no

controls, (2) GMPs, or (3) property rights adjudication. We estimate latent benefits via an

ordered logit model.

        Consider a vector of   characteristics,   . The benefits of collective controls to mitigate

open-access losses are described by the following relationship:



where     is assumed to be distributed standard logistic. Now we define     as the level of

management, where                 represents {No controls, GMP, Adjudication}. The value of

is determined by the unobserved latent variable      according to the following:




                                                           ,

where     is the cost of implementing a GMP,       is the cost of adjudicating property rights, and

        . It is costlier to adjudicate than to agree on a GMP. The parameters


                                                                                                      15
are estimated by maximum likelihood. The        estimates indicate how a variable increases or

decreases the benefits of pumping controls, and the        estimates indicate different average regime

costs.

    B. Collective Action Benefits Estimation Results

         We are interested in identifying the characteristics of basins that would most benefit from

pumping controls. After that, we analyze why agents in those basins adopt strict management or

fail to take any action.

         Table 3 presents predicted signs for the estimated coefficients in the ordered logit

regression. Well yields (a proxy for hydraulic conductivity), well density, exposure to seawater

intrusion, and increases in the relative value of water induced by urban population growth raise

the benefits of adopting management of any type. Greater precipitation supports groundwater

recharge and reduces the benefits of controls on pumping. State Water Project connections to a

basin provide alternative surface water, potentially lowering the benefits of groundwater

extraction controls. The variable, however, is highly correlated with water value (and urban

population growth). Accordingly, the predicted sign of the variable is ambiguous.

Table 3: Empirical Predictions for the Basin Benefits of Management – Ordered Logit
                                               Predicted        Prediction from Analytic
                       Measure
                                                 Sign                    Model
            Well Yield                             +                         i
            Precipitation                          -                        ii
            State Water Project Dummy             -/+                     ii/iv
            Coastline Dummy                        +                         v
            Well Density                           +                        iii
            Urban Growth                           +                        iv


         The results of various specifications are shown in Table 4. Some specifications include

the conductivity measure, well yield, but it is available only for 185 basins (197 if the San



                                                                                                    16
Joaquin is broken up into its constituent subbasins). Other specifications exclude basins with

imputed well data. Columns 1-6 report estimates for an ordered logit across the three types of

management, while columns 7 and 8 reflect a standard logit regression where GMP and

adjudicated basins are grouped together as “managed” basins, allowing us to relax the

assumption of tiered management stringency.9 Columns 1 and 2 reflect a baseline specification

that includes all of the variables with management benefit predictions.10

         Across all specifications, the findings are broadly consistent with model predictions (i)-

(v) in Section III.11 Well yield or conductivity is positive and statistically significant in 3 of 4

specifications, urban population growth as a proxy for value is highly significant in all

specifications, and well density is always positive although its significance is sensitive to the

inclusion of imputed data. Precipitation has significantly negative effects in 4 specifications,

while its sign depends on the inclusion of well yield. State Water Project connections seemingly

proxy for water value, with the estimated coefficient large, positive, and statistically significant.

The results are robust to its inclusion.12

         Table 5 presents estimates of the marginal effects of the results shown in Table 4, column

(2). The marginal effect of increasing urban growth leads to the greatest change in probability of

adopting stricter pumping controls: a one standard-deviation change increases the probability of


9
  The ordered logit model relies on a parallel slopes assumption, i.e., that the coefficient estimates in binary logit
models between None and GMP and GMP and Adjudication are statistically similar. This assumption can be
assessed using a Brant Test. We fail to reject this assumption at the 5% level for our main specifications.
10
   In all columns the San Joaquin Valley groundwater basin is broken into its constituent subbasins because it is by
far the largest aquifer in the state as well as one of the most important for agriculture, and treating it as a singular
basin may mask important heterogeneity.
11
   We also include two robustness checks in the Appendices. We agglomerate the San Joaquin subbasins into one
basin and present the results (Appendix D). In addition, other regression specifications including our SWP variable
are included (Appendix E). The results remain broadly consistent with those reported here.
12
   The estimated coefficient on the coastline dummy is consistently negative, although not statistically significant.
This result is likely due to the fact that coastal basins have higher transaction costs in reaching agreement as
pumpers near the coast and exposed to seawater intrusion have different incentives for controls than do inland
pumpers, who are less impacted.


                                                                                                                       17
Table 4: Basin Benefits of Management
                                        (1)            (2)           (3)            (4)               (5)             (6)            (7)               (8)
                                                                        Ordered Logit                                                        Logit
                                    Mgt Type        Mgt Type       Mgt Type      Mgt Type          Mgt Type       Mgt Type          Mgmt             Mgmt

                                     0.000487      0.000516*                                      0.000579**                     0.000624*
        Avg. Well Yield
                                    (0.000297)     (0.000306)                                     (0.000290)                     (0.000359)
    Mean Precipitation 1950-          0.00394         -0.0353      -0.0898***      -0.110***         0.0499        -0.0507*        0.0157        -0.0829***
             2014                     (0.0480)       (0.0506)        (0.0288)       (0.0295)        (0.0499)       (0.0287)       (0.0569)         (0.0299)
                                        196.8       5,099***           2,770        7,070***          400.2          2,273          436.3            3,350
          Well Density
                                       (575.0)        (1,580)         (2,536)        (1,795)         (735.6)        (2,196)        (860.3)          (3,490)
   Average Urban Pop. Growth        0.0326***      0.0282***        0.0285***      0.0234***       0.0243***      0.0198***      0.0540***        0.0331***
          (1950-2010)                (0.00839)      (0.00802)       (0.00575)      (0.00550)       (0.00896)      (0.00599)       (0.0206)        (0.00982)
                                        -0.305         -0.763          -0.255         -0.283          -0.820         -0.685         -0.665           -0.339
        Coastline Dummy
                                       (0.448)        (0.525)         (0.378)        (0.398)         (0.560)        (0.426)        (0.488)          (0.382)
       State Water Project                                                                          1.428***       1.690***
           Connection                                                                                (0.388)        (0.313)

                                    0.910***         0.890**        0.710***       0.701***        1.423***       1.098***        -1.113***      -0.766***
        Kappa 1/Constant
                                     (0.346)         (0.346)         (0.168)        (0.176)         (0.362)        (0.180)          (0.358)        (0.171)
                                    3.008***        2.714***        2.713***       2.552***        3.677***       3.258***
             Kappa 2
                                     (0.467)         (0.449)         (0.281)        (0.275)         (0.460)        (0.271)
  Observations                         197             166             445            400             197            445             197               445
  Missing Basins                    Imputed         Dropped         Imputed        Dropped         Imputed        Imputed          Imputed           Imputed
  Notes: Robust standard errors in parentheses and significance levels are: *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1. The number of observations is determined as
  follows: The entire data set is 445 observations, and 45 observations are dropped when list wise deletion is implemented. If well yield is included, the
  dataset collapses to 197 observations due to missing values, and listwise deletion further reduces the number of observations to 166.




                                                                                                                                                               18
falling into the adjudicated category by 4.70 percentage points and of adopting a GMP by 8.17

percentage points. The effects of well yield and density are of slightly smaller magnitude. The

underlying probability of adjudicating groundwater rights is around 9% and of having a GMP

around 29%. Accordingly, the magnitude of changing these variables by a full standard deviation

on adoption of adjudication or a GMP is substantial relative to these underlying probabilities.

Table 5: Marginal Effects of Key Variables on Adoption of Groundwater Management
                                                                                    Average
                                                Average            Well
                                                                                     Urban
                                               Well Yield         Density
                                                                                    Growth
               One Standard Deviation around Mean
               None                      -7.23%                    -5.29%           -12.87%
               GMP                        4.56%                     3.40%            8.17%
               Adjudication               2.67%                     1.88%            4.70%


        Indeed, the observables that we associate with higher benefits are widespread in the

basins that have adopted the most stringent management via definition of groundwater rights.

Consider the adjudicated basins in eastern Los Angeles: water is scarce due to low recharge (an

average of 403 mm (15.86 in)/year compared to the sample mean of 497 mm (19.57 in)/year),

high urban population growth rates (42% on average, compared to a sample mean of 8%), a

mean of average well yields (965 gal/min) above the sample mean (561), and high well

densities.13

        High expected aggregate benefits alone, however, may not be enough to lead to

agreement for collective action if the agents have divergent views on the benefits. The Oxnard

Plain to the west shares many basin characteristics with those in eastern Los Angeles, but users




13
 Here we include the following adjudications: Main San Gabriel (1968-73), Puente (81-85), Six Basins (96-98),
Chino (75-78), Western San Bernardino (63-69), and Beaumont (2002-04).


                                                                                                                19
have not agreed upon pumping restrictions. Accordingly, we turn now to examining the

determinants of transaction costs that impede collective action.



   VI.     Transaction Costs in Collective Action to Constrain Pumping

   A. Empirical Strategy

       The effect of transaction costs in molding group responses to open-access losses is

examined in three ways:

       First, we examine critically overdrafted basins as defined by Department of Water

Resources to determine why pumpers have not implemented controls. To do this, we explore

which transaction cost variables explain a lack of collective action in those basins that would

seem to need the strictest controls, relative to those basins that have adjudicated property rights.

We show how the determinants of transaction costs systematically differ across the two.

       Second, we use a duration variable to examine transaction costs among adjudicated

basins. From the time that court documents are filed by adjudication proponents to the

finalization of the stipulated judgement assigning groundwater rights, pumpers bargain over the

implied assignment of property rights. When judgements are appealed or important parties

remain recalcitrant, the process is drawn out and additional costs are incurred.

       Third, where users have chosen not to pursue adjudication of property rights, but still

recognize the need for management via GMPs, we analyze why many of those are fragmented.

Where agreement on management institutions remains elusive among heterogeneous parties,

different groups form their own management districts, resulting in a patchwork of small GMPs

across the basin.




                                                                                                   20
         B. Comparison of Critically Overdrafted and Adjudicated Basins

             Critically overdrafted basins are identified as those where maintaining current pumping

  rates likely will result in significant adverse effects.14 We use estimated values from the ordered

  logit results in Table 4 to demonstrate that the critical and adjudicated basins are comparable in

  the aggregate benefits of pumping controls. Although there are 20 critical basins, 3 have been

  recently adjudicated in part or in whole. Accordingly, 17 basins are coded as critical; these and

  the remaining 31 adjudicated basins form a sample size of 48. Nine of these, however, lack well

  yield data, leaving us with 39 basin observations for this comparison. We predict a management

  benefits value using average well yield, well density, average precipitation, a coastline dummy,

  and the average decadal urban population growth rate from 1950 to 2010 (column 1, Table 4).

  We then estimate                                                   , where the coefficient        captures the

  difference in conditional means between adjudicated and critical basins for modeled benefits                           .

  The results are shown in column 1, Table 6.

  Table 6: Differences in Aggregate Benefits of Pumping Controls and Transaction Cost
  Variables between Critical and Adjudicated Basins
                          (1)            (2)            (3)            (4)              (5)             (6)              (7)
                                                                      Log
                       Modeled                      Number of                         Well          Spatial Var      SWP
                                     Basin Size                     Number of
                       Benefits                       Wells                       Heterogeneity       Precip       Connection
                                                                      Wells
Adjudicated             -0.486        -311.3**         -20.00       -1.655**         -0.0144          0.0340        0.421***
  Basins               (0.291)         (120.4)        (42.77)        (0.770)        (0.0303)         (0.122)         (0.141)
                      1.632***        493.3***          28.51       5.810***        0.143***         0.271**        0.353***
 Constant
                       (0.123)         (111.1)        (43.20)        (0.598)        (0.0264)         (0.101)         (0.118)

Observations              39             48             48              48              48              48               48



             Our average index of the benefits of adopting pumping constraints is over 40% higher in

  the critically overdrafted basins than it is in adjudicated ones, which reinforces the relevance of

  this empirical test: if the benefits of curtailing excessive pumping are so high in these critical
  14
       A detailed definition of critical overdraft can be found here: http://www.water.ca.gov/groundwater/sgm/cod.cfm.


                                                                                                                         21
basins, why have they not adjudicated property rights? To assess the impact of transaction cost

variables, we turn to predictions (vi)-(viii) from Section III regarding the effect of basin size, the

number of users, and heterogeneity in pumpers and the resource. We estimate the same equation

as in column 1, but with transaction cost variables, and predict that these variables are

systematically higher in critical basins. The results are shown in columns 2-7, Table 6.

         As predicted, critical basins are systematically larger with more users (wells), and the

users are more heterogeneous in their demand for or valuation of water relative to the

adjudicated basins. The latter are more likely to have imported water connections, which is

consistent with the notion that imported water lowers the costs of adjudication.15 All in all, it is

clear that in critically overdrafted basins, users face higher transaction costs that block agreement

on the pumping constraints that have been implemented in adjudicated basins.

         The impact of these transaction cost variables is particularly clear in one critical basin,

Borrego Valley, where groundwater is effectively the sole source of water and water tables have

declined over 100 feet in recent decades. Users have implemented one GMP, but it has proved

ineffectual. Borrego Valley is almost twice as large as the sample mean (152,560 acres relative

to 89,000), and its mixed pumpers (municipal and agricultural users in addition to golf courses

and a state park) greatly differ in water valuation. Well heterogeneity in Borrego Valley is .16,

much higher than the sample average of .06.

     C. Transaction Costs in the Adjudication of Groundwater Rights

         To further understand the role of transaction costs in collective action, we examine how

long it takes to reach agreement on a property rights distribution in basins when it has occurred.

Adjudications vary significantly in the time it takes to concur on the assignment of groundwater

15
  This prediction of the effect of imported water on the transaction costs side can be supported anecdotally from the
cases in the Central and West Basins. Imported water lowers transaction costs by allowing users recharge rather than
restricting pumping. Where the costs of reductions are very high, this may be more efficient and ease agreement.


                                                                                                                  22
property rights. Parties disagree on the level of allowable pumping, where basin depletion is

greatest, the risk of collateral effects, and the division of shares over the total allowable

extraction. If some pumpers are not affected by seawater intrusion, lie on thick portions of the

basin with low conductivity, have different water valuations, or are not impacted by high well

density, then they may accept the status quo and resist assignment of more formal groundwater

rights that do not incorporate these advantages. Basin size raises the number of pumpers and the

costs of obtaining and agreeing on reliable hydrologic information (Donohew, 2005).

        An example of a particularly lengthy adjudication process is the Santa Maria Valley

basin. Pumpers began adjudication proceedings in 1997; they broke down in 2008 and finally

were completed in 2013. The groundwater basin is relatively large, has a large number of users

(the number of wells is 5 times the sample average), and has a mix of municipal and agricultural

users; in addition, coastal pumpers are more affected by seawater than those inland. These

conditions engendered a lengthy, contentious litigation process with total costs of $11 million

(Cal Coast News, 2013).

        Figure 2 presents the temporal distribution of 25 adjudications in California and their

durations.16 The mean adjudication duration is 8 years, and the standard deviation is 5.8 years.

To examine how the length of adjudication is affected by transaction costs, we conduct duration

analysis focusing on how many basins remain in adjudication each year after the process begins.

Due to the low number of observations, we present nonparametric Kaplan-Meier estimates of the

survivor function and investigate how they vary according to the same transaction cost variables




16
  Throughout the text, we list 31 adjudicated basins, resulting from 25 adjudication decisions. Some adjudication
decisions apply to multiple basins as defined in DWR’s Bulletin 118 (2004), which we use to define our basin
observations.


                                                                                                                    23
we examine above.17 Factors increasing transaction costs lead to a lower hazard rate, which in

turn implies a higher survival function or longer expected adjudication duration. Kaplan-Meier

survival functions are stratified into two groups: basins that exhibit values below the median for

each transaction cost variable and those basins above the median.

Figure 2: Groundwater Adjudication Chronology




         Figure 3 presents the plotted survival functions. The red lines correspond to observations

above the sample median for: (a) numbers of wells, (b) basin size, (c) well water use

heterogeneity, and (d) spatial precipitation variance. The number of wells and well heterogeneity




17
  In Appendix C we report results from a Cox Proportional Hazard (Cox PH) Model, which controls for all
covariates simultaneously and attempts to capture the marginal effect of any particular covariate on the length of
adjudication processes. The Cox PH results are illustrative of the conditional effects of each variable. They are
identified from very few observations, so we prefer the nonparametric estimates here.


                                                                                                                     24
especially are associated with lengthier and costlier adjudications, and the effect is conspicuous

across the observed range of adjudication durations.18

Figure 3: Results – Nonparametric Duration Analysis of Property Rights Allocation




                          (a)                                                       (b)




                          (c)                                                       (d)


     D. Fragmentation of Groundwater Management Plans

         When parties cannot agree on a basin-wide groundwater management plan, partial ones,

covering only portions of the basin may emerge to encompass a more homogeneous group of

pumpers. To examine the relationship between transaction costs and observed GMP design, we

present the following measure of GMP fragmentation for each basin :                                  . This

measure captures how many GMPs of the average size in that basin it would take to cover its

18
  Counter to our expected result, high spatial variance in precipitation is associated with faster adjudications and
there is no clear effect of basin size. Results for the parametric Cox PH model are given in Appendix C and indicate
that basin size, spatial variance in precipitation, and well location near the coast do increase duration.


                                                                                                                  25
     entirety. Using all groundwater basins with GMPs, we estimate                                  , with GMP

     fragmentation as the dependent variable. The results are reported in Table 7.

     Table 7: Results – GMP Fragmentation and Bargaining Costs
      GMP Fragmentation                (1)           (2)          (3)          (4)          (5)          (6)           (7)

                                   0.00967***                                                                      0.00743***
       Basin Area (acres)
                                   (0.000864)                                                                       (0.00256)
                                                  0.105**                                                             0.0300
       Number of Wells
                                                  (0.0407)                                                           (0.0301)
                                                                0.804*
     Log Number of Wells
                                                                (0.410)
                                                                              7.672                                    0.735
      Well Heterogeneity
                                                                             (6.612)                                 (5.031)
 Mean Spatial Precip. Variance                                                             0.970                       0.250
         1950-2014                                                                        (0.987)                    (0.382)
                                                                                                        -1.269        -0.215
       Coastline Dummy
                                                                                                       (0.892)       (0.929)
                                    1.637***      2.554***       0.437      2.627***     3.059***     3.528***      1.671***
           Constant
                                     (0.349)       (0.410)      (1.235)      (0.584)      (0.448)      (0.597)       (0.437)

                N                       105          104         104           104         105          104            104
Notes: Robust standard errors in parentheses and *** p<.01, ** p<.05, and * p<.1. The number of observations is either 105 for
the full sample or 104 where well numbers or types must be imputed and one observation is lost.



              As in the other transaction cost exercises, the signs of the coefficients for basin size, the

     number of users, user heterogeneity and mean spatial precipitation variance (recharge

     differences) are positive in all specifications. While the small number of observations limits the

     statistical power, basin area is significant at the 1% level in both specification (1) and (7) and

     well number measures are significant when regressed individually. GMP fragmentation is more

     likely to occur in larger basins with more pumpers who differ in water valuation and where

     recharge varies.

          E. Transaction Costs in Mitigating the Economic Losses of Groundwater Overdraft

              Our empirical analysis of varying collective responses to competitive over-exploitation

     across California’s 445 groundwater basins reveals that the more common the resource as



                                                                                                                      26
indicated by well yield, the higher the value of water as indicated by urban population growth,

and the greater the cross-well externalities as indicated by well density, the more likely basin

users will adopt individual groundwater rights or implement GMPs. On the other hand, where

precipitation is greater and there is more recharge, there is less need. Furthermore, transaction

costs block agreement on what exactly remedies should look like: where the basin is larger with

more users who are more heterogeneous, agents are less likely to agree upon groundwater rights

or management plans, and rent dissipation continues. Even in critically overdrafted basins where

property rights would be the most effective response, they are not adopted.

       These findings reveal the role of transaction costs in impeding collective action among

parties even when there are large aggregate gains from undertaking it. Users in critical basins

encounter especially high costs in curtailing excessive exploitation. These basins are on average

larger with a larger number of more different users than is the case in basins where parties have

successfully agreed upon an allocation of property rights. In adjudicated basins, however, there is

still variation in how long it takes for the parties to reach agreement, and this time varies

according to the numbers of parties (wells), basin size, heterogeneity in water valuation, and

variation in precipitation. If parties cannot agree on a property rights regime, they can turn to a

groundwater management plan, but many of those cover only parts of the formation.

Fragmentation of management plans also is more likely as basin size increases, as the number of

users grows, and as water values differ more greatly.

       On the basis of these insights, basins in California can be described as belonging to three

categories based on the make-up of their users:

       1) Users in basins where gains from adopting management are low do not implement

           management despite relatively low transaction costs. A typical basin in this category



                                                                                                      27
           has a small number of agricultural users, high basin recharge, and no collateral

           impacts of drawdown.

       2) Basins with mixed agricultural and urban users face high transaction costs. Increasing

           the proportion of the latter raises returns to adopting management, but a mix of user

           types raises transaction costs substantially.

       3) In basins where all users value the resource highly, such as in urban settings, returns

           to management are high and transaction costs comparatively low, leading to

           adjudication of groundwater rights.

       These three categories mirror the historical development of many adjudicated basins in

California. When users were relatively few and focused on agricultural production, few

perceived a need to restrict pumping. As demand grew and areas became more urban, the desire

to control and regulate groundwater increased, but solving the problem was difficult. Only users

who faced risk of collateral impacts, were densely settled, or urbanized very quickly chose to

adjudicate early (e.g., West Coast (1946), Raymond (1937), or Upper LA River (1955)). Later,

most of the remaining Los Angeles basin and surrounding areas were adjudicated as farm land

was urbanized (e.g., Six Basins (1996), Main San Gabriel (1968), or Mojave (1990)).

       More generally, the effective management of groundwater is a major natural resource

challenge worldwide. The problems encountered in securing consensus on action to avoid

serious economic loss that we document, however, are emblematic of similar obstacles found

across many natural and environmental resources where sustainability is desired.




                                                                                                   28
    VII. Concluding Remarks: Transaction Costs and Collective Action

          In 1960, Ronald Coase suggested that standard ways of viewing open-access problems as

ones of externalities, correctable with Pigouvian taxes or regulation, were flawed. He

recommended consideration of the reciprocal nature of any environmental/natural resource

problem and the use of bargaining among the relevant parties to reduce exploitation. Coase

explicitly recognized that transaction costs could be high and that they could impede a collective

response: “Once the costs of carrying out market transactions are taken into account it is clear

that such a rearrangement of rights will only be undertaken when the increase in the value of

production consequent upon the rearrangement is greater than the costs which would be involved

in bringing it about” (Coase, 1960, 15-16). Indeed, since Coase’s analysis, economists

increasingly have acknowledged that the existence of costly open access resource management

institutions alone is not sufficient to spur action. It is not only aggregate gains that matter;

individual gains and losses from the adoption of controls, including the transaction costs of

reaching agreement on the implicit assignment of property rights, determine whether or not a

consensus can be reached. Despite growing awareness of the issue, however, it has been difficult

to empirically examine transaction costs and how variation in them might affect collective

action.

          If collective action involves the mobilization of resource users for mitigation, then

whether or not any user joins depends upon how they perceive their status quo position (present

value of net returns) relative to what they would expect under the new arrangement—under a

new, more formal property rights regime (present value of ex ante expected net returns). If the

resource is large and heterogeneous in size and quality, then parts of it will exhibit open-access

losses sooner than others and not all parties will observe this variation. Additionally, if the users



                                                                                                     29
are heterogeneous in production cost and value, then they will have different abilities to adapt to

open access, different asset valuations, and different time frames for production. These sources

of heterogeneity mean that some parties perceive individual open-access losses as more severe

than do others and hence push for early and more complete action. Others feel less imperative,

particularly if the response offers them less then they expect under existing conditions. Under

these circumstances, the latter will have to be compensated by the former to be convinced to

comply with any collective solution. This is the Coasean bargain, and if transaction costs are

sufficiently high, the parties may not be able to complete it and the open-access problem will

persist.

           In this paper, we examine user and resource characteristics (including production

heterogeneity) that affect reactions to the common pool. The extensive variation in groundwater

overdraft status and management in California, including open access, limited (and in important

cases, fragmented) groundwater management plans, and fully adjudicated basins with defined

property rights (varying in implementation time) provides a laboratory for investigating the

sources and impact of transaction costs. Our analysis reveals why some groundwater basins have

been more and others less amenable to collective responses to overdraft. Analysis of this

particular case, made possible by our novel dataset, allows us to make discussion of transaction

costs concrete and to identify specific resource and user characteristics that affect the benefits

and success of implementing collective remedies to the common pool.



    VIII. References

Adhikari, B. and J. Lovett (2006). Institutions and Collective Action: Does Heterogeneity Matter
      in Community-based Resource Management? Journal of Development Studies, 42(3):
      426-45.




                                                                                                     30
Aeschbach-Hertig, W. and T. Gleeson (2012). Regional strategies for the accelerating global
      problem of groundwater depletion. Nature Geoscience, 5: 853-861.
Allen, Douglas W. (1991). What Are Transaction Costs? Research in Law and Economics 14: 1–
       18.
Allen, Douglas W. (2000). Transaction Costs. In Encyclopedia of Law and Economics, Volume I:
       The History and Methodology of Law and Economics, edited by Boudewijn Bouckaert
       and Gerrit De Geest, 893–926. Cheltenham: Edward Elgar.

Barlow, P. and E. Reichard (2010). Saltwater intrusion in coastal regions of North America.
      Hydrogeology Journal, 18: 247-60.
Bjørndal, T. and A. Brasão (2006). The East Atlantic Bluefin Tuna Fisheries: Stock Collapse or
       Recovery? Marine Resource Economics 21:193–210.
Brill, T. and Burness, H. 1994. Planning versus competitive rates of groundwater pumping.
        Water Resources Research, 30(6):1873–1880.
Brozović, Nicholas, David L. Sunding, and David Zilberman. (2010). On the spatial nature of the
      groundwater pumping externality. Resource and Energy Economics, 32(2): 154-164.
Cal Coast News (2013). Supreme Court tosses Santa Maria groundwater rights case. Cal Coast
      News.com. Published 15 Octobe,r 2013. Available at:
      http://calcoastnews.com/2013/10/supreme-court-tosses-santa-maria-groundwater-rights-
      case/
Cheung, Steven N.S. (1970). The Structure of a Contract and the Theory of a Non-exclusive
      Resource. Journal of Law and Economics, 13 (1): 49-70.
Coase, R. (1960). The Problem of Social Cost. Journal of Law and Economics, 3: 1-44.
Demsetz, H. (1967). Towards a Theory of Property Rights. The American Economic Review,
      57(2), 347-359.
Donohew, Z. (2005). Markets and Private Property Rights to Groundwater. Conservation
      Leadership Council.
Ellis, R. (2008). The Bluefin Tuna in Peril. Scientific American 298: 70-77.
Edwards, E.C. (2016). What Lies Beneath? Aquifer Heterogeneity and the Economics of
      Groundwater Management. Journal of the Association of Environmental and Resource
      Economists, 3(2): 453-91.
Famiglietti, J.S., Lo, M., Ho, S.L., Bethune, J., Anderson, K.J., Syed, T.H., Swenson, S.C., de
       Linage, C.R., and M. Rodell. (2011). Satellites measure recent rates of groundwater
       depletion in California’s central valley. Geophysical Research Letters, 38: 1-4.
Farr, T., Jones, C., and Z. Liu (2015). Progress Report: Subsidence in the Central Valley,
        California. Jet Propulsion Laboratory, California Institute of Technology. Prepared for
        the California Department of Water Resources.




                                                                                                  31
Giordano, M. (2009). Global Groundwater? Issues and Solutions. Annual Review of Environment
      and Resources, 34: 7.1-7.26.
Gisser, M. and D.A. Sanchez (1980). Competition versus Optimal Control in Groundwater
        Pumping. Water Resources Research 16 (4): 638-42.
Gordon, H. S. (1954). The Economic Theory of a Common-property Resource: The Fishery.
      Journal of Political Economy, 62(2): 124-42.
Grainger, C.A. and Costello, C., 2015. Distributional Effects of the Transition to Property Rights
       for a Common-Pool Resource. Marine Resource Economics, 31(1).
       doi: http://dx.doi.org/10.1086/684132.
Guilfoos, Todd, Andreas D. Pape, Neha Khanna, and Karen Salvage. 2013. Groundwater
       management: The effect of water flows on welfare gains. Ecological Economics, 95: 31-
       40.
Hardin, G. (1968). The Tragedy of the Commons. Science, 162(3859): 1243-48.
Johnson, R.N. and Libecap, G.D., 1982. Contracting problems and regulation: the case of the
      fishery. The American Economic Review, 72(5), pp.1005-1022.
Konikow, L. and E. Kendy (2005). Groundwater depletion: A global problem. Hydrogeology
      Journal, 13: 317-20.
Korman, S. (2011). International Management of a High Seas Fishery: Political and
     Property-Rights Solutions and the Atlantic Bluefin. Virginia Journal of
     International Law 51 (3): 697-748.
Koundouri, P. (2004). Potential for groundwater management: Gisser-Sanchez
      effect reconsidered. Water Resources Research, 40, W06S16. DOI:
      0.1029/2003WR002164.
Kuwayama, Y., & Brozović, N. 2013. The regulation of a spatially heterogeneous externality:
     Tradable groundwater permits to protect streams. Journal of Environmental Economics
     and Management, 66(2), 364-382.
Leonard, B. and G. Libecap (2015). Endogenous First-Possession Property Rights in Open-
      Access Resources. Iowa Law Review, 100: 2457-78.
Libecap, G. and J. Smith (1999). The Self-Enforcing Provisions of Oil and Gas Unit Operating
       Agreements: Theory and Evidence. The Journal of Law, Economics, and Organization,
       15(2): 526-48.
Libecap, G. and J. Smith (2001). Regulatory Remedies to the Common Pool: The Limits to Oil
       Field Unitization. The Energy Journal, 22(1): 1-26.
Libecap, G. and S. Wiggins (1984). Contractual Responses to the Common Pool: Prorationing of
       Crude Oil Production. The American Economic Review, 74(1): 87-98.
Little, R. and D. Rubin (1987). Statistical Analysis with Missing Data. New York: John Wiley,
         1987.



                                                                                                32
McGlothlin, R. (2016). Personal Communications. 12 February 2016 and 17 November 2016.
Nachbaur, J. (2014). Precipitating institutional change: Drought sinks in. Available at SSRN:
      https://ssrn.com/abstract=1128327 or http://dx.doi.org/10.2139/ssrn.1128327
Ostrom, E. (1990). Governing the Commons: The Evolution of Institutions for Collective Action.
      Cambridge University Press.
Rubin, DB. (1987). Multiple imputation for nonresponse in surveys. New York: John Wiley,
       1987.
Ruttan, L. (2008). Economic Heterogeneity and the Commons: Effects on Collective Action and
       Collective Goods Provisioning. World Development, 36(5): 969-85.
Scanlon, B., Faunt, C., Longuevergne, L., Reedy, R., Alley, W., McGuire, V., and P. McMahon
       (2012). Groundwater depletion and sustainability of irrigation in the US High Plains and
       Central Valley. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, 109(24): 9320-5.
Schafer, J. (1999). Multiple imputation: a primer. Statistical Methods in Medical Research, 8: 3-
       15.
Senter, E. (2016). Personal Communication. 11 October 2016.
Sutherland, S. (2016). Empirical evidence on the role of distribution in determining level of
       policy support (Chapter 1, doctoral dissertation). Bren School of Environmental Science
       and Management, UC, Santa Barbara.
Webster, D. (2010). Quasi-Property Rights and the Effectiveness of Atlantic Tuna
      Management. in Conservation and Management of Transnational Tuna
      Fisheries, edited by R. Allen, J. Joseph and D. Squires, Oxford, UK: Wiley-
      Blackwell, 321-32.
Wiggins, S. and G. Libecap (1985). Oil Field Unitization: Contractual Failure in the Presence of
      Imperfect Information. American Economic Review 75(3): 368-85.
Wiggins, S. and G. Libecap (1987). Firm Heterogeneities and Cartelization Efforts in Domestic
      Crude Oil. Journal of Law, Economics, and Organization, 3(1): 1-25.
Zekri, S. (2008). Using Economic Incentives and Regulations to Reduce Seawater Intrusion in
        the Batinah Coastal Area of Oman. Agricultural Water Management, 95: 243-52.




                                                                                                33
       IX.     Data and Results Appendices

       A. Data Definitions

Mean Precipitation

           Precipitation variables were calculated directly from PRISM interpolations using GIS
           software, and only precipitation falling over the basin itself, as defined in DWR’s
           Bulletin 118, was included. These basin boundaries were obtained from DWR
           shapefiles.19 The mean value from 1950 to 2014 was calculated.

Spatial Variance in Precipitation

           Using the same PRISM data, the zonal statistics tool in ArcGIS was used to calculate the
           spatial variance in precipitation in each basin for each year, 1950-2014. The average level
           of variance was calculated for each basin.

Number of Farms

           The number of farms is calculated as an average over the period 1940-1959 to capture the
           period during which center-pivot irrigation was introduced but before adjudications went
           into effect, which limits endogeneity concerns. These data are available historically from
           the USDA Agricultural Census on a county basis. When basins cover only portions of or
           multiple counties, the percentage of agricultural land within each county that was within
           each individual basin was computed using Cropscape data20 from 2007, the earliest year
           for which data are available. Then, those proportions were used to assign the farms in
           each county to individual basins.

Basin Size

           Basin size is a measure of the surface area overlying the aquifer. This was calculated
           using geometric calculations in GIS software, and the Albers Equal Area Conic
           projection was used to maintain area relations.

Coastline Dummy

           The coastline dummy is equal to 1 if the boundary of the basin’s polygon in the GIS
           shapefile touches the coast at any point.

Number of Wells

           Well completion reports were provided by DWR, and these reports were imported into
           GIS software using latitude and longitude coordinates. The number of wells refers to the

19
     https://gis.water.ca.gov/app/gicima/
20
     https://nassgeodata.gmu.edu/CropScape/


                                                                                                    34
           number of wells physically located within a basin. With some exceptions, well
           completion reports place wells at the center of a township and range, i.e., all or most
           wells within a 6 mile by 6 mile grid have the same coordinates, so there may be some
           slight measurement error in this variable. One important note is that one can filter well
           completion reports by the date of well completion: we count only wells completed by the
           time adjudication began for adjudicated basins or 1980 for GMP or unmanaged basins
           (initial legislation governing the GMP process was adopted in 1980). This allows us to
           allay concerns that the implementation of management endogenously affects the number
           of wells or users.

Well Density

           Our measure of well density simply divides the total number of wells in a basin by the
           size of the basin, in acres, as calculated using GIS software.

Number of Agricultural Wells/Non-Agricultural Wells

           The number of wells by use type was calculated using planned use codes contained in the
           data. Specifically, any well listed with a planned use of irrigation, agricultural use, or
           animal or stock watering was counted as an agricultural well. All other planned uses were
           non-agricultural, including drinking water wells and injection wells. These numbers were
           calculated using the same date filters as used for the total number of wells. Proportions
           were calculated using the total number of wells.

Number of Wells within 1000m of the Coast

           A 1000m-buffer was placed along the coastline, and the number of wells within this
           buffer within each basin was recorded. These numbers were calculated using the same
           date filters as used for the total number of wells. We then divide this by the total number
           of wells in that basin to come to our proportion.

Urban Population Growth

           Historical census data for major municipalities were obtained from the California
           Department of Finance21 and decadal growth rates for 1950-2010 were calculated. Then,
           if a city's center overlies a basin, that city's growth rate was included for that basin. City
           centers were located in GIS software using a point shapefile from USC's Southern
           California Earthquake Center.22

Well Heterogeneity

           Our measure of well heterogeneity is defined as                                             ,
           which reaches its maximum when agricultural and non-agricultural wells are evenly
           balanced.

21
     http://www.dof.ca.gov/Reports/Demographic_Reports/index.html#reports
22
     http://52.26.186.219/internships/useit/content/california-cities-point-shapefile


                                                                                                        35
SWP Connections

          Water agencies and irrigation districts holding Table A allotments from the State Water
          Project23 were identified, and GIS shapefiles of water agencies in California24 were used
          to identify basins underlying these water agencies. If a water agency holding an
          entitlement was not found in DWR's shapefile for GMPs, the authors located it on a map
          and judged which, if any, basins underlie its service area. If the service or management
          area of a water agency or irrigation district holding a SWP entitlement overlies an
          aquifer, that basin received a 1.

Number of Groundwater Management Plans

          The number of GMPs overlying a basin was also calculated using the above-mentioned
          shapefiles from DWR. Any GMP polygon that intersects (i.e., overlaps) a basin was
          included in that basin’s tally.

Adjudication Dummy

          This measure was based on previous research. If basin users have accepted a stipulated
          judgement and that judgement has been implemented following approval by a state court,
          then that basin was listed as adjudicated.

Adjudication Duration

          Our calculated durations begin when court documents were first filed (as identified on
          subsequent judgement documents) and end when a judgement is reached by the court.

GMP Fragmentation

          For each basin we calculate                 . GMP sizes were calculated using the above-
          mentioned DWR shapefiles. This ratio captures how many GMPs of the average size in
          basin it would take to cover its entirety. If basin users formulate several small GMPs,
          reflecting a high fragmentation of management, this measure will be high. It is always
          weakly greater than one.




23
     http://water.ca.gov/swpao/swp-max-table-a.html
24
     https://gis.water.ca.gov/app/gicima/



                                                                                                    36
   B. Missing Well Data and Multiple Imputation

       Our well data are missing for some basins. Specifically, their locations are shown in

Figure 4:

Figure 4: Spatial Representation of Well Data




       Each green dot indicates one or more wells. Within the red area depicted on this map,

well data are either completely or partially missing because the Fresno regional office of the

DWR did not collect and digitize Well Completions Reports (WCRs) in the same manner as

other regional offices (Senter, 2016). There are several methods for dealing with such missing

data problems, two of which are listwise deletion and multiple imputation.

       Multiple imputation is under most circumstances preferable to listwise deletion. This

relates to the nature of the missing data mechanism, i.e., why the data are missing. If the data are




                                                                                                  37
missing completely at random, using listwise deletion (i.e., dropping those observations with

missing data) results in unbiased parameter estimates. If, however, the missing data mechanism

is endogenous to observed characteristics, listwise deletion will result in biased parameter

estimates; multiple imputation on the basis of observable characteristics can resolve this bias. In

the event that data are missing due to unobservable factors, multiple imputation may not remove

all bias but will perform better than listwise deletion (Little and Rubin, 1987; Schafer, 1999).

          Our missing data mechanism depends certainly on observable factors and likely also on

unobservable factors. As a result, imputation will resolve some bias in estimation but not all of it

because we cannot control for unobservable characteristics of the area covered by the Fresno

regional office that may affect the number of wells, well density, etc. Still, the use of imputation

can be justified on two grounds. First, the data are clearly not missing completely at random, so

listwise deletion may produce severely biased results. Second, dropping the observations in this

area would cost us many of the critically overdrafted basins in California, which in turn would

severely hinder our analysis.

          Schafer (1999) provides a useful overview of multiple imputation procedures. Multiple

imputation proceeds in two major steps: 1) data imputation and 2) data analysis. In the

imputation phase, a regression model is fit with the variable to be imputed as the dependent

variable and every variable used in the analysis phase included on the right-hand side. In

particular, one fits                    , where     is the explanatory variable to be imputed,     is

of rank         ( being the number of explanatory variables in our analysis in aggregate), and

is of rank (where is the number of dependent variables in our analysis in aggregate). In this

way, parameters are estimated that allow for a conditional posterior distribution of the imputation




                                                                                                    38
variable of interest to be constructed, from which values are drawn for    imputations. The result

is   “new” datasets that include different imputed values for all missing variables.


       The second step, data analysis, involves using the     imputed datasets to perform the

desired estimation for the research analysis. In particular, estimation is performed on each

imputed dataset (              ) individually, and then the parameter estimates from each

imputation are combined according to rules designed by Rubin (1987). The end result is one set

of parameter estimates derived from the existing data for all complete observations as well as the

imputed data for incomplete observations, but all observations, both complete and imputed, are

used in the analysis.

       We impute three variables directly and another four as passive variables (i.e., as

deterministic functions of imputed variables). Two variables, the number of wells and the

percentage of wells in a basin used for agriculture, need to be imputed for 45 basins (when the

San Joaquin is broken up into its constituent subbasins). The proportion of wells within 1000m

of the coast is relevant only for basins on the coast and needs to be imputed for only 21 basins.

Unfortunately, because well yield data are included in the imputation model, we are only able to

impute values for 30 of the 45 basins and 17 of the 21 basins, respectively. However, we provide

results with and without well yield to examine whether this issue affects our results.

       After imputing values, we calculate four passive variables. The proportion of wells for

non-agricultural use is defined as                   . Well heterogeneity is defined as

                                        . Well density is calculated as

               . Finally, the proportion of wells within 1000m of the coast is squared to provide

us with a quadratic term.




                                                                                                    39
            Then, we run our typical estimation using the (                   ) datasets produced by the

imputation process. We apply ordered logit, logit, and Cox PH models to the data, as described

in their respective section. In order to recover conditional means in Section VI, we run OLS as

well. For the purposes of the nonparametric duration analysis, we use averages of the imputed

variables where necessary to construct dummy variables for high and low well counts as well as

high and low well heterogeneity.

       C. Cox Proportional Hazard Results

            Formally, a Cox PH model can be represented as:




where                is the proportional hazard function, as a function of time conditional on the

covariates.          is the vector of covariates25 and        represents the underlying baseline hazard

function. The parameter vector ( ) is estimated using maximum likelihood and describes how

the covariates affect the hazard rate after entry into the initial state.

            We expect all coefficients of interest to have negative signs, increasing duration, save for

the quadratic term on the proportion of wells near the coast—this effect is nonlinear and reduces

bargaining costs at high proportions because bargaining positions again become more

homogeneous. We test our predictions by estimating the coefficient vector and comparing the

signs of the estimated coefficients with our predicted effects on bargaining costs.

            Table 9 presents results from the Cox PH regressions on the duration of the adjudication

process. We include several controls (number of farms, a coastline dummy, and the percentage

of well types) because adjudication duration is not a perfect measure of bargaining costs:

25
     In this case,     is not a function of time because we assume covariates are time-invariant.


                                                                                                           40
adjudication duration may also be shorter when resource values are higher. Columns 1 and 2 use

the imputed data in the baseline specification, while columns 3 and 4 drop the imputed

observations. Columns 5 and 6 omit well yield to use the entire sample, and columns 7 and 8

control for any potential effect of imported water connections. Despite small sample sizes, we

observe statistically significant results for several covariates.

          Our strongest results concern basin size and the spatial variance in precipitation. Larger

area increases the length of adjudications, and the coefficient estimates are highly statistically

significant. Larger basins are generally more difficult to understand, and logistical costs are

higher, leading to higher bargaining costs. This is one of the strongest predictors. The effect of

high variance in precipitation has the same sign but is less reliably statistically significant.

Meanwhile, coefficient estimates on well heterogeneity and the number of wells are also

consistently negative although generally not statistically significant. When imputed observations

are dropped, the proportion of users near the coastline in coastal basins also becomes statistically

significant. That a higher proportion of wells within 1 km of the coastline increases the length of

adjudication speaks to the difficulty of getting coastal users, who are exposed to seawater

intrusion, and inland users, who are not, to agree on management rules. The sign and statistical

significance on the quadratic term suggest that the effect is nonlinear: basins where a very high

proportion of users are within 1 km of the coastline actually adjudicate quickly because

bargaining positions are homogeneous.

          As in the nonparametric duration analysis, imported water connections seem to have little

effect. However, our controls present interesting results. Resource benefits seem to play a role

because basins with many farms tend to adjudicate much more quickly, as aggregate benefits are

higher.


                                                                                                       41
Table 9: Bargaining Costs: Cox PH Results
               Adj Duration                (1)            (2)           (3)            (4)            (5)            (6)            (7)            (8)
                                       -0.00391*                    -0.0039***                    -0.00225**                    -0.00395*
            Basin Area (acres)
                                       (0.00218)                     (0.00105)                     (0.00106)                    (0.00207)
           Mean Spatial Precip.         -1.479*         -0.977       -1.656**       -1.189**        -0.0979        -0.0658       -1.491**        -0.995
           Variance 1950-2014           (0.756)        (0.636)        (0.674)        (0.601)        (0.475)        (0.477)        (0.726)        (0.645)
                                       -0.000348      -0.000187      -0.000308      -0.000129                                   -0.000374      -0.000204
             Avg. Well Yield
                                       (0.000408)    (0.000372)     (0.000326)     (0.000341)                                   (0.000413)     (0.000377)
                                        -0.0585         -0.103       -0.0882**      -0.175***       -0.0226        -0.0530       -0.0594         -0.106
         Number of Wells (Exog)
                                        (0.0670)       (0.0902)       (0.0359)      (0.0375)       (0.0338)       (0.0496)       (0.0685)       (0.0921)
        Proportion of Wells within       -27.87         -25.33       -155.1**       -141.7**        -9.481         -8.905         -26.78         -27.15
           1000m of Coastline
                 (Exog)                 (66.86)        (50.03)        (74.86)        (62.10)        (32.20)        (26.15)        (68.40)        (53.70)
                                         117.7          85.41         652.7**        567.4**         50.04          35.75         117.3          93.83
        Proportion of Wells within
         1000m Squared (Exog)           (275.1)        (203.4)        (324.1)        (265.6)        (135.8)        (110.2)        (277.5)        (217.7)
            Well Heterogeneity           -8.489         -19.76         -20.44        -27.46         -5.296         -9.233         -8.705         -19.84
                 (Exog)                 (21.36)        (14.43)        (22.64)        (17.93)        (7.881)        (7.676)        (21.78)        (14.86)
            State Water Project                                                                                                   0.322          0.144
                Connection                                                                                                        (0.921)        (0.833)
                                                                            Controls
                                         0.216          0.567         1.405*      1.794***           0.235          0.408         0.0425         0.558
            Coastline Dummy
                                        (2.171)        (1.531)        (0.804)        (0.683)        (0.752)        (0.656)        (2.595)        (1.670)
        Average Number of Farms        0.401***         0.263*       0.481***       0.401***       0.214***       0.162**        0.398***        0.266*
               1940-1959                (0.135)        (0.148)        (0.113)       (0.0883)       (0.0608)       (0.0792)        (0.131)        (0.147)
           Percentage Ag Wells           0.129          7.353          6.954          11.36          2.734          5.187         0.474          7.557
                 (Exog)                 (14.11)        (9.000)        (13.75)        (10.25)        (4.008)        (3.897)        (14.71)        (9.182)
                     N                     23             23             21            21             31             31             23             23
              Missing Basins            Imputed        Imputed       Dropped        Dropped        Imputed        Imputed        Imputed        Imputed
Notes: Standard errors in parentheses and * p<.1, ** p<.05, *** p<.01. The total number of adjudicated basins is 31; eight are lost when well yield is included,
and another two when observations with imputed values are dropped.




                                                                                                                                                                   42
       D. Results with San Joaquin presented as one Basin

           In this subsection we present the results of our ordered logit model when the San Joaquin

   groundwater basin is treated as one observational unit (instead of 15 subbasins). The results are

   broadly consistent with those presented in Section V.

   Table 10: Benefits of Management – San Joaquin Whole
                                    (1)           (2)            (3)              (4)            (5)              (6)
                                                     Ordered Logit                                      Logit
                                 Mgt Type       Mgt Type      Mgt Type        Mgt Type         Mgmt             Mgmt

                                 0.000507       0.000527*                                    0.000560*
      Avg. Well Yield
                                (0.000319)      (0.000313)                                   (0.000336)
  Mean Precipitation 1950-        0.00747          -0.0346    -0.0751***      -0.108***        0.0208       -0.0748**
           2014                   (0.0465)        (0.0505)      (0.0266)       (0.0294)       (0.0554)       (0.0294)
                                    30.18        4,990***         109.7        6,907***         697.8          3,254
    Well Density (Exog)
                                   (110.2)         (1,564)       (332.9)        (1,748)        (1,190)        (3,289)
Average Urban Pop. Growth       0.0314***       0.0282***      0.0252***      0.0221***       0.0449**      0.0248***
       (1950-2010)               (0.00932)       (0.00857)     (0.00603)      (0.00568)       (0.0205)      (0.00822)
                                    -0.309          -0.774       -0.0265         -0.252         -0.628         -0.224
     Coastline Dummy
                                   (0.415)         (0.522)       (0.332)        (0.396)        (0.509)        (0.365)

                                 0.957***       0.905***       0.762***        0.723***      -1.115***      -0.828***
     Kappa 1/Constant
                                  (0.345)        (0.347)        (0.168)         (0.177)        (0.351)        (0.171)
                                 2.738***       2.637***       2.535***        2.489***
          Kappa 2
                                  (0.438)        (0.441)        (0.257)         (0.268)
Observations                        185            163            430             395           185               430
Missing Basins                   Imputed        Dropped        Imputed         Dropped        Imputed           Imputed
Notes: Robust standard errors in parentheses and *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1. The number of observations differs from
those in Table 4 because the 15 San Joaquin subbasins are treated as one basin.




                                                                                                                    43
   E. Benefits Results with State Water Project Connections

       In this subsection we present the results of our ordered logit model when the dummy variable associated with imported water

connections is included in every specification. The results are consistent with those presented in Section V, although well yield

becomes a more significant predictor and other determinants of water value (precipitation and urban growth rates) are less significant.

Table 11: Benefits of Management – SWP Connections
                                      (1)             (2)          (3)           (4)         (5)           (6)          (7)               (8)
                                                                      Ordered Logit                                             Logit
                                   Mgt Type       Mgt Type       Mgt Type     Mgt Type    Mgt Type      Mgt Type       Mgmt              Mgmt

                                  0.000579**     0.000627**                              0.000733***   0.000703***   0.000687*
        Avg. Well Yield
                                  (0.000290)     (0.000290)                               (0.000256)    (0.000272)   (0.000354)
    Mean Precipitation 1950-         0.0499          0.0271       -0.0507*   -0.0609**                                  0.0542          -0.0497*
             2014                   (0.0499)       (0.0558)       (0.0287)    (0.0303)                                (0.0577)          (0.0301)
                                      400.2        4,844***         2,273     5,987***      481.0       5,453***        638.1             3,078
      Well Density (Exog)
                                     (735.6)        (1,516)        (2,196)     (1,602)     (829.0)       (1,343)       (1,043)           (3,294)
   Average Urban Pop. Growth       0.0243***        0.0166*      0.0198***   0.0144***                                0.0485**          0.0265**
          (1950-2010)              (0.00896)      (0.00853)      (0.00599)   (0.00540)                                (0.0222)          (0.0103)
                                      -0.820      -1.884***         -0.685    -1.218**      -0.788      -1.913***      -1.089*           -0.721*
        Coastline Dummy
                                     (0.560)        (0.613)        (0.426)     (0.476)     (0.589)        (0.635)      (0.579)           (0.399)
       State Water Project          1.428***       2.003***       1.690***    1.996***    1.704***      2.259***      1.206***          1.460***
           Connection                (0.388)        (0.440)        (0.313)     (0.340)     (0.356)        (0.411)      (0.392)           (0.295)

                                   1.423***       1.603***        1.098***    1.175***    1.116***      1.472***     -1.575***      -1.128***
        Kappa 1/Constant
                                    (0.362)        (0.377)         (0.180)     (0.196)     (0.241)       (0.270)       (0.378)        (0.185)
                                   3.677***       3.682***        3.258***    3.245***    3.212***      3.478***
            Kappa 2
                                    (0.460)        (0.438)         (0.271)     (0.276)     (0.316)       (0.331)
  Observations                        197            166             445         400         197           166          197               445
  Missing Basins                   Imputed        Dropped         Imputed     Dropped     Imputed       Dropped       Imputed           Imputed
  Robust standard errors in parentheses *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1




                                                                                                                                                   44
