NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

MACROECONOMIC EFFECTS OF MEDICARE
Juan Carlos Conesa
Daniela Costa
Parisa Kamali
Timothy J. Kehoe
Vegard M. Nygard
Gajendran Raveendranathan
Akshar Saxena
Working Paper 23389
http://www.nber.org/papers/w23389

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
May 2017

This project was supported by the National Institutes of Health (NIH Grant No.
5R01AG048037-02). We thank participants at the 2015 Macroeconomics of Population Aging
Workshop at Harvard T.H. Chan School of Public Health, the Aging and Macroeconomics
meeting at the 2016 Barcelona GSE Summer Forum, the Macro Public Finance Group meeting at
the 2016 NBER Summer Institute, and two anonymous referees for helpful comments. The views
expressed herein are those of the authors and not necessarily those of the Federal Reserve Bank
of Minneapolis, the Federal Reserve System, or the National Bureau of Economic Research. The
data and computer code used here can be found in the supplementary materials available at
www.econ.umn.edu/~tkehoe.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.
© 2017 by Juan Carlos Conesa, Daniela Costa, Parisa Kamali, Timothy J. Kehoe, Vegard M.
Nygard, Gajendran Raveendranathan, and Akshar Saxena. All rights reserved. Short sections of
text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Macroeconomic Effects of Medicare
Juan Carlos Conesa, Daniela Costa, Parisa Kamali, Timothy J. Kehoe, Vegard M. Nygard,
Gajendran Raveendranathan, and Akshar Saxena
NBER Working Paper No. 23389
May 2017
JEL No. E21,E62,H51,I13
ABSTRACT
This paper develops an overlapping generations model to study the macroeconomic effects of an
unexpected elimination of Medicare. We find that a large share of the elderly respond by
substituting Medicaid for Medicare. Consequently, the government saves only 46 cents for every
dollar cut in Medicare spending. We argue that a comparison of steady states is insufficient to
evaluate the welfare effects of the reform. In particular, we find lower ex-ante welfare gains from
eliminating Medicare when we account for the costs of transition. Lastly, we find that a majority
of the current population benefits from the reform but that aggregate welfare, measured as the
dollar value of the sum of wealth equivalent variations, is higher with Medicare.
Juan Carlos Conesa
Department of Economics
Stony Brook University
SBS Building, Office S-637
Stony Brook, NY 11794-4384
juan.conesa@stonybrook.edu

Vegard M. Nygard
Department of Economics
University of Minnesota
1925 Fourth Street South
Minneapolis, MN 55455-0462
nygar028@umn.edu

Daniela Costa
Department of Economics
University of Minnesota
1925 Fourth Street South
Minneapolis, MN 55455-0462
costa096@umn.edu

Gajendran Raveendranathan
Department of Economics
University of Minnesota
1925 Fourth Street South
Minneapolis, MN 55455-0462
rave0049@umn.edu

Parisa Kamali
Department of Economics
University of Minnesota
1925 Fourth Street South
Minneapolis, MN 55455-0462
jalal008@umn.edu

Akshar Saxena
T. H. Chan School of Public Health
Harvard University
677 Huntington Avenue
Boston, MA 02115-6028
aks511@mail.harvard.edu

Timothy J. Kehoe
University of Minnesota
Department of Economics
1925 Fourth Street South
Minneapolis, MN 55455-0462
and Federal Reserve Bank of Minneapolis
and also NBER
tkehoe@umn.edu
A online appendix is available at http://www.nber.org/data-appendix/w23389

1

Introduction

Medicare is one of the largest health insurance programs in the world. In 2015 it provided health insurance
to about 52 million Americans and comprised 17.3 percent of federal outlays, or 3.6 percent of GDP. This
paper aims to improve our understanding of the role of Medicare in the macroeconomy. To do this, we
develop a general equilibrium overlapping generations model with incomplete markets and heterogeneous
consumers. In the model, consumers diﬀer along the dimensions of age, education, health status, labor
productivity, assets, and health insurance status. The consumers are subject to idiosyncratic uncertainty
on their labor productivity and health, the latter of which determines their medical expenses. While shocks
to labor productivity are uninsurable, medical expenses are partially insurable in the form of Medicare,
Medicaid, private, and employer-provided health insurance. We use the model to calculate the eﬀects of an
unexpected elimination of Medicare. This numerical experiment enables us to capture the eﬀects of Medicare
on macroeconomic aggregates, insurance enrollment, government spending, and welfare.
We start by comparing the steady state of the economy with and without Medicare. Eliminating Medicare
leads to a 2.7 percentage point reduction in payroll taxes and a 1.3 percent increase in wages. Wages increase
because capital increase as consumers raise their saving to finance the higher cost of medical expenses in old
age. The combination of higher wages and lower payroll taxes raises labor supply and generates an increase
in output per capita of 2.0 percent.
We then compare the insurance distribution in the two economies. Our results show that a large share
of the elderly respond by substituting Medicaid for Medicare. This increases spending on Medicaid from 3.6
to 5.3 percent of GDP. Spending on Social Security benefits also increases from 4.7 to 4.8 percent of GDP
because wages surge following the rise in capital. As a result, government spending as a share of GDP only
declines by 1.5 percentage points following the elimination of Medicare. We thus find that the government
saves only 46 cents for every dollar it cuts on Medicare due to oﬀsetting spending on Medicaid and Social
Security.
Next, we examine the ex-ante welfare eﬀects of the reform on unborn consumers under the veil of ignorance. We find that ex-ante welfare is higher in the steady state without Medicare. In particular, we find that
consumption has to increase by 3.6 percent in all periods and contingencies in the economy with Medicare
to make an unborn consumer under the veil of ignorance indiﬀerent between the two steady states. This
follows from the observation that the reform leads to lower taxes and higher wages, both of which facilitate
higher consumption and saving.
We then examine the ex-post welfare eﬀects of the reform on the current cohorts. To do this, we first
solve for the transition path between the economy with and without Medicare. This enables us to account
for the costs of transiting between the steady states. In particular, it enables us to account for the costs of
accumulating assets to finance the higher cost of medical expenses in old age.
We start by examining the ex-post welfare eﬀects on consumers in diﬀerent age brackets. Our estimates
show that the majority of the young would benefit from the policy change due to the reform’s eﬀect on
payroll taxes and wages. The majority of the elderly, on the other hand, are better oﬀ in the economy with
Medicare. After summing across all age brackets, we find that 56.8 percent of the population alive in the
period of the reform would benefit from the elimination of the program.
Next, we quantify the ex-post welfare eﬀects on those that benefit and lose from the reform by computing
the dollar value of how much wealth must change in the initial steady state to make the consumers weakly
better oﬀ in the economy with Medicare than in the transition to the economy without Medicare. We find that
those that benefit from the reform experience an average welfare gain that is equivalent to receiving $3, 600
1

higher wealth in the steady state with Medicare. In contrast, those that lose from the reform experience an
average welfare loss that is equivalent to at least a $27, 700 reduction in wealth. As a result, we find that
the elimination of Medicare lowers aggregate welfare, and that the per capita welfare loss of the reform is
equivalent to at least a $9, 900 reduction in wealth in the initial steady state. Note that this is a lower bound
for the welfare loss of the reform. This follows from the fact that consumers are not allowed to borrow in
our model. Consequently, some consumers will be strictly better oﬀ in the economy with Medicare even if
they forfeit all of their current wealth. In this case, we find that the constraint binds for 9.4 percent of the
population.
Lastly, we consider an additional ex-post welfare measure that quantifies the welfare eﬀect by computing
the average consumption equivalent variation across consumers. We show that our finding that aggregate
welfare declines following the elimination of Medicare is robust to using this alternative welfare measure.
The paper is organized as follows. The next section relates our contribution to the literature. In section
3 we lay out the environment of our economy and set up a quantitative life cycle model. This section also
presents the diﬀerent types of health insurance that are available in the economy. After calibrating the
model in section 4, we turn to the policy experiments. Section 5 starts by studying the macroeconomic
eﬀects of eliminating Medicare. The section also considers an alternative reform where we eliminate both
Medicare and Medicaid. Section 6 discusses the robustness of our results to alternative parameterizations of
the model. Lastly, section 7 concludes and gives directions for future research.

2

Relation to the literature

This paper is related to several strands of the literature. Our framework is similar to the one Conesa and
Krueger (1999) use to study the aggregate eﬀects of Social Security reforms. Their model has two essential
features for our analysis. First, it takes a life cycle perspective on consumption, assets, and labor decisions.
Second, it accounts for general equilibrium feedback eﬀects. We extend their model by incorporating idiosyncratic risk to health and by allowing consumers to enroll in private and public health insurance programs.
We build on the literature that uses overlapping generations models to study the macroeconomic eﬀects
of health and aging. Attanasio et al. (2010) study the implications of an aging population for the financing
of Medicare, but they do not explicitly model Medicaid, a program that we show is essential to determine
consumers’ saving and insurance behavior upon changes to Medicare. Pashchenko and Porapakkarm (2013)
study the welfare eﬀects of the Patient Protection and Aﬀordable Care Act (ACA). Our model is closely
related to theirs, except that we endogenize the retirement decision, since 20 percent of the population aged
65 and older are still active in the labor market. Jung and Tran (2016) use a model with endogenous health to
quantify the eﬀects of ACA. They do not, however, study transitional dynamics. Conesa and Krueger (1999)
and Krueger and Ludwig (2016) argue that a full characterization of the transition path is crucial for policy
evaluation. Comparative statics exercises fail to account for potentially large transitional costs, and hence
give at best a partial picture of the eﬀects of policy reforms. Bairoliya et al. (2017) and İmrohoroğlu and
Zhao (2017) develop overlapping generations models to study health insurance and social security reforms in
China. McGrattan and Prescott (2017) propose an overlapping generations model to study the impacts of
fiscal policies in economies that are undergoing a demographic change. Lastly, Borella et al. (2017) examine
the importance of including gender and marriage in structural life cycle models.
We also contribute to the literature on precautionary saving and its interaction with medical expenditure
shocks. Hubbard et al. (1994) and Palumbo (1999) study the role of out-of-pocket medical expenditure risk

2

in life cycle models. De Nardi et al. (2010) find that accounting for medical expense risk is important in
explaining the observed saving of the elderly.
Lastly, our paper is related to the empirical literature studying social insurance programs. Finkelstein
(2007) and Finkelstein and McKnight (2008) estimate the impact of Medicare on insurance coverage, health
care utilization, and spending. They find that the introduction of Medicare increased the share of elderly
with insurance coverage by 75 percentage points and led to a significant reduction in the elderly’s exposure to
out-of-pocket medical expenditure risk. Finally, Michaud et al. (2017) examine the impact of demographic
changes on Social Security Disability Insurance trends.

3

Model

The following subsections present the benchmark model used in the analysis. The model is a discrete time,
general equilibrium, overlapping generations model with ex-ante heterogeneous consumers, where consumers
diﬀer in age, educational level, health status, labor productivity, assets, and health insurance status.

3.1

Consumers

The economy is populated by a continuum of ex-ante consumers. Consumers are indexed by type s =
(j, e, h, ⌘, a, i), where j denotes age, e is educational level, h denotes health status, ⌘ is labor productivity, a
denotes assets, and i is the consumer’s health insurance status. Throughout we let

(s) denote the measure

of consumers of type s.
The consumer’s educational level can take on one of two values: college or non-college. For simplicity,
we assume that the consumer’s educational level is permanent over her lifetime. Health status is stochastic
and depends on the consumer’s current age, education, and health. It follows a finite-state Markov process
with stationary transitions over time:
Qj,e (h, H) = P rob (h0 2 H : (h, j, e)) .

(1)

Labor productivity is given by a stationary finite-state Markov process:
Q (⌘, E) = P rob (⌘ 0 2 E : ⌘) .

(2)

Lastly, the consumer’s health insurance status specifies if she is self-insured or has private health insurance,
employer-provided health insurance, or health insurance provided by the government in the form of Medicare.
Health insurance is used to cover medical expenses, mjh , which vary with the consumer’s age and health
status.
Consumers are endowed with one unit of time in every period that can be allocated to work and leisure.
We assume that consumers can work in old age. This assumption is motivated by the observation that
nearly 20 percent of individuals aged 65 and older still participate in the workforce. Labor supply, `, is
indivisible and can take on one of four values: ` 2 {0, `p , `f , `e }, where p, f, and e refer to part time, full
time, and extra time, respectively. In addition to leisure, consumers also derive utility from consumption, c.

3

The period-by-period return function is given by

U (c, `) =

h

`)1

c (1
1

i1

(3)

.

Starting at age jr , all consumers receive health insurance from the government in the form of Medicare.
They also receive Social Security benefits SSe that depend on their education. Lastly, consumers face a
survival probability

jeh

that depends on their age, education, and health. All consumers that survive until

age J die with probability one. In the event of death, the consumer’s assets are uniformly distributed across
the population by means of lump-sum transfers, B.

3.2

Health insurance and government welfare programs

This section presents the diﬀerent types of health insurance that are available in the economy. As noted
earlier, health insurance is available in the form of private insurance, employer-provided insurance, and
Medicare. Health insurance is also provided by the government in the form of Medicaid and a combination of
food stamps and basic medical relief (for brevity, referred to as food stamps below). The consumer’s insurance
status determines what fraction of her medical expenses must be paid out-of-pocket, mop . Throughout, we
let

P,

E,

CARE ,

and

CAID

denote the copayment parameter for private health insurance, employer-

provided health insurance, Medicare, and Medicaid, respectively.
3.2.1

Private health insurance

Consumers can purchase health insurance for the following period from private insurance companies. We
let private insurance companies price-discriminate based on age, education, and health. We assume that the
price is actuarially fair for each insurance pool (j, e, h). That is, the firm breaks even on each insurance pool.
This gives the following expression for the insurance premium:

⇡jeh =

8
>
>
>
<
>
>
>
:

jeh (1

P)

mj 0 h0 Qj,e (h,dh0 )
(1+r 0 )

´

if j < jr

1
(4)

jeh (1

mj 0 h0 Qj,e (h,dh
(1+r 0 )

P ) CARE

´

0

)

if j

jr

1.

We assume that Medicare is the primary payer for all elderly consumers. That is, in the event that a
consumer is covered by both Medicare and private insurance, Medicare pays first.
3.2.2

Employer-provided health insurance

We assume that a fraction of workers have health insurance provided by their employer. The employer pools
the medical expenses of all their employees that do not choose to go on food stamps. These costs are then
split evenly between all employees that currently work positive hours. That is, we model employer-provided
health insurance as a pay-as-you-go system where current contributors pay for the health expenditures of
current receivers. The premium is thus given by
⇡
¯E =

(1

E)

´

IF =0 mjh {1, . . . , jr 1} ⇥ de ⇥ dh ⇥ d⌘ ⇥ da ⇥ iE
I`>0 ({1, . . . , jr 1} ⇥ de ⇥ dh ⇥ d⌘ ⇥ da ⇥ {iE })

´

4

,

(5)

where the indicator function IF =0 in the numerator equals one for all consumers that do not choose to go on
food stamps. We assume that consumers cannot have both employer-provided and private health insurance,
and that consumers cannot opt out of employer-provided insurance. The latter assumption is needed to
alleviate the adverse selection problem associated with group insurance plans, which would arise in our
model due to our abstracting from tax deductions for employer-provided health insurance premia. Jeske
and Kitao (2009) find that these deductions discourage healthy individuals to opt out of group insurance in
favor of private insurance. Lastly, we assume that consumers aged jr and older are not eligible for employerprovided health insurance. This is motivated by data from the Medical Expenditure Panel Survey which
show that the percentage of individuals with employer-provided insurance drops from about 50 to 20 percent
between the ages of 60 and 70. Since consumers aged jr and older are not eligible for employer-provided
health insurance, we let consumers of age jr

1 with employer-provided insurance purchase private insurance

for the following period.
3.2.3

Medicaid

Medicaid is a means-tested program that provides health insurance to the poor. There are two ways to qualify
for Medicaid. First, consumers are eligible for Medicaid if the sum of their gross income and interest earnings
is below a threshold y cat . Second, consumers also qualify for Medicaid if the sum of their gross income and
interest earnings net of out-of-pocket medical expenses is below a threshold y mn and their assets are less
than amn . Following Pashchenko and Porapakkarm (2013), we call the two eligibility criteria “categorical
eligibility” and “eligibility based on medical need,” respectively.
3.2.4

Medicare

The government also provides health insurance in the form of Medicare. Unlike Medicaid, Medicare is not a
means-tested program, but provides equal health insurance to all the elderly. Since Medicare does not cover
all out-of-pocket medical expenses, elderly consumers can purchase private insurance as a complementary
insurance.
3.2.5

Food stamps and basic medical relief

Finally, the government provides health insurance in the form of a combined food stamps and basic medical
relief program. The program combines institutional features of food stamps, disability insurance, and basic
medical relief for the poor. To qualify for this program in the model, consumers have to forfeit all assets
and work zero hours. In return, the government pays for all out-of-pocket medical expenses and guarantees
a minimum consumption level, c.

3.3

Consumer problem

The consumer’s choice set depends on her current age and insurance status. Throughout, we use the word
young to denote consumers less than age jr and old to denote consumers that are at least jr years old. We
start by presenting the problem of a young consumer without employer-provided health insurance. This
subsection also defines the value of going on food stamps. Next, we set up the problem faced by young
consumers with employer-provided health insurance. Lastly, we discuss the problem of old consumers.

5

3.3.1

Young consumers without employer-provided health insurance

Recall that a consumer’s type is given by s = (j, e, h, ⌘, a, i) , where j denotes age, e is educational level, h
denotes health status, ⌘ is labor productivity, a denotes assets, and i is the consumer’s health insurance status.
Let V I (s) denote the value of young consumers without employer-provided health insurance. Similarly, let
V F (s) denote the value of food stamps. Consumers without employer insurance that do not choose to go on
food stamps may or may not purchase private insurance for the following period. This yields the following
problem:
V I (s) , V F (s) ,

V (s) = max

(6)

where V I (s) is given by
V I (s)

=
s.t.

max
U (c, `) +
0
0

c,a ,`,i

jeh

˜

V (s0 )Q (⌘, d⌘ 0 ) Qj,e (h, dh0 )

c + a0 + mop + Ii0 =iP ⇡jeh = w (1

⌧ ) ✏je ⌘⇠ (h) `

+ (1 + r) (a + B) + IM ed (s, `) (1
mop = Ii=iP

P mjh

CAID ) mop

Ii=iP ) mjh

+ (1

(7)

` 2 {0, `p , `f , `e }
c, a0

0

0

i 2 {iP , iS } .
Here, i = iP means the consumer has private health insurance, and i = iS means the consumer is self-insured.
The indicator function, IM ed (s, `), equals one if the consumer qualifies for Medicaid. Medicaid covers a share
1

CAID

of out-of-pocket medical expenses, which are given by mjh for self-insured consumers and

P mjh

for consumers that purchased private insurance in the preceding period. Lastly, labor earnings depend on
the consumer’s stochastic labor productivity, ⌘, health, ⇠ (h), and deterministic life cycle productivity, ✏je ,
the last of which varies with age and education.
To qualify for food stamps in the model, consumers have to forfeit all assets and work zero hours. In return, the government covers all out-of-pocket medical expenses and provides the consumer with consumption
c. The value of food stamps is thus given by
V F (s)

=
s.t.

U (c, 0) +

jeh

˜

V (s0 )Q (⌘, d⌘ 0 ) Qj,e (h, dh0 )

a0 = 0

(8)

i0 = iS .
3.3.2

Young consumers with employer-provided health insurance

Let V E (s) denote the value of being on employer-provided health insurance. Consumers with employer
insurance choose whether or not to go on food stamps. This yields the following problem:
V (s) = max

V E (s) , V F (s) ,

6

(9)

where V E (s) is given by
V E (s)

=

max U (c, `) +

c,a0 ,`

jeh

˜

V (s0 )Q (⌘, d⌘ 0 ) Qj,e (h, dh0 )

c + a0 + mop + I`>0 ⇡
¯E = w (1

s.t.

⌧ ) ✏je ⌘⇠ (h) `

+ (1 + r) (a + B) + IM ed (s, `) (1
mop =

E mjh

8
<0, ` , ` , `
p f e
`2
:` , ` , `
p

c, a0

CAID ) mop

f

e

(10)
if sick
if healthy

0

i0 = iE .
Out-of-pocket medical expenses are given by

for consumers on employer insurance. All consumers on

E mjh

employer insurance that work positive hours must pay a premium ⇡
¯E . We assume that healthy consumers
on employer insurance have to supply a minimum of `p > 0 hours. Sick consumers, on the other hand, are
free to choose zero hours. In the model, consumers are considered sick if they have a catastrophic health
state. Finally, the value of going on food stamps is the same as above, with the exception that consumers
continue to be eligible for employer-provided insurance in the following period, i0 = iE .
3.3.3

Old consumers

Let V R (s) denote the value of an old consumer of type s. Similarly to young consumers without employerprovided health insurance, old consumers that do not choose to go on food stamps may or may not purchase
private insurance for the following period. This yields the following problem:
V R (s) , V F (s) ,

V (s) = max

(11)

where V R (s) is given by
V R (s)

=
s.t.

max
U (c, `) +
0
0

c,a ,`,i

jeh

˜

V (s0 )Q (⌘, d⌘ 0 ) Qj,e (h, dh0 )

c + a0 + mop + Ii0 =iP ⇡jeh = w (1

⌧ ) ✏je ⌘⇠(h)`

+ (1 + r) (a + B) + SSe + IM ed (s, `) (1
mop = Ii=iP

P

CARE mjh

+ (1

` 2 {0, `p , `f , `e }
c, a0

0

0

i 2 {iP , iS } .

7

Ii=iP )

CARE mjh

CAID ) mop

(12)

All consumers start receiving Medicare and Social Security benefits at age jr. Neither program is tied to
retirement, and hence consumers continue to receive both Medicare and Social Security benefits even if
they choose to work in old age. Out-of-pocket medical expenses are given by
consumers and

3.4

P mjh

CARE

CARE mjh

for self-insured

for consumers that purchased private insurance in the preceding period.

Firms

Firms hire labor at wage w and rent capital at rate r from the consumers to maximize profits. We assume
that the aggregate technology can be represented by a constant returns to scale Cobb-Douglas production
function:
Y = ✓K ↵ N 1

↵

(13)

,

where ✓ denotes total factor productivity, K is the aggregate capital stock, N denotes aggregate labor
supply (measured in eﬃciency units), and ↵ is capital’s share of income. Output is used for consumption,
C, investment, I = K 0

(1

)K, and to cover medical expenses, M :
C + M + K 0 = ✓K ↵ N 1

where

3.5

↵

+ (1

(14)

)K,

is the rate of depreciation.

Government

Let be denote the Social Security replacement rate conditional on the consumer’s educational level. Social
Security benefits SSe then satisfy
SSe = ´

({1, . . . , jr

be wN
.
1} ⇥ de ⇥ dh ⇥ d⌘ ⇥ da ⇥ di)

(15)

The government finances its costs of providing health insurance, food stamps, and Social Security by means
of payroll taxes. For simplicity, we assume that the government balances its budget period-by-period. Let
gov denote the total government expenditure on health insurance and food stamps. Taxes on labor income,
⌧, then have to satisfy
⌧ wN = SSe

3.6

ˆ

({jr , . . . , J} ⇥ de ⇥ dh ⇥ d⌘ ⇥ da ⇥ di) + gov.

(16)

Definition of equilibrium

Given a replacement rate be , copayment parameters
capital K1 and the measure of types

P,

E,

CARE,

and

CAID ,

and initial conditions for

1 , an equilibrium in our model is a sequence of model variables such

that:
1. Given prices, insurance premia, government policies, and accidental bequests, consumers maximize
utility subject to their constraints.
2. Factor prices satisfy marginal product pricing conditions.
3. Government policies satisfy the government budget constraint.
4. Goods, factor, and insurance market clearing conditions are met.
8

5. Aggregate law of motion for

is induced by the policy functions and the exogenous stochastic processes

for idiosyncratic risk.

4

Calibration

This section describes how we map the model to the data. We start by presenting the health expenditure
data used in this paper. Next, we discuss how we compute the health insurance copayment parameters,
how the Medicaid eligibility criteria are determined, and how we compute the health transition probabilities.
The last two subsections summarize the calibration of the preference and technology parameters, and the
parameters of the idiosyncratic earnings process.

4.1

Health expenditure

We use data from the Medical Expenditure Panel Survey (MEPS). The MEPS collects detailed records
on medical expenditure, insurance, income, and demographics for a nationally representative sample of
households. The survey consists of two-year overlapping panels for the period 1996 to 2013, of which we use
data from 1996 to 2010 for individuals aged 20 to 85 years. All current price series are converted to 2010
dollars using the GDP deflator.
We split medical expenses into three categories: low, high, and catastrophic. To identify these expenses
in the data, we first pool all medical expenses for each age group and compute the 60th and 99.9th percentile.
We then identify low, high, and catastrophic expenses as the average value between the 0-60th percentile, the
60-99.9th percentile, and the 99.9-100th percentile. Next, we assume a logarithmic trend. Since the MEPS
pools all medical expenses for individuals older than 85, we extrapolate medical expenses for consumers aged
85 to 100. Lastly, we scale the expenditures to match the 16.5 percent health expenditures-to-GDP ratio
observed in the United States between 2006 and 2010. These series are illustrated in figure 1. We also report
how medical expense risk varies over the life cycle. This is illustrated in figure 2, which shows that both the
mean and variance of medical expenses increase as people age.

4.2

Health insurance parameters and Medicaid eligibility criteria

To compute the copayment parameter on private insurance, employer insurance, and Medicaid, we first derive
each consumer’s primary insurance provider, defined as the insurer that pays for most of the consumer’s
expenses. For instance, if Medicaid covers most of the consumer’s expenses, but she also pays some expenses
out-of-pocket, Medicaid will be her primary insurance provider. We then compute the average share of
expenses paid by Medicaid across consumers with Medicaid as their primary insurance provider, and let the
copayment parameter on Medicaid be given by the complement of this share. The same method is used
to compute the copayment parameter on private insurance and employer insurance. Given data from the
MEPS, we obtain a copayment parameter on private insurance and employer insurance of 22.9 percent, and
a copayment parameter on Medicaid of 13.8 percent. We use the same copayment parameter on private and
employer insurance since the MEPS pools expenses covered by these insurance plans.
Recall that all of the elderly receive Medicare in the model and that Medicare is their primary payer
(that is, in the event that an old consumer is covered by multiple insurance plans, Medicare pays first). An
implication of this assumption is that the percentage of the elderly’s total health expenses that is paid by
Medicare will always be equal to the complement of the Medicare copayment parameter in the model. In
9

other words, using a Medicare copayment parameter of x percent means that Medicare will pay for 1

x

percent of the elderly’s total medical expenses. Data from the MEPS show that Medicare pays for 46.9
percent of the elderly’s total health expenses and for 70.9 percent of the medical expenses of those with
Medicare as their primary insurance provider. To better match the age-specific insurance distribution in
the data, we pick a value closer to the first estimate and let the copayment parameter on Medicare be 50.0
percent.
Prior to ACA, financial eligibility criteria for Medicaid varied considerably across states, but were typically
well below the federal poverty level (FPL). Data from the Kaiser Family Foundation show that 33 states
had a categorical income limit below the FPL in 2009, which was about $10, 800, or 23 percent of GDP per
capita. The weighted average categorical income limit, with weights given by each state’s share of total health
expenses, was 90.2 percent of the FPL. The categorical income limit in the model is set to match this 90.2
percent weighted average limit. Next, among the 34 states that had a Medicaid medically needy program
in 2009, 30 states had a medically needy income limit below the FPL, and 23 states had a medically needy
asset limit below $2, 500. The corresponding weighted average medically needy income and asset thresholds
across the states with a medically needy program were 41.9 percent of the FPL and $1, 950, respectively. We
set the medically needy income and asset thresholds to match these weighted average limits. A summary of
the health insurance parameters is given in table 1.

4.3

Health transition and death probabilities

The health transition matrix must guarantee that, for each age and educational level, 60, 39.9, and 0.1
percent of consumers have low, high, and catastrophic medical expenses, respectively. Similarly, the survival
probabilities must ensure that the age, health, and education specific survival probabilities are consistent
with what we observe in the data. The following discussion explains how we adjust the health transition
matrix to ensure consistency with the data. Using our MEPS sample, we first estimate age, health, and
education specific health transition and death probabilities by running an ordered probit regression of next
period’s health on current age, age squared, education, health, and interaction terms. Next, we scale the
probabilities to match the age-specific death probabilities reported by the Social Security Administration.
This last step is necessary since individuals drop out of the MEPS when they become institutionalized, which
biases the death probability estimates from the MEPS. Lastly, we iterate on the transition matrix by means
of the RAS-method until the probabilities guarantee that, for each age and educational level, the correct
percentage of consumers transition to each health state.

4.4

Preference, technology, and life cycle parameters

Consumers enter the model at age 20. We set jr to 47 so that consumers start receiving Medicare and Social
Security benefits at age 66. The maximum life span is set to 100 years. We follow Conesa and Krueger
(1999) and set the population growth rate to 1.1 percent per year. Together with the estimated survival
probabilities, these values give an old age dependency ratio (that is, the ratio of population older than 65 over
population between 20 and 65) of 22.3 percent, slightly more than the 20.9 percent reported by the 2009 U.S.
Census. Capital’s share of income is set to 0.36. We follow Castañeda et al. (2003) and set the depreciation
rate to 0.059. We set the consumption share in intratemporal utility to 0.574 to match estimates in French
(2005), and set to 2.742 to match an intertemporal elasticity of substitution (IES) of 0.5. Next, consumers
are endowed with one unit of time in every period that can be allocated to work and leisure. We set the

10

grid for labor supply to ` 2 {0, 0.225, 0.300, 0.375}, which corresponds to working zero hours, part time, full
time, and overtime, respectively. We let ⇠ (h) be equal to 1 for agents with low and high health expenditures,

and 0 for agents with catastrophic expenses. Given data from the MEPS, we estimate deterministic labor
productivity profiles, ✏je , by regressing the logarithm of wages on age, education, higher-order moments of
age, and interaction terms. Lastly, we set the fraction of consumers with at least a four-year college degree
to 23.5 percent and let the remaining share be denoted as consumers without a college degree to match
estimates in the MEPS. A summary of the non-insurance parameters that are determined outside the model
is given in table 2.
The final set of parameters is determined jointly in equilibrium, a summary of which is given in table 3.
We calibrate ✓ to generate a steady state GDP per capita of 1 in the benchmark economy. The discount factor
is set to 0.927 to match a capital-to-output ratio of 3. The low value of the discount factor is attributed
to consumers being subject to idiosyncratic shocks to both labor productivity and health expenditures.
Consumers accordingly save more in our model than in standard life cycle models where consumers only
face shocks to labor productivity. A lower value of

is thus needed to generate the desired capital-to-

output ratio. The Social Security replacement rates are calibrated to match average Social Security benefits
across individuals with and without a college degree. The assumption that benefits depend on education is
motivated by the fact that Social Security benefits are tied to lifetime earnings in the United States, which
is correlated with educational attainment. Next, we set the consumption floor, c, to match the average
annual Supplemental Nutrition Assistance Program benefits reported by the United States Department of
Agriculture. Lastly, we calibrate the mass of 20-year-olds that qualify for employer-provided insurance to
match the mass of individuals with either private or employer insurance in the data.

4.5

Earnings process

We follow Castañeda et al. (2003) and calibrate the parameters of the labor earnings process to match the
empirical earnings distribution in the United States. We choose a right-skewed productivity shock process
to match the top decile of the earnings distribution, and calibrate the variance of the process to match the
dispersion observed in the data. The comparison of the labor earnings distribution in the model and the
data reported in table 4 shows that the model successfully matches the empirical distribution. A similar
comparison of the wealth distribution is given in table 5. Although we do not calibrate the model to match
this distribution, the table verifies that the model generates a concentration and right skewness of wealth
that is comparable to what we observe in the data.

5

Results

We use the model to run two policy experiments. We start by studying the macroeconomic eﬀects of eliminating Medicare from the benchmark economy. We then analyze an alternative reform where we eliminate
both Medicare and Medicaid.
Before we present the policy experiments, we first evaluate the performance of the model by comparing
the distribution of medical expenses by age and provider in the model and the data. Figure 3 shows that the
benchmark model captures several features of the age-specific insurance distribution in the MEPS. The model
is consistent with the fact that medical expenses in young age are largely paid out-of-pocket, by Medicaid, and
by private and employer-provided insurance plans, and that the majority of expenses in old age are covered
by Medicare. Quantitatively, the model also largely matches the percentage of expenses covered by Medicare,
11

private, and employer-provided insurance plans over the life cycle. The model underestimates the expenses
paid out-of-pocket and overestimates the expenses covered by Medicaid. The latter discrepancy between the
model and the data is partly driven by the Medicaid income tests. Recall that we set the categorical and
medically needy income thresholds to match the 90.2 and 41.9 percent weighted average limits in the data,
respectively. The corresponding median categorical and medically needy income thresholds are 64.0 and 50.5
percent. Using the median rather than weighted mean income limits in the model lowers the percentage of
expenses covered by Medicaid for the young and increases the corresponding share for the old. We choose
the weighted mean estimates to better match the insurance distribution of the elderly. A sensitivity analysis
reported in section 6 shows that our results are robust to using median income and asset tests. With easier
access to Medicaid, however, a larger share of the elderly is able to substitute into Medicaid. As a result, the
saving to the government from eliminating Medicare is only 44 cents on the dollar in the model with median
income and asset limits, in contrast to 46 cents on the dollar with weighted average limits. Lastly, figure 3
shows that other insurance programs cover about 7 percent of health expenses of all age groups in the data.
In the model, this insurance plan corresponds to our combined food stamps and basic medical relief program.
We find that the share of health expenses paid by this program declines with age and approaches zero for
the elderly, a result that follows directly from the assumption that consumers have to forfeit all assets and
work zero hours to qualify for the program.

5.1

Eliminating Medicare

Our first policy experiment involves an unexpected elimination of Medicare. Starting from the benchmark
economy, we lower the insurance coverage rate of Medicare to zero and study the macroeconomic eﬀects
as the economy transitions to a new steady state without Medicare. By “macroeconomic eﬀects,” we mean
the eﬀects of the policy reform on consumption, assets, output, insurance choice, government spending, and
welfare. We study not only comparative statics but also the full transition path between the economies,
which Conesa and Krueger (1999) and Krueger and Ludwig (2016) have shown to be crucial for evaluating
Social Security and education policy reforms.
5.1.1

Macroeconomic aggregates, insurance enrollment, and government spending

Table 6 compares the steady state of the economy with and without Medicare. Eliminating Medicare leads
to a 2.7 percentage point reduction in payroll taxes and a 1.3 percent increase in wages. The increase in
wages follows from the 4.4 percent increase in capital per capita. Capital increases as consumers raise their
saving to finance the higher cost of medical expenses in old age. The combination of higher wages and lower
payroll taxes raises labor supply and generates an increase in output per capita of 2.0 percent.
Table 7 reports the insurance distributions in the two steady states. As consumers are allowed to combine
health insurance policies (for instance, an old consumer on Medicare can purchase private insurance), we
define a consumer’s main insurance provider as the insurance plan that pays for the largest share of her
medical expenses. For instance, a consumer is defined to be on employer-provided health insurance if most
of her medical expenses are paid by the employer. The table also reports the percentage of total medical
expenses covered by each insurance plan. Note that total health expenses are equal in the two economies
since all medical spending is non-discretionary in the model. In the benchmark economy, 18.2 percent of
consumers have Medicare as their primary health insurance provider. Not surprisingly, eliminating Medicare
increases the percentage of self-insured consumers and the fraction of consumers with private insurance as

12

their main provider. More interestingly, we find that the policy reform raises the percentage of consumers
with Medicaid as their primary health insurance provider from 16.4 to 20.8 percent. As Medicaid coverage
increases, total medical expenses covered by Medicaid also rises from 22.1 to 32.3 percent.
Figure 4, which plots Medicaid enrollment by age in the economy with and without Medicare, shows
that all of the increase in the Medicaid coverage rate is driven by the elderly, who respond to the removal
of Medicare by partially substituting Medicaid for Medicare. To better understand how Medicare aﬀects
Medicaid enrollment, we compute the percentage of people in each age bracket that qualify for Medicaid
under the categorical and medically needy criterion in the two economies. Recall that consumers qualify
for Medicaid under the categorical criterion if the sum of their gross income and interest earnings is below
the categorical threshold. Similarly, consumers qualify for Medicaid under the medically needy criterion if
the sum of their gross income and interest earnings net of out-of-pocket medical expenses and their assets
are both below the corresponding limits. Given our calibration of the categorical income limit and Social
Security replacement rates, none of the elderly qualify for Medicaid under the categorical criterion in the two
economies. All of the increase in the Medicaid coverage rate is thus driven by an increase in the percentage of
elderly that qualifies under the medically needy criterion because the reform lowers the elderly’s net income.
Note that net income declines even though the elderly respond to the reform by increasing their labor supply,
saving, and purchase of private health insurance.
Medicare spending accounts for 3.3 percent of GDP in the benchmark economy, about $489 billion. How
much the government saves by eliminating the program depends on what happens to spending on other
social insurance programs such as Medicaid, food stamps, and Social Security. Table 8 decomposes fiscal
spending on these programs in the economy with and without Medicare. Eliminating Medicare leads to
a rise in Medicaid expenses from $545 to $796 billion as the share of old consumers that qualify for the
program increases. It also raises the fraction of elderly that goes on food stamps, but total spending on the
program remains constant at $94 billion since fewer young consumers go on food stamps in the economy
without Medicare. Lastly, government spending on Social Security benefits increases from $699 to $714
billion as wages surge following the rise in capital. These estimates show that government spending on
other social insurance programs increases by $266 billion following the reform. As a result, we find that the
elimination of Medicare leads to a $223 billion annual reduction in fiscal spending. Accordingly, although
Medicare spending accounts for 3.3 percent of GDP in the benchmark economy, the reform only results in a
1.5 percentage point reduction in government spending in the long run.
The $223 billion annual reduction in fiscal spending following the $489 billion cut in Medicare spending
shows that the government saves only 46 cents for every dollar it cuts on Medicare expenses. Our results
also show that most of the loss in saving following the reform can be attributed to spending on Medicaid.
Put together, these findings suggest that for every dollar the government cuts on Medicare, spending on
Medicaid increases by 51 cents. Consequently, eliminating Medicare will have only limited long-run fiscal
eﬀects if the current Medicaid eligibility criteria are maintained.
Recall that total health expenses are equal in the two economies and that the $489 billion cut in Medicare
expenses leads to an increase in Medicaid spending by $251. The remaining $238 billion increase in health
spending can be attributed to private insurance, self-insurance, employer insurance, and food stamps. We
find that the elderly partially respond to the reform by purchasing private health insurance, which in turn
increases spending by private insurance from $296 to $388 billion. Similarly, the increase in the percentage
of self-insured consumers leads to a surge in out-of-pocket medical spending from $565 to $706. Lastly,
spending by employer insurance increases from $472 to $476 billion, and spending by food stamps increases

13

from $100 to $101 billion. Note that total health expenses covered by food stamps exceed total government
spending on food stamps since consumers have to forfeit all assets to qualify for the program.
We next examine the transition path between the economy with and without Medicare. We choose a
transition duration of 100 years to ensure that the economy has suﬃcient time to transition to the new
steady state. Starting from an initial steady state with Medicare, figure 5 shows how capital, output,
consumption, and eﬀective labor supply evolve during the first 50 years following the elimination of the
program. Although the comparative statics exercise in table 6 showed that consumption per capita is 1.8
percent higher in the steady state without Medicare, the transition path shows that consumption initially
drops by about 0.7 percent. In fact, the percentage change in consumption compared to the initial steady
state remains negative for several years following the elimination of Medicare. Consumption declines during
the transition as consumers accumulate assets to finance the higher cost of medical expenses in old age. As
we have shown earlier, the surge in capital leads to higher wages and labor supply, both of which enable the
consumers to save and consume more in the long run.
5.1.2

Welfare

This section quantifies the ex-ante and ex-post welfare eﬀects of the reform. While the ex-ante measure
refers to the eﬀect on an unborn consumer under the veil of ignorance, the ex-post measure refers to the
eﬀect on the current cohorts.
Ex-ante welfare

We quantify the ex-ante welfare eﬀect by means of consumption equivalent variation.

That is, we measure how much a consumer’s consumption must increase in all periods and contingencies in
the economy with Medicare to make her indiﬀerent between the economy with and without Medicare. Let
V M (s) denote the value of a consumer of type s in the steady state with Medicare. Similarly, let VtN (s)
denote the value of a consumer of type s that enters the economy in period t of the transition. Finally,
let

0

(s) =

(1, e, h, ⌘, 0, i) denote the mass of newborns of type s. Given our functional form for utility,

we obtain the following expression for the ex-ante welfare eﬀect on an unborn consumer under the veil of
ignorance that enters the economy in period t of the transition:
CEVtT r

´ N
V (s)
= ´ tM
V (s)

(ds)
0 (ds)

0

1
(1

)

.

(17)

Figure 6 shows how ex-ante welfare evolves during the first 50 years of the transition. That is, it shows
how much consumption must increase in all periods and contingencies in the economy with Medicare to
make an unborn consumer under the veil of ignorance that enters the economy in period t of the transition
indiﬀerent between the benchmark economy and the transition. We find that ex-ante welfare increases by 2.1
percent for a consumer that enters in the first period of the reform. This welfare gain further increases over
the transition. Consequently, we find that ex-ante welfare increases by 3.6 percent in the long run. Ex-ante
welfare is higher without Medicare because payroll taxes are lower and wages are higher in the economy
without Medicare, both of which facilitate higher consumption and saving.
Ex-post welfare For unborn cohorts, we do not need to compare utility across diﬀerent consumers. Once
a consumer is born, however, she begins as either college educated or non-college educated, and either has or
does not have employer-provided health insurance. As life progresses, the consumer experiences a sequence
of shocks to her health status and labor productivity. Furthermore, at any point in time there are consumers
14

of diﬀerent ages. Consequently, if we want to calculate some sort of aggregate ex-post welfare measure of
the impact of eliminating Medicare, we have to compare gains and losses across very diﬀerent consumers.
We use three alternative measures to quantify the ex-post welfare eﬀect on the current cohorts. None
of them are perfect, and we discuss the advantages and disadvantages of each measure. Our first measure
avoids the problem of comparing gains and losses across diﬀerent consumers by simply computing the mass
of people that benefit from the reform. This measure tells us whether or not the reform would win on a vote
among all consumers aged 20 and older in the period that the reform is implemented.
For our second measure, we compute the dollar value of how much wealth must change in the initial
steady state to make the consumer weakly better oﬀ in the economy with Medicare than in the transition.
Given that consumers are not allowed to borrow, there exists a lower bound for this change in wealth.
For instance, consider a consumer that is better oﬀ in the economy with Medicare. Since wealth must be
non-negative, there might not exist a suﬃciently large reduction in wealth that would make this consumer
indiﬀerent between the economy with and without Medicare. For each type s, we therefore compute the
minimum change in wealth, W EV 1 (s), that satisfies the following constraints:
min

W EV 1 (s)

s.t.

V M j, e, h, ⌘, a + W EV 1 (s) , i
1

a + B + W EV (s)

V1N (j, e, h, ⌘, a, i)

(18)

0.

We then compute the average welfare eﬀect of the reform by integrating across consumers:
W EV 1 =

ˆ

W EV 1 (s)

(ds) .

(19)

Finally, for our third measure, we follow Chatterjee et al. (2007) and quantify the ex-post welfare eﬀects
by computing the average consumption equivalent variation across consumers. To do this, we first compute
the percentage change in consumption in all periods and contingencies that is needed to make a consumer
of type s indiﬀerent between the two economies:


V1N (s)
CEV (s) =
V M (s)

1
(1

)

,

(20)

where V M (s) and V1N (s) denote the value of a consumer of type s in the steady state with Medicare and
in the first period of the transition, respectively. We then compute the average welfare eﬀect of the reform
by integrating across consumers:
CEV =

ˆ

CEV (s)

(ds) .

(21)

Unlike the second measure, this measure does not control for consumers’ diﬀerent levels of initial consumption, diﬀerent assets, or diﬀerent length of their remaining lifetime.
We start by examining how support for the policy varies with age. This is illustrated in figure 7, which
plots the percentage of consumers in diﬀerent age brackets that would vote in favor of eliminating Medicare.
Our result shows that the majority of young consumers are better oﬀ without Medicare. In particular, we
find that the percentage of votes by age in favor of eliminating the program exceeds 50 percent for all ages
up to the age of 48. This result is due to the wage and tax eﬀect discussed earlier. Although it takes time
to transition to the new steady state, these consumers are still young enough to reap most of the benefits
associated with higher labor earnings. The majority of older consumers, on the other hand, are better oﬀ
15

with Medicare. Note, however, that the percentage of votes by age in favor of eliminating the program does
not decline monotonically with age. We find that the percentage of consumers that are better oﬀ without
Medicare increases late in life. This is driven by the interplay between Medicare and Medicaid highlighted
earlier. That is, more old consumers qualify for Medicaid in the economy without Medicare, which in turn
lowers their cost of going through the transition. After summing across votes, we find that 56.8 percent of
the population alive in the period of the reform is better oﬀ without Medicare. That is, the majority of the
population would vote in favor of eliminating the program.
Next, we turn to our second welfare measure, which quantifies the ex-post welfare eﬀect by computing
the dollar value of how much wealth must change in the initial steady state to make the consumer weakly
better oﬀ in the economy with Medicare than in the transition. We then compute the average change in
welfare across the population that would benefit and lose from the elimination of Medicare by summing
across consumers in the two groups. Our estimate shows that the winners experience an average welfare gain
that is equivalent to receiving $3, 600 higher wealth in the steady state with Medicare. In contrast, the losers
experience an average welfare loss that is equivalent to at least a $27, 700 reduction in wealth. The average
welfare gain across the 56.8 percent of the population that would benefit from the elimination of Medicare is
thus considerably lower than the average welfare loss experienced by the remaining population. As a result,
we find that the elimination of Medicare lowers aggregate welfare, and that the per capita welfare loss of
the reform is equivalent to at least a $9, 900 reduction in wealth in the initial steady state. Recall that this
measure binds for some consumers. That is, some consumers will be strictly better oﬀ in the economy with
Medicare even if they forfeit all of their current wealth. In this case, we find that the constraint binds for
9.4 percent of the population.
Finally, in terms of consumption equivalent variation, we find that the winners experience an average
welfare gain that is equivalent to receiving 1.9 percent higher consumption in all periods and contingencies
in the initial steady state, and that the losers experience an average welfare loss of 7.0 percent. When we
average the percentage gains and losses across all consumer types, we find that the average change in the
diﬀerent consumption equivalent variations is a decline of 2.0 percent.
Our discussion so far has shown that the majority of the population alive in the period of the reform is
better oﬀ without Medicare. Yet, aggregate welfare is higher in the benchmark economy since the welfare
gain experienced by those that benefit from the reform is outweighed by the welfare loss experienced by the
rest of the population. The remaining part of this section studies how these heterogeneous welfare eﬀects
vary across consumers in diﬀerent health and educational states, and across consumers with diﬀerent wealth
and labor earnings, a summary of which is given in table 9.
We find that the majority of college and non-college educated consumers are better oﬀ without Medicare,
but that both groups experience a reduction in average welfare following the elimination of the program.
Next, our results show that 56.3, 57.5, and 61.8 percent of consumers with low, high, and catastrophic medical
expenses, respectively, are better oﬀ without Medicare. This follows from the fact that the majority of young
consumers in all three health states benefit from the reform, which can be confirmed by examining the ageand health-specific voting outcomes reported in figure 8. Although the majority of consumers in all three
health states benefit from the reform, their average welfare nevertheless declines. In particular, we find that
consumers with low, high, and catastrophic medical expenses, respectively, experience an average welfare
loss that is equivalent to receiving at least $10, 300, $9, 400, and $1, 400 lower wealth in the steady state with
Medicare. The finding that welfare declines by less for consumers in catastrophic health, which also holds
under our third welfare measure, is driven by the fact that most of these consumers are covered by food

16

stamps or Medicaid. As shown in table 10, 72.1 percent of consumers with catastrophic medical expenses
are enrolled in food stamps or Medicaid in the steady state with Medicare. This lowers the insurance value
provided by Medicare to these consumers, which in turn lowers their welfare loss from the reform.
Lastly, we examine how welfare varies with wealth and labor earnings. Whereas the majority of consumers
in the first four wealth quintiles are better oﬀ without Medicare, only 14.2 percent of consumers in the top
wealth quintile benefit from the reform. This is largely driven by the observation that consumers at the top
of the wealth distribution are older on average than consumers at the bottom of the wealth distribution.
Moreover, the latter group is more likely to qualify for Medicaid, which in turn lowers their cost of eliminating
Medicare. Finally, we find that about 70 percent of consumers in the second, third, and fourth labor earnings
quintile benefit from the reform. In contrast, the majority of consumers in the first and fifth quintile of the
earnings distribution are better oﬀ with Medicare.

5.2

Eliminating Medicare and Medicaid

The preceding subsection identified an important relation between Medicare and Medicaid. In particular, we
found that the percentage of old consumers that qualified for Medicaid was higher in the economy without
Medicare. A large share of the elderly therefore responded to the policy reform by substituting Medicaid
for Medicare, which in turn lowered their cost of going through the transition. The substitutability between
Medicare and Medicaid also implied that the elimination of Medicare would have limited long-run fiscal
implications if the current Medicaid eligibility criteria were maintained. Given these findings, we therefore
end this section with a brief analysis of the macroeconomic eﬀects of eliminating both Medicare and Medicaid.
Starting from the benchmark economy, we lower the Medicare and Medicaid insurance coverage rates to zero
and study the eﬀects as the economy transitions to its new steady state.
Eliminating both programs leads to a 37.8 percent surge in capital per capita as consumers accumulate
assets to finance the higher cost of medical expenses throughout their life. This almost ninefold increase
in capital compared to what we found when we only eliminated Medicare highlights Medicaid’s significant
insurance role in the economy. The combination of 11.0 percent higher wages and 10.0 percentage points
lower payroll taxes raises labor supply and generates an increase in output per capita of 14.5 percent.
Table 7 showed that eliminating Medicare increases the percentage of expenses paid by private insurance
plans from 12.0 to 15.7 percent. Eliminating Medicaid further increases this fraction to 43.2 percent. This
shows that public insurance crowds out private insurance in the economy by discouraging consumers from
purchasing insurance. Similar results are reported by Cutler and Gruber (1996), who estimate the extent
of private insurance crowd-out following the 1987-1992 expansion of Medicaid eligibility to pregnant women
and children.
Our estimates show that public spending declines by $777 billion on impact when we eliminate Medicare
and Medicaid, about 75 percent of the $1.03 trillion the government spends on these programs in the
benchmark economy. As the economy approaches the new steady state, we find that the reform leads to an
$832 billion annual reduction in fiscal spending. This additional long-run reduction in public expenditures
can be attributed to spending on food stamps, which increases during the first years of the transition but
eventually declines following the surge in saving, the last of which raises the relative cost of going on food
stamps in the model.
Next, we examine the ex-ante welfare eﬀect of the reform, and find that ex-ante welfare is higher in the
economy without Medicare and Medicaid. In particular, we find that consumption has to increase by 7.8
percent in all periods and contingencies in the steady state with Medicare and Medicaid to make an unborn
17

consumer under the veil of ignorance indiﬀerent between the two steady states. That said, this measure
fails to account for the costs of transiting between the steady states. It also abstracts from the reform’s
heterogeneous welfare eﬀects on consumers of diﬀerent types. After accounting for these costs, we find that
eliminating Medicare and Medicaid lowers aggregate welfare, and that the per capita welfare loss of the
reform is equivalent to at least a $29, 500 reduction in wealth in the initial steady state. As noted earlier,
this measure binds for some consumers. That is, some consumers will be strictly better oﬀ in the initial
steady state with Medicare and Medicaid even if they forfeit all of their current wealth. We find that the
constraint binds for 37.4 percent of the population. Finally, we find that 19.4 percent of the population alive
in the period of the reform is better oﬀ without both Medicare and Medicaid. That is, the majority of the
population would not vote in favor of eliminating both programs. While our previous result showed that
young consumers would benefit from the elimination of Medicare, we find that the majority of all age groups
would be worse oﬀ if both programs were to be removed.

6

Sensitivity analysis

We have conducted a wide range of sensitivity analyses, and we find that our main results are robust.
That is, the findings that aggregate ex-post welfare declines if we eliminate Medicare, that old consumers
partially substitute Medicaid for Medicare, and that part of the reduction in government spending from
eliminating Medicare is oﬀset by higher spending on other social insurance programs are robust to alternative
parameterizations of the model. We limit our discussion here to two robustness checks. First, we consider
an alternative parameterization of the model where we lower the Medicare copayment parameter. Then
we examine the implications of using median rather than weighted mean Medicaid income and asset limits.
In both cases we recalibrate the model to match the same targets as in section 4. A comparison of the
macroeconomic eﬀects of eliminating Medicare under diﬀerent parameterizations of the model is given in
table 11.
Lower Medicare copayment parameter The copayment parameter for Medicare was set to match the
age-specific insurance distribution in the data. Here we consider an alternative parameterization of the model
where we set the Medicare copayment parameter to match the average share of expenses paid by Medicare
across individuals with Medicare as their primary insurance provider. Given data from the MEPS, we obtain
a Medicare copayment parameter of 29.1 percent.
Lowering the Medicare copayment parameter from 50.0 to 29.1 percent increases the percentage of medical
expenses paid by Medicare from 19.8 to 28.1 percent. This increase can be attributed to a reduction in the
percentage of expenses paid out-of-pocket, by Medicaid, and by private insurance. Higher Medicare expenses
translate into higher payroll taxes in the initial steady state of this economy. As a result, we find that
eliminating Medicare leads to a 4.0 percentage points reduction in payroll taxes in this economy, compared
to the 2.7 percentage points reduction in payroll taxes reported in section 5.1.
We find that our result regarding how much the government will save by eliminating the program is
robust to this alternative parameterization of the model. Whereas the government saves 46 cents for every
dollar it cuts on Medicare in the benchmark model, it saves 49 cents for every dollar it cuts on Medicare in
this model. Our finding that 56.4 and 56.8 percent of the population alive in the period of the reform would
benefit from the elimination of Medicare in this model and in the benchmark model, respectively, also shows
that the welfare implications of eliminating Medicare are comparable in the two models. That said, using a

18

lower Medicare copayment parameter further increases the elderly’s cost of going through the transition. As
a result, we find that the per capita welfare loss of the reform is equivalent to at least a $14, 700 reduction
in wealth in the initial steady state under this parameterization of the model, compared to at least a $9, 900
reduction under the benchmark parameterization.
Median Medicaid income and asset limits We end this section by studying the eﬀects of eliminating
Medicare in a model with median rather than weighted mean Medicaid income limits. That is, we set the
categorical income limit to match the 64.0 percent median categorical income limit across states, and set the
medically needy income and asset thresholds to match the 50.5 percent and $2, 000 median medically needy
income and asset limit across the states with a medically needy program.
Using median rather than weighted mean Medicaid eligibility limits increases the percentage of elderly
that qualifies for Medicaid in the model, which in turn lowers their cost of going through the transition. As
a result, we find that the aggregate welfare loss from eliminating Medicare is higher in the benchmark model
than in the model with median Medicaid eligibility limits. In particular, we find that the per capita welfare
loss of the reform is equivalent to at least a $9, 500 reduction in wealth in the initial steady state under this
parameterization of the model, slightly less than the $9, 900 reduction reported in section 5.1. Next, we find
that the majority of the population alive in the period of the reform would benefit from the elimination of
Medicare under both parameterizations of the model. While 56.8 percent of the population would vote for
the policy reform in the benchmark model, we find that 56.6 percent of the population would benefit from
the elimination of Medicare in the model with median Medicaid eligibility thresholds. Lastly, our results
show that the fiscal implications of the policy reform are similar in the two models. Recall from section 5.1
that the government saves 46 cents for every dollar it cuts on Medicare expenses. In comparison, we find
that the government saves 44 cents for every dollar it cuts on Medicare in the model with median Medicaid
eligibility limits.

7

Conclusion

This paper has developed an overlapping generations model to study the role of Medicare in the macroeconomy. We used the model to quantify the eﬀects of an unexpected elimination of Medicare on macroeconomic
aggregates, insurance enrollment, government spending, and welfare. We found that a large share of the
elderly responded to the reform by substituting Medicaid for Medicare, which in turn increased spending on
Medicaid from 3.6 to 5.3 percent of GDP. Spending on Social Security benefits also increased from 4.7 to
4.8 percent of GDP due to a rise in wages following an increase in capital. As a result, we found that the
government saved only 46 cents for every dollar it cut on Medicare.
We then examined the welfare eﬀects of the reform, and found that ex-ante welfare was higher in the
steady state without Medicare. In particular, we found that consumption had to increase by 3.6 percent in
all periods and contingencies in the steady state with Medicare to make an unborn consumer under the veil
of ignorance indiﬀerent between the two economies.
Lastly, we have examined the ex-post welfare eﬀects of the reform on the current cohorts. Our estimates
showed that the majority of young consumers would benefit from the policy change due to the reform’s eﬀect
on wages and payroll taxes. The majority of the elderly, on the other hand, were better oﬀ in the economy
with Medicare. After summing across all age brackets, we found that 56.8 percent of the population alive
in the period of the reform would benefit from the elimination of Medicare. Finally, we showed that the

19

average welfare gain across the winners of the reform was considerably lower than the average welfare loss
experienced by the remaining population. As a result, we found that the elimination of Medicare lowered
aggregate welfare, and that the per capita welfare loss of the reform was equivalent to at least a $9, 900
reduction in wealth in the initial steady state.
We have also studied an alternative policy reform where we eliminated both Medicare and Medicaid. The
elimination of both programs led to a surge in capital and labor supply, which in turn increased output per
capita by 14.5 percent. It also resulted in a 31.2 percentage points increase in private insurance coverage
and a 10.0 percentage points reduction in payroll taxes. Lastly, we found that the reform lowered aggregate
ex-post welfare, and that only 19.4 percent of the population alive in the period of the reform was better oﬀ
in the economy without Medicare and Medicaid.
This paper has abstracted from two channels that are likely to influence our results. First, we did not
account for demographic changes in the model. In particular, we did not account for the projected increase
in the old age dependency ratio, which will raise the future fiscal burden of Medicare. Second, the healthexpenditure-to-GDP ratio has risen steadily since the 1960s and is projected to continue to increase in the
future. To overcome the future fiscal pressure from Medicare and Medicaid, the government will have to
raise taxes, lower the public insurance coverage rates, or change the eligibility rules, an example of which
would be to increase the age at which individuals can claim Medicare. We leave it to future work to address
how our results regarding the macroeconomic eﬀects of Medicare are aﬀected by these channels.
We also leave it to future research to examine two additional extensions of our paper: optimal fiscal
policy and a small open economy framework. The optimal fiscal policy approach can be used to identify
ways to finance the transition from an economy with Medicare to an economy without Medicare where
the new equilibrium is constrained Pareto optimal. Conesa and Garriga (2008) use this approach to study
Social Security reforms and find that cohort-specific labor income taxes can be used to shift the welfare
gains between present and future generations. Lastly, we considered a closed economy where accumulation
of assets leads to an increase in the wage rate, which increases the welfare for an unborn consumer under
the veil of ignorance. Future research should examine how our results would change if we instead considered
a small open economy framework where the increase in accumulation of assets may not increase the wage
rate.

20

References
Attanasio, O., S. Kitao, and G. L. Violante (2010), “Financing Medicare: A General Equilibrium Analysis,”
in J. B. Shoven (ed.), Demography and the Economy, University of Chicago Press.
Bairoliya, N., D. Canning, R. Miller, and A. Saxena (2017), “The Macroeconomic and Welfare Implications
of Rural Health Insurance and Pension Reforms in China,” forthcoming in Journal of the Economics of
Ageing.
Borella, M., M. De Nardi, and F. Yang (2017), “The Aggregate Implications of Gender and Marriage,”
forthcoming in Journal of the Economics of Ageing.
Castañeda, A., J. Díaz-Giménez, and J.-V. Ríos-Rull (2003), “Accounting for the U.S. Earnings and Wealth
Inequality,” Journal of Political Economy, 111: 818-857.
Chatterjee, S., D. Corbae, M. Nakajima, and J.-V. Ríos-Rull (2007), “A Quantitative Theory of Unsecured
Consumer Credit with Risk of Default,” Econometrica, 75: 1525-1589.
Conesa, J. C., and C. Garriga (2008), “Optimal Fiscal Policy in the Design of Social Security Reform,”
International Economic Review, 49: 291-318.
Conesa, J. C., and D. Krueger (1999), “Social Security Reform with Heterogeneous Agents,” Review of
Economic Dynamics, 2: 757-795.
Cutler, D. M, and J. Gruber (1996), “Does Public Insurance Crowd Out Private Insurance?,” Quarterly
Journal of Economics, 111: 391-430.
De Nardi, M., E. French, and J. B. Jones (2010), “Why Do the Elderly Save? The Role of Medical Expenses,”
Journal of Political Economy, 118: 39-75.
Finkelstein, A. (2007), “The Aggregate Eﬀects of Health Insurance: Evidence from the Introduction of
Medicare,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 122: 1-37.
Finkelstein, A., and R. McKnight (2008), “What Did Medicare Do? The Initial Impact of Medicare on
Mortality and Out of Pocket Medical Spending,” Journal of Public Economics, 92: 1644-1668.
French, E. (2005), “The Eﬀects of Health, Wealth, and Wages on Labour Supply and Retirement Behaviour,”
Review of Economic Studies, 72: 395-427.
Hubbard, R., J. Skinner, and S. P. Zeldes (1994), “The Importance of Precautionary Motives in Explaining
Individual and Aggregate Saving,” Carnegie-Rochester Conference Series on Public Policy, 40: 59-125.
İmrohoroğlu, A., and K. Zhao (2017), “Intergenerational Transfers and China’s Social Security Reform,”
forthcoming in Journal of the Economics of Ageing.
Jeske, K., and S. Kitao (2009), “U.S. Tax Policy and Health Insurance Demand: Can a Regressive Policy
Improve Welfare?,” Journal of Monetary Economics, 56: 210-221.
Jung, J., and C. Tran (2016), “Market Ineﬃciency, Insurance Mandate and Welfare: U.S. Health Care Reform
2010,” Review of Economic Dynamics, 20: 132-159.
Krueger, D., and A. Ludwig (2016), “On the Optimal Provision of Social Insurance: Progressive Taxation
Versus Education Subsidies in General Equilibrium,” Journal of Monetary Economics, 77: 72-98.

21

McGrattan, E. R., and E. C. Prescott (2017), “An Aggregate Model for Policy Analysis with Demographic
Change,” forthcoming in Journal of the Economics of Ageing.
Michaud, A., J. Nelson, and D. Wiczer (2017), “Vocational Considerations and Trends in Social Security
Disability,” forthcoming in Journal of the Economics of Ageing.
Palumbo, A. (1999), “Uncertain Medical Expenses and Precautionary Saving Near the End of the Life Cycle,”
Review of Economic Studies, 66: 395-421.
Pashchenko, S., and P. Porapakkarm (2013), “Quantitative Analysis of Health Insurance Reform: Separating
Regulation from Redistribution,” Review of Economic Dynamics, 16: 383-404.

22

Table 1: Insurance parameters determined outside the model
Parameter
P
E
CARE
CAID

y cat
y mn
amn

Description

Source

Value

Private insurance copayment parameter
Employer insurance copayment parameter
Medicare copayment parameter
Medicaid copayment parameter

MEPS
MEPS
MEPS
MEPS

0.229
0.229
0.500
0.138

Categorical income limit
Medically needy income limit
Medically needy asset limit

Kaiser Family Foundation
Kaiser Family Foundation
Kaiser Family Foundation

0.197
0.092
0.041

Table 2: Non-insurance parameters determined outside the model
Parameter

Description

J
jr

Maximum life span (100 years)
Consumers receive SS and Medicare (66 years)
Population growth rate
Capital income share
Depreciation rate
Consumption share in utility
IES = 0.5

↵

` p , `f , `e
⇠(h)

Source

Indivisible labor
Health-specific labor productivity
Fraction of consumers with college degree

Value
81
47
0.011
0.360
0.059
0.574
2.742

Conesa and Krueger (1999)
Castañeda et al. (2003)
French (2005)

MEPS

0.225,0.300,0.375
1,1,0
0.235

Table 3: Parameters determined jointly in equilibrium
Parameter

Description

Target

Value

✓

Total factor productivity
Discount factor
SS college replacement rate
SS non-college replacement rate
Consumption floor
Eligible for employer insurance
Scale for health care costs

GDP pc = 1
Capital/output = 3
Average SS benefits college ⇡ $14, 200
Average SS benefits non-college ⇡ $11, 900
Average food stamps ⇡ $1, 300
Share with private or employer = 0.508
Health expenditure/output = 0.165

0.647
0.927
0.374
0.313
0.028
0.464
1.803

Variance
Productivity at the top
Probability at the top
Persistence
Persistence at the top

Labor earnings Gini = 0.630
Labor earnings top 1 percent = 0.148
Labor earnings top 10 percent = 0.435
2-year persistence: Bottom 80 percent = 0.940
2-year persistence: Top 1 percent = 0.580

4.051
24.657
0.004
0.901
0.775

bc
bnc
c

⌘

⌘top
⇡top
⇢n
⇢top

23

Table 4: Labor earnings distribution (percent)

Data
Benchmark
w/o Medicare

1st

2nd

-0.40
0.26
0.42

3.19
4.79
5.20

Quintiles
3rd
4th
12.49
9.79
9.82

23.33
20.59
20.44

5th

90-95

Top
95-99

99-100

Gini

61.39
64.56
64.13

12.38
11.83
11.75

16.37
16.77
16.65

14.76
14.78
14.67

0.63
0.63
0.62

Table 5: Wealth distribution (percent)

Data
Benchmark
w/o Medicare

1st

2nd

-0.39
0.22
0.22

1.74
0.48
0.46

Quintiles
3rd
4th
5.72
4.93
4.43

13.43
18.27
17.80

5th

90-95

Top
95-99

99-100

Gini

79.49
76.10
77.09

12.62
15.98
16.33

23.95
25.79
26.26

29.55
15.15
15.24

0.78
0.75
0.75

Table 6: Comparative statics: Economy with and without Medicare
Variable

Without Medicare
(percentage change from benchmark)

y
k
h
c
N
w

Output pc
Capital pc
Avg hours
Consumption pc
Eﬀective labor pc
Wage rate

⌧
r

Tax rate
Interest rate

2.0
4.4
2.1
1.8
0.7
1.3
(percentage point change from benchmark)
-2.7
-0.3

Table 7: Insurance distribution and medical expenses
Head count by main provider
(percent of population)

Private
Employer
Self
Medicare
Medicaid
FS+MR

Medical expense
(percent of total medical expenses)

Benchmark

Without Medicare

Benchmark

Without Medicare

8.6
33.0
18.8
18.2
16.4
5.0

15.1
33.3
26.1
0.0
20.8
4.7

12.0
19.2
22.9
19.8
22.1
4.0

15.7
19.3
28.6
0.0
32.3
4.1

24

Table 8: Fiscal implications
Spending (percent of GDP)
Benchmark

Without Medicare

3.3
3.6
4.7
0.6

0.0
5.3
4.8
0.6

Medicare
Medicaid
Social Security
FS+MR

Table 9: Ex-post welfare eﬀects
Variable

Votes in favor (percent)

W EV 1 (dollars)

CEV (percent)

56.8

9, 900

-2.0

100.0
0.0

3, 600
27, 700

1.8
-7.0

Education
Non-college
College

56.2
58.6

9, 300
12, 100

-2.0
-1.8

Medical expenses
Low
High
Catastrophic

56.3
57.5
61.8

10, 300
9, 400
1, 400

-2.0
-2.0
-1.2

Wealth (quintile)
1st
2nd
3rd
4th
5th

70.6
77.6
71.8
51.9
14.2

1, 000
2, 800
1, 800
10, 700
39, 600

-1.6
0.2
-0.3
-2.7
-5.2

Labor earnings (quintile)
1st
2nd
3rd
4th
5th

40.1
69.5
70.2
68.8
36.0

16, 600
4, 500
900
6, 000
21, 400

-5.6
-0.8
0.1
-0.5
-2.8

Entire population
Winners and losers
Winners
Losers

Table 10: Medicaid and food stamps enrollment by health in steady state with Medicare (percent of population)
Health
Low
High
Catastrophic

Medicaid

Food stamps

12.6
37.4
28.0

4.9
5.1
44.1

25

Table 11: Comparative statics: Eﬀect of eliminating Medicare under diﬀerent parameterizations of the model
Variable
y
k
h
c
N
w

Output pc
Capital pc
Avg hours
Consumption pc
Eﬀective labor pc
Wage rate

⌧
r

Tax rate
Interest rate

Benchmark

Lower Medicare copay

Median Medicaid limits

2.0
4.4
2.1
1.8
0.7
1.3

3.1
7.1
3.2
2.6
1.0
2.1

1.8
4.0
1.7
1.5
0.6
1.2

-2.7
-0.3

-4.0
-0.4

-2.5
-0.3

26

Figure 1: Medical expenses by age and health state (MEPS)

9
8

normalized by gdp pc

7

catastrophic

6
5
4
3
2

high

1

low
0
20

25

30

35

40

45

50

55

60

65

70

75

80

85

90

95

100

95

100

age

Figure 2: Medical expense risk by age (MEPS)

0.8

0.7

normalized by gdp pc

0.6

0.5

0.4

standard deviation
0.3

0.2

mean
0.1

0
20

25

30

35

40

45

50

55

60

age

27

65

70

75

80

85

90

Figure 3: Distribution of medical expenses by age and provider

Data (MEPS)

Benchmark model

60

60

50

percentage

40

out-of-pocket

30

20

Medicare

private and employer

40

30

out-of-pocket

20

Medicaid

Medicaid
10

10

other

other
0

0
20

25

30

35

40

45

50

55

60

65

70

75

80

85

20

25

30

35

40

45

age

50

100

80

without Medicare
60

40

20

benchmark

0
20

25

55

age

Figure 4: Medicaid enrollment by age

percentage

percentage

Medicare

private and employer

50

30

35

40

45

50

55

60

age

28

65

70

75

80

85

90

95

100

60

65

70

75

80

85

Figure 5: Transition from economy with Medicare to economy without: Aggregates

percentage change from benchmark

5

capital

4

3

output
2

consumption
1

effective labor
0

-1
0

5

10

15

20

25

30

35

40

45

50

years

Figure 6: Transition from economy with Medicare to economy without: Ex-ante welfare on unborn consumer

4
3.8
3.6

percentage

3.4
3.2
3
2.8
2.6
2.4
2.2
2
0

5

10

15

20

25

years

29

30

35

40

45

50

Figure 7: Percentage of votes in favor of reform by age

1
0.9
0.8

percentage

0.7
0.6
0.5
0.4
0.3
0.2
0.1
0
20

25

30

35

40

45

50

55

60

65

70

75

80

85

90

95

100

age

Figure 8: Percentage of votes in favor of reform by age and health

1
0.9
0.8

percentage

0.7

catastrophic

0.6
0.5
0.4

high

0.3

low

0.2
0.1
0
20

25

30

35

40

45

50

55

60

age

30

65

70

75

80

85

90

95

100

