                             NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




          DECENTRALIZATION AND EFFICIENCY OF SUBSIDY TARGETING:
                 EVIDENCE FROM CHIEFS IN RURAL MALAWI

                                       Pia M. Basurto
                                      Pascaline Dupas
                                     Jonathan Robinson

                                     Working Paper 23383
                             http://www.nber.org/papers/w23383


                    NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                             1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                               Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    May 2017




This research makes use of data collected as part of a research grant funded by the Bill and
Melinda Gates foundation, whose support is gratefully acknowledged. The data collection
protocols were approved by the IRBs of Stanford, UCLA, and UCSC. We thank Aaron Dibner-
Dunlap, Rachel Levenson and Michael Roscitt for outstanding field research assistance, and
Travis Baseler and Santiago Saavedra for excellent research assistance. We are grateful to IPA
and IPA Malawi for administrative assistance. We thank Siwan Anderson, Eric Edmonds, Marcel
Fafchamps, Patrick Francois, Mushfiq Mobarak, Ben Olken, Quentin Stoeffler and numerous
seminar participants for helpful comments. All errors are our own. The views expressed herein
are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of
Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2017 by Pia M. Basurto, Pascaline Dupas, and Jonathan Robinson. All rights reserved. Short
sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission
provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Decentralization and Efficiency of Subsidy Targeting: Evidence from Chiefs in Rural Malawi
Pia M. Basurto, Pascaline Dupas, and Jonathan Robinson
NBER Working Paper No. 23383
May 2017
JEL No. D73,I38,O12,Q12

                                               ABSTRACT

Developing countries spend vast sums on subsidies. Beneficiaries are typically selected via either a
proxy-means test (PMT) or through a decentralized identification process led by local leaders. A decentralized
allocation may offer informational or accountability advantages, but may be prone to elite capture.
We study this tradeoff in the context of two large-scale subsidy programs in Malawi (for agricultural
inputs and for food) decentralized to traditional leaders (“chiefs”) who are asked to target the needy.
Using high-frequency household panel data on neediness and shocks, we find that nepotism exists
but has only limited mistargeting consequences. Importantly, we find that chiefs target households
with higher returns to farm inputs, generating an allocation that is more productively efficient than
what could be achieved through a PMT. This could be welfare improving, since within-village redistribution
is common.


Pia M. Basurto                                        Jonathan Robinson
Department of Economics                               Department of Economics
University of California, Santa Cruz                  University of California, Santa Cruz
Santa Cruz, CA 95064                                  457 Engineering 2
mbasurto@ucsc.edu                                     Santa Cruz, CA 95064
                                                      and NBER
Pascaline Dupas                                       jmrtwo@ucsc.edu
Department of Economics
Stanford University
579 Serra Mall
Stanford, CA 94305-6072
and CEPR
and also NBER
pdupas@stanford.edu
1       Introduction
Targeting programs such as subsidies to needy households is an important part of what gov-
ernments do. To do this effectively, governments must first identify who is truly needy, which
may be difficult in developing countries where government infrastructure and information
technology is limited (particularly in rural areas). Governments typically have the choice to
administer such selection of eligibles centrally, or to decentralize authority to local commu-
nities (usually these programs are officially administered by local leaders).1 Decentralization
has two main benefits: (1) local leaders are almost surely more informed about the relative
neediness of people in their village than a centralized bureaucracy, especially in a context in
which most people do not file a tax return; and (2) local leaders will be more accountable to
villagers, particularly if leaders face village electoral pressure or are motivated by reputation
concerns. On the downside, decentralization may open the door for corruption or nepotism.
    This paper uses rich panel data collected from a sample of 1,559 households over four
survey rounds in 2011-2013 to explore this fundamental trade-off in the context of two
subsidy programs in Malawi – the well-known farming input subsidy program which provides
subsidies for fertilizer and hybrid seeds once a year, and a one-time food aid relief program
put in place after a drought in 2012. These programs were conceived as anti-poverty programs
and the selection of beneficiaries was decentralized to local traditional leaders, called chiefs.
How well do chiefs target the program?
    This is a setting in which the tradeoff between nepotism and information is particular
salient. On the one hand, nepotism is possible since chiefs cannot be held accountable
via electoral pressure (in contrast to papers such as Bardhan and Mookherjee 2000, 2005;
Bardhan 2002) – the position of chief in Malawi is hereditary and chiefs face fairly weak
oversight. There is also no strict eligibility rule provided by the government (only general
guidance on who should be “considered”) and no government backchecking of allocations2 .
But on the other hand, local information is critical, along two main dimensions: (1) shocks
are common and chiefs likely have good information on recent household-specific economic
conditions; and (2) the return to inputs will likely be heterogenous across households within
a village and related to factors such as soil type, access to credit, household composition,
etc. Since there is some non-negligible level of income pooling, targeting the inputs where
they will increase output the most (rather than to the neediest) may be welfare improving:
the input subsidy can be allocated based on productive efficiency to increase the size of the
pie, and ex post inter-household transfers can be used to reduce poverty.
    1
    See Coady et al. (2004) for a detailed discussion of various forms of targeting.
    2
    See Niehaus et al. (2013) for a discussion of optimal targeting rules when programs are implemented via
local, possibly corruptible, agents, but in which agents can be punished if they do not follow the rule.




                                                    1
    In this paper, we compare the allocation chosen by chiefs to that which would have
obtained under an alternative of a proxy-means test (PMT) based on a household survey.
We are interested in two sets of questions. First, how common are errors of exclusion (truly
needy households not getting the subsidy) under the chiefs, and is this error rate higher
or lower than what would have occurred under the PMT? Do chiefs use local information
to target households which have suffered recent negative shocks? Do they favor relatives?
Second, do chiefs take into consideration productive efficiency when allocating the input
subsidies? Specifically, do they target the agricultural subsidies to households with higher
returns to fertilizer?
    To answer the first question, we follow Alatas et al. (2011, 2013) and use observed
food expenditures in the immediate pre-subsidy period as our measure of neediness. We
find evidence that both the chiefs and the PMT miss a substantial fraction of poor people,
but that the chiefs miss significantly more: chiefs wrongly exclude about 15% of people for
both the input and food subsidy, whereas the PMT would have excluded only about 10%
for the input subsidy and 14% for the food subsidy. We also find evidence of nepotism:
chiefs are more likely to target food subsidies to relatives. However, this nepotism appears
to have minimal aggregate welfare consequences, since chiefs’ relatives are similarly poor to
other villagers. Ultimately, we find that both the PMT and the observed chiefs’ allocation
are pro-poor, consistently outperforming a random allocation (especially in terms of mean
squared error). While chiefs do worse than the PMT in terms of poverty targeting, we find
that chiefs use their informational advantage to the benefit of households hit with negative
shocks: people who have experienced droughts, floods, cattle death, or crop disease are
significantly more likely to receive subsidies.
    The second part of the paper tests whether chiefs target input subsidies to people with
higher returns to agricultural inputs. The test is derived from a model of subsidy allocation
in which chiefs have preferences over households (each household has a given welfare weight),
but also have information about household-specific returns to agricultural inputs. We assume
that there is little heterogeneity in productive returns to food, in which case the allocation of
the food subsidy is reflective of the welfare weights. To back out the relative importance of
productivity considerations in the chief’s objective function, we can thus exploit the wedge
between the allocations of the food and input subsidies. Taking this to the data, we find that
chiefs indeed allocate relatively more inputs to households with higher gains from fertilizer
use, while the PMT would not, suggesting productive efficiency gains from a decentralized
system.
    Our paper makes several contributions to the literature. Starting with the more narrow
contribution, our paper highlights a number of pitfalls for studies aiming to assess the effi-



                                               2
ciency of poverty targeting in government programs. We show that assessing the true quality
of targeting is very data-demanding: assets like land are noisy predictors of consumption
– the R-squared for our PMT regression is only 0.32 in Malawi, and we document similar
figures for datasets from Kenya and Uganda. This may be one reason we find lower levels of
mistargeting and elite capture here than in previous work which used assets as a proxy for
need (i.e. Bardhan and Mookherjee 2006 in West Bengal), including several previous studies
in Malawi (Dorward et al. 2008, 2013; Kilic et al. 2013). We also bring attention to the
difference between poverty targeting and poverty reduction (the ultimate goal of subsidy pro-
grams). In communities with informal income pooling, productive efficiency targeting may
be the more effective (albeit indirect) way of reducing poverty. Thus looking only at who
gets input subsidies rather than how the produced output is allocated may not be sufficient
to gauge the poverty impacts.
    Our paper ultimately paints a nuanced view of the targeting of chiefs – while chiefs pick
favorites and while they miss more poor people than would a (perfectly implemented) PMT,
they also target based on recent economic shocks as well as land productivity. Our results
thus represent a data point in favor of relatively good targeting, along with Galasso and
Ravallion (2005) for the food-for-education program in Bangladesh, Bardhan and Mookherjee
(2006) for credit and farming input subsidies in West Bengal, and Alatas et al. (2013) for
government benefits in Indonesia.
    PMTs and chiefs are not the only mechanisms that can be used to select beneficiaries.
Another common mechanism is community-based targeting (CBT, where communities get
together to decide on beneficiaries). Two studies that do careful comparisons between PMT
and CBT in the context of cash transfer programs tend to give a modest advantage to the
PMT: Alatas et al. (2012, 2013) in Indonesia, where the relationship between assets and
consumption is somewhat stronger than in contexts we consider; and Stoeffler et al. (2016)
in Cameroon, where the CBT implementation appear poor. While the results of these
two studies suggest community targeting could at best marginally improve on the chiefs’
allocation, exploring the impact of community-based targeting in contexts like ours is an
interesting area for future research.
    More broadly, we contribute to the literature on the role of traditional authorities in
African development. While survey evidence from the Afrobarometer suggests that tradi-
tional leaders are perceived to regulate important aspects of the local economy in numerous
African countries (Logan, 2011; Michalopoulos and Papaioannou, 2013), the question of
whether their existence further undermines weak governance, or instead palliates it, is still
unsettled. Acemoglu et al. (2014) find that areas of Sierra Leone where competition among
potential chieftaincy heirs was low during and after British colonial rule have significantly



                                             3
worse development outcomes today, but higher levels of respect for traditional authorities.
They hypothesize that this reflects the ability of uncontested traditional ruling families to
simultaneously capture resources and civil society organizations. Our evidence from Malawi
mitigates this view: in our context, traditional leaders are uncontested and popular, as in
Acemoglu et al. (2014), but effective at targeting input subsidies to productive farmers,
possibly putting their village on a higher growth path.3
    The layout of the paper is as follows. Section 2 presents some background on the Malaw-
ian local governance structure and decentralized subsidy programs. Section 3 discusses the
sample and data. Section 4 presents evidence on poverty-based (mis)targeting. Section 5
tests for productive efficiency targeting. Section 6 concludes.


2       Institutional Background
2.1     Local governance in Malawi and the role of chiefs
Malawi is a presidential democracy with a single federal legislative body (parliament). At
the sub-national level, Malawi is divided into 28 districts each administered by a District
Assembly. District Assemblies consist of a combination of democratically elected councilors
and members of parliament, together with ex-officio, non-voting members. This local gov-
ernment coexists with a traditional chieftaincy hierarchy. There are four ranks within this
hierarchy: Paramount Chief, Traditional Authority (TA), Group Village Headman (GVH),
and Village Headman (also known as village chief). In our data, TAs have authority over
areas smaller than a district. They oversee from 10 to 45 GVHs, and GVHs oversee between
2 and 10 villages.4
    3
      Outside of Africa, Anderson et al. (2015) also finds evidence of poor governance by elites in Maharashtra,
India. Though democracy appears to be vibrant, there exists elites an entrenched clientilisic vote-trading
system in which elites landholders are able to enact policies which lower rural wages in exchange for insurance.
As in Acemogulu et al. (2014), this system is so engrained that people report high levels of satisfaction.
    4
      A brief history of the coexistence of these two systems of local governance is as follows (this note relies
heavily on Lihoma 2012, Eggen 2011 and Cammack et al. 2007). Prior to colonialism, local government
structures in Malawi varied across regions and ethnic groups. Most local governments included chiefs, but
the role of chiefs varied between centralized systems in which the chief’s authority was paramount and
more decentralized, participatory systems (Lihoma, 2012). Malawi was colonized by Britain in 1891, which
attempted a system of direct rule which minimized the authority of chiefs. In 1912, Britain moved towards
a system of indirect rule which recognized chiefs as traditional authorities, reporting to the colonial district
administrator. In 1933, traditional powers were extended such that chiefs could perform some functions
of local government (such as administering communal land and arbitrating disputes in traditional courts),
though chiefs were still financially dependent on colonial administrators. Beginning in 1953 and continuing
until independence in 1964, the British transferred local authority from chiefs to district councils. While
higher-ranked chiefs (TAs) served as ex-officio members of these councils, their powers to act unilaterally
were limited (and were officially subordinate to the council itself).




                                                       4
    Chiefs in Malawi hold little formal power. They do not have direct control over any
public funds and are not allowed to raise local taxes. However, chiefs hold other customary
responsibilities. The 1998 Decentralisation Policy and Local Government Act recognized
the rights of chiefs to allocate communal land and adjudicate matters related to customary
law (in particular customary land). Chiefs also play an advisory and coordination role
regarding local development projects: local development funds are in principle spent through
groups known as Area Development Committees (headed by TAs) and Village Development
Committees (chaired by GVH and composed of ward councilors, MPs, religious leaders,
business leaders and youth and women representatives). Finally – and this is the focus of
this paper – chiefs are typically relied upon to identify beneficiaries for targeted government
programs.
    Traditional leadership positions are hereditary. Chiefs who pass away are replaced by
someone from the chieftaincy clan. In patrilineal communities, such as in the northern part
of the country, chieftancy is inherited from father to son, while in matrilineal communities,
like in the southern and central parts of the country where our data comes from, chieftancy
is inherited from maternal uncle to nephews (so the first son of the first sister inherits the
right to the position) (Chirwa 2014). There are a few female chiefs, but they are often seen
as “holding the place for a brother” (Peters 2010).
    Chiefs are paid a salary by the government that is known as mswahala, but it is fairly
small.5 Chiefs do occasionally charge fees to villagers (in our sample, 44 percent of villagers
report having ever made a payment to the village chief). Interestingly, chiefs are favorably
viewed by the majority of the Malawian population. In 2008-2009, 74% of Afrobarometer
respondents in Malawi perceived traditional leaders as having “some” or “a great deal” of
influence, and 71% thought the amount of influence traditional leaders have in governing the
local community should increase – for comparison, the average across 19 African countries
for these two questions were both 50% (Logan, 2011). Possibly as a result of this high
popularity, chiefs appear able to influence local villagers on whom to support in general
elections and local government elections (Patel et al., 2007), an influence that may limit
their accountability to elected representatives.
  5
    In 2014, a village chief in Malawi received 2,500 MWK (about US$6 in 2014) per month as mswahala,
around a week’s worth of labor at the prevailing casual wage.




                                                 5
2.2     Subsidy Programs
2.2.1    Fertilizer Subsidy Program

Malawi’s Farming and Agricultural Input Subsidy Program (FISP) is one of the largest
fertilizer and seed subsidy programs in the world.6 Though the program has existed since
1998, it greatly expanded after a drought in 2004 and has steadily increased in size since
then. In 2012-13, the program reached 4.4 million recipients and took up 10-15% of the
government’s budget (Dorward et. al 2013, Baltzer and Hansen 2011). In our data, the
percentage of people benefitting from subsidies has increased steadily over time, from 63%
in 2008 to 82% in 2012.
    The subsidy program covers several inputs and comes in the form of vouchers, which are
redeemable at a local agricultural shop in exchange for the items. The four most common
items covered by the voucher subsidy during our study period were planting fertilizer (a 50
kilogram bag of NPK, worth about $40 at market prices in 2013), top-dressing fertilizer (a
50 kilogram bag of Urea, comparable in price to NPK), hybrid maize seeds (a 5 kg bag,
worth about $7), and hybrid groundnut seeds (a 2 kg bag, worth $2.60). The price of the
voucher is only $1.7, so the subsidy is extremely high, at over 98%, and as a result take-up
of the vouchers is reported to be 100%.
    There is no strictly defined, official eligibility criteria for the subsidy, but the intention is
to target the poor and vulnerable. The official FISP guidelines reads that beneficiaries “will
be full time resource poor smallholders Malawian farmers” but no threshold is provided
for what defines “resource poor”. The program guidelines does hint at particular groups
however: “...the following vulnerable groups should also be considered: elderly, HIV positive,
female headed households, child headed households, orphan headed households, physically
challenged headed households and heads looking after the elderly and physically challenged”
(MoAFS 2009).
    The identification of beneficiaries has three main stages (Chirwa et al. 2010). First, the
government conducts a national farmer registration census. Second, the central government
allocates vouchers to districts as a function of the area’s farming population and the acreage
under cultivation. Within each district, the District Agriculture Development Office (DADO)
allocates vouchers across villages based on farming population shares (Chirwa and Dorward
2013). Finally, within each village, once the number of subsidies available to the village is
known, a list of eligible villagers is made. Formally, the selection of beneficiaries at this stage
   6
    Fertilizer subsidies are one of the more popular (and expensive) aid programs across the developing
world, in some cases taking up significant fractions of government budgets. For example, Sri Lanka, Malawi
and India spend 10-20% of their government’s budget on fertilizer subsidies (Wiggins and Brooks 2010). The
countries of Zambia and Tanzania also devote 1-2% of their budget to subsidies (Baltzer and Hansen 2011).




                                                    6
is supposed to be done by the Village Development Committee through open community
meetings, and audited by the DADO. However, as we will show below, most authority appears
to be de facto delegated to chiefs.7 Once the list of beneficiaries have been received by the
DADO, it establishes a date and venue for the distribution of the vouchers themselves. The
distribution is done by a staff member from the DADO. Listed beneficiaries have to show
their voter registration card in order to receive the vouchers and also to redeem the vouchers
at the retail stores (MoAFS 2009).
    The identification of beneficiaries and distribution of vouchers is timed to precede the
main planting season (which begins in November and lasts until the harvest in March).
Beneficiary lists are typically drawn in August, while the subsidy vouchers themselves are
distributed in September/October, in advance of planting.

2.2.2    Food Subsidy Program

Malawi devalued its currency in 2012, causing inflation of 20-30% in 2012-13 (World Bank
2015) and making food imports prohibitively costly. There was also a drought in 2012,
causing the harvest to be poor. In response, a food subsidy program was implemented in
late 2012, lasting from November 2012 to January 2013. In our area of study, the subsidies
were distributed in kind. As with the input subsidy, the program was targeted at the “poor”
but without a precise threshold or formula for what constitutes poverty. Of those receiving
the subsidy in our data, the average amount received was 103 kg of maize, 14 kg of soy blend,
18 kg of pigeon peas, 10 kg of beans, and 3 liters of oil. We estimate that this package was
worth about $72 in 2013 USD. As with the farming input subsidy program, chiefs were given
primary responsibility for identifying which households should receive the food aid.


3       Data
3.1     Sample
The data we use for this paper was collected as part of a separate research project focused
on estimating the impact of providing savings accounts to unbanked households (Dupas et
al., 2017a). The project took place around the catchment areas of NBS bank branches in
two districts of Southern Malawi – Machinga and Balaka. The sampling frame for Dupas et
    7
    For example, Dorward et. al (2013) show that around 70% of households in 2013 believed the decision
on voucher recipients was made by the chiefs before the official meeting was held.




                                                  7
al. (2017a) relied on a census of market businesses and a census of households – we use only
the household sample for this analysis. The household census listed 9,297 households from
68 villages in three Traditional Authorities (TA) areas – Kalembo, Sitola, and Nsamala. Of
these, 78.8% met the eligibility criteria set by Dupas et al. (2017a): they did not have a
bank account and had a female head. Dupas et al., 2017a randomly sampled a subset and
completed 2,107 baseline surveys. Of this baseline sample, 354 did not complete one of the
three follow-up surveys used in this paper (16.9%). In addition, the module to measure
food subsidy receipt was introduced only partially through the endline survey, and another
185 households were not asked these questions (9.7%). We are thus left with a sample of
1,568 households. The analysis in this paper requires comparing subsidy recipients to non-
recipients in the same village, so we need a sufficient number of people in each village. For
this reason we drop five villages with less than 5 households in our data, and are left with
1,559 households in 61 villages for our analysis.
     This sampling frame creates two issues for the analysis in this paper. First, our data
includes only a subset of people in each village (around 10%). Since our question of interest
is to understand how chiefs allocated subsidies within this sample, and our basic thought
experiment is to ask what the gains would be from re-allocating subsidies within this sample,
our results are still internally valid and of interest, however. Second, our sample is selected
on not having a formal place to save. Since poorer people are less likely to have an account,
it is likely that our sample is poorer than average. We may therefore underestimate overall
targeting errors (if any of the relatively better-off people with bank accounts ended up
receiving subsidies).


3.2    Data Sources
Household Panel We have four waves of survey data for each household in the sample:
(1) a baseline conducted from January to March 2011 (2) a first follow-up survey conducted
from January to March 2012; (3) a second follow-up survey conducted from September to
November 2012; and (4) an endline survey conducted from January to March 2013. The
baseline survey includes a standard set of demographic variables, including a module on
asset ownership which can be used to construct the allocation that would have obtained
under a counterfactual allocation based on a proxy-means test from baseline assets. Each of
these survey rounds included detailed expenditure modules.
    The follow-up and endline surveys include a module on the farming subsidy. This is used
to construct a time series of subsidies received from 2008-2013, for each household. The
module includes information on which input subsidy was received, whether the household




                                              8
received the voucher itself or shared another household’s voucher, and what the household
actually did with the subsidized products (used them, sold them, shared them, etc.). The
endline survey also asked these questions for the food subsidy, which was introduced in
2012. Finally, the endline included a separate module with questions on how the input and
food subsidies were allocated. These include questions on how (in the respondent’s opinion)
the vouchers were allocated, whether a public meeting was held, whether the respondent
participated in the meeting, etc. We use this module to provide some descriptive evidence
on how the programs were implemented.
   In addition, between August and October 2014 we collected a fifth wave of data for a
random subset of 563 households in the initial sample. This survey asked additional questions
on the process through which subsidies were allocated and on respondents’ attitudes towards
the allocation process as well as their perception of the traditional authorities’ role, beliefs
and objectives in this allocation. Importantly, we also elicited households’ beliefs on the
returns to farming inputs on their own land.

Chiefs Survey Between August and October 2014 we collected surveys with all of the
105 traditional leaders in our study area of 61 villages, including 76 village headmen (chiefs)
and 29 group village headmen (GVH).8 The survey included questions on their tenure and
responsibilities, and included questions about the details of how the FISP and Food subsidy
programs were allocated. We also measured village chiefs’ self-reported knowledge of the
distribution of returns to inputs in their village, and of the realizations of household-specific
shocks.


3.3     Characteristics of households, chiefs and villages in the sample
Table 1 presents basic summary statistics on the households in our sample. Panel A in-
cludes time-invariant characteristics collected at baseline. The first variable shown is the
household’s self-reported relationship to the chief. We asked the following question to each
respondent: “Are you related to the chief?,” to which 27% reported yes. In a follow-up
question, we asked: “How are you related?” The modal answer was the chief is an uncle
(20% of the related cases), followed by brother (13%), brother-in-law (12%) and grandfather
(12%). In what follows, we refer to those who reported as being related to the chief as “kin”.9
   8
     The reason why there are more chiefs than villages is that 19 villages were divided into multiple villages
between our initial data collection in 2011-13 and the time of the survey in 2014.
   9
     Given an average village size of 300 households (Table A1), the numbers imply that in an average village
the chief is uncle to 16 heads of households, the brother to 11 households, the brother in law to 10 households,
and the grandfather to 8 households. While high, these numbers are not implausible given high fertility rates.




                                                       9
    Households in the sample are very poor: 90% have mud floors or worse quality, 77% have
thatch roofs, and less than 1% have electricity. Only 59% are literate, and average years of
education for the household head is just below 5.10 The FISP program specifically targets
single-headed households (the majority of which are widowed women), and there are a large
number of these: 28% of households are headed by females alone. Ninety-seven percent of
households in our sample own some land.
    Panel B shows time varying expenditure, shocks and transfers. Across rounds, households
report spending a total of only $9.66 per month per capita, $6.80 on food, and $2.71 on non-
staple food. These figures place these households well below the global extreme poverty
threshold of $1.25 per day. Shocks are also quite common: 26% lost at least 1 day of work
in the past month due to illness, 69% had another household member sick over the past
month, 28% experienced a drought or flood, and 20% experienced crop loss or livestock
death. Across survey rounds, 72% of households report being worried about having enough
food to eat in the past 3 months. Transfers across households within the village are very
common, with 58% of households reporting being recipients of transfers in the last 90 days,
and 25% reporting having made transfers.
    Columns 3 and 4 of Table 1 show, for each variable, the gap between kin and non-kin
and its standard error. This reveals that if anything, kin are poorer than non-kin – they are
significantly less educated (Panel A), and have slightly lower consumption (Panel B). The
only dimension in which they appear better off regards land ownership, which likely comes
from the fact that chiefs’ primary official responsibility concerns customary land allocation.
    Not only are households in our sample poor, they area also facing a lot of variation in
resources over time. Column 5 of Table 1 presents the correlation between survey rounds
for the variables in Panel B. In general, the correlation is fairly low: shocks are largely
uncorrelated across rounds, and the correlation for our neediness measure, non-stable food
expenditure, is just 0.35. The correlations for chiefs’ kin are not higher than for the overall
sample, suggesting that chiefs’ kin do not face less risk.
    Table A1 presents summary statistics on villages and village chiefs in our sample. The
average village in our sample has 340 households and over 7,000 acres of customary land.The
average village chief is 53 years old and has just over 5 years of education. Eighty two percent
of chiefs are male. They have been chief for 13 years on average, and 90% inherited the
position (most of the remainder were appointed). The vast majority faced no competition
from within the family blood line for the position. In principle, traditional leaders can be
removed from office or reprimanded, but our data suggests this almost never happens: only
one of the chiefs we surveyed mentioned having ever been suspended. These basic statistics
 10
      The school system in Malawi is composed of 8 years of primary school and 4 years of high school.




                                                     10
suggest that chiefs are de facto not accountable to anyone.
   When chiefs were asked about their main responsibilities, the five most common re-
sponses were resolving conflicts among villagers (90%); reporting issues to higher level chiefs
(61%); monitoring village projects (56%); disseminating information to villagers (33%); and
overseeing subsidy programs (20%).


3.4    Summary statistics on the allocation of subsidies in our sample
Table A2 presents summary statistics on the process through which input and food subsidies
were allocated among households in our sample. Panels A and C rely on the latest round
of survey data (2014) and presents evidence on how both chiefs and villagers experience
and perceive the subsidy allocation mechanisms. Panel B presents data from the earlier
household survey waves.
    The data confirms that chiefs are the primary decision-makers in allocating subsidies.
Turning first to panel A, the great majority of village chiefs report that they have control
over the subsidy allocation: 62% declare deciding by themselves, and an additional 3%
report deciding in collaboration with others. Of the remainder, 13% report that the village
development committee (of which the chief is a member) decides the allocation, and 13%
report that subsidies are allocated in a village meeting (which the chief typically runs). When
asked about selection criteria, chiefs report need as the primary criterion. Chiefs also put
significant weight on female-headed households, households which recently received a shock
households taking care of orphans, and households that the chief believes are hard-working.
    Panel B suggests that community meetings regarding the selection appear to happen
quite regularly, with approximately 95% of villagers reporting that a meeting was held to
discuss input subsidies, and high attendance at the meeting (82% for inputs and 65% for
food subsidies). Nevertheless, Panel C shows that households report that the village chiefs
has a considerable role in the allocation: 49% report that the chief alone decides on the
input subsidies, and 73% report that the chief alone decides on the food subsidies. Like
chiefs, households list neediness as the main criterion, but they also mention demographic
characteristics of the household (elderly and female headed households, which are considered
priority households in the allocation due to increased neediness). The great majority of
households perceive the allocation of subsidies as “very good.” There seems to be two factors
that households consider when deciding whether the allocation is good – one is whether the
allocation benefits the poorest, and the other is whether the allocation reaches the largest
possible share of households. The concern for reaching as many households as possible is
echoed by chiefs: when asked how they would allocate additional vouchers if they were to




                                              11
receive them, all but one chief say they would give vouchers to more households so that the
number of beneficiaries expand (Panel A).
    This relates to an important fact about the allocation of subsidies that transpired from
our data: while the FISP guidelines do not endorse sharing of subsidy packages, in practice
sharing is quite common. We show this in Table A3. Villagers report large levels of sharing,
primarily orchestrated by the chief. Seventy-seven percent (0.46/0.60) of households who
received a subsidy voucher report sharing it; of those 83% say they received instructions
from the chief on whether to share it, and 79% received specific instructions from the chief
on whom to share with. They also overwhelmingly report that the chief decides how food
subsidies are shared.
    Table A3 also shows summary statistics on subsidy receipt. The percentage of households
receiving input subsidies has increased steadily over time, from 58% in 2008 to 81% in 2012.
Receipt of the input subsidy is quite correlated over time, with 48% of households receiving
some input subsidy in all five years covered in our data, and 10% never receiving any input
subsidy. Conditional on receiving the subsidy, the quantity of fertilizer received (summing
over the two types of fertilizer, for planting and top-dressing) was about 77 and 64 kg during
2011 and 2012 respectively. This is smaller than the official package that subsidy beneficiaries
are entitled to get (100 kg) due to sharing. Sharing seems to increase over time, explaining
part of the growth in the coverage rate: in 2012, more households receive some subsidized
inputs but they receive smaller quantities. The food subsidy of 2012 was more limited in
scope than the input subsidy, reaching only 59% of households, though sharing was common
for food as well.11
    Since our aim is to think about the efficiency of the chief’s allocation, in what follows we
consider the allocation observed in our data after sharing. That is, if a household answered
“yes” to the question “Did you receive an input (food) subsidy in that year?”, we consider
this household as a beneficiary, irrespective of whether, in subsequent survey questions,
the households reveals that it did not receive the actual voucher but a share from another
household instructed to share their voucher.

Other safety net programs

Beegle, Galasso and Goldberg (2015) document that chiefs are also involved in deciding which
households are eligible for Malawi’s public work program (PWP) – though the responsibility
falls more on the Group Village Headmen and the villagers themselves. They report that
Malawi’s PWP “has been operational since the mid-1990s and aims to provide short-term
  11
    In 2012, 53% of households received both the input and food subsidy, 13.6% received neither, 5% received
the food subsidy only and 27.9% received the input subsidy only.




                                                    12
labor-intensive activities to poor, able-bodied households for the purpose of enhancing their
food security.” While we unfortunately did not collect data on participation in the PWP
directly from respondents in our surveys, a fuzzy name match between the original household
sample and administrative data on PWP participants obtained from the two districts in
our sample yields 167 matches for the 2012-2013 budget year, out of 2,107 households in
the Dupas et al. (2017a) baseline survey, suggesting that the PWP coverage in our study
area is about 8%. Verification surveys with a subset of those matched and unmatched
conducted in March 2015 suggests that an additional 3% may have been participating in
PWP, bringing our estimates to roughly 11%.12 While name matching is always prone
to significant error, this ballpark figure is not far from the 15% coverage targeted by the
program. While studying how the PWP is targeted and the specific role of chiefs would have
been interesting, omitting it due to data limitations should not affect our analysis of the
other subsidy progams. Notably, Beegle, Galasso and Goldberg (2015) find no correlation
between receipt of PWP and receipt of other benefits, suggesting no strategic allocation
across programs, in particular, no compensation of non-PWP households with input or food
subsidies.


4      Poverty targeting
4.1     Measuring Neediness
To measure neediness, we follow Alatas et al. (2012) and use whether households would
have qualified based on their food expenditure distribution, which we consider a proxy for
consumption. Food expenditures have been shown to be better predictors of neediness than
other measures such as income (Deaton 1997; Meyer and Sullivan 2012).
    While there are 12 total food categories measured in each survey wave, we focus on the
10 categories that are typically purchased rather than self-produced. These are all but the
staples and grains: vegetables, fruits, meat, dairy/eggs, salt, sugar, other cooking items
(oil, margarine), coffee and tea, snacks, and juice/sodas. Ligon (2016) identifies those foods
as elastic goods among a similar population of households in Uganda, and thus useful for
drawing inferences regarding household’s marginal utility of contemporaneous expenditures,
or neediness. The two categories excluded were recorded in the survey as “staple” and
“grains/nuts”, which the great majority of household produce for home consumption.13
  12
     We are extremely grateful to Santiago Saavedra for obtaining the administrative records and performing
the matching analysis and verification surveys.
  13
     We expect expenditure to be negatively rather than positively correlated with total consumption for
such goods.




                                                    13
    We compute the sum of expenditures on these 10 food categories over the 30 days preced-
ing the survey and then divide the sum by the number of household members to construct
“per capita non-staple food expenditure” or PCF, our measure of need going forward (we
report this figure in USD).14 The distribution of log PCF in our data is plotted separately
for the two main years of analysis, 2011 and 2012, in the top panel of Figure A1.

Timing The food expenditure we would ideally use to determine “true need” (PCF eli-
gibility) would be measured right around the time when subsidy beneficiaries are identified
(which is around August for the input subsidy and November for the food subsidy). However,
the timing of our surveys does not precisely correspond to these periods. Our food expendi-
ture module covered the last 7-30 days (depending on the question) before the survey date.
Thus, given the dates of the surveys mentioned in Section 3.2, we have consumption data for
the following periods: December 2010 to February 2011; December 2011 to February 2012;
August to October 2012; and January to March 2013. To study the targeting of the 2011 in-
put subsidy, we thus have to rely on the December 2010 to February 2011 expenditure data,
which is not ideal because it is substantially before the period of interest. In particular, it is
before the March 2011 harvest, which is likely an important determinant of actual neediness
as of August - October 2011.15 This is less of a concern for the 2012 subsidies, where we
have consumption data from August to October, which is concurrent with the identification
of beneficiaries and exactly precedes any actual distribution of food.


4.2     Constructing counterfactual allocations
4.2.1    Neediness Rank

For each village, we observe the total number of households within our sample who benefited
from a subsidy (be it full or partial) – call this number s̄. To construct the counterfacult
in which vouchers (voucher shares) were distributed based on true consumption, we rank
households (within each village) by their per capita non-staple food expenditure (PCF). We
consider a household “PCF eligible” if they are ranked at or below the s̄th farmer in the PCF
distribution. We break ties based on total food expenditures and then total expenditures on
  14
     We choose to compute things per capita (PC) rather than per adult equivalent (PAE) because commonly
used equivalence scales between children and adults may be an underestimate of how much communities
actually value children consumption (Olken 2005). We have done the entire analysis in the paper using PAE
instead of PC and the results are identical. See Deaton and Zaidi (2002) for a discussion of constructing
poverty indices.
  15
     We could possibly use the December 2011 to February 2012 data since no food subsidies were distributed
that year and the proceeds of the maize planted with the subsidized inputs of 2011 were not reaped until
March 2012. We have run the analysis for 2011 this way and the results are very similar.




                                                    14
all items.

4.2.2       PMT Score Rank

To construct the counterfactual in which voucher shares were allocated via PMT, we repeat
this procedure but this time we rank households (within each village) by a “PMT score”. We
consider households PMT eligible if they are ranked at or below the s̄th household in the PMT
score distribution. We compute the PMT score as follows: we regress log PCF on household
characteristics, including demographic characteristics, dwelling characteristics, assets and
occupation, and use the estimated coefficients to predict a score for each household. As in
Alatas et al. (2012), we do this in two steps: we first run kitchen sink regressions with
all available characteristics and then, using a backward stepwise procedure, keep only those
characteristics significant at the 10 percent level in the regression used to predict the score.
    The PMT regressions are shown in Table A4. We show the results for both per capita and
per adult equivalent food expenditure, and find slightly higher predictive power for per capita
values.16 From Column 1, we obtain a R-Squared of 0.32, which is somewhat lower than the
0.40 obtained by Alatas et al. (2012) in Indonesia (when pooling districts together). To test
the extent to which our lower R-Squared is due to a particularly pronounced measurement
error problem in our dataset, in Table A5 we use data from the third wave of the Integrated
Household Survey (IHS3), a representative household survey collected by Malawi’s National
Statistics Office. We restrict that dataset to the two districts in our sample, and estimate
PMT regressions using the same backward stepwise method to identify covariates. We obtain
a R-Squared of 0.39 when we include all potential covariates available in the IHS3, and
essentially the same when we restrict the potential regressors to the set available in our own
dataset (we call it “BDR variables,” with slightly different variables than the IHS3). This
suggests that the lower R-Squared we obtain in our own dataset is not due to our survey
instrument having failed to measure important predictors. Instead, our R-squared of 0.32
in our dataset is possibly lower than the 0.39 found in IHS3 data because our sample is
somewhat poorer than a representative sample, and their consumption may be more volatile
due to lower access to insurance. In comparable samples from neighboring countries we find
similarly low R-squared values: Table A6 shows regressions for samples of rural unbanked
households in Kenya (Dupas et al., 2017b) and Uganda (Dupas et al., 2017a). We find an
R-squared of 0.31 in Kenya and 0.28 in Uganda.
  16
       We use a per adult equivalent formula of 1 child under 18 equal to 0.5 adults.




                                                       15
4.3     Poverty-targeting results
4.3.1    PMT vs. Chief Allocation

Our first main result is Figure 1, which plots the probability of receiving the subsidies by
quintile of the PMT score distribution (top panel) and quintile of the PCF distribution
(bottom panel). We show the “true” allocation (made by the chiefs, solid line) as well as
two counterfactual allocations: the PMT allocation, our “benchmark” for what could be
done under centralization; and the PCF-based allocation, the “optimal” allocation from the
point of view of need targeting. We pool across villages, which vary in their underlying
distributions as well as in the number of subsidies available, which explains why neither of
the two counterfactual allocations are perfect step functions of their respective distributions.
It also explains why even the PCF-based allocation does not reach perfect targeting: there
appears to be substantial mistargeting across villages which explain that even a perfect allo-
cation within village would yield evidence of mistargeting on Figure 1 since it is aggregated
across villages. The PCF gradient of PCF-based allocation in Figure 1 should therefore be
considered as the “best possible targeting” given the across-village allocation in our data.17
    From the top panel, it is clear that chiefs target different people than the PMT would:
while the PMT, by definition, would allocate subsidies to 100% of people at the bottom of
the distribution, the chiefs’ allocation has a much flatter gradient with respect to the PMT
score. In isolation, this result looks similar to Dorward et al. (2008, 2013) and Kilic et
al. (2013), who look at how well chiefs target based on assets and conclude that there is
widespread mistargeting.
    The bottom panel, which show targeting based on PCF, also show that the PMT does
better than chiefs – but the gap is much smaller than in the top panel. In the allocation
decision of 2011, contemporaneous to the PMT formula data collection, the gradient for the
PMT allocation is quite a bit steeper than that of the chiefs, but by 2012 a lot of the PMT
edge has ebbed already, suggesting that the advantage of the PMT may be short-lived. While
the PMT does better than the chiefs at least initially in terms of poverty-targeting, it still
generates a substantial number of errors. This is true even if we use the PMT formula from
the IHS3 rather than the one derived in our dataset (see Figure A3). The relatively poor
targeting performance of the PMT seems due to the fact that assets (the most important
factor in the PMT) are a relatively poor proxy for need in our study context, because PCF
eligibility is not time-invariant (the correlation between food expenditures across rounds is
only 0.35 as previously discussed and shown in Table 1) and because there are important
  17
    While understanding the determinants of subsidy allocations across villages is of great interest, our data
does not allow us to study this question.




                                                     16
unobservables in the determinants of PCF.
    One concern is that part of the variation across periods and unexplained variation across
households could come from measurement error in food expenditures. Such measurement
error would flatten the gradient in PCF for both the chiefs and the PMT. In Table A7 we
show that our measure of non-staple food expenditure in the past month is significantly
correlated with self-reported food security: a log point increase in PCF corresponds to a 4
percentage point (15%) decrease in the share of days without enough food and a 5 percentage
point (15%) increase in the likelihood of not being worried about having enough food.

4.3.2    Error rates

Table 2 shows the poverty-targeting error rate under the two allocation schemes (chiefs and
PMT). The table shows the average village error rate (averaging first over individuals within
villages, and then across villages). For these calculations, we include only those villages in
which the probability of getting a subsidy is between 0 and 100% (so that targeting errors are
possible).18 Following Alatas et al. (2012), what we call the poverty-targeting error rate is
the probability that a household is (1) eligible based on its position in the PCF distribution
within the village; but (2) does not make it onto the actual beneficiary list (chief error) or
on the counterfactual PMT beneficiary list (PMT error). Note that since the number of
beneficiaries within the village is kept fixed in this exercise, this error rate also provides the
probability that a household is (1) categorized as ineligible based on its position in the PCF
distribution and (2) gets the subsidy. In other words, mechanically there are as many people
who don’t get the subsidy when they should (exclusion errors) as there are people who get
the subsidy when they should not (inclusion errors). We also show what the expected error
rate would be if subsidies were allocated randomly. These are calculated from a permutation
test with 1,000 draws (the distribution of results for those are shown in Figure A2). Finally,
we also compute the squared error for each allocation.
    We can see that both allocations make a significant number of errors compared to the
PCF-based allocation, but that the PMT always performs better for input subsidies. The
average error rate for the PMT is 10-12%, compared to 14-16% observed by chiefs (these
differences are statistically significant). Perhaps a better metric for measuring error is mean
squared error, which punishes error far from the eligibility threshold more than errors closer.
We again find strong evidence that the PMT does better. Note that we consider somewhat of
a “best-case” PMT: we assume perfect compliance with the allocation rule, ignoring poten-
  18
     The table reports the probability of all or none of the villagers getting the subsidy. The odds that all
villagers got the subsidy was 9,8% for the 2011 input subsidy, 14.8% for the 2012 input subsidy, and 4.9%
for the 2012 food subsidy. In addition, the food subsidy was not given out in 4.9% of villages.




                                                     17
tial implementation issues; what’s more, our PMT formula is based on data that predates
the consumption and subsidy allocation measures by only a year, while any actual PMT
allocation rule would likely rely on older data in most years (since measuring household-held
assets, a key component of the PMT formula, is costly, especially once households know their
eligibility depends on their survey responses – see Besley 1990).
    While chiefs do worse than the PMT, they do not seem to make random allocations (see
Table 4 and Figure A2). The simple error rate for the input subsidies is clearly worse than
would most likely be obtained from random targeting (see Figure A2), though– the mean
squared error is much lower, suggesting that chiefs trade PCF_eligible for ineligible only
around the PCF cutoff. Chiefs, in contrast, do better than random on the food subsidy, by
both metrics.
    Thus an interesting pattern in these results is that chiefs look worse at targeting the truly
needy for the input subsidy than the food subsidy. A central hypothesis of this paper is that
this may be due to productivity targeting of the input, which we will argue is less relevant
for food. We will return to this issue in detail in Section 5.

4.3.3    Who is favored and who is left out by chiefs?

Table 3 shows the results of a multivariate regression of subsidy receipt on background
characteristics and village fixed effects. We show the covariates of actual receipt (the true
allocation, made by the chiefs) in columns 1-4. In columns 5-8 we show the characteristics
targeted under the counterfactual PMT. Comparing the coefficient estimates across the two
sets of analyses tells us who is favored and who is left out under each scheme. We consider
both the extensive margin (receiving any subsidy) and the intensive margin (value of the
subsidy received, since this varies across households due to sharing).19 The first row of Table 3
confirms the poverty-targeting results discussed above: the gradient in PCF is more negative
under the PMT than under the chiefs, and the gap in the gradient is more pronounced for
the input subsidy than for the food subsidy.
    We find evidence of nepotism: conditional on covariates, chief’s kin are 11 percentage
points more likely to receive the food subsidy under the chief, whereas they would not be
favored under the PMT. For the input subsidy, nepotism appears much less pronounced:
while chief’s kin receive a greater input subsidy package (an extra 3.30 kg off of a mean
  19
    For the intensive margin, we construct the counterfactual PMT allocation keeping the distribution of
input subsidy values the same as under the chief, but assigning the largest value subsidy to the household
with the lowest PMT score, the second largest value to the housheold with the second lowest PMT score,
etc. This inflates the targeting performance of the PMT compared to allocating fixed subsidy values to
every household eligible. This is the relevant benchmark insofar as there is no reason (other than logistical
constraints) why subsidy amounts under the PMT cannot be varying with the PMT score.




                                                     18
of 50.5 kg, significant at 10%), the PMT would also award kin higher subsidy packages
(+2.3 kg, also significant at the 10 percent level). This is due to the fact that chiefs’ kin
are marginally asset poorer than non-relatives. Turning to other covariates, we find that
chiefs target older households, as per the official FISP recommendation. Chiefs also target
households that received negative shocks: households who experienced a drought or flood are
4 percentage points more likely to receive subsidized food, while households who experienced
crop loss or cattle death are 8 points more likely to get it.
    In sum, the results in Table 3 epitomize the tradeoff between local information and
capture: we find that chiefs are able to use local knowledge to benefit households hit by
recent negative shocks, while the PMT misses them; but they also favor their kin.
    Our finding of nepotism in the allocation of the food subsidy is not unique to Malawi. A
review paper by Baltzer and Hansen (2011) of programs in four African countries (Ghana,
Malawi, Tanzania and Zambia) finds significant evidence that subsidies disproportionately
go to politically connected households. The important question though is whether such
nepotism has important welfare consequences. Alatas et al. (2013) show that the “cost” of
nepotism in terms of average consumption level among beneficiaries can be approximated
with the following formula:
                                             4β (ce − cb )
                                    4C = α
                                              β      cb
where α is the share of kin, 4ββ
                                   is how much more likely kin are to receive benefits, and (cec−c
                                                                                                b
                                                                                                  b)


is how much richer kin are. Taking the following values from our data: α = 0.27, 4β      β
                                                                                           = 0.19
                             (ce −cb )
(for the food subsidy) and cb = 0.053, we obtain 4C ≈ 0.0027. In other words, nepotism
in the allocation of the food subsidy reduces consumption among the truly eligible by 0.26%.
This is a very small cost, in fact surprisingly similar to that obtained by Alatas et al. (2013)
for Indonesia (4C ≈ 0.003 for a cash transfer program). The main reason why nepotism
is not very costly in terms of consumption targeting is that kin and non-kin are equally
poor in our sample. Nepotism could however mean that kin can achieve the same level of
consumption alongside much more leisure (if they do not need to work as hard to achieve
the consumption). The distributional impacts of nepotism in terms of overall welfare could
thus be non-trivial if leisure is valued highly.


5     Productive Efficiency Targeting
In this section, we investigate whether some of the apparent mistargeting of input subsidies
by chiefs is due to targeting on farming productivity: if returns to input subsidies are
heterogeneous and chiefs have information on this, then they might allocate subsidies in a



                                                19
way that takes both poverty targeting and productive efficiency into account. In this section
we present a model that allows for heterogeneity in returns as well as heterogeneity in the
welfare weights that chiefs assign to households, and propose a method to test whether
the mistargeting we observe for input subsidies is in part driven by productive efficiency
considerations.


5.1    Model and prediction
We consider the problem of allocating subsidies across households within a village. The
intra-village allocation is done by the village chief.
    Suppose that allocation of subsidy s (s ∈ {fertilizer, food}) to household i enables that
household to generate additional income:

                                           yi = Ais sµ

where Ai denotes individual-specific returns to the subsidized resource and µ ∈ (0, 1) denotes
potentially diminishing returns in the subsidized resource. In the nested special case where
the subsidized resource is food, rather than farming inputs, we set µ = 1 and Ais = 1 for all
households (and thus start by abstracting away from a case in which there is a productive
response to nutrition – we relax this assumption later).
   We assume that households share a common homothetic, CRRA utility function defined
over total income:
                                            (yi + ei )1−ρ
                                       ui =
                                                1−ρ
with ρ > 0, 6= 1 and where ei is the income that household i gets in addition to the subsidy-
enabled income.
    The aggregate supply of subsidies to the village is denoted by s̄. Under a proxy-mean
test, the subsidies would go to the s̄ households in the village with the lowest PMT score.
In contrast, when allocating subsidies across households within the village, and assuming for
now that there is no ex post redistribution orchestrated by the chief, the chief chooses the
subsidy levels si so as to maximize the weighted sum of villagers’ utility:

                                     X      (Ais sµi + eˆi )1−ρ
                                         ωi                                                (1)
                                                  1−ρ

subject to
                                           X
                                                 si = s̄
                                             i

In equation 1, eˆi is the income that the village chief expects household i to have at the time


                                                 20
the subsidy benefits are realized, and ωi is the relative welfare weight of household i. Since
chiefs do not face reelection incentives and have limited accountability (see section 2.1), the
relative welfare weight of a household may not reflect its role in the political process as in
earlier models (Bardhan and Mookherjee, 2000, 2003, 2006) but may instead depend on the
preferences of the chief (e.g. if the chief favors his kin, the relative welfare weight of kin will
be higher).
    While êi could be endogenous, we assume that the chief can take the households’ best
response distribution of eˆi as given when maximizing the objective function shown in 1.
    Taking the first order conditions for input subsidies (s =f ert) for two households i and
j yields:
                                                                              −ρ
               ωi (Ai f ertµi + êi )−ρ Ai f ertµ−1
                                                i   = ω j   A j f ert µ
                                                                      j + ê j     Aj f ertµ−1
                                                                                           j   (2)

   For food subsidies, where A = 1 and µ = 1 for all households, we have an analogous but
simplified expression:

                              ωi (f oodi + êi )−ρ = ωj (f oodj + êj )−ρ                      (3)

   Taking the ratio of 2 over 3, the welfare weights cancel and we obtain:
                                                                    −ρ
                  (Ai f ertµi + êi )−ρ Ai f ertµ−1
                                                i
                                                      Aj f ertµj + êj    Aj f ertµ−1
                                                                                  j
                                         −ρ         =                       −ρ                 (4)
                          (f oodi + êi )                    (f oodj + êj )
    From this expression we can derive the relationship between a household’s productivity
parameter Ai and the difference in value between the fertilizer and the food subsidy that that
household receives (f erti − f oodi ) . In Figure A4, we plot that relationship setting µ = 0.9
and either ρ = 0.5 or ρ = 1.2. The relationship is positive: as the returns to fertilizer
increase, a household receives relatively more fertilizer subsidies than food subsidies. The
intuition here is the following: if productivity considerations matter, then if a household has
a higher return to the fertilizer subsidy than average, then that household should be relatively
more favored when it comes to the input subsidy than for the food subsidy. Unsurprisingly,
when the utility function is very concave (ρ = 1.2 ), the impacts of productive efficiency
considerations is considerably muted, since increases in the resources of the already better
off have lower value.
    This leads us to the prediction we can test in the data:

Prediction If chiefs take into consideration productive efficiency when allocating farm-
ing subsidies, d (f erti − f oodi ) /dAi > 0. Namely, the higher the return to fertilizer for a
household, the higher the gap between fertilizer and food subsidies received by that household.



                                                  21
  Below we show that this prediction holds under a number of extensions to the basic
model.

Allowing chiefs to orchestrate transfers As shown in Table 1 Panel C, there is a
significant amount of transfers between households within the village. In the presence of a
redistribution instrument, the chief’s objective function would be modified as follows: the
chief now chooses the sets of subsidies si and transfers ti so as to maximize:

                                         X        (Ai sµi + ti + êi )1−ρ
                                               ωi
                                           i              1−ρ

subject to
                                                    X
                                                          si = s̄
                                                     i
                                                    X
                                                          ti = 0
                                                      i


where ti is the net ex-post income transfer received by household i, which can be either
negative or positive.
    It is evident that redistribution will allow chiefs to target productivity more than the
autarkic case. Thus the more rdistribution is possible, the greater the optimal wedge between
the fertilizer and the food subsidy a given household receives. In the extreme case in which
income is fully pooled, the objective function of the chief can be rewritten as max i βi (Ai sµi ).
                                                                                        P

In this case, the allocation of fertilizer subsidies will be entirely driven by productive efficiency
since redistribution will happen ex post.20

Productive response to better nutrition It is possible that food subsidies increase
productivity for very poor households due to improved nutrition (Strauss, 1986). Such a
nutrition-productivity link would not change the prediction. To see this, note that allow-
ing for the efficiency of an hour worked to increase with food subsidies implies a negative
correlation between the relative productivity of inputs and the relative productivity of food,
  20
     The two subsidies we study could be complementary: the input subsidy as a growth instrument and
the food subsidy as a redistribution instrument. This is an interesting insight which suggests that the
introduction of the food subsidy may lead to an increase in the extent to which the input subsidy can be
used by chiefs as a growth instrument going forward. Note that this does not invalidate our test: since
the food allocation at any point in time should be based on the pareto weight and current consumption –
irrespective of whether the current consumption level was secured through enhanced yields in the previous
period thanks to inputs subsidies or not – relative pareto weights can still be backed out from jointly observing
the food allocation and current consumption, as we do. Also, in our data, the food subsidy was announced
after the 2012 input subsidy allocation had been decided.




                                                          22
given the complementarity between farm inputs and efficient labor units. This increases
d (f ert − f ood) /dA.

Price effects In many African countries, rural economies are poorly connected to markets
and thus local prices may be responsive to local output. If so, allocating subsidies to the
most productive may reduce prices by increasing output. Since 90% of farmers in our sample
are net buyers of grain (in other words, they consume more grain than they produce), such
a price effect would translate into a positive income effect for most villagers and thereby
increase welfare. This increases d (f ert − f ood) /dA for any ρ because allocating inputs to
households with higher returns increases the welfare of the rest of the village through lower
prices.


5.2    Results
To test the prediction, we need to exploit cross-sectional variation in A, the household (farm)
specific productivity of fertilizer. This information was not collected as part of the savings
project (Dupas et al., 2017a) that generated our core dataset, so we collected this data in
the fifth survey round conducted in the summer 2014. Due to budget constraints this survey
was done with only a random subset of households in each village, so the sample size for
this analysis is about 1/3 of the initial sample size. In the survey, we asked respondents
to estimate the output they would get on their land both with and without fertilizer. We
show these means in panel C of Table 1, and we plot the distribution of the reported gain in
total output in Panel B of Figure A1. There is substantial heterogeneity in these reported
gains from input use. What drives it? Table A8 examines correlates of yield increases
with inputs. We regress the log yield increase on log acres and other observables. We find
that yield increases are correlated with many variables, including household demographics
(yield increases are increasing in the age of the head of household), education, log assets, and
household size (though this is not statistically significant). We expect that these are the types
of proxies that the chief may use to allocate subsidies, in addition to other characteristics
that are unobservable to us, such as land quality. Also of note is that the correlation between
estimated production gains from using fertilizer are and our measure of neediness, PCF, is
fairly weak (Panel C of Figure A1). We also find no systematic differences by kinship status
(Table 1 Panel C, column 3, and Table A8).
    To test for productive efficiency targeting, in Table 4 we regress the value of the fertilizer
and food subsidies received, as well as their gap (f erti − f oodi ), on the log of reported
gains in output when using fertilizer. We find clear evidence in favor of targeting based
on productive efficiency: the value of the input subsidy received increases significantly with


                                               23
the reported gains from fertilizer use. The food subsidy, by contrast, is not correlated with
gains. When we look at our primary outcome – the gap betwen the two – we find that the
gap increases significantly with the gain from fertilizer, as predicted by the model. In Figure
2 we plot the estimated relationship between the subsidy values and the gain when using
a quadratic instead of log. The positive slope for input subsidy values under the chief’s
allocation is very clear, compared to the flat relationship for food subsidies.
    These results are in sharp contrast with those for the counterfactual PMT distribution, in
which the value of the subsidy is actually (insignificantly) declining in the gains to fertilizer
(because of a negative correlation between returns and assets). In that case, the PMT
undermines the effect of the subsidy on total farm output at the village level. In contrast
with the chief’s allocation, the gap between fertilizer and food subsidy values does not
significantly increase with reported gains from fertilizer under the PMT allocation (Table 4,
column 6).21
    Overall, the results in Table 4 and Figure 2 are consistent with chiefs taking productive
efficiency into consideration when allocating input subsidies – something that the PMT
cannot do since information on who has more to gain from fertilizer use is not something
that can be elicited in an incentive-compatible way if people expect their subsidy package
to depend on it. The magnitude of the effects is not trivial: a household with an extra log
point gain from fertilizer gets about 6.5 more kgs of input subsidies under the chiefs than
under the PMT.
    Chiefs appear to have substantial power to enforce redistribution (as evidenced by the
fact that they control how subsidy packages are shared among villages). This redistributive
power may be what allows chiefs to use the input subsidies as a growth instrument, bringing
their village closer to the production possibility frontier, and then enforcing sharing of food
after harvest. Interestingly, allocating input subsidies based on returns is not what they are
asked to do. The official guidelines of the inputs subsidy program is to target the poor, and
thus when asked chiefs report targeting the poor rather than taking productivity into account
(see Table A3) – even though our careful analysis of their allocation decision suggests that
they do.
  21
    The analysis in Table 4 only controls for log farm size, log PCF, and relation to chief in this regression:
we omit other household controls such as demographics, since these controls themselves are predictors of log
gains as shown in Table A8. Including all other controls attenuates coefficients (see Table A9), causing the
relationship between yield increases and the value of the input subsidy to lose significance at conventional
levels (p=0.16). However, the gap in coefficients on log gains between the chief and conterfactual PMT
allocation remains large, and for our primary outcome – the value gap between the fertilizer and food
subsidies, the object of the model’s prediction – the coefficient on log gains remains large and significant at
5% for the chief’s allocation and small and insignificant under the PMT.




                                                      24
5.3    Supportive evidence
Is information on the relative productivity of various potential beneficiaries of the input
subsidy embedded in the chief, or does it rest in the people themselves? People who have
high value for the input subsidy could wait in line more, lobby more or protest more if they
don’t get the subsidy, such that the allocation of the chief ultimately favors them in a way
that looks as if the chief was himself aware of the heterogeneity.
    Disentangling whether the information rests in the chief or can be elicited in an incentive-
compatible way from the people is interesting, since a PMT scheme could possibly achieve
some level of productive efficiency if the lobbying made to the chief was made to the outside
government agent coming to the village to distribute the subsidy vouchers based on the PMT.
Yet the outside government agent would not be able to know the level of redistribution in the
village; that is, she would not be able to gauge the “poverty mistargeting” cost of responding
to the lobbying and targeting based on productive efficiency.
    To provide descriptive evidence on this question, in the 2014 survey, we asked respondents
if they had ever lobbied the chief to obtain subsidies. Only nine percent of respondents
reported lobbying for input subsidies, and 4% reported lobbying for food subsidies (Table
A3). The likelihood of having lobbied is not positively correlated with returns to fertilizer,
however (see Table 4, column 7). In the survey of chiefs also conducted in 2014, we asked
chiefs a number of questions about what they could observe about households, which we
present in Appendix Table A10. We find that 86% of chiefs report that they can easily
categorize farms in their villag in terms of productivity of inputs. Chiefs also report that
they know who works harder, who has money for inputs, and whose returns are highest.
While descriptive, these responses suggest significant local knowledge on the part of chiefs.


6     Conclusion
Traditional leaders, often known as “chiefs,” have maintained a significant amount of de
facto if not de jure power in sub-Saharan Africa. Possibly owing to the weakness of local
governance in most of the continent, chiefs are commonly involved in the decisions of how
to allocate government resources. One prominent type of resource is subsidies. Developing
country governments allocate an important portion of their national budget to subsidies
targeted at the poor, and it is common for chiefs to be asked to identify who should be
eligible for such subsidies. Do chiefs identify the right beneficiaries? Previous work on this
question concluded that there was widespread elite capture (Dorward et al., 2008; Kilic et al.,
2013). These conclusions are based on evidence that “connected” households are more likely




                                              25
to receive subsidies, and that household assets measures do not strongly predict subsidy
receipt. We show that such evidence may not directly speak to the issue of poverty-targeting
in environments where assets are a poor predictor of need, and where the subsidized items
are productive inputs.
    Using detailed food expenditure and shocks data to better proxy for neediness, we show
that since chiefs’ kin are no better off than non-kin, the nepotism that is evident in the data
does not imply greater poverty mistargeting. Chiefs do make more errors than a perfectly
implemented PMT scheme would, but the gap reduces over time as the information used for
the PMT becomes less accurate due to frequent shocks, while chiefs appear able to target
based on such shocks.
    Importantly, chiefs also appear to allocate input subsidies to farmers with larger returns
to input use. This result underscores how a naive measure of targeting based solely on
the neediness of households (even when needinesss is well measured) may understate the
poverty-alleviation impacts of the allocation: when ex post redistribution is possible through
informal transfers as in the context considered, targeting input subsidies based on productive
efficiency (i.e. using input subsidies as a growth instrument) can have a larger if indirect
impact on welfare than poverty-targeting. While this result is for one particular subsidy
program in Malawi, the results have important policy implications because most of the
inputs subsidized by governments are productive inputs (farming inputs, health inputs) that
have heterogeneous returns.




                                              26
References
 [1] Acemoglu, Daron, Tristan Reed and James A. Robinson (2014). “Chiefs - Economic
        Development and Elite Control of Civil Society in Sierra Leone.” Journal of Political
        Economy 122 (2): 319-368.
 [2] Alatas, Vivi, Abhijit Banerjee, Rema Hanna, Benjamin A. Olken, Ririn Purnamasari,
        and Matthew Wai-Poi (2013). “Does Elite Capture Matter? Local Elites and Tar-
        geted Welfare Programs in Indonesia.” NBER Working Paper #18798.
 [3] Alatas, Vivi, Abhijit Banerjee, Rema Hanna, Benjamin A. Olken, and Julia Tobias
        (2012). “Targeting the Poor: Evidence from a Field Experiment in Indonesia.” Amer-
        ican Economic Review, 104 (2):1206-1240.
 [4] Anderson, Siwan, Patrick Francois, and Ashok Kotwal (2015). “Clientelism in Indian
       villages.” American Economic Review 105 (6): 1780-1816.
 [5] Baltzer, Kenneth Thomas, and Henrik Hansen (2011). Agricultural input subsidies in
        sub-Saharan Africa. Ministry of Foreign Affairs of Denmark.
 [6] Bardhan, Pranab (2002). “Decentralization of Governance and Development.” Journal
        of Economic Perspectives, 16(4): 185–205.
 [7] Bardhan, Pranab and Dilip Mookherjee (2000). “Capture and Governance at Local and
        National Levels.” American Economic Review 90 (2): 135–139.
 [8] Bardhan, Pranab and Dilip Mookherjee (2005). “Decentralizing antipoverty program
        delivery in developing countries.” Journal of Public Economics 89: 675–704.
 [9] Bardhan, Pranab and Dilip Mookherjee (2006). “Pro-poor targeting and accountabil-
        ity of local governments in West Bengal.” Journal of Development Economics 79:
        303–327.
[10] Beegle, Kathleen, Emanuela Galasso and Jessica Goldberg (2015). “Direct and Indirect
        Effects of Malawi‘s Public Works Program on Food Security.” Mimeo, University of
        Maryland.
[11] Besley, Timothy J. (1990). “Means Testing versus Universal Provision in Poverty Alle-
        viation Programmes.” Economica 57 (225): 119-29.
[12] Cammack, Diana, Edge Kanyongolo, and Tam O’Neil (2009). ‘Town Chiefs’ in Malawi.”
       Africa Power and Politics Series. London, UK: Africa Power and Politics Pro-
       gramme, Overseas Development Institute.
[13] Chasuka, Michael, Chiweza, Asiyati, and Mercy Chikapa-Jamali (2014) “Public Partici-
       pation in Local Councils in Malawi in the Absence of Local Elected Representatives-


                                             27
        Political Eliticism or Pluralism?” Journal of Asian and African Studies Vol. 49(6)
        705 –720.
[14] Chirwa, E., Matita, M., Dorward, A. (2010).” Factors Influencing Access to Agricultural
        Input Subsidy Coupons in Malawi.” Future Agricultures Consortium, Brighton, Sus-
        sex
[15] Chirwa, Ephraim and Andrew Dorward (2013) Agricultural Input Subsidies. The Recent
        Malawi Experience. Oxford, Oxford University Press.
[16] Chirwa, Wiseman Chijere (2014) “Malawi Democracy and Political Participation” Open
        Society Initiative for Southern Africa.
[17] Coady, David; Grosh, Margaret; Hoddinott, John (2004). Targeting of transfers in
        developing countries : Review of lessons and experience. Washington, DC: World
        Bank.
[18] Cohen, Jessica, and Pascaline Dupas (2010). “Free Distribution or Cost-Sharing? Ev-
        idence from a Randomized Malaria Prevention Experiment.” Quarterly Journal of
        Economics 125 (1): 1–45.
[19] Deaton, Angus (1997). The analysis of household surveys: a microeconometric approach
        to development policy. World Bank Publications.
[20] Deaton, Angus, and Salman Zaidi (2002). Guidelines for constructing consumption ag-
        gregates for welfare analysis. Vol. 135. World Bank Publications.
[21] Dizon-Ross, Rebecca, Pascaline Dupas and Jonathan Robinson (2016). “Governance
        and the Effectiveness of Public Health Subsidies: Evidence from Ghana, Kenya and
        Uganda.” Unpublished.
[22] Dorward, A., E. Chirwa, V. Kelly, T.S. Jayne, R. Slater, and D. Boughton. (2008).
        “Evaluation of the 2006/07 Agricultural Input Subsidy Programme, Malawi.” Final
        Report. London, England: School of Oriental and African Studies
[23] Dorward A, Chirwa E., Matita M., Mhango W., Mvula P., Taylor E. and K. Thorne
        (2013). “Evaluation of the 2012/13 farm input subsidy programme, Malawi.”
[24] Dupas, Pascaline, Dean Karlan, Jonathan Robinson, and Diego Ubfal (2017a). “Banking
       the Unbanked? Evidence from three countries.” NBER Working Paper No. 22463.
[25] Dupas, Pascaline, Anthony Keats, and Jonathan Robinson (2017b). “The Effect of
       Savings Accounts on Interpersonal Financial Relationships: Evidence from a Field
       Experiment in Rural Kenya” NBER Working Paper No. 21339.




                                            28
[26] Eggen, Øyvind (2011). “Chiefs and everyday governance: Parallel state organisations
        in Malawi.” Journal of Southern African Studies 37 (2): 313-331.
[27] Galasso, Emanuela, and Martin Ravallion (2005). “Decentralized targeting of an anti-
        poverty program”. Journal of Public Economics 89: 705–727.
[28] Hussein, Mustafa Kennedy (2005). Good governance and the new local government sys-
       tem in Malawi: challenges and prospects. Doctoral dissertation, University of Jo-
       hannesburg.
[29] Kilic, Talip, Edward Whitney and Paul Winters (2013) “Decentralized Beneficiary Tar-
         geting in Large-Scale Development Programs: Insights from the Malawi Farm Input
         Subsidy Program.” Policy Research Working Paper 6713. World Bank.
[30] Ligon, Ethan (2015). “Estimating Household Neediness from Disaggregate Expendi-
        tures.” CUDARE working paper.
[31] Lihoma, Paul (2012). The impact of administrative change on record keeping in Malawi.
        Doctoral dissertation, University of Glasgow.
[32] Logan, Carolyn (2011). “The roots of resilience: Exploring popular support for African
        Traditional Authorities”. Afrobarometer Working Paper No. 128.
[33] Malawi Government (1998) Local Government Act.
[34] Malawi Ministry of Agriculture and Food Security (MoAFS) (2009). “2009-2010 farm
       input subsidy program implementation guidelines.” Lilongwe: MoAFS
[35] Meyer, Bruce and James Sullivan (2012). “Identifying the Disadvantaged: Official
       Poverty, Consumption Poverty, and the New Supplemental Poverty Measure.” Jour-
       nal of Economic Perspectives 26 (3): 111-135.
[36] Michalopoulos, Stelios, and Elias Papaioannou (2013). “Pre-Colonial Ethnic Institutions
        and Contemporary African Development.” Econometrica 81 (1): 113-152.
[37] Niehaus, Paul, Antonia Attanassova, Mariane Bertrand and Sendhil Mullainathan
        (2013). “Targeting with Agents.” American Economic Journal: Economic Policy
        5 (1): 206-238.
[38] Olken, Benjamin A. (2005). “Revealed Community Equivalence Scales.” Journal of Pub-
        lic Economics, 89 (2-3): 545–566.
[39] Patel, Nandini, Richard Tambulasi, Bright Molande and Andrew Mpesi (2007). “Consol-
        idating Democratic Governance in southern Africa: Malawi”. EISA REsearch Report
        No. 33. EISA, Johannesburg, South Africa.




                                            29
[40] Peters, Pauline (2010). Our daughters inherit our land, but our sons use their wives’
        fields”: matrilineal-matrilocal land tenure and the New Land Policy in Malawi. Jour-
        nal of Eastern African Studies, 4:1, 179-199.
[41] Reserve Bank of Malawi (RBM) (2012) Financial and Economic Review. Reserve Bank
        of Malawi, volume 44, number 2.
[42] Reserve Bank of Malawi (RBM) (2014) Financial and Economic Review. Reserve Bank
        of Malawi, volume 46, number 2.
[43] Stoeffler, Quentin, Bradford Mills, and Carlo Del Ninno (2016). “Reaching the Poor:
        Cash Transfer Program Targeting in Cameroon.” World Development 83: 244-263.
[44] Strauss, John (1986). “Does better nutrition raise farm productivity?” Journal of Po-
        litical Economy 94 (2): 297-320.
[45] USAID (2012) Inadequate funding for humanitarian assistance programs could result in
       Crisis and Emergency-level food security outcomes in 2012/13. Malawi Food Security
       Outlook.
[46] World Bank (2015). Development Indicators Database. Accessed February 26, 2015.
       http://data.worldbank.org/indicator
[47] Wiggins, Steve and Jonathan Brooks (2010. “The Use of Input Subsidies in Developing
       Countries.” OECD working paper.




                                            30
Table 1. Summary Statistics on Households in the sample
                                                                            (1)      (2)      (3)        (4)          (5)           (6)
                                                                                               Difference         Correlation   Correlation
                                                                          Overall   Std.     kin vs. non-kin       between       between
                                                                           Mean     Dev.                Std.        rounds        rounds
                                                                                             Diff.
Panel A. Time-Invariant Baseline Variables                                                              Err.         (all)      (kin only)

Related to chief ("Kin")                                                    0.27        -
Mud/dirt floor                                                              0.90        -      0.02      0.02
Thatch roof                                                                 0.77        -      0.01      0.02
Has electricity in dwelling                                                0.006        -     0.002     0.004
Reads or writes chichewa                                                    0.58        -     -0.07    0.029*
Years of education                                                         4.86       3.54    -0.50    0.205*
Widowed or divorced female                                                  0.29        -     0.03      0.03
Owns land                                                                   0.97        -      0.03     0.01*
Household size                                                              4.57      2.07    -0.06     0.12
Number of children                                                          2.49      1.72    -0.06     0.10
Respondent age                                                             40.14     17.09     0.50     0.99
If yes, acres of land owned                                                 2.36     1.96      0.19     0.11
Value of durable assets owned (USD)                                        98.04    384.06   -11.27     22.32
Value of animals owned (USD)                                               36.76    105.51    -2.43     6.15

Number of households                                                       1559


Panel B. Time-varying Variables
                                          1
Total expenditures per capita (monthly)                                    9.66     10.85    -0.476     0.313        0.45          0.43
Total food expenditures per capita (monthly eq.)                           6.80      7.77    -0.349     0.224        0.35          0.35
PCF: Total non-staple food expenditures per capita (monthly eq)            2.71      3.45    -0.186   0.099**        0.38          0.35
Shocks
    Experienced drought or flood (past 3 months)                           0.28       -      0.005      0.013        -0.33         -0.33
    Experienced cattle death or crop disease (past 3 months)               0.20       -      0.013      0.012        0.04          0.06
    Respondent missed work due to illness (past month)                     0.26       -      -0.002     0.015        0.16          0.11
    Other household member was sick (past month)                           0.69       -      0.007      0.013        0.16          0.18
Report being worried about having enough food to eat (past month)          0.72       -      -0.023     0.012        0.14          0.13
Share of days with enough food to eat                                      0.67              0.004      0.016        0.19          0.18
Informal redistribution
    Received transfers from other villagers in past 90 days                0.58              -0.017     0.014        0.11          0.14
    Made transfers to other villagers in past 90 days                      0.25              -0.003     0.013        0.07          0.06

Number of observations                                                     6236
Number of households                                                       1559

Panel C. Reported returns to fertilizer (2014 Survey)
Self-reported total production without fertilizer use (50 kg bags)          3.87     2.62     0.25      0.25
Self-reported total production with fertilizer use (50 kg bags)            18.48     9.41     0.42      0.87
Gain in production from using fertilizer (50 kg bags)                      14.50     8.05     0.20      0.76
Gain in production from using fertilizer (50 kg bags), per acre             7.83     4.92     0.20      0.47
Number of households                                                       532
Note: All monetary amounts are in US dollars. Years of education is highest in the household (husband or wife).
1
Expenditures are winsorized at the 99th percentile.




                                                                     31
Table 2: Targeting errors: Comparison of chief and PMT allocations with consumption-based allocation
                                                                             (1)                           (2)                           (3)
                                                                    2011 Input Subsidy            2012 Input Subsidy            2012 Food Subsidy

Percentage of population receiving subsidy                                  0.753                        0.812                         0.586
Percentage of villages in which 0% received subsidy                         0.000                        0.000                         0.049
Percentage of villages in which 100% received                               0.098                        0.148                         0.049
If between 0 and 100%
    Simple error rate under following allocation mechanism:1
     Chief (True allocation)                                                0.161                        0.140                         0.151
     PMT (Counterfactual)                                                   0.108                        0.104                         0.141
     PMT (Counterfactual) based on IHS3 formula                             0.124                        0.116                         0.145
     Random (Counterfactual)                                                0.153                        0.126                         0.162
       P-val   Chiefs = PMT                                                 <.001                        0.003                         0.365
       P-val   Chiefs = PMT (IHS3)                                          0.002                        0.031                         0.585
       P-val   Chiefs = Random                                              0.461                        0.229                         0.275
       P-val   PMT = Random                                                 <.001                        <.001                         <.001
    Mean squared error in log consumption under following allocation mechanism:2
     Chief (True allocation)                                        0.497                                0.269                         0.375
     PMT (Counterfactual)                                           0.199                                0.126                         0.193
     PMT (Counterfactual) based on IHS3 formula                     0.282                                0.154                         0.250
     Random (Counterfactual)                                        0.543                                0.808                         1.084
      P-val Chiefs = PMT                                            <.001                                0.005                         0.057
      P-val Chiefs = PMT (IHS3)                                     0.439                                <.001                         <.001
      P-val Chiefs = Random                                         <.001                                <.001                         <.001
      P-val PMT = Random                                            <.001                                <.001                         <.001
Notes: IHS3 = Malawi Third Integrated Household Survey, a representative survey conducted by Malawi's National Statistical Office from March
2010 to March 2011.
1
 Error rate is defined as the percentage of people who received the subsidy and shouldn't have. Since the total number of beneficiaries is fixed, this
error rate is equal to the percentage of people who didn't receive the subsidy and should have.
2
Mean squared error is calculated as deviations from the log PCF threshold.


                                                                           32
Table 3. Multivariate correlates of Subsidy Receipt
                                                                              (1)         (2)         (3)        (4)         (5)          (6)          (7)         (8)
                                                                                    Actual (Chief's) allocations                   Counterfactual PMT allocation
                                                                                                                                        Value                    Value
                                                                                    Value             Value              Eligible for (USD) of Eligible for (USD) of
                                                                        Got input (USD) of Got food (USD) of                input       input         food        food
                                                                         subsidy    input  subsidy     food                subsidy     subsidy      subsidy     subsidy
                                                                                   subsidy           subsidy             under PMT      under     under PMT      under
                                                                                                                                       PMTa                      PMTa
Log PCF (total non-staple food expenditures per capita in past month)         -0.01        -0.99*   -0.03**    -2.12*     -0.04***    -5.54***     -0.04***     -4.08***
                                                                             (0.01)        (0.59)    (0.01)    (1.21)      (0.01)      (0.50)       (0.01)       (0.77)
Time-Invariant Baseline Variables
Related to chief                                                           0.04            3.24*    0.12***   10.87***       -0.01        1.87         0.04        2.83
                                                                          (0.02)          (1.71)     (0.03)     (2.89)      (0.02)       (1.19)      (0.03)       (1.75)
Log (acres farmed)                                                       0.04**          5.58***       0.02       1.9     -0.05***     -6.00***    -0.09***     -9.24***
                                                                          (0.02)          (1.14)     (0.02)     (1.48)      (0.02)       (1.05)      (0.01)       (0.93)
Years of education (divided by 10)                                         -0.14          -16.03       -0.1     -22.52       -0.13        9.08        -0.12        -8.24
                                                                          (0.31)         (22.19)     (0.31)    (20.15)      (0.19)      (20.59)      (0.31)      (16.13)
Widowed or divorced female                                                 0.02             2.7       -0.06      -3.38    -0.35***    -29.35***    -0.29***    -30.12***
                                                                          (0.03)          (2.66)     (0.05)     (4.10)      (0.03)       (2.16)      (0.04)       (3.19)
Household size (divided by 10)                                             0.02             0.52        0         1.94      0.05*       9.92***     0.12***    15.90***
                                                                          (0.02)          (1.60)     (0.03)     (2.88)      (0.03)       (1.67)      (0.03)       (2.28)
Respondent age: 2nd quartile (26-35)                                      0.09*            6.86       -0.04      -0.69     0.44***    47.01***      0.53***     72.39***
                                                                          (0.05)          (4.26)     (0.05)     (5.55)      (0.07)       (5.06)      (0.08)       (7.98)
Respondent age: 3rd quartile (36-51)                                     0.12***        8.78***      0.06*        4.32        0.05        1.89      0.07**         0.16
                                                                          (0.03)          (2.41)     (0.03)     (3.04)      (0.03)       (1.46)      (0.03)       (2.07)
Respondent age: highest quartile (over 52)                               0.17***        13.20***    0.12**    11.34***     0.09**       6.40***    0.11***        5.38*
                                                                          (0.04)          (2.90)     (0.05)     (3.96)      (0.04)       (2.05)      (0.04)       (2.85)
Log (value of animals owned)                                             0.21***        15.00***    0.24***   22.01***    0.11***     14.47***      0.20***     23.47***
                                                                          (0.04)          (2.80)     (0.05)     (4.33)      (0.04)       (2.21)      (0.04)       (2.89)
Shocks
Experienced drought or flood (past 3 months)                                 0             1.17*     -0.01      0.74      -0.03***    -2.05***      -0.02**     -2.52***
                                                                          (0.01)           (0.67)   (0.01)     (0.88)      (0.01)      (0.57)        (0.01)      (0.80)
Experienced cattle death or crop disease (past 3 months)                  0.04**            -0.85   0.08**     5.45*        0.04        -0.38         0.03        1.93
                                                                          (0.02)           (1.50)   (0.03)     (2.74)      (0.03)      (1.56)        (0.03)      (2.59)

Number of Observations                                                       3094       3043      1559       1559           3118        3043         1559           1559
Number of Households                                                         1558       1558      1559       1559           1559        1558         1559           1559
Number of Villages                                                            61          61        61        61             61          61            61            61
Mean of dependent variable                                                   0.78       50.47      0.59      42.03          0.78        50.47         0.59          42.03
Note: Regressions for input subsidies pool years 2011 and 2012 and control   for the year. Omitted age category is less than 26. Standard errors clustered at the   village
level. All regressions include village fixed effects.
a
 Counterfactual quantities have the same distribution as actual quantities.
* significant at 10%; ** significant at 5%; *** significant at 1%                     33
Table 4. Productive efficiency
                                                                          (1)            (2)         (3)           (4)           (5)          (6)            (7)
                                                                          Actual (Chief's) allocations            Counterfactual PMT allocation
                                                                                                                                                             Ever
                                                                                                                                                           Lobbied
                                                                                        Value                 Value (USD) Value (USD) Value gap             Chief
                                                                     Value (USD)                  Value gap
                                                                                        (USD)                   of input    of food     (input-            to try to
                                                                       of input                    (input-
                                                                                       of food                  subsidy     subsidy   food) under         get Input
                                                                       subsidy                      food)
                                                                                       subsidy                under PMTa under PMTa      PMT               Subsidy

Log (gain in farm production from fertilizer use)                        4.04**           0.23     8.16**          -2.49         -3.97        2.35          0.000
                                                                         (1.70)         (2.93)     (3.44)         (2.54)        (3.28)       (2.83)        (0.025)
Log (total non-staple food expenditures per capita in past month)         0.01           -0.58      0.23        -11.46***     -10.92***       1.87          0.010
                                                                         (0.73)         (1.57)     (2.14)         (1.06)        (1.96)       (1.71)        (0.012)
Time-Invariant Baseline Variables
Related to chief                                                          2.34         10.74***     -7.27        7.34***        7.87*        -0.96          0.030
                                                                         (2.95)         (4.02)     (5.37)         (2.48)       (4.17)       (3.82)         (0.028)
Log (acres farmed)                                                       6.14**          -1.28       6.28          -2.87      -7.23***      3.86**          0.000
                                                                         (2.58)         (2.87)     (3.77)         (2.45)       (2.71)       (1.84)         (0.027)

Number of Observations                                                         1048          530           529              1048    530          529            530
Number of Households                                                            530          530           529               530    530          529            530
Number of Villages                                                               61           61            61                61     61           61             61
Mean of dependent variable                                                     51.83        37.78         11.94            52.96   40.53         9.26          0.089
Note: Sample restricted to households surveyed in 2014 and asked about perceived returns to fertilizer use. Regressions for input subsidies pool years 2011 and 2012
and control for the year. 2011 input allocation information comes from 2011 survey. 2012 input and food allocations information comes from 2012 survey. Omitted age
category is less than 26. Standard errors clustered at the village level. All regressions control for village fixed effects.
* significant at 10%; ** significant at 5%; *** significant at 1%




                                                                                  34
                          Figure 1. Comparing chiefs' allocation to counterfactual allocations


                         2011 Input Subsidy                  2012 Input Subsidy                    2012 Food Subsidy




                                                                                         1
               1




                                                   1




                                                                                         .9
               .9




                                                   .9
                                                   .8




                                                                                         .8
               .8




                                                                                         .7
               .7




                                                   .7




                                                                                         .6
               .6




                                                   .6




                                                                                         .5
               .5




                                                   .5




                                                                                         .4
               .4




                                                   .4




                                                                                         .3
               .3




                                                   .3




                                                                                         .2
               .2




                                                   .2




                                                                                         .1
               .1




                                                   .1




                                                                                         0
               0




                                                   0

                    .2     .4      .6    .8    1        .2     .4      .6    .8    1          .2     .4      .6    .8    1
                         Quantile of PMT score               Quantile of PMT score                 Quantile of PMT score


                                                             Chief's allocation
                         2011 Input Subsidy                  2012 Input Subsidy                    2012 Food Subsidy
               1




                                                   1




                                                                                         1
                                                             Hypothetical allocations:
               .9




                                                   .9




                                                                                         .9
                                                             Based on PCF
               .8




                                                   .8




                                                                                         .8
                                                             Based on PMT (BDR data)
               .7




                                                   .7




                                                                                         .7
               .6




                                                   .6




                                                                                         .6
               .5




                                                   .5




                                                                                         .5
               .4




                                                   .4




                                                                                         .4
               .3




                                                   .3




                                                                                         .3
               .2




                                                   .2




                                                                                         .2
               .1




                                                   .1




                                                                                         .1
               0




                                                   0




                                                                                         0




                    .2     .4     .6    .8    1         .2     .4     .6    .8     1          .2     .4     .6    .8    1
                           Quantile of PCF                     Quantile of PCF                       Quantile of PCF


                                                             Chief's allocation

                                                             Hypothetical allocations:
                                                             Based on PCF
                                                             Based on PMT (BDR data)


Notes: See main text section 4.2. The PMT formula is obtained using 2011 data. The PCF is contemporaneous of the subsidy
allocation decision. The chief allocation is the allocation observed, made by chiefs. Because the share of households that receive
subsidies vary across villages, the threshold PMT (PCF) score for eligibility varies across villages, which explains why the
allocations by PMT (PCF) quantile are not either 1 or 0.




                                                                     35
                           Figure 2. Productive Efficiency of Chief's Allocation: Polynomial Estimates


                                                               Inputs                                                                            Food
                                         70                                                                               70



                                         60                                                                               60
             Input subsidy value (USD)




                                                                                               Food subsidy value (USD)
                                         50                                                                               50



                                         40                                                                               40



                                         30                                                                               30



                                         20                                                                               20


                                               0         10       20        30          40                                      0         10       20        30          40
                                              Extra output(50Kg bags) when using fertilizer                                    Extra output(50Kg bags) when using fertilizer


                                                           Chief allocation                                               Counterfactual PMT allocation
           95% confidence intervals



Notes: 2012 data. Estimates from OLS regressions with second-order polynomial in the variable shown on the
x-axis as well as controls for PCF, log land size, and chief kinship.




                                                                                              36
Table A1. Summary statistics on villages and chiefs in the sample
                                                                                           (1)         (2)
                                                                                           Villages (N=61)
                                                                                          Mean         SD
Panel A. Characteristics of Villages
Village population                                                                        3169         4149
Number of households in village                                                            309          333
Number of family clans in village                                                           63          186
Total acres of customary land in village                                                  7640         7294


                                                                                         Village Chiefs (N=79)
                                                                                          Mean         SD
Panel B. Characteristics of Chiefs
Age                                                                                       53.96       14.99
Male                                                                                      0.82
Years of education                                                                        5.25         3.54
Religion
   Christian                                                                               0.61
   Muslim                                                                                  0.39

How were you selected to be chief?
  Hereditary                                                                               0.90
  Appointed                                                                                0.09
  Elected                                                                                  0.01

For how many years have you been chief?                                                   13.24       13.23
For how many years have you lived in this village?                                        44.90       17.25
For how many years have you farmed the land you currently farm?                           24.19       14.70
At the time you became chief, was there someone else considered for the position?          0.05
Do you receive a payment (mswahala) from the government?                                   0.89
Have you ever been suspended from your position as village head                            0.01

Describe your responsibilities as village chief
 Solve conflicts among villagers                                                           0.90
 Report to group village headman and traditional authority                                 0.61
 Monitor village projects                                                                  0.56
 Disseminate information to villagers                                                      0.33
 Oversee subsidy programs                                                                  0.20
 Preserve local traditions                                                                 0.14
 Demarcate and supervise use of customary land                                             0.06
 Supervise government laws                                                                 0.01
Notes: Data from surveys conducted from August to October 2014 in the study districts.




                                                       37
Table A2. Chiefs' role in the allocation of subsidies
                                                                                                          (1)              (2)
                                                                                                     Input subsidy    Food subsidy
Panel A. Surveys of Chiefs in 2014 (N = 79)
Who decides which households in the village will be beneficiaries of the subsidy program?
   Village head (chief) alone                                                                            0.62
   Village Development Committee alone                                                                   0.13
   Village meeting                                                                                       0.13
   District agricultural officer alone                                                                   0.06
   Group village head alone                                                                              0.04
   Chief in consult with others                                                                          0.03

What selection criteria are used to allocate vouchers in your village? (multiple answers possible)
 Neediness                                                                                               0.97             1.00
 Absence of male head                                                                                    0.62             0.54
 Recent negative shocks                                                                                  0.54             0.34
 Child headed households and households taking care of orphans                                           0.24             0.20
 How hard-working the household is                                                                       0.16               -
 Farm size                                                                                               0.11               -
 Elderly, disabled, or chronically ill                                                                   0.05             0.76
 Land quality                                                                                            0.01               -

Panel B. Survey of villagers in 2013 (N = 1,381)
The chief organized a meeting to talk about the program                                                  0.95             0.81
If yes, did you attend the meeting?                                                                      0.82             0.65
At the meeting, was there a discussion about:
 Who should be included in the program?                                                                  0.77             0.81
 Sharing the subsidies (i.e.: who should share with who, how much should be shared)?                     0.75             0.71

Panel C. Survey of villagers in 2014 (N=542)
Who decides which households in the village will be beneficiaries of the subsidy program?
   Village head (chief) alone                                                                            0.49             0.73
   Chief in consult with others                                                                          0.23             0.04
   Village meeting                                                                                       0.15             0.02
   Village Development Committee alone                                                                   0.10             0.09
   District agricultural officer alone                                                                   0.01               -
   NGO alone                                                                                               -              0.08
   Group village head alone                                                                              0.02             0.03
   Other                                                                                                 0.01             0.02

Have you ever asked the village head to give you an input subsidy voucher?                               0.09             0.03
Have you ever complained to the village head about the allocation?                                       0.16             0.05

What selection criteria are used to allocate vouchers in your village?
 Neediness                                                                                               0.71             0.88
 Elderly, disabled, or chronically ill                                                                   0.46             0.75
 Child headed households and households taking care of orphans                                           0.16             0.29
 Absence of male head                                                                                    0.12             0.37
 Recent negative shocks                                                                                  0.10             0.34
 How hard-working the household is                                                                       0.13               -
 Farm size                                                                                               0.01               -
 Households with more children                                                                             -              0.32
 Households with poor land                                                                                 -              0.27
 Households not receiving other subsidies                                                                  -              0.26

Do you think the subsidy is allocated in a good way?
   Very good                                                                                             0.49             0.67
   Somewhat good                                                                                         0.36             0.27
   Not so good                                                                                           0.13             0.05
   Very bad                                                                                              0.02             0.01
What is your definition of a "good" allocation? An allocation that…
... benefits the poorest                                                                                 0.47             0.65
... increases total village production so that there is more food to share                               0.07               -
... rewards those who work hard                                                                          0.03               -
... provides at least something to most households                                                       0.37             0.58
… benefits those not receiving subsidies from other programs                                               -              0.26
On a scale from 1 to 5, how much do you agree with the selection of subsidy beneficiaries?               3.65             3.96
Notes: Panel A and C come from surveys administered in August-October 2014. Panel B comes from a survey administered Feb - May 2013.
                                                                         38
Table A3. Exposure to Subsidy Programs
                                                                                       (1)         (2)
                                                                                      Mean      Std. Dev.
Panel A. Input subsidy
Received input subsidy in 2008                                                         0.58
………………………….……..in 2009                                                                 0.66
………………………….……..in 2010                                                                 0.73
………………………….……..in 2011                                                                 0.75
………………………….……..in 2012                                                                 0.81
If any, kgs of fertilizer received in 2011                                            81.58       26.54
………………………………………………. 2012                                                              64.22       25.47
If any, kgs of seeds received in 2011                                                  5.07       3.44
…………………………………………. 2012                                                                 4.80       3.05
                                             1
If received subsidy, value of 2011 package                                            72.28       24.14
……………………………………….2012 package                                                          58.07       22.68
Received input subsidy all 5 years                                                     0.48
Never received input subsidy                                                           0.10

Sharing (based on 2014 villagers survey, N=504)
 Received voucher and didn't share                                                     0.14
 Received voucher and shared                                                           0.46
 Received share of someone's voucher                                                   0.30
 Didn't receive a voucher or share                                                     0.10

Who decided the voucher would be shared? (Asked of voucher recipients)
   Village Chief                                                                       0.85
   Villagers themselves                                                                0.13
   Other                                                                               0.02

Who decided with whom the voucher would be shared? (Asked of voucher recipients)
   Village Chief                                                                       0.73
   Villagers themselves                                                                0.23
   Other                                                                               0.04

Who decided with whom the voucher would be shared? (Asked of share recipients)
   Village Chief                                                                       0.85
   Villagers themselves                                                                0.09
   Other                                                                               0.06

Panel B. Food Subsidy
Received food subsidy in 2012                                                          0.59
If received subsidy, value of package                                                 72.00       37.40
Received both food and input subsidy in 2012                                           0.53

Sharing (based on 2014 villagers survey, N=504)
Who decided with whom the food would be shared?
   Village Chief                                                                       0.75
   Group Village Chief                                                                 0.03
   Villagers themselves                                                                0.13
   Other                                                                               0.09
Note: All monetary amounts are in US dollars. Exchange rate was roughly 150 MWK to $1 at the time of the
baseline, and it was 300 MWK to $1 in late 2012.
                                                    39
Table TA4. PMT formula
                                                                        (1)                  (2)
                                                                     log PCF             log PAEF
Household size (divided by 10)                                       -4.73***             -3.04***
                                                                       (0.74)               (0.55)
Household size (divided by 10) squared                                1.91***              1.22***
                                                                       (0.48)               (0.42)
Number of children under 5 (divided by 10)                                -                1.23***
                                                                                            (0.34)
Total number of children (divided by 10)                               0.54*                   -
                                                                       (0.32)
Log durable assets                                                    0.40***             0.40***
                                                                       (0.03)              (0.03)
Log animal assets                                                         -                   -

Owns land                                                                -                    -

Owns land * log acres owned                                           0.10**               0.09**
                                                                      (0.04)               (0.04)
Widowed or Divorced Female Head                                      -0.27***                 -
                                                                      (0.07)
Age of respondent (divided by 100)                                       -                    -

Age of respondent (divided by 100) squared                           -1.28***             -1.30***
                                                                      (0.28)               (0.27)
Highest education within household                                   0.05***              0.06***
                                                                      (0.01)               (0.01)
Household head is literate                                               -                    -

Home has mud or dirt floors                                            -0.16*                 -
                                                                       (0.10)
Home has thatch roof                                                      -                   -

Home has mud or dirt walls                                               -                    -

Toilet is private covered latrine                                        -                    -

Toilet is uncovered latrine                                              -                    -

No toilet                                                                -                    -

Water source is public tap                                            0.69***             0.64***
                                                                       (0.19)              (0.20)
Water source is well                                                  0.58***              0.55**
                                                                       (0.19)              (0.21)
Water source is piped water                                           1.02***             1.05***
                                                                       (0.32)              (0.30)
Has electricity                                                           -                   -

Has a mobile phone                                                       -                    -

Main occupation = vendor                                                 -                    -

Main occupation = owner of other business                                -                    -

R-squared                                                                0.32                0.28
Households                                                              1559                1559
Villages                                                                  61                 61
Notes: Baseline data. PC(PAE)F = per capita (per adult eq) expenditures on non-staple food
(monthly eq.), in USD. Sequential selection of variables done using Stata backward stepwise
regression. Standard errors, clustered by village, in parentheses. *, **, and *** denote significance at
10%, 5%, and 1%.
                                                   40
Table A5. PMT formula from IHS3 Data
                                                                       (1)                   (2)

                                                               BDR variables only All IHS3 Variables

Household size (divided by 10)                                      -5.82***              -5.63***
                                                                      (0.66)                (0.68)
Household size (divided by 10) squared                              2.66***                2.58***
                                                                      (0.56)                (0.57)
Number of children under 5 (divided by 10)                          -1.24***              -1.16***
                                                                      (0.39)                (0.42)
Total number of children (divided by 10)                             1.01**                 0.84*
                                                                      (0.42)                (0.46)
Log durable assets                                                   0.17***               0.17***
                                                                      (0.03)                (0.03)
Log animal assets                                                        -                     -

Owns land                                                               -                  -0.18*
                                                                                           (0.09)
Owns land * log acres owned                                             -                     -

Widowed or Divorced Female Head                                     -0.26***              -0.24***
                                                                     (0.09)                (0.09)
Age of respondent (divided by 100)                                      -                     -

Age of respondent (divided by 100) squared                           -0.38**               -0.40**
                                                                      (0.18)                (0.18)
Highest education within household                                   0.03**                0.03**
                                                                      (0.01)                (0.01)
Household head is literate                                               -                     -

Home has mud or dirt floors                                             -                     -

Home has thatch roof                                                -0.37***              -0.35***
                                                                     (0.08)                (0.08)
Home has mud or dirt walls                                              -                     -

Toilet is private covered latrine                                    -0.26**                  -
                                                                      (0.11)
Toilet is uncovered latrine                                          -0.28**                  -
                                                                      (0.12)
No toilet                                                             -0.30*                  -
                                                                      (0.16)
Water source is public tap                                           0.48***              0.48***
                                                                      (0.12)               (0.13)
Water source is well                                                     -                    -

Water source is piped water                                             -                     -

Has electricity                                                       0.35*                0.39**
                                                                      (0.18)               (0.18)
Has a mobile phone                                                       -                    -

Main occupation = vendor                                                -                     -

Main occupation = owner of other business                            0.29***              0.30***
                                                                      (0.09)               (0.09)
Variables in IHS3 but not BDR
Value of house (USD)                                                    -                     -

Has trash pit for garbage                                               -                     -

R-squared                                                              0.40                   0.39
Households                                                             763                   763
Villages                                                                48                    48
Notes: Data comes from Malawi Integrated Household Survey Wave 3 (IHS3). PCF = per capita (per
adult eq) expenditures on non-staple food (monthly eq.), in USD. Sequential selection of variables done
using Stata backward stepwise regression. Standard41errors, clustered by village, in parentheses. *, **,
Table A6. PMT in Kenya and Uganda
                                                                   (1)                (2)
                                                                 Kenya             Uganda
                                                               Dependent variable: log PCF
Household size (divided by 10)                                 -3.43***           -3.09***
                                                                 (0.42)             (0.35)
Household size (divided by 10) squared                          1.12***            1.10***
                                                                 (0.26)             (0.28)
Number of children under 5 (divided by 10)                          -                  -

Total number of children (divided by 10)                           -                  -

Log durable assets                                              0.19***            0.28***
                                                                 (0.04)             (0.03)
Log animal assets                                                   -              0.05***
                                                                                    (0.02)
Owns land                                                          -                   -

Owns land * log acres owned                                        -                  -

Widowed or Divorced Female Head                                -0.83***           -0.20***
                                                                 (0.09)            (0.06)
Age of respondent (divided by 100)                              5.87***           -0.89***
                                                                 (1.41)            (0.21)
Age of respondent (divided by 100) squared                     -6.76***               -
                                                                 (1.46)
Highest education within household                               0.03**               -
                                                                 (0.01)
Household head is literate                                          -              0.12**
                                                                                   (0.05)
Home has mud or dirt floors                                        -              -0.17***
                                                                                   (0.05)
Home has thatch roof                                               -                  -

Home has mud or dirt walls                                     -0.61***             -0.11*
                                                                (0.23)              (0.07)
Toilet is private covered latrine                                  -                   -

Toilet is uncovered latrine                                        -                  -

No toilet                                                          -                  -

Water source is public tap                                         -                  -

Water source is well                                               -                  -

Water source is piped water                                        -                  -

Has electricity                                                    -                  -

Has a mobile phone                                                 -                  -

Main occupation = vendor                                                          -0.26***
                                                                                    (0.05)
Main occupation = vendor                                           -               0.43***
                                                                                    (0.08)
Main occupation = owner of other business                          -                   -

R-squared                                                          0.31                0.28
Households                                                         845                2160
Notes: Data from surveys conducted in 2010 in Kenya (Dupas, Keats and Robinson 2016) and
Uganda (Dupas et al. 2016). Dependent variable is total household log per capita food
expenditures. *, **, and *** denote significance at
                                                 42 10%, 5%, and 1%.
Table A7. Correlations between neediness measures
                                                                       (1)                    (2)                   (3)                    (4)                     (5)
                                                                   Log (total          Log (total food                                                     Dummy = 1 if not
                                                                                                               Food share of        Percent of days
                                                                expenditures per       expenditure per                                                    worried about having
                                                                                                               expenditures       without enough food
                                                                    capita)                capita)                                                            enough food
Log PCF (non-staple food expenditures per capita)                    0.62***                0.69***               0.02***               -0.04***                 0.05***
                                                                      (0.01)                (0.02)                 (0.00)                (0.00)                   (0.01)

Observations                                                          6,027                  6,027                 6,027                 6,018                    4,507
Number of villages                                                      61                     61                    61                    61                       61
Number of households                                                  1,558                  1,558                 1,558                 1,558                    1,558
R-squared                                                              0.57                   0.54                  0.02                  0.02                     0.02
Mean of Dep. Var.                                                      1.78                   1.35                  0.70                  0.28                     0.33
Notes: Regressions pooled across 4 survey rounds (only 3 rounds for col 5). All variables are measured over previous 30 days, with exception of days with enough food (Col 4),
which was measured over 30 days in the first 2 surveys, and 90 days over the last 2 surveys. Standard errors in parentheses.
* significant at 10%; ** significant at 5%; *** significant at 1%




                                                                                       43
Table A8. Multivariate correlates of Returns to Fertilizer
                                                      Dependent variable: Log (gain in farm
                                                         production from fertilizer use)
Log (acres farmed)                                                      0.13***
                                                                         (0.04)
Related to chief                                                          -0.01
                                                                         (0.04)
Years of education (divided by 10)                                      0.25***
                                                                         (0.08)
Widowed or divorced female                                                 0.00
                                                                         (0.05)
Household size (divided by 10)                                           0.23*
                                                                         (0.12)
Respondent age: 2nd quartile (26-35)                                     0.13**
                                                                         (0.06)
Respondent age: 3rd quartile (36-51)                                    0.21***
                                                                         (0.06)
Respondent age: highest quartile (over 52)                              0.22***
                                                                         (0.08)
Log (value of animals owned)                                            0.06***
                                                                         (0.02)

Number of Observations                                                   530
Number of Villages                                                        61
Mean of dependent variable                                               2.04
SD of dependent variables                                                0.74
R-squared (no village FE)                                                0.14
Note: Omitted age category is less than 26. Standard errors clustered   at the village level.
Regression includes village fixed effects.
 * significant at 10%; ** significant at 5%; *** significant at 1%




                                               44
Table A9. Productive efficiency with longer list of controls
                                                                            (1)            (2)         (3)           (4)            (5)          (6)            (7)
                                                                            Actual (Chief's) allocations            Counterfactual PMT allocation
                                                                                                                                                                Ever
                                                                                                                                                              Lobbied
                                                                                          Value                 Value (USD) Value (USD) Value gap              Chief
                                                                       Value (USD)                  Value gap
                                                                                          (USD)                    of input     of food    (input-            to try to
                                                                         of input                    (input-
                                                                                         of food                subsidy under   subsidy  food) under         get Input
                                                                         subsidy                      food)
                                                                                         subsidy                    PMTa      under PMTa    PMT               Subsidy

Log (gain in farm production from fertilizer use)                          2.33            -0.84     7.57**          -2.75        -5.14*         2.82          0.000
                                                                          (1.64)          (2.52)     (3.36)         (1.86)        (2.87)        (2.91)        (0.026)
Log (total non-staple food expenditures per capita in past month)          1.03             1.94      -1.36        -5.67***      -4.33***        0.05          0.000
                                                                          (0.87)          (1.89)     (2.54)         (1.07)        (1.46)        (1.58)        (0.012)
Time-Invariant Baseline Variables
Related to chief                                                           0.87           7.51*        -4.68         4.69**        5.26*          -0.3         0.040
                                                                          (3.09)          (4.07)      (5.43)         (2.29)        (2.94)       (3.55)        (0.031)
Log (acres farmed)                                                          3.34           -4.18      6.95*         -5.55**      -9.40***      4.70**          0.010
                                                                          (2.67)          (2.89)      (3.72)         (2.41)        (2.13)       (1.82)        (0.030)
Years of education (divided by 10)                                         2.03            -7.68      10.13       -29.87***     -33.00***         7.88          0.010
                                                                          (5.53)          (7.24)      (8.21)         (4.18)        (4.96)       (4.90)        (0.060)
Widowed or divorced female                                                 -1.02            1.39       -2.33       10.48***      16.76***        -5.01         0.000
                                                                          (2.77)          (3.95)      (4.36)         (2.53)        (3.73)       (3.87)        (0.033)
Household size (divided by 10)                                             -1.24             1.9        1.08       49.30***     68.32***       -21.99*          0.020
                                                                          (6.00)          (9.57)     (12.59)         (9.11)       (13.56)      (11.51)        (0.078)
Respondent age: 2nd quartile (26-35)                                     11.85***           5.2         3.71          2.01          -0.92         2.72        -0.10**
                                                                          (4.30)          (5.91)      (6.91)         (3.43)        (4.65)       (4.43)        (0.050)
Respondent age: 3rd quartile (36-51)                                     16.26***         12.97*        0.68          4.95          -0.69          4.4         -0.12*
                                                                          (4.65)          (7.53)      (7.64)         (3.66)        (4.62)       (5.18)        (0.064)
Respondent age: highest quartile (over 52)                               19.40***        24.69***      -9.17       14.14***       13.14**        -0.55        -0.14**
                                                                          (4.86)          (6.87)      (7.14)         (4.57)        (5.75)       (6.07)        (0.064)
Log (value of animals owned)

Shocks
Experienced drought or flood (past 3 months)                               0.68             4.70      -3.90          -2.25         0.79           0.04        -0.08**
                                                                          (3.68)          (4.90)     (6.14)         (3.06)        (4.73)        (4.78)        (0.029)
Experienced cattle death or crop disease (past 3 months)                   3.49            -1.44      5.26           2.25          5.02          -3.24         -0.02
                                                                          (2.53)          (4.31)     (4.49)         (2.32)        (3.09)        (3.11)        (0.021)

Number of Observations                                                          1048          530           529              1048    530           529           530
Number of Households                                                             530          530           529               530    530           529           530
Number of Villages                                                                61          61             61                61    61             61            61
Mean of dependent variable                                                     51.83         37.78         11.94             52.96  40.53         9.26           0.09
Note: Sample restricted to households surveyed in 2014 and asked about perceived returns to fertilizer use. Regressions for input subsidies pool years 2011 and 2012 and
control for the year. 2011 input allocation information comes from 2011 survey. 2012 input and food allocations information comes from 2012 survey. Omitted age
category is less than 26. Standard errors clustered at the village level. All regressions control for village fixed effects.
* significant at 10%; ** significant at 5%; *** significant at 1%
                                                                                    45
Table A10. Perceived Within-Village Heterogeneity among Village Chiefs
Can you easily categorize households in the village with land better suited for fertilizer and those with land not so well
suited for fertilizer?
   Yes                                                                                                                       0.86



Can you easily categorize households in the village in two groups, those who are very poor and those who are less poor?
   Yes                                                                                                                       0.96

Do you know which families in the village are having specific difficulty with money at a given time?
   I know how everyone is doing                                                                                              0.65
   I know how some people are doing                                                                                          0.32
   I do not know                                                                                                             0.04

Do you know who is likely to have money to buy fertilizer for the coming planting season and who will not?
   I know how everyone is doing                                                                                              0.49
   I know how some people are doing                                                                                          0.27
   I do not know                                                                                                             0.24

Number of observations                                                                                                       79
Notes: From survey of village chiefs conducted in 2014. See text for details.




                                                                    46
                            Figure A1. Distributions of key variables of interest

                     A. Log Total non-staple food expenditure per capita in last month (PCF)




                .4
                .3
           Density
             .2 .1
                0




                                   -4                 -2                  0                 2      4

                                                                2011                    2012
                            (2012): Within-village SD= 1.09, Between-village SD = .27



                        B. Log gain in farm production from fertilizer use (winsorized top 5%)
                 .6
                 .4
           Density
                 .2
                 0




                                  1                         2                           3              4
                            Within-village SD= .55, Between-village SD = .14



                                        C. Variation in PCF within Fertilizer Returns Level
                     4  2
           2012 Log PCF
                0    -2
                     -4




                             1              1.5           2              2.5           3            3.5
                                 Log gain in farm production from fertilizer use (winsorized top 5%)

                                                                    Quadratic fit




Notes: Gain in farm production expressed in 50 Kg bag units.
                                                                     47
                       Figure A2. Permutation test, village average error rate

                                          2011 Input Subsidy




     .08




                                                                            .08
     .06
                        PMT (IHS3 data)




                                                                            .06
                                                                                                        Observed (chiefs)
Fraction




                                                                  Fraction
  .04




                                                                   .04
                                        Observed (chiefs)                                        PMT (IHS3 data)
     .02




                                                                            .02
                 PMT (BDR data)                                                             PMT (BDR data)
     0




                                                                            0
             .1 .11 .12 .13 .14 .15 .16 .17 .18 .19 .2                              .05    .2    .35 .5 .65 .8 .95 1.1 1.25 1.4
                       Village average error rate                                                Village mean squared error



                                           2012 Input Subsidy
       .08




                                                                              .08
       .06




                                                                              .06




                      PMT (IHS3 data)                                                       PMT (IHS3 data)
  Fraction




                                                                       Fraction
    .04




                                                                         .04




                                Observed (chiefs)                                                 Observed (chiefs)
       .02




                                                                              .02




                 PMT (BDR data)                                                            PMT (BDR data)
       0




                                                                              0




              .1 .11 .12 .13 .14 .15 .16 .17 .18 .19 .2                              .05    .2    .35 .5 .65 .8 .95 1.1 1.25 1.4
                        Village average error rate                                                Village mean squared error


                                          2012 Food Subsidy
    .08




                                                                            .06




                              PMT (BDR data)                                                PMT (BDR data)
    .06




                               PMT (IHS3 data)
                                                                            .04




                                                                                                PMT (IHS3 data)
Fraction




                                                                 Fraction
  .04




                                  Observed (chiefs)
                                                                            .02




                                                                                                   Observed (chiefs)
    .02
    0




                                                                            0




             .1 .11 .12 .13 .14 .15 .16 .17 .18 .19 .2                            .05      .2    .35 .5 .65 .8 .95 1.1 1.25 1.4
                       Village average error rate                                                Village mean squared error




                                                            48
                                           Figure A3. Comparing chiefs' allocation to counterfactual allocations


                                           2011 Input Subsidy                                           2012 Input Subsidy                                              2012 Food Subsidy
       1




                                                                    1




                                                                                                                                    1
       0 .1 .2 .3 .4 .5 .6 .7 .8 .9




                                                                    0 .1 .2 .3 .4 .5 .6 .7 .8 .9




                                                                                                                                    0 .1 .2 .3 .4 .5 .6 .7 .8 .9
                                      .2     .4     .6    .8    1                                  .2     .4     .6    .8     1                                    .2     .4     .6    .8   1
                                             Quantile of PCF                                              Quantile of PCF                                                 Quantile of PCF


                                                                                                        Chief's allocation

                                                                                                        Hypothetical allocations:
                                                                                                        Based on PCF
                                                                                                        Based on PMT (BDR data)
                                                                                                        Based on PMT (IHS3 data)


Notes: See main text section 4.2 and figure 1 notes.
IHS3 = Malawi Third Integrated Household Survey, a representative survey conducted by Malawi's
National Statistical Office from March 2010 to March 2011.




Figure A4. Model simulation: Optimal Allocation with Productive Efficiency Consideration




Notes: see text section 5.
                                                                                                               49
