                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                STIMULUS EFFECTS OF INVESTMENT TAX INCENTIVES:
                        PRODUCTION VERSUS PURCHASES

                                      Christopher L. House
                                       Ana-Maria Mocanu
                                      Matthew D. Shapiro

                                      Working Paper 23391
                              http://www.nber.org/papers/w23391


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     May 2017




We thank Anusha Chari, Guiseppe Fiori, Simon Gilchrist, Adam Guren, Greg Kaplan, John
Leahy, James Nason, Jonathan Parker, Nora Traum and seminar participants at Boston
University, University of Chicago, Johns Hopkins, LSE, MIT, University of Melbourne,
University of Michigan, University of North Carolina Chapel Hill, North Carolina State
University, Northwestern, and the Federal Reserve Board for helpful comments and suggestions.
This research is supported by the National Science Foundation (SES 0962219). The views
expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National
Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2017 by Christopher L. House, Ana-Maria Mocanu, and Matthew D. Shapiro. All rights
reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit
permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Stimulus Effects of Investment Tax Incentives: Production versus Purchases
Christopher L. House, Ana-Maria Mocanu, and Matthew D. Shapiro
NBER Working Paper No. 23391
May 2017
JEL No. E22,E62,H25

                                         ABSTRACT

The distinction between production and purchases of investment goods is essential for
quantifying the response to changes in investment tax incentives. If investment goods are
tradeable, a large fraction of the demand from changes in tax subsidies will be met from abroad.
This difference between production and purchases implies that investment tax incentives will lead
to more capital accumulation, but less stimulus to economic activity relative to a no-trade
counterfactual. Domestic capacity to produce investment goods is less than perfectly elastic
because of quasi-fixed factors of production, adjustment costs, and specialization of labor. This
paper builds these features into a DGSE model where key parameters are estimated to match the
reduced-form response of investment production and purchases to tax incentives. Typical
investment tax policies result in equipment purchases that are split roughly half between domestic
and foreign production of equipment.

Christopher L. House                            Matthew D. Shapiro
University of Michigan                          Department of Economics
Department of Economics                         University of Michigan
238 Lorch Hall                                  611 Tappan St
Ann Arbor, MI 48109-1220                        Ann Arbor, MI 48109-1220
and NBER                                        and NBER
chouse@umich.edu                                shapiro@umich.edu

Ana-Maria Mocanu
Amazon
410 Terry Ave. North
Seattle, WA
98109-5210
anamaria@amazon.com




A online appendix is available at http://www.nber.org/data-appendix/w23391
                                         I. INTRODUCTION

Does capital accumulation respond strongly to investment tax incentives? Do investment tax
incentives stimulate the economy? This paper investigates whether the answer to these two
questions is different. The neoclassical theory of investment demand implies that business
investment should respond strongly to changes in the after-tax price of capital–particularly for
temporary tax policies. Such an increase in purchases of capital goods, however, need not
stimulate domestic economic activity if capital goods are imported or if the domestic supply of
investment goods is relatively inelastic. Indeed, imported capital equipment has become a
common feature of for the U.S. economy over the past 50 years. Figure 1 plots the ratio of the
total dollar value of gross imports and exports of capital equipment relative to total equipment
investment for 1967-2015. While capital imports were less than five percent of aggregate
equipment investment in 1967, this ratio has steadily risen to more than fifty percent in 2015.
Capital exports have also gone up steadily over this time period (though not quite as rapidly as
imports). Hence, the U.S. economy is increasingly open to trade in capital equipment as both
supplier and demander of capital equipment.
       In a framework that distinguishes purchases and production, we present both reduced-
form estimates and structural estimates of a dynamic equilibrium model of the effects of
investment tax subsidies. Because different capital goods receive different investment tax
treatments, our empirical and modeling frameworks also feature an analysis of the reallocation of
inputs and production across sectors in addition to the aggregate effects of investment tax policy.
These approaches show that indeed the production/purchase distinction is essential for
understanding the effects of changes in tax policy and for quantifying the magnitude of responses
to specific policy interventions.
       Notwithstanding the volatility and measurement limitations of industry-level investment
data, clear and consistent patterns are evident. Our reduced-form estimates imply that a one
percentage point investment tax incentive increases purchases of capital equipment by roughly 2
percent. Domestic production of capital equipment also increases, though by only about 1
percent. Thus, tax incentives succeed on both margins—they both encourage businesses to
expand physical capital, and encourage increased domestic production. Yet, the response of
production is about half as large as the increase in purchases.
       We find little evidence for pass-through of investment tax subsidies to the pre-tax price of

                                                 2
capital goods. Although there are empirical specifications in which a one percentage point
subsidy leads to roughly a one percent increase in prices, such findings are not robust to even
modest changes in the econometric specification. Overall, the results suggest that either there are
no discernible impacts of investment tax subsidies on prices or that the true impact is difficult to
measure accurately in the available data. This result differs from Goolsbee’s (1998) finding that
investment subsidies push up the prices of investment goods. We can replicate his findings using
his original sample period and vintage data. Data revisions and additional observations have both
led to a reduction in the estimated price responses found in his earlier study. Thus, the effective
supply of new capital goods appears substantially more elastic than earlier data suggest.
       In the second part of the paper, we construct a general equilibrium model that has key
features for understanding the dynamic supply of investment goods. Some of these features
increase the effective short-run supply elasticity of capital goods, while others work to reduce it.
In addition to imports and the fact that investment goods production is a relatively small part of
the economy, the model allows for variable utilization, factor mobility, and factor accumulation
as other margins of domestic supply of capital goods. In addition to standard general equilibrium
effects, factors adjustment and sectoral specificity of labor limit the elastic supply of capital. Our
DGSE model integrates all these margins in a framework that highlights both industrial
heterogeneity and a meaningful distinction between production and purchases of capital goods.
The reduced-form econometric specification in the first part of the paper serves as the auxiliary
model which allows us to estimate the elasticity of supply for foreign equipment–the key
structural parameter governing the difference between production and purchases of domestic
investment goods. We then use the estimated structural model to study the effects of investment
subsidies that match features of commonly-enacted tax policies.
       The model illustrates important dynamic effects of the response to policy. In the short
run, the increase in investment purchases is largely accommodated by an expansion of imports of
equipment. As a result, the immediate stimulus effects of investment tax incentives exhibit
“leakage” in the sense that the subsidies are stimulating production and employment of over-seas
capital producing firms. Over time, investment, domestic production of capital goods, equipment
exports, consumption and GDP all increase. The delayed increase in exports of equipment is
notable. After investment subsidies expire, as often happens, the increased capacity for domestic
production of equipment persists and results in above-trend production of capital goods and

                                                  3
equipment exports. Hence, while investment subsidies adversely affect the trade balance in
equipment initially, subsequently such policies have favorable effects on the trade balance.


                                          II. RELATED LITERATURE
Economists have attempted to quantitatively address the reaction of investment spending to
changes in the after-tax price of capital goods at least since Hall and Jorgensen (1967).1 Our
paper adds to a resurgence of work addressing the effects of tax policy on investment. This
renewed interest in investment tax policy is driven in part by the availability of new data and in
part by a renewed interest on the part of policy makers in the viability of investment incentives
as a policy tool.
        Goolsbee (1998) considers whether the pre-tax price of investment typically increases
following investment subsidies. For many of the types of capital goods in his dataset, prices
appear to rise almost one-for-one with the subsidy. Goolsbee’s conclusion is natural—investment
tax incentives might have little impact on investment spending because the supply of new capital
is effectively price-inelastic. This finding has been challenged by several recent papers including
Whelan (1999), House and Shapiro (2008), Edgerton (2010), Mian and Sufi (2012) and Sallee
(2011). Whelan argues that after controlling for input cost shocks, there is little evidence that
investment incentives bid up prices. House and Shapiro (2008) focus on the cross-sectional
impact of bonus depreciation in the early 2000s and conclude that, at least for that episode, there
is no clear relationship between the subsidy and capital goods prices.
        There are also recent studies that suggest that real investment spending does react to
subsidies and other shocks. The estimated reactions to bonus depreciation in House and Shapiro
(2008) were surprisingly large. Edgerton (2010) argues that in the mid-2000s, housing prices,
farming prices and oil prices all experienced dramatic increases unrelated to the supply of capital
goods. He then looks at the production and pricing of construction equipment, agricultural
equipment and mining equipment and finds little evidence that prices of these goods rose despite
increases in the production of these capital goods. Mian and Sufi (2012) find that the CARS
program (better known as “Cash for Clunkers”) sharply increased automobile purchases while
the subsidy was in place. Zwick and Mahon (2017) use business tax return data to re-examine the

1
 The existing literature on investment demand and investment tax incentives is vast and an adequate summary is
beyond the scope of this paper. Foundational contributions include Jorgenson (1963), Abel (1981), Hayashi (1982),
and Summers (1981).
                                                       4
effects of bonus depreciation and find that investment responded strongly to the subsidy. Zwick
and Mahon pay particular attention to financially constrained firms whom, they argue, reacted
most sharply to the bonus depreciation subsidy.


                                       III. DATA AND CONCEPTS
                                      A. Production and Purchases
Data on investment purchases come from nominal investment spending and investment prices in
the Bureau of Economic Analysis’ (BEA) underlying detail tables. We define real purchases as
the ratio of total nominal purchases to the type-specific price index. Our data on quantities and
prices of domestic production of equipment come from the NBER-CES Manufacturing
Productivity Database.2 The NBER database also provides data on inputs and total factor
productivity for equipment. Because purchases and production of structures are identical, we use
the BEA data for them. We create a quarterly panel of 30 equipment types and 20 structure types
shown in Tables 1A and 1B from 1959 to 2009. The BEA purchase data are much more detailed
than the NBER production data. Appendix A contains details of how we harmonize the data by
type and frequency.
        The top panel of Figure 2 shows purchases and production for general industrial
equipment (one of the 30 investment categories in our equipment dataset). The bottom panel
shows the real relative price. The figure illustrates three noteworthy features common to many
investment types in our sample.
        First, the quantity series exhibit dramatic movements over time. Real quantities (for
either purchases or production) regularly change by more than twenty percent from one year to
the next. In contrast, real relative prices are much less volatile. The average volatility of
investment purchases and production is 11 and 8 percent respectively. In contrast, the average
volatility of investment prices is only two percent. Edgerton (2010) argues that, on its face, this
observation alone suggests that the supply of investment goods is highly elastic.
        Second, while domestic production exceeds purchases for the entire sample period, the
gap between the two is gradually closing. As U.S. manufacturing has declined, domestic firms
have become more and more reliant on imported capital goods.


2
  This dataset was assembled by Eric Bartelsman, Randy Becker, Wayne Gray and Jordan Marvakov. The raw data
are freely available at the NBER data website. See Bartelsman and Gray (1996).
                                                    5
         Third, there is a dramatic transitory downward spike in the relative price in the early-mid
1970’s. This spike is associated with a sharp increase in world oil prices at the same time.
Following the increase in oil prices, the Personal Consumption Expenditure (PCE) price series
used to construct relative investment-goods prices reacts rapidly while the investment price
indices react with a modest delay. This might be because oil prices are passed through directly to
gasoline prices, which receive substantial weight in the PCE deflator. The timing of price
increases across goods was also likely affected by the Nixon price controls. We address both oil
price variation and the Nixon price controls in the econometric specification.
                                         B. Investment Tax Subsidies
Tax policy affects the after-tax purchase price of investment goods via depreciation allowances,
the investment tax credit, and tax rates. Building on the framework of Hall and Jorgenson (1967)
and using data provided by Dale Jorgenson, we define the comprehensive investment tax subsidy
as the tax saving per unit of investment goods purchased.3 Denote the ITC for type m capital at
time t as ITCtm . Let ztm denote the present discounted value of tax depreciation allowances for

type m capital purchased at time t. That is, if 1+ it is the gross nominal interest rate and { Dmj,t } j=
                                                                                                                 R

                                                                                                                     1


is a sequence of tax depreciation deductions for a unit of type m capital with a tax life of R
periods, then
                                                    R           Dtm, j
                                            ztm = å            j-1            .                                  (1)
                                                    j =1      s=0
                                                                   (1+ is )
The comprehensive subsidy ztm is then

                                              ztm = ITCtm + ttp ztm .                                            (2)

This measure assumes that the firm writes off depreciation deductions against the corporate tax
rate ttp .4

         Tables 1A and 1B list the average value of the comprehensive subsidy for each
3
  The original annual data on the ITC and the discounted value of depreciation deductions are available from
Jorgenson and Yun (1991). We are grateful to Dale Jorgenson and Jon Samuel for providing updates to these data.
To match the frequency of our data on investment and investment prices, we construct a quarterly version of these
data using the historical record of investment tax changes, some of which have effective dates that do not correspond
to calendar years. See Appendix A for further details.
4
  Several details of tax policy affect the calculation of the comprehensive subsidy. First, how the ITC affects the
basis for depreciation has changed over time. Additionally, since 2002, there has been “bonus depreciation” that
allows immediate write-off of some types of investment in varying amounts. Our implementation of ztm includes an
adjustment for how the ITC affects the basis and for bonus depreciation. See Appendix A for details.
                                                           6
investment category. The comprehensive subsidy can change for a variety of reasons. Changes
(or expected changes) in nominal interest rates, changes in depreciation schedules or changes in
the corporate tax rate can all cause changes in ztm . The dependence of the comprehensive subsidy

on the corporate tax deserves special mention. Notice that the value of the subsidy increases with
ttp since the firm is writing off depreciation against the corporate income tax rate. It is not

necessarily true however, that an increase in ttp will lead to an increase in investment demand.

While the effective subsidy to new capital has gone up, the value of the capital itself may have
gone down.
         Mapping the comprehensive subsidy into the decisions problem of the firm yields an
alternative formulation that has been used in the literature. If there were no change in the price of
capital over time, the firms’ first order condition for capital implies that firms would invest to the
point at which the after-tax marginal product of capital is equal to the tax-adjusted user cost of
capital. In such a situation, the first order condition for type m capital would require
                                                                     1- ztm
                                          MPt k ,m = ptm (r + d )´          ,                                      (3)
                                                                     1- ttp

where MPt k ,m is the marginal product of type m capital and ptm is the real relative price of type m

capital. Because the “normal” user cost is simply the term ptm (r + d ) in equation (3), we refer to

this measure as the tax adjustment to the user cost.5 For comparability with the investment tax
credit ITCtm and the comprehensive subsidy ztm , we reverse the sign so that an increase in this
measure corresponds to a positive subsidy. More specifically, we denote the tax adjustment to
the user cost as F tm with

                                               z tm - 1 ITCtm + t tp ztm - 1
                                      F tm º            =                    .                                     (4)
                                               1 - t tp      1 - t tp
Unlike under the comprehensive subsidy (2), under the tax adjustment to the user cost (4) an
increase in the corporate profit tax ttp reduces the firm’s incentives to accumulate capital. While

it enhances the value of the tax subsidy (through the effect on ztm ) an increase in the corporate

5
  Goolsbee (1998) calls this variable simply the “tax term.” Note that this specification of the tax-adjusted user cost
implicitly adopts the “new view” of corporate profit taxation in which we assume that marginal investment projects
are financed with retained earnings and are thus unaffected by taxation of distributed corporate earnings. We will
return to this issue in the modeling section below, where we observe that the tax on distributions cancels from the
relevant first-order conditions. For discussion of this point see Sinn (1991).
                                                          7
profit tax reduces the after-tax marginal product of capital by more.
           Figure 3 plots three measures of the investment tax subsidy for general industrial
equipment: the comprehensive subsidy ( ztm ), the tax adjustment to user cost ( F tm ), and the

investment tax credit ( ITCtm ). (In the figure, we normalize F tm so that it begins at 0.) Notice that
the three measures exhibit similar movements over time. Changes in the ITC were made at the
same time as changes in tax depreciation rates and changes in the tax rate on corporate profits.
While the overall time series variation is similar across the three measures, it is not identical. For
instance, while the ITC has been zero since the Tax Reform Act of 1986, there are nevertheless
significant changes in the comprehensive investment tax subsidy. These changes arise from
changes in tax depreciation and changes in nominal interest rates, both of which factor directly
into the computation of the comprehensive subsidy.
           Figure 4 plots the comprehensive subsidy ztm for all of the investment types in our

dataset. Notice that, in addition to the time series variation shown in Figure 3, there is also a
substantial amount of variation across capital types. One particular event which featured
pronounced cross sectional differences in tax treatment was the so-called “bonus depreciation”
allowance introduced in 2002. This policy can be seen clearly in Figure 4 as a sudden change in
investment tax incentives for a few types starting in 2003. See House and Shapiro (2008) for
discussion of this policy.
                                                C. Aggregate Data
In addition to the type-specific data on investment, investment prices and investment tax
subsidies, we also make use of several aggregate data series. Specifically, we use data on real
GDP, real oil prices and dummy variables for the Nixon price controls. Quarterly data on real
GDP are from the BEA. To construct real oil prices, we average the monthly spot oil price (West
Texas Intermediate) to construct a quarterly nominal series. We then take the ratio of the
quarterly oil price to the PCE deflator for non-durables. Finally, the Nixon price controls were
part of the Economic Stabilization Program and went into effect on August 15, 1971 and were
removed on April 30, 1974.6 The price controls play a non-trivial role in price data for that
period. We accommodate this policy with dummy variables. Given the timing of the legislation,



6
    Source: National Archives. See http://www.archives.gov/research/guide-fed-records/groups/432.html.
                                                          8
our dummy variable for the Nixon price controls takes the value 0.6 for 1971:3 and 1.0 for
1971:4 to 1974:1.7


                    IV. REDUCED-FORM EFFECTS OF INVESTMENT TAX SUBSIDIES
This section presents reduced-form empirical results. We begin in section 4.1 by discussing our
basic regression specification. In section 4.2 we present the main estimates. The reduced-form
coefficients later serve as a basis for the structural estimate of the supply elasticity of foreign
equipment used in the quantitative model.
                                       A. Econometric Specification
We estimate the effects of investment tax subsidies on the production and purchases of
investment goods, their prices, imports and exports of capital goods as well as variables that
reflect producer activity including employment, payroll, production employees, production
hours, production wages, TFP, inventories, the cost of materials and the cost of energy used by
producers. We present pooled OLS results to paint a broad picture of how tax subsidies affect the
production and purchases of capital goods.
        The reduced-form econometric specification we consider is
                                    ytm = b1 ⋅ ztm + b m (t ) + G m Xtm + etm                             (5)

where ytm are different left-hand-side variables, which may be investment, production, prices,

and so on. The index m denotes the type of investment good and t denotes time. Separate
estimates are presented for equipment and structures. The variable Xtm is a set of covariates

(which could include type-specific data and/or aggregate data) and Gm is the associated set of
type-specific regressors. For each type, we also include a type-specific time trend given by
b m (t ) . The coefficient of interest in equation (5) is b1 . This coefficient, which is constrained to

be common across the types of capital goods (thus there is no superscript m), describes the
average change in the variable of interest ytm associated with changes in the comprehensive

investment tax subsidy. It is identified from both the persistent time series variation in tax
subsidies and the cross-sectional variation in how the subsidies affect types.


7
 Our dates and the dummy variable specification are the dates used by Goolsbee (1998). Robert J. Gordon (1990)
dates the expiration of the price controls as 1974:4.
                                                       9
       We present results for four different regression specifications with different controls. The
first is a parsimonious specification including, in addition to the subsidy itself, only a constant
and a linear trend. The second and third specifications include a constant, a time trend and a set
of macroeconomic covariates: HP-filtered GDP and dummy variables for years affected by the
price controls during the Nixon administration. The third specification includes the real price of
oil. The fourth specification uses a linear trend, all macroeconomic covariates, and also includes
two lags and two leads of the subsidy variable. This last specification is intended to capture
anticipation effects or measurement lags in the data. Because investment and investment policy
are highly correlated across time and across capital types, we use the heteroskedasticity and
autocovariance consistent estimate of the standard errors proposed by Driscoll and Kraay (1998).
       Before proceeding to the results themselves it is appropriate to make a remark about the
interpretation of the findings. In particular, we want to be upfront about the potentially important
endogeneity problems our estimates face. Investment tax policy in the U.S., while capricious, is
not truly econometrically exogenous. To the extent that investment tax incentives react
endogenously to economic conditions, as for instance the CARS program did in the Mian and
Sufi (2012) study, our results will be biased indicators of the true causal effects of investment tax
subsidies. On the other hand, many of the legislative changes to investment tax incentives in our
sample were made without direct connection to contemporaneous economic conditions and thus
were in a certain sense “exogenous” changes. Appealing to a narrative assessment of the
legislation, Romer and Romer (2009) argue that most of the major modifications to tax policy in
our sample frame were motivated by long-run concerns (see Appendix Table A.1. for the Romer-
Romer classifications). In particular, the motivations explicitly cited by law makers when they
expanded investment subsidies in the 1960s and 1970s often centered on increasing long-run
growth by encouraging firms to increase and modernize the capital stock. When the subsidies
were pared back in the 1980s, the goals were reducing the deficit and eliminating tax distortions.
       The historical chronology of the main legislative changes to the investment tax subsidies
is presented in Table 2. In addition to providing information about the specifics of the policies
driving the measures of tax subsidies, the table provides information about the duration of policy
that will inform our simulations. The table lists both changes to the ITC and changes to the
treatment of tax depreciation allowances. The table also lists the stated duration and actual
duration of the policies. Laws are described as “permanent” if the legislation contained no

                                                 10
explicit stipulations of subsequent revisions or sunsets in the policies. That is, if the bill did not
include an end-date, it is listed as permanent in the table. Temporary policies have an end-date
included in the legislation. The actual duration of the policy is measured based on the next
legislated change in the tax treatment of investment. We date these policy changes according to
the dates when the policies were enacted and not necessarily when they went into effect.
Changes to investment tax policy have historically been quite common. Typically the tax
treatment of investment changes roughly every two and a half years. Policies with announced
end-dates (explicitly temporary policies) are rare, though they appear to be more common in
recent history. We do not parameterize the duration of the policy for the reduced-form estimate;
the subsidy is simply entered at its current value. Hence, the estimated reduced-form response of
variables to the subsidy reflects both the average size of the subsidy and its average expected
duration. We revisit the evidence and implications of duration when we turn to the structural
estimation and simulation in Sections V and VI.
                                        B. Reduced-Form Estimates
Table 3 reports the reduced-form estimates for how the comprehensive investment subsidies
affect the production and purchases of capital goods. Table 4 shows how the subsidy affects
equipment prices; employment, hours, wages, TFP, the cost of materials, and the cost of energy
in the production of equipment. Table 4 also presents estimates of the effect of subsidies on the
production and prices of structures. Both tables include estimates for the four econometric
specifications discussed above. The data are as described in Section III and Appendix A. For
equipment, the reduced-form estimates use the types in Table 1A excluding computers and
software. We exclude computers and software because they have such dramatic changes in prices
owing to technological progress. For structures, the reduced-form estimates use the types in
Table 1B excluding the three residential types.8


Purchases and Production of Capital Goods. Table 3 shows our central reduced-form empirical
finding, that the response of purchases of equipment to the comprehensive subsidy ztm is almost

twice as large as the response of domestic production. Looking across the first row, the estimates
indicate that a one percentage point investment subsidy is associated with an increase in

8
 When we turn to the model, all types are included because the general equilibrium model needs to account for all
components of investment. See Section V.
                                                        11
investment production of between 1.08 and 1.19 percent. The second row reports the estimates
for investment purchases. Again, the results are economically significant—a one percentage
point increase in the investment subsidy is associated with an increase in investment purchases of
between 1.76 and 1.97 percent. The third row of Table 3 reports the differences of the coefficient
estimates. For instance, if we focus on the column for the “Macro covariates” specification
(column 3) the estimated response of production associated with the comprehensive subsidy is
1.08 while the estimated response of purchases to variations in the comprehensive subsidy is
1.76. That is, for every one percentage point increase in the investment tax subsidy, purchases of
investment goods rise by 1.76 percent while domestic production of capital goods increases by
only 1.08 percent. The difference between the estimates is 0.68 with a standard error of 0.11, so
the difference is strongly statistically significantly different from zero. The covariance of the
purchases and production coefficient estimates are strongly positive, so the standard error of their
differences is substantially less than the sum of the standard errors. Hence, there is strong
evidence of substantial “leakage”—that is, about half of the stimulus benefits foreign rather than
domestic producers.9


Equipment Prices. Goolsbee’s 1998 paper made a case that one of the main reasons that
investment tax incentives were not as effective as one might expect is that much of the subsidies
are passed through to capital goods prices. An investment subsidy might bid up prices of capital
goods, but not cause increased production. The first row of Table 4 presents estimates of the
reaction of equipment prices to the comprehensive subsidy using the same four specifications of
covariates as in Table 3. Unlike Goolsbee’s estimates, our estimates show little or no price
response for equipment. The coefficients estimates are close to zero with fairly tight confidence
intervals. From the point of view of basic economic analysis, sensible estimates would be
anywhere between 0.00 and 1.00 depending on the duration of subsidy, the supply elasticity, the
openness of the economy, and durability of the capital goods.10 As we emphasize in this paper,



9
   These findings carry over to the other measures of investment subsidies as well. For the ITC, depending on the
econometric specification, production increases by between 2.09 and 2.91 percent while purchases rise by between
2.94 and 3.31 percent. For the tax adjustment to the user cost (Fm) the estimates show a similar pattern though they
are less statistically significant. See Appendix Table B.1 for these results.
10
    The standard neoclassical theory of investment demand predicts that, particularly for temporary investment
subsidies, capital goods prices must rise nearly one-for-one with the subsidy regardless of the elasticity of supply.
                                                        12
the open economy channel substantially attenuates the price response. This analysis contrasts
with Goolsbee’s closed-economy, inelastic supply analysis and findings.
        We have made considerable efforts to explain the difference between our findings and the
findings in Goolsbee’s earlier paper. The two sets of estimates differ both in sample period
(Goolsbee’s sample was 1962–1988 while we use data from 1959–2009) and in the vintage of
the data—that is, the data have been updated and revised substantially since Goolsbee’s original
paper was published. Both factors contribute to the different results. Appendix B presents a
detailed comparison between our findings and Goolsbee’s results. In brief, we can replicate
Goolsbee’s results for his estimation period using vintage data. The main reason for differences
between our results and his is that we study a longer, more recent sample period and the data
have been revised.


Employment, Wages, Inputs and Productivity of Equipment Producers. Another way to quantify
the effects of investment tax subsidies is to examine the productive inputs of capital producing
firms. The second three rows of Table 4 report results for employment, hours and wages of
production workers in equipment-producing firms. Consistent with the results from Table 3,
employment and hours are positively associated with high investment subsidies. The response of
employment and hours to the subsidy are strong, but consistently less than the response of
production. This finding is consistent with short-run increasing returns to labor, an issue we will
return to in the model section.
        Wages at equipment-producing firms also increase with investment subsidies. Goolsbee
(1998) also emphasizes this point and our updated estimates agree with his earlier results. Note
that the response of wages, however, is very imprecisely estimated, and very unstable across
specifications.
        Table 4 shows additional measures of production activity at equipment-producing firms.
Consistent with earlier results, materials costs, energy costs and measured total factor
productivity all rise in response to investment subsidies, which suggests that these firms do
actively expand production of capital goods. A one percentage point investment subsidy is
associated with an increase in measured TFP of about 1/3 percent. Materials inputs increase


Thus, observing sharp price increases following an investment subsidy does not suggest that the policy has little
effect. See House and Shapiro (2008) for extended discussion of this point.
                                                       13
roughly one-for-one with the subsidy. The response of energy is imprecisely estimated. Overall,
these responses are consistent with an increase in production of capital goods. The increase in
measured productivity suggests that firms are varying unmeasured inputs in addition to measured
factor inputs such as worker effort.

Investment Subsidies and Structures Investment. While much of the existing literature focuses on
investment in equipment, U.S. tax policy also provides varying incentives for purchases of
business structures. Importantly, the neoclassical theory of investment suggests that structures
investment should be much more sensitive to predictable variations in its after-tax price than
equipment investment (see House and Shapiro 2008). Unlike equipment investment, there is
essentially no difference between domestic purchases and domestic production of business
structures (i.e., there are no imported structures to speak of).
       The last two rows of Table 4 present estimates on the effect of investment subsidies for
investment in business structures. As we found with the effects of subsidies on purchases and
production of equipment, purchases (identically production) of structures respond to variations in
investment tax incentives. For a one percentage point investment tax subsidy, structures
investment rises between one-half and 1 percent. Unlike the findings for equipment, there is
evidence that structures prices do respond strong to investment tax incentives though there is
substantial variation in the estimates across econometric specifications.
       Although investment subsidies for structures are generally lower than subsidies for
equipment, and notably structures do not receive the ITC, the estimated effects are sizeable.
Overall, the reduced-form estimates for structures are larger than the estimates for equipment.
This pattern could be generated by a variety of factors. First, equilibrium complementarities
between equipment and structures may cause structures investment to rise when tax policies
stimulate investment in equipment. Second, changes in tax depreciation allowances, which
directly affect structures, are correlated with changes in the ITC. The most prominent example is
the Tax Reform Act of 1986, which both repealed the ITC and dramatically limited accelerated
depreciation. Many other legislative changes modified both forms of tax incentives in the same
direction (see Table 2). Lastly, structures have low rates of economic depreciation, which implies
high intertemporal elasticities of substitution. As a result, structures investment is more sensitive
to changes in the after-tax price of capital.


                                                  14
                                               V. QUANTITATIVE MODEL
In this section we present a quantitative dynamic general equilibrium model that captures the key
features observed in the reduced-form relationships between investment subsidies and the
production and purchases of capital goods. To capture the heterogeneity in production, use, and
tax treatment of capital, the model has M capital-producing industries matching the level of
detail in Section IV. The model has a single industry that produces the numeraire good Q, which
can be used for consumption, government purchases, material inputs, or exports. The model
features variable effort and capital and labor adjustment costs in all sectors. Labor income,
dividends and profits are subject to distortionary taxes, while investment receives subsidies.
Equipment and the numeraire good can be traded internationally. We impose period-by-period
balanced trade, which requires that trade in equipment is accompanied by offsetting trade flows
of the numeraire good.11 Structures are not traded, so the production and investment in structures
are equal. We use the model to estimate the supply elasticity of foreign equipment using an
indirect inference procedure that targets the reduced-form empirical results in section IV. We
then use the model to quantify the aggregate effects of investment tax policy.
                                                    A. Households
The representative household consumes the non-durable final good, supplies labor and effort on
the job, saves at the risk-free rate, pays taxes and owns the capital stock. The household derives
utility from consumption and disutility from labor and effort. The household’s flow utility
function is
                                                              1              1
                                                         1-             1+
                                                       Ct     s    æ Q Q M m m ÷ö
                                                                       Lt    h
                     U (Ct , Lt , e ,, e , e ) =
                                  1        M    Q
                                                       -f      - y ççet nt + å et nt ÷                              (6)
                                  t       t     t
                                                     1       1      çè               ÷ø
                                                  1-      1+                 m=1
                                                     s       h
where
                                                                                        1
                                        é              1+ yn
                                                                M
                                                                              1+ yn ù
                                                                                       1+yn

                                   Lt = ê a Q (ntQ+ j )      + å a m (ntm+ j ) ú                                    (7)
                                        êë                     m=1
                                                                                    úû

is a labor index that aggregates work over the M+1 sectors with the constant elasticity of
substitution (CES) form. Total hours spent working is denoted by

11
   We suppress international borrowing and lending primarily for simplicity. Whether we allow international
borrowing has little effect on the structural estimate of the supply elasticity of foreign investment goods, but it does
matter for the timing of the model-implied aggregate effects of stimulus policy. We report results allowing for
international borrowing and lending in Appendix E. See also the discussion of the policy simulations in Section VI .
                                                                  15
                                                     Nt = ntQ + å m=1 ntm .
                                                                      M
                                                                                                                 (8)

The elasticity of labor substitution in equation (7) across sectors is yn . If yn > 0 , then there is

limited substitutability of labor across sectors. We introduce this form of labor specificity as a
realistic device for specialization in labor that limits the flexibility in changing the composition
of output. It thus limits the response to an investment tax subsidy. Indeed, a permanent
investment tax subsidy will drive a permanent wedge between wages in subsidized and not-
subsidized sectors. This specification also nests the special case when yn = 0 , where the

household supplies labor to each sector symmetrically. The household spends ntm hours working

in each capital-producing sector m and ntQ hours working in the final goods sector. For each hour

of labor, the household receives pre-tax real wages Wt m and Wt Q in the capital industries and the
numeraire sector, respectively.
          We choose parameters to ensure that, in the steady state, the CES labor aggregate and
total hours are equivalent, i.e. L = N . This relationship is obtained by choosing the constant
terms a Q , a m in (7) such that a m = (n m / N )-yn for m = 1,..., M . We introduce variable effort, a
margin of adjustment that makes supply more elastic. Effort in each capital-goods producing
sector m is denoted by etm and etQ indicates effort in the numeraire sector. Each hour of effort

entails a utility cost of y to the representative household.
          To summarize, each period the household seeks to maximize its expected discounted
utility
                              é     ì 1                                                          üïù
                              ê¥ ï  ï                                                             ïú
                                                     1
                                        1-        1+
                              ê     ï      s
                                      Ct + j         h
                                                 Lt + j       æ Q Q            M               öïïú
                                   jï                                                         ÷
                          Et ê å b í         -f         - y ççet + j nt + j + å et + j nt + j ÷ýú
                                                                                  m     m
                                                                                                                 (9)
                             ê j=0 ïï1 - 1            1      çè                               ÷øïú
                             ê      ï           1+                            m=1                 ïïú
                             ëê     ï
                                    ï s
                                    î                 h                                            ïþïûú

subject to the budget constraint
                      é              M           ù                              M
             (1- t N ) êêWt Q ntQ + åWt mntm úú + (1- ttd )(1- ttp ) å Rtm Ktm + Tt + St-1 (1 + rt-1 )
                      ë             m=1          û                           m=1
                                                                                                                (10)
                                                                            M
                                             = Ct + St + (1- t         d
                                                                       t   ) å Pt   m   é1- z ù ( I + IMPt ),
                                                                                        êë  t
                                                                                             m
                                                                                              úû  t
                                                                                                   m       m

                                                                            m=1

and the capital accumulation constraints


                                                               16
                                      K tm+1 = K tm (1 - d m ) + I tm + IMPt m                        (11)

and the definition of L in equation (7). The representative household owns the capital stock K tm

for all types m = 1,..., M . The household may purchase new capital from domestic producers I tm

or from foreign importers IMPt m . The pre-tax price of type m capital in units of the numeraire

good at date t is Pt m . The pre-tax real rental price of type m capital is Rtm . Each type of capital

has a type-specific depreciation rate d m . In addition to investing in physical capital, the
household saves in bonds St , which earn the net real safe rate of return rt .
        One of the key features of the model is its realistic treatment of tax policy, which allows
us to analyze the aggregate effects of investment tax incentives once we estimate the structural
parameters. Purchases of capital goods receive type-specific investment subsidies. The
comprehensive investment tax subsidy for type m at date t is ztm . Capital income is taxed twice—

once at the profit tax rate t tp and again according to the tax rate on distributed capital earnings

t td . Labor income is taxed at the constant rate t tN . In addition to the distortionary taxes t N , t td

and t tp , the government also remits excess revenue to the household through a lump-sum

transfer (or tax) Tt .
        The solution to the household’s optimization problem requires the following first order
conditions,
                                              1
                                             s        é 1 æ L ö-yn æ n m öyn    ù
                              Wt =m C                 êf Lh ç t ÷ ç t ÷÷ + ye m ú ,
                                                      ê t ççè L ÷÷ø çç n m ÷÷
                                            t
                                                                              t ú                     (12)
                                   1- t N             êë             è ø        úû

                                            -
                                                  1                    é -1 ù
                                          Ct      s
                                                      = b (1 + rt ) Et êCt +s1 ú ,                    (13)
                                                                       ê       ú
                                                                       ë       û
                                    é -1                                                 ù
                         qtm = b Et êCt+s1 (1- ttp+1 )(1- ttd+1 ) Rtm+1 + qtm+1 (1- d m )ú            (14)
                                    ê                                                    ú
                                    ë                                                    û
                                                          1
                                                      -
                                       qtm = Ct           s
                                                              (1- ttd ) Pt m éêë1- ztm ùúû . ,        (15)

Equation (12) is the household’s labor supply condition for sector m (abusing notation
somewhat, we have implicitly included the first order condition for m = Q in equation (12) as


                                                                   17
well). This equation serves as the wage-effort menu faced by the firms. Equation (13) is the
stochastic Euler equation. Equation (14) is the shadow value of type m capital and equation (15)
is investment demand for type m capital (either imported or domestically produced).12
                                               B. Firms and Production
Aggregate Capital Services. The individual capital types m = 1,...M owned by the household are
aggregated to produce a single capital input. The aggregate capital good is denoted by H t and is
produced according to the Cobb-Douglas production function
                                                   æM         öæ M       gm ö
                                            H t = çç g m-gm ÷÷çç( Ktm ) ÷÷ .                                    (16)
                                                   çè m=1     ÷øèç m=1      ÷ø

                      å
                             M
We assume that               m=1
                                   g m = 1 so the production of the aggregate capital good has constant

returns to scale. Firms that produce the capital aggregate sell the aggregate good for a rental
price Rt and pay type-specific rental prices Rtm . Each period these firms choose a combination of

type-specific capital inputs { Ktm }m=1 to maximize profits
                                           M



                                                             M
                                                  Rt Ht - å Rtm Ktm                                               (17)
                                                             m=1


subject to the production function (16). The first order condition for the choice of K tm is

                                                            Ht
                                                   Rt g m       = Rtm .                                           (18)
                                                            Ktm

                     
                         M
The scalar term          m=1
                                 g m-gm in (16) ensures that the rental price for the capital aggregate is a

weighted average of the rental prices of the type-specific rental prices. In equilibrium profits are
zero for these firms.

The Numeraire Good. The numeraire good can be used either as the final consumption good,
government purchases, payment for purchases of imported capital goods or as material input for
the capital goods industries. The numeraire good is produced with aggregate capital htQ , labor




12
   If the distribution tax were to remain constant over time (as we assume in the analysis below), then the tax-
adjusted user cost expression in the steady state is given by equation 3. That is, the distribution tax cancels from the
first-order condition under the “new view” of dividend taxation.
                                                             18
ntQ and effort etQ . The output elasticity of effort is given by the parameter q . The production
function for the numeraire good is
                                                                                    1-a
                                               Qt = A ëéê htQ ûùú éê(etQ ) ntQ ùú
                                                                 a        q
                                                                                          .                                  (19)
                                                                   ë            û
The producers of the numeraire good rent capital and labor and choose effort to maximize their
discounted profits
       é¥        1 ì
               - ï
                                                                                                                          2 ù
                                                                       æ ntQ+ j - ntQ+ j-1 ÷ö x h Q æ htQ+ j - htQ+ j-1 ÷ö ü
                                                                                             2
                                                                                                                           ïïú
       ê            ï                                       x n
                                                                       ç
    Et ê å b Ct +sj íQt + j -Wt + j nt + j - Rt + j ht + j - nt + j-1 çç                   ÷   -    ç
                                                                                                    ç                   ÷   ýú (20)
             j                  Q    Q                Q         Q

                                                                       çè ntQ+ j-1 ÷÷ø 2 t + j-1 ççè htQ+ j-1 ÷÷ø ïïú
                                                                                                 h
       ê j=0        ï
                    ï                                       2
       ë            ï
                    î                                                                                                       þïû
subject to the production function (19) and the wage-effort supply schedule (12). The parameters
x n and x h are adjustment cost parameters for labor and capital. It is important to note that in a
multi-sector model adjustment costs act through two distinct channels: they temper both the
intertemporal substitution and the reallocation of capital and labor inputs across sectors.
       Firms may ask workers to provide additional effort but doing so requires a higher wage.
Note that, as long as the elasticity of effort in production is below unity ( q < 1 ), the firm’s
demand for additional effort will be bounded. Another interpretation of effort input, which is
effectively equivalent with the specification we adopt in this paper, is overtime to extend the
work week. In this case, the elasticity of effort q represents the shift premium households
require to compensate them for working outside standard work hours. Including effort as a
separate input allows measured TFP to increase in response to investment tax incentives, as it
does in the data. This simple specification imparts realism to the model, but as we show in
Section VI below, it remains somewhat limited in its ability to match the magnitude of the
measured response of TFP in our reduced-form estimates.
       The solution to the firm’s optimization problem requires the following first order
conditions,
                                                           é           -
                                                                         1                                    ù
                    æ   Q
                          -    Q ö      é         ù        ê æ       ö   s
                                                                           x hæ Q
                                                                                      -   Q öæ Q
                                                                                            ÷         +   Qö
                                                                                                            ÷ ú
                              t -1 ÷                                 ÷
                  hç th      h            Q                  ç C              ç h       h     ç h       h
                 x ç               ÷÷ = êa Q - Rt ú + b Et êç
                                           t                    t +1
                                                                     ÷÷       ç  t +1    t
                                                                                            ÷÷ç  t +1    t
                                                                                                            ÷÷ú ,            (21)
                   çè ht-1 ø÷ ëê ht
                           Q                      ú
                                                  û        êçè Ct ø÷ 2 çè ht          Q
                                                                                            ÷ç ht
                                                                                            øè
                                                                                                      Q
                                                                                                           ø÷úú
                                                           êë                                                 û
                                                          é           -
                                                                        1                                  ù
                  æ       Q ö      é              ù       ê æ        ö s n æ nQ - nQ öæ nQ + nQ öú
                     Q
                       -                                                  x
              xn ççç t Q t-1 ÷÷÷ = ê(1-a) Qt -WtQ ú + bEt êççç t+1 ÷÷÷      ççç t+1 Q t ÷÷÷ççç t+1 Q t ÷÷÷ú ,
                    n    n               Q                    C
                                   ê              ú       ê                                                                  (22)
                  è nt-1 ø ë   ÷         nt       û       êëè t ø
                                                               C     ÷    2 èç nt         ÷ç nt
                                                                                         øè             ø÷úú
                                                                                                           û

                                                                19
and
                                                             1
                                                         -                                  Q
                                            yntQ = Ct        s
                                                                 (1- t N ) q (1- a) eQt .                                          (23)
                                                                                            t

Equations (21) and (22) are the firm’s intertemporal demand curves for capital and labor
respectively. Equation (23) gives the firm’s demand for effort. This condition says that the firm’s
choice of effort balances the after-tax marginal benefit of additional effort (the left-hand-side)
with the marginal cost of additional effort (the right-hand-side). Not surprisingly, demand for
effort is an increasing function of the marginal product of labor.

Domestic Capital Producers. Each type of capital is produced with units of the capital aggregate
htm , labor ntm , effort etm and materials xtm (units of the numeraire good). The production function
for each type of capital is
                                                                                                             r
                              ì
                              ï                                                   r-1 ü r-1
                                                     é m mh m q(1-mh ) m (1-mh ) ù r ïï
                                        r-1
                             mï
                      I t = B ímx ( xt ) + (1 - mx ) ê(ht ) (et )
                         m           m r
                                                                      (nt ) úû ýï                                                  (24)
                              ï
                              ï                      ë                                ïþï
                              ï
                              î
where Bm is a scalar and the parameter m x governs the share of materials in production. The
capital producers maximize the expected discounted value of profits,
          é¥       1 ì
                  - ï                                               æ    m
                                                                              -   m
                                                                                          ö
                                                                                            2
                                                                                                        æ   m
                                                                                                                 -   m
                                                                                                                             ö
                                                                                                                               2 ù
                                                                                                                                üï
          ê           ï                                   x                               ÷   x
                                                                                                                             ÷÷ ïýúú (25)
                                                                                                                             ÷
                                                            n                                   h
                                                                    ç  n        n                       ç h        h
       Et êå b Ct + j íPt + j It + j -Wt + j nt + j - xt - nt + j-1 çç                    ÷÷ - ht + j-1 ç
                j  s      m m            m    m        m      m         t + j    t + j -1         m        t + j    t + j -1

          ê j=0       ïï                                  2          çè nt + j-1 ÷ø 2
                                                                              m                         ç
                                                                                                        çè ht + j-1 ÷ø ïïú
                                                                                                                 m

          ë            ïî                                                                                                        ïþû
The first order conditions for the optimal choices of xtm , ntm , htm and etm are
                                                                                     1
                                                                        r-1   æ I m ÷ör
                                                 1 = Pt mmx ( B       m r
                                                                         )    çç t ÷ ,                                             (26)
                                                                               çè x m ÷÷ø
                                                                                 t


                                                  é          -
                                                               1                         ù
              æ       m ö                         ê æ       ö s n æ nm - nm öæ nm + nm öú
                n
             nç t
                 m
                   - nt-1 ÷                         ç C     ÷    x ç         ÷ ç        ÷
            x çç m ÷÷ = ëêé Pt MPt -Wt ûúù + b Et êçç
                              m   n , m m              t +1
                                                            ÷      ç t +1 t
                                                                             ÷ç  t +1 t
                                                                                        ÷ú
              è nt-1 ø÷                           êè Ct ø÷÷ 2 çèç ntm øè    ÷÷çç ntm ø÷÷ú ,                                        (27)
                                                  êë                                     úû

                                                                  é          -
                                                                               1
                                                                                   hæ m        m öæ m         mö
                                                                                                                  ù
                   æ  m
                        -  m ö                                    ê æ      ö  s
                                                                                 x         -              +       ú
              x h çç t m t-1 ÷÷÷ = êéë Pt mMPt h,m - Rt úùû + bEt êçç t+1 ÷÷÷       ççç t+1 m t ÷÷÷ççç t+1 m t ÷÷÷ú ,
                     h    h                                           C                h     h        h     h
                                                                  êçè Ct ø÷ 2 èç ht                                                (28)
                  çè ht-1 ø÷
                                                                  êë
                                                                                                 ÷ç ht
                                                                                                 øè            ø÷úú
                                                                                                                  û



                                                                    20
                                                           1
                                                       -                       Pt m I tm
and                                      yn = Ctm
                                                t
                                                           s
                                                               (1- t ) q (1- m) em .
                                                                        N
                                                                                                          (29)
                                                                                   t

The marginal product of capital and the marginal product of labor are given by
                                                                                             1
                                                                              r-1     æ I m ÷ör U m
                                       MPt m ,h º mh (1 - mx )( B            )
                                                                            m r       çç t ÷ t ,          (30)
                                                                                       çèU m ÷÷ø h m
                                                                                         t       t


and
                                                                                                 1
                                                                                   r-1   æ I m ö÷r U m
                                MPt m ,n º (1 - mh )(1 - mx )( B                  )
                                                                                 m r     çç t ÷ t ,       (31)
                                                                                          çèU m ø÷÷ n m
                                                                                             t       t

                  mh        q(1-mh )        (1-mh )
where U tm º (htm )    (etm )          (ntm )         . Equations (26), (27) and (28) are the firm’s demand

curves for materials, labor hours and the aggregate capital input, respectively. Equation (29),
which is analogous to (23), is the firm’s effort demand curve.

Imported Capital. To avoid having to specify the rest of the world in detail, we model the
international trade margin with an investment import supply curve. We assume that in the initial
non-stochastic steady state, there are no imported capital goods. The parametric form for the
import supply curve is
                                                                        éæ P m öc  ù
                                                    IMPt = I            êç t ÷÷ - 1ú
                                                                          ç
                                                           m        m
                                                                        êç P m ÷÷  ú                      (32)
                                                                        êëè ø      úû

where I m is the amount of type m capital produced in the steady state and c is the import
supply elasticity. If c = 0 then the model collapses to a closed economy with no interaction
with foreign capital importers. If c = ¥ then the model becomes a “small open economy” with
regard to the capital goods markets. In this latter case, the domestic price of capital goods will be
pinned down by the import prices.

Trade Balance. For simplicity and transparency, we assume period-by-period trade balance, so
exports of the numeraire good increase to balance imports of equipment goods and vice versa.
Our analysis—focused on a relatively small equipment goods sector—has little to say about the
extent to which international borrowing and lending changes in response to fiscal shocks.
Instead, Appendix E presents a variant of the model that allows for different extents of


                                                                   21
international borrowing and lending and allows us to evaluate the robustness of our findings with
respect to the behavior of the trade balance across time.
                             C. Resource Constraints and Real GDP
The total amount of the numeraire good is used for either consumption of the final good,
materials inputs for the capital producers, government purchases or payment for imported capital
goods from abroad. The resource constraint for the numeraire good is
                                                        M
                                 Qt = Ct + X t + å Pt m IMPt m + Gt .                        (33)
                                                       m=1

Aggregate capital and materials must satisfy
                                                              M
                                          H t = htQ + å htm                                  (34)
                                                              m=1

and
                                                         M
                                              X t = å xtm .                                  (35)
                                                        m=1

Real gross domestic product (GDP) is the sum of all final goods and services produced in a given
period evaluated at the steady state pre-tax prices. We let Yt denote real GDP. Thus,
                                             M
                               Yt = Ct + å P m éêë I tm + IMPt m ùúû + Gt .                  (36)
                                            m=1


Note that I tm + IMPt m is total investment purchases (production plus imports). Because the model
assumes period-by-period balanced trade, there is no net export term in (36). While equipment
can be imported, equal exports of the numeraire good are offered in exchange.
                                      D. Exogenous Processes
To close the model, we need to specify the stochastic process for the tax policy variables. This
plays two roles in the analysis below. First, we need an empirical process for the estimation of
structural parameters. Second, we consider alternative processes for simulating the effects of tax
policies. Let

                                         Xt = éëêttp , zt1,..., ztM ùûú ¢                    (37)




                                                      22
denote the vector of exogenous tax variables at date t where t tp is the tax rate for corporate

profits and z tm is the comprehensive investment tax subsidy for type m capital. We assume that

the law of motion for X t is given by
                                                        
                                              Xt = Xt + X                                             (37)
                                                          t

       = é tp , z1 ,..., zM ù ¢ is the percent deviation of the tax variables from a time varying trend
where X t êë t t              t ûú


                      follows a VAR process
X t . We assume that X t

                                             = LX
                                            X     +ε ,                                               (38)
                                              t    t -1 t


where ε t is a date-t vector of structural innovations and E [εε '] = W is a variance-covariance

matrix.
          For the indirect inference estimation, we assume that L is diagonal with an
autoregressive root l < 1 that is equal across types of capital. The time varying trend X t is a

step function with a single break occurring at the 1986 tax reform. Hence, Xt£1986 is set equal to

the average value of the tax variables prior to 1986 and, X t >1986 is set equal to the average value
of the tax variables after 1986. Thus, agents perceive the majority of the changes in investment
subsidies as being transitory. The exception to this is the 1986 tax change which is interpreted as
an unanticipated, permanent change. Hence, in the simulations, the tax vector X t experiences a

one-time, unanticipated shift in 1986. Given this specification of shocks, for any given l we
choose the sequence of vectors of structural tax shocks ε t to exactly match the observed time
paths of the tax rates and investment subsidies, and feed them into the simulations used for the
indirect inference.
                              E. Steady State and Calibrated Parameters
Non-Stochastic Steady State. We choose the scaling parameters f, y and B m = B to ensure that

P m = P = N = e = 1 in the non-stochastic steady state. Without loss of generality, we express
steady state investment in type m capital in proportion to type 1. It is easy to show that
I m = Y m I 1 where the scaling factors Y m are
                                            g m d m çæ r + d 1 ÷öæç 1 - z 1 ÷ö
                                     Ym =           ç          ÷÷ç          ÷.                        (39)
                                             g1d 1 çè r + d m øè÷ç1 - z m ø÷÷


                                                      23
Additionally, n m = Y m n1 and x m = Y m x1 so there is a constant material-to-labor ratio across
investment sectors. Similarly, K m = (d m / d1 ) Y m K 1 and h m = Y m h1 for all m. Additional details
on the steady state solution can be found in Appendix C.

Baseline Calibration. Most of the parameters are calibrated to standard values used in the
macroeconomic literature on DSGE models. In this subsection, we focus on parameters that are
important to the baseline, but not pivotal for the margins of adjustment that are the focus of the
analysis. Table 5.A summarizes the baseline values for the calibrated parameters used in the
model that are constant across all model simulations. We set the quarterly discount factor b to
0.99 which implies a 4 percent annual real interest rate. The Frisch labor supply elasticity h is
set to 0.5, in line with recent estimates (see Farber 2005 and Kimball and Shapiro 2008). We set
s , the elasticity of intertemporal substitution, to 0.2, roughly the average of the estimates in Hall
(1988), Campbell and Mankiw (1989) and Barsky, et al. (1997). Based on calculations in House
and Shapiro (2008), we set the steady state tax rates to t N = 0.36 , t d = 0.30 and t p = 0.43 (the
tax rate on corporate profits is a time series average of marginal tax rates taken over the sample
period).
           To calibrate labor’s share for the numeraire (Q) sector, we take total employee
compensation as a fraction of total GDP less proprietors’ income. This share has been roughly
constant in the post-war period and, using data up to 2009, implies 1 - a = 0.62 .13 This
calculation implicitly assumes that proprietors’ income is divided proportionally between labor
income and capital income.
           The model has M = 50 different types of capital. There are 30 equipment classes and 20
structures classes. (The model includes all types of capital, while the reduced-form estimates
exclude computers, software, and residential types.) Together with data on average investment
shares ( I m / I 1 ) and average investment subsidies ( z m ) we use equation (39) to calculate implied
values for gm . Tables 1A and 1B lists the capital classes in the model together with their
associated depreciation rates, investment shares (as a fraction of total investment) and their
average investment subsidies over the sample period.



13
     See Elsby et al. (2013) for a discussion of recent changes to the U.S. labor’s share.
                                                             24
         To calibrate the share parameters m h and m x we use data on input shares from the NBER
productivity dataset. We use the same parameters for structures as for equipment though we have
no independent input data for structures to verify our calibration. Relative to labor’s share for
GDP, labor’s share of gross investment output (for equipment production) is quite low and has
been falling over the sample period. Averaging over all of the types in our data, labor’s share in
capital producing industries fell from roughly 20 percent in the late 1960’s to roughly 9 percent
by 2009. For purposes of calibrating the model we assume that labor’s share of gross output in
the capital-producing sectors is 14 percent (roughly the average over all types and time periods).
Material’s share of gross output is approximately 45 percent.14 The implied capital share in gross
output ( Rhm / I m ) is 1-0.14 -0.45 = 0.41. In steady state, Rh m / Wn m = mh / (1 - mh ) . Using

                                                 Rh m 0.41
                                                     =     = 2.93 ,                                                 (40)
                                                 Wn m 0.14
implies that mh = 0.75 . We calibrate the parameter m x to match the observed materials ratio

X m / I m given the elasticity of substitution r . In the steady state,
                                                                              -1
                                               æ                        1ö
                                               çç          1-r æ m    ö r÷ ÷
                                        mx = çç1 + ( MC U ) r çç m -1÷÷÷ ÷÷÷ .
                                                                  I
                                                                                                                    (41)
                                             ççè               çè X  ø÷ ÷÷
                                                                         ø
                             m -1      -mh
Where MC U º (1- mh ) h (mh )                W 1-mh R mh is the “marginal cost” of U m . For each substitution

parameter r , we set m x according to (41) to match a materials-to-investment ratio

X m / I m = 0.45. For our baseline calibration we set r = 0.01 , which implies that there is

essentially no substitution between materials and the input composite U tm (for this value of r ,

the implied calibration for m x is extremely small).15

Calibrations Affecting Domestic Adjustment. Several parameters directly affect the elasticity of
domestic supply. Because of how they interact with the estimated import supply elasticity, we


14
   We include energy in total material inputs. Energy is a very small fraction of gross investment output, roughly 1
percent.
15
   If we estimate the materials substitution elasticity (r) the estimates are pushed to 0.00. We suspect this reflects the
fact that there is a high degree of correlation between production and materials throughout the data sample. This
estimate echoes a recent finding by Boehm et al. (2014). See also Atalay (2014).
                                                           25
will consider estimates of model parameters under alternative calibrations of these parameters.
Table 5.B shows the baseline and alternative values of these parameters.
         The labor and capital adjustment cost parameters x n and x h are calibrated using
combined evidence from several different studies. Caballero and Engel (1993) use data on gross
and net employment flows for U.S. manufacturing from the Bureau of Labor Statistics. They
estimate an annual quadratic adjustment cost parameter of 0.53 for net flows and 0.28 for gross
flows, although they prefer a specification with fixed costs.16 Shapiro (1986) estimates
employment adjustment costs of 0.23–0.34 for non-production workers, and zero for production
workers. If we take 0.25 as a representative estimate, the corresponding quarterly adjustment cost
is 1.0 (four times the annual value). We use x n = 1.00 as our baseline calibration.
         There is a wide range of estimates of capital adjustment costs in the literature. For our
baseline, we use a calibration with moderate adjustment costs—consistent with the moderate
(Shapiro 1986) to low (Hall 2004) estimates in the literature. Specifically, we set x h = 8.00 for
our quarterly model. Following the thought experiment in Hall (2004) this implies that the
doubling time for capital in response to a permanent increase in its shadow value is roughly two
years (8 quarters).
         Given the relatively wide range of adjustment costs estimated in the literature, and that
we specify a multi-sector model rather than a single sector like in most of these studies, we also
consider how our results change if we adopt lower factor adjustment costs ( x n = 0 and x h = 2 )

and higher factor adjustment costs ( x n = 4.00 and x h = 16.00 ), which doubles the adjustment
time.
         The model allows for unobserved effort in production. The magnitude of this effect is
captured by the production elasticity of effort q . In the model, q must be between 0 and 1.
There are few reliable estimates of utilization elasticities that we can turn to.17 There are some
estimates from the DSGE literature on reactions to identified monetary shocks, but these
estimates are quite wide and are often estimated to be at on or the other corner of admissible

16
   Cooper and Willis (2009) use the empirical results of Caballero and Engel (1993) to estimate a set of structural
models with asymmetric labor adjustment costs. Their estimates for the quadratic costs specification are 7.9 for
positive adjustment and -0.28 for negative adjustment, however neither coefficient is statistically significant.
17
   The elasticity is identified by the derivative of the cost of increasing utilization (e.g., the shift premium or
incremental depreciation). There are estimates of the level of this cost in the literature, but not of its derivative. We
are grateful to Susanto Basu for a discussion of this issue.
                                                          26
values. For our baseline calibration we will choose the intermediate value q = 0.5 and consider
how our estimates change for higher or lower values.
         The final parameter governing the domestic supply of investment is yn which limits the

long-run substitution of labor across sectors. yn = 0 implies that labor is perfectly substitutable

across sectors in the long run. yn = h -1 = 2 implies that each sector has a separate labor supply
curve with no possibility of substitution. Our baseline calibration of this parameter is to set
yn = 1.00 , with 0.25 and 1.75 as low and high alternatives.


Persistence of Tax Policy Changes. We also calibrate the (perceived) persistence of policy
changes. This persistence is determined by the parameter l in the transition matrix in (38). If l
is close to 1.00 then tax changes are perceived as permanent in the sense that agents believe that
it is equally likely for tax subsidies to increase or decrease in the future. If l is less than 1.00
then agents interpret changes in tax policy as transitory events which are expected to be undone
in the future. It is convenient to discuss this calibration when we discuss introducing the policy
shocks into the estimation, so that discussion is deferred to the next section.
                        F. Estimating the Supply Elasticity of Foreign Equipment
Here we estimate the foreign supply elasticity of equipment c . This structural parameter is of
central importance in determining the reactions of domestic production and domestic purchases
of equipment to changes in investment tax subsidies.18 We use an indirect inference approach
similar to the one proposed by Gourieroux, Montfort and Renault (1993). Given any value of c ,
we simulate the post-war investment paths implied by the model using the observed shocks to
investment subsidies and tax rates as forcing variables. We then run regressions of the form (5)
for the simulated data and recover the implied reduced-form coefficients. We choose the
parameter c to make the simulated regression coefficients and their reduced-form analogues
match as closely as possible.




18
  We limit our attention to this parameter for several reasons. It is central for quantitatively distinguishing between
production and purchases of capital goods. Moreover, it is sharply identified by the difference in the reduced-form
response of production versus purchases to investment subsidies, which is the key empirical finding of the paper.
Conversely, while we can estimate other model parameters and have done so in earlier version of this paper, the data
and the model are not particularly informative vehicles for estimating them.
                                                         27
Simulating the Path of Investment Subsidies in the Post-War Period. To implement the indirect
inference, we simulate the model using variation in tax subsidies as the stochastic forcing
variation. As is clear from Figure 4, there is substantial variation in tax subsidies both across
types and over time (that is, relative to the numeriaire good). We do not include variation in
productivity shocks as is conventional in DSGE modeling.19
        Equation (38) describes the evolution of the exogenous forcing processes. We assume
that the tax changes are perceived as autoregressive with common persistence across types, so
L = diag(l ) . We construct a path of shocks that generates the investment subsidies and tax rates

observed over the time period of our data sample as

                                                  - LX
                                            εt = X     .                                             (42)
                                                   t    t -1


The subsidy and the tax rates are mechanically related to each other (recall (2) and (4)), so we
include the exact path of both in the simulation. With the structural innovations, we can simulate
the economy’s dynamic reaction to the shocks. Note, we do not have to specify the covariance of
the shocks. Instead, since we use the actual realization of the shocks in the estimation, the
simulation exactly reflects the strong common movements of tax rates and investment subsidies.
        We calibrate l to 0.9167, which, in our quarterly model, corresponds to a three-year
expected duration of tax changes. This expected duration is roughly in line with the evidence in
Table 2 on the frequency of tax changes. The alternative values of 0.8750 and 0.9375 correspond
to two and four-year expected durations. The expected duration of the investment subsidy
powerfully affects how much it increases investment, with shorter durations leading to larger
increases in investment as firms take advantage of the temporary reduction of the cost of durable
investment. This parameter therefore has a considerable effect on the magnitude of response to a
policy shock.


Indirect Inference. To implement the indirect inference, we simulate the path of endogenous
variables given a value of c and for the path of policy variables as just described. We estimate
the reduced-form regressions (5) on the simulated data, which generates the model-implied
moments. The indirect inference approach then adjusts the estimate of the model parameter to


19
  As long as technology shocks are uncorrelated with the tax subsidies, including them would not change the
average simulated response that we are using for estimation.
                                                    28
find the best fit of the model-implied moments with the analogous moments in the data (the
“targeted moments”). Specifically, the targeted moments are the estimated coefficients on the
comprehensive subsidy ( b1 in equation 5) for five different regressions with the following left-

hand-side variables: equipment production, equipment purchases, hours, material inputs, and
measured productivity (TFP).20 Denote the vector of these b1 estimates as b̂ data and let b (c )

denote the corresponding vector of regression coefficients for the model simulation given a
vector of parameters c .21 Our parameter estimate ĉ is the solution to the minimum distance
problem
                                               ìïï data                                  ü
                              cˆ = arg min c í                   ˆ -1 ébˆ data - b (c)ùýïï
                                                  ébˆ - b (c)ù ¢ W                                              (43)
                                             ïîïêë           úû       êë              úûï
                                                                                        þï
where W = Var éêbˆ data ùú . Under the usual conditions, the estimate is asymptotically normally
               ë         û
distributed cˆ  N (c* , sc2 ) . The estimated variance of the indirect inference estimate is
                                                                                         -1
                                              é                                     ù
                                              êæç ¶ b (cˆ )÷ö ˆ - 1 çæ ¶ b (cˆ )ö÷¢ ú
                                       sˆ c = êçç
                                          2
                                                           ÷W ç                  ÷ú           .                 (44)
                                              êèç ¶ c ÷÷ø           ççè ¶ c ø÷÷ ú
                                              ëê                                    ûú

Recall that Ŵ accounts for heteroskedasticity and autocorrelation, so the estimated variance sˆ c2

will also be heteroskedasticity and autocorrelation consistent.


Estimates of model parameters. The indirect inference estimates of the import supply elasticity
c are reported in Table 6. The first column gives the targeted moments previously reported in
the third column of Tables 3 and 4, i.e., the reduced-form regression coefficient of the response
of the equipment production, equipment purchases, hours, materials, and TFP to the
comprehensive subsidy for the “macro covariates” specification. The top row gives the estimates


20
   We target equipment production and purchases because their distinct behavior is central to our analysis of
subsidies. We also target materials, TFP, and hours because they carry important information about domestic supply
elasticity. We do not target wages because it is well understood that measured wage payments may not be allocative
on a spot basis (see Basu and House 2017 and the references therein). While we do not target equipment prices and
structures prices and quantities we do examine the fit of the model for these untargeted moments (see below).
21
   We use the estimates of b̂ data from the “macro covariates” columns of Table 3 and 4 in the indirect inference. The
trend, oil prices, and Nixon price controls are not generated in the simulations and do not enter as exogenous forcing
variables in the model, so we do not attempt to match the coefficients on the control variables (Gm in equation 5).

                                                               29
of the import elasticity for the baseline and various alternatives of the calibrated parameters. The
rest of the table reports the model-implied moments given the estimated supply elasticity.
       There are several noteworthy features of these estimates. First, the estimates for the
import supply elasticity are substantial. For the baseline specification, the estimate is 6.53.
Inelastic values are far outside of the confidence interval. These estimates suggest that the U.S.
faces an elastic international supply of capital goods. While this estimate changes as we change
the calibrated parameters, the estimated elasticity is always above 3.
       Table 6 also reports the model implied moments for the parameter estimates. Overall the
model does a reasonably good job of reproducing the broad features of domestic production of
investment equipment. The model matches the key reduced-form finding, that the response of
investment production is substantially less than the response of purchases. For the baseline
specification and other specifications, the modeled reduced-form coefficients come very close to
the 1.08 value in the data. It is instructive to see how the modeled coefficients vary under
alternative calibrations.


Policy persistence. The persistence parameter l controls how much investment demand

responds to a policy shock. The lower the persistence, the more demand increases to take
advantage of the temporary subsidy. Since the size of the shocks is given by the history of actual

policy, low l implies a bigger increase in investment and vice versa. These outcomes are

apparent in the modeled reduced-form estimates (the value of 1.59 in the baseline increases to
1.73 in the low persistence parameterization and decrease to 1.45 in the high persistence
parameterization). Implicitly, imports take up more or less of the gap between domestic demand
and domestic production. Even though the low persistent calibration fits the equipment

investment moment a bit better than the baseline, we prefer the baseline value of l because its

half-life of three years fits our reading of the narrative a bit better than the shorter half-life
implied by the low persistence. With the higher increase in demand corresponding to the lower
persistence, the estimated import supply elasticity is higher. That is, the model must estimate
more responsive imports to accommodate the observed shift in demand.




                                                30
Margins Affecting Domestic Supply Response. The other alternatives to the baseline shown in
Table 6 relate to the elasticity of domestic supply. Higher or lower supply response to effort ( q)
imply more or less responsive domestic supply. Higher adjustment costs imply less responsive
domestic supply. Higher or lower sectoral labor supply specificity ( yn ) imply less or more
responsive domestic supply. Varying these parameters has the expected effects on the modeled
reduced-form coefficients and on the estimate of the supply elasticity.


Other moments. The estimated model does a good job of hitting the targeted moments for hours.
There is slight undershooting in the data of the theoretically-mandated one-for-one movement of
production and materials, perhaps because of measurement problems. The most substantial
discrepancy is for TFP. In the data, measured TFP rises by 0.28 log points for a 1 percentage
point investment subsidy. In the model, the effort margin generates a reaction in TFP but it is
substantially smaller than the estimate from the actual data.


Non-targeted moments. The model generates predictions for moments that are not targeted in the
indirect inference procedure. Appendix Table D.1 shows results. The model predicts
substantially larger response of structures than seen in the data. Given that the model leaves out
features that make it hard to have structures respond quickly (within a quarter in the model) such
as time to plan and time to build, this miss is not surprising or troubling. Similarly, the model
implies a larger short-run effect on wages than seen in the data, again presumably because it does
include frictions that might keep spot wages from being non-allocative. On the other hand, the
model does a remarkably good job of hitting non-targeted movements in prices of capital goods.


                      VI. SIMULATED RESPONSE TO INVESTMENT SUBSIDIES
We now use the estimated model to quantify the effects of investment tax policies on
macroeconomic activity. We consider a policy that returns the ITC to the pre-1986-reform level
of 10 percent. Consistent with historical practice, the simulated ITC applies to equipment, but
not structures. We consider various scenarios for the expected and actual duration of the policy.
For each simulation, we report the effects of the policy on investment (both aggregate and by
type), the prices of capital goods, imports of equipment goods and macroeconomic aggregates.
The simulation is based on the baseline estimate and calibration as reported in Table 6.
                                                31
                  A. Temporary Subsidy with Uncertain Expiration (Baseline case)
For our baseline policy simulation, we consider a policy where the ITC is temporarily set to 10
percent and will sunset with a known probability. In particular, we assume that the sunset is
described by a Poisson process with a constant hazard rate per unit time. The hazard rate is
chosen to imply an expected duration of 3 years, which corresponds to the baseline value of l
used to generate the parameter estimates for the simulations.22
        To simulate sample realizations of the policy with constant hazard of return to baseline,
we can model the ITC as having an expected path given by an AR(1) as in (38) with the diagonal
elements of L given by l = 1- (1 / 12) (implying an expected policy horizon of 12 quarters as
long as the policy stays in effect). Each period the policy continues conveys news, so results in a
shock to the subsidy relative to its expected path. Thus, each sample path will look like a
constant subsidy while the policy is in effect followed by a sudden removal of the subsidy at a
random point in time.
        Figure 5 shows a set of impulse response paths for several variables in the model under
this temporary investment subsidy scenario. The figure depicts a policy that happens to last
exactly 3 years—the expected duration of the policy. Again, the exact duration of the policy is
unknown at the date the subsidy is introduced and so, much like the policies facing firms in the
real world, there is an important element of uncertainty in the simulated tax policy. Figure 5.A
reports domestically-produced investment goods for all of the types in the model. The
differential response of equipment and structures production can be seen clearly in the figure.
Since all types of equipment receive the subsidy, production of all types expand. The expansion
is limited by the factor adjustment costs initially, but gradually rises as the subsidy continues.
Structures do not receive the subsidy.23 Production of business and residential structures
contracts while the policy is in effect. The cost of producing investment goods has gone up for
all types (wages, capital services, and the effective cost of material inputs all rise), so structures
production falls. Notice that once the subsidy is removed in period 13, production in the
equipment categories does not return to steady state immediately, but instead falls only gradually


22
   Mertens and Ravn (2012) show how differences in the anticipation, implementation lag, and duration of tax
changes affects aggregate economic outcomes (see also Mertens and Ravn 2013). Our approach gives an alternative
method for incorporating duration into a DGSE model.
23
   Residential structures get either business or household treatment depending on the form of tenancy. In the
simulations, we presume residential treatment on the margin, so they get zero subsidy each period.
                                                      32
over time. This is again due to the factor adjustment costs, which keep labor and capital in the
equipment-producing sectors temporarily above steady state.
        Figure 5.B displays the equilibrium real relative (pre-tax) prices of the capital goods.
Again, the differences between equipment and structures are easy to identify. Equipment prices
rise immediately and remain high for the duration of the policy. For long-lived capital goods
(i.e., capital goods with low depreciation rates) the price increase is on the order of the subsidy
itself (see House and Shapiro 2008). Prices fall for the structures. Factor inputs are still attached
to these industries because of the adjustment costs and this puts downward pressure on prices
while the inputs are gradually reallocated to other sectors.
        Figure 5.C shows imported capital goods (total additions to capital for each type is the
sum of the lines in the Figure 5.A and Figure 5.C). Obviously, there is no response for structures
(the line at zero). Given the imports supply curve (32), the response of imported equipment is
simply a scaled-up version of the price response where the scaling factor is the estimated import
elasticity (6.53).
        Finally, Figure 5.D reports the simulated time paths for GDP, aggregate employment,
aggregate consumption, aggregate investment production, aggregate investment purchases, and
aggregate investment imports. In the short run, the increased investment is supplied primarily by
imports. Only after domestic industries have had the opportunity to respond by expanding their
productive capacity does domestic production rise. Notice that despite the large subsidy, the
aggregate effects on GDP, employment and consumption are relatively modest. GDP rises by
only 0.9 percent by the end of the policy. Employment rises immediately; even though it has
adjustment costs, its maximal response is on impact because of the greater quasi-fixity of capital.
Investment is a relatively small share of total employment, the subsidy affects only a portion of
investment, and much of the short term stimulus is transmitted to foreign rather than domestic
firms. All of these features limit the aggregate stimulus from investment tax subsidies.24
Nonetheless, a one to two percent of GDP effect could be noticeable in aggregate time series and
significant as a counter-cyclical policy.




24
  Note that aggregate consumption changes only slightly in response to the subsidy. Hence, relaxing the assumption
of period-by-period balanced trade would not change the results appreciably.
                                                       33
                                      B. Comparison with no trade case
To illustrate the role of trade in the response of the economy to an investment tax subsidy, we
compare the responses in the baseline case to a case where trade is shut down. Figure 6 shows
the response of GDP, aggregate investment purchases, aggregate investment production, and
aggregate imports of capital goods for the baseline specification and for the no trade case to the
same temporary shock to investment subsidies illustrated in Figure 5. Because of the more elastic
supply of investment goods in the baseline case with international trade, the response of
purchases to the tax subsidy is substantially greater on impact in the our model than in the no
trade specification. On impact, aggregate purchases of investment goods increase by 15 percent
in our model versus 3 percent with no imports. The peak response at quarter 12 (the period
before the temporary subsidy has its random termination) is also about 15 percent versus 5
percent for the no trade case.25
         Interestingly, when the tax subsidy expires, there is a more rapid decline of purchases in
our baseline model than in the no trade case. Domestic production has increased by
approximately the same amount with and without trade. When the subsidy expires, this above-
steady-state capacity to produce equipment leads to exports of equipment. Production also
remains high longer because of the ability to sell into international markets. Hence, the presence
of an import margin attenuates the stimulus to the overall economy of temporary investment
subsidies, but leads to incremental stimulus after the policy has expired.
                           C. Temporary Subsidy with Alternative Expirations
There are multiple ways to model temporary tax policies. The simulation in Figure 5 is a realistic
depiction of actual tax policies recently adopted in the U.S. It combines two distinct effects—the
temporary nature of the policy change and the unanticipated expiration of the policy. Here we
present two alterative simulations that separate these effects. In Figure 7, we simulate a subsidy
that follows an AR(1) process with the same autoregressive coefficient as used in the simulation

25
   Aggregate GDP increases substantially more in the baseline case with trade in equipment than in the no-trade
alternative. Because of the assumption of period-by-period trade balance, exports of numeraire good expand to pay
for the imports of equipment. This finding depends on our specification of period-by-period balanced trade. If there
were international borrowing, the increase in exports of numeraire can be spread out over many periods, so GDP
rises less immediately, but more later. Appendix E presents simulations under alternative degrees of international
borrowing and lending. The degree of borrowing does affect the timing of aggregate GDP substantially, but has little
effect on the paper’s central results relating to investment production and purchases. See Appendix Figure E1. The
central empirical finding of the paper, that production versus purchases of equipment move quite differently in
response to tax subsidies has little bearing on the extent to which the resulting imports are finance by international
borrowing.
                                                         34
behind Figure 5. But, unlike Figure 5, the subsidy simply decays at the AR rate and thus
gradually declines from 10% to zero. This simulation is instructive, but not realistic. The AR(1)
phase out in Figure 7 and the Poisson expiration in Figure 5 have similar patterns during the first
12 quarters except with the AR(1) decay, the magnitudes of the responses are lower because the
value of the subsidy is uniformly lower. In both cases, the responses build over time as the
capacity to produce equipment gradually increases. Upon expiration of the subsidy (that occurs
randomly in Figure 5 at quarter 12), the dynamics look similar, though without the sharp jump.
In Figure 5, there is a protracted period of exports of capital goods once domestic production has
expanded sufficiently and the subsidy has been removed.
       Alternatively, Figure 8 shows a constant subsidy with known expiration date at three
years from its onset. This case has precedent in actual policy where temporary investment
incentives are not uncommon (e.g., bonus depreciation, at least as initially legislated). Because
we have calibrated the Poisson hazard (Figure 5) and AR(1) decay rate (Figure 7) and the
duration of the policy (Figure 8) to each have an expected duration of three years, each model
features the same reaction for all endogenous variables in the period in which the policy is
announced and put into effect (the impact period). After the first period, the simulated paths
diverge with the known temporary subsidy in Figure 8 having larger effects than in the policy
where the tax subsidy decays (Figure 7) or gets extended in expectation by a period (Figure 5).
The known and increasingly impending expiration in Figure 8 creates an urgency to invest
during the known period of the subsidy. This effect is also seen in the prices. With the known,
temporary subsidy, they are higher uniformly.
                                      D. Permanent Subsidy
Figure 9 displays the impulse responses for a permanent investment subsidy, that is, a change in
the subsidy that is expected to be permanent and actually is so. (It also represents policies that
are expected to be temporary, but where the subsequent policy symmetrically increases or
decreases the subsidy so that the continuation has the same expected value as the current subsidy.
Obviously, the simulated paths would change when the future subsidy actually changes.)
       As in Figure 5, there are clearly identifiable differences between equipment and
structures. There are several differences between the two figures that deserve emphasis. Notice
that in the long run, production of structures increases even though it is not subsidized. This is
due to the fact that the capital aggregate (16) is a Cobb-Douglas aggregate over all of the capital

                                                35
types in the model. As a result, if the subsidy encourages firms to increase the total number of
units of medical equipment, it is indirectly encouraging firms to increase the total number of
hospitals as well (though to a lesser degree). Also, the price responses are not as great as they
were in the temporary subsidy. For the permanent subsidy, the policy is anticipated to have a
long-run impact on the stock of subsidized equipment. Since the price reflects the present value
of the after-tax marginal products of capital, the anticipated increase in the stock of capital
implies lower future marginal products and thus relatively lower current prices. Under the
temporary policy, the long-run impact on the stock of equipment was not affected as much and
so the prices were comparatively high. Finally, the aggregate effects of the permanent subsidy
are not as great. Under the permanent subsidy there is no urgency to purchase the capital goods
while the subsidy is in place and thus the firms can wait to acquire the goods. This delay—
reflected in a smaller price increase—implies that the short-run increase in overall investment
production and aggregate employment is somewhat smaller than with a temporary subsidy.
     E. Elasticity of Domestic Supply of Investment Goods (Alternative Parameter Values)
The less-than-infinite elasticity of investment supply is the key driver of the analysis. Our model
features a number of margins of adjustment that allow domestic production to respond to
subsidies. Of course, the main sources of the finite supply elasticity are the quasi-fixity of capital
and the upward sloping supply of labor that are a feature of our DGSE model. These alone,
however, will not make supply of investment goods very inelastic because the investment-goods-
producing sector is relatively small. So if factors of production are mobile across sectors,
production of investment goods could increase in response to tax subsidies with little increase in
price.

         Factors of production are not, however, very mobile across sectors (Ramey and Shapiro
1998, 2001). Our DGSE model introduces two sources of frictions relating to factor mobility:
quadratic costs of adjusting labor and capital and specificity in sectoral labor supply. Working in
the opposite direction of increasing elasticity of investment supply, the model allows for an
intensity-of-work margin modeled as variable effort. Figure 10 quantifies the importance of these
features of the model by showing how different parameter value in the model for these margins
of adjustment effect the aggregate outcomes relative to the baseline case. For this exercise, we
return to the case of the temporary subsidy with uncertain expected duration. The baseline results
are the same as in Figure 5 and 6. Reducing the adjustment cost parameters x n and x h from
                                                 36
their baseline values (1 and 8 respectively) to 0 and 2 makes all aggregates more responsive to
the subsidy. Reducing the labor specificity parameter yn from its baseline value of 1 to 0.25, in
contrast, has little effect.26 Eliminating the variable effort margin (by setting q to approximately
0) in contrast considerably decreases the flexibility of domestic supply, so it reduces the
expansion of purchase, production, and GDP.


                                                 VII. CONCLUSION
Investment tax incentives are used both to encourage capital accumulation in the long run and to
stimulate economic activity in the short run. This paper highlights the distinction between the
purchase and production of capital goods affected by these tax incentives. It finds that, in
response to typical changes in investment tax incentives, only part of the observed increase in
investment is met by domestic production. A substantial fraction of the increase in investment
demand is met by imports. While investment tax incentives do promote capital accumulation,
their ability to stimulate aggregate economic activity—especially in the sectors producing the
subsidized capital goods—is limited to an extent by “leakage” of the stimulus to foreign
producers through imports of capital goods. Hence, the production versus purchases mechanism
identified and quantified in this paper is important for understanding the effects of investment tax
policy.
          Goolsbee (1998) argued that the stimulative effects of investment tax subsidies might be
limited because the supply of capital goods was relatively inelastic. The production versus
purchases mechanism in our analysis is quite different from the one identified by Goolsbee
where investment incentives bid up the prices of capital goods. In our mechanism, the bidding up
of prices is limited by foreign supply. Indeed, we do not find evidence that investment subsidies
much affect the prices of investment goods in our sample. Using vintage data and his original
estimation period, we can partially reproduce the original findings reported by Goolsbee. Hence,
the differences in our empirical results for prices reflect changes in the economy since his work
and, to an extent, revisions of the data used in the earlier analysis.
          How does the economy respond to investment tax subsidies? To answer this question, the
paper presents an equilibrium analysis of investment tax incentives. To capture important

26
  For temporary policies, labor specificity has little effect on the simulated responses. It does have important effects
for permanent policies.
                                                          37
margins of adjustment across investment sectors and to include a distinction between domestic
purchases and domestic production of capital goods, we specify a dynamic stochastic general
equilibrium model with capital and labor adjustment costs, variable effort, and international trade
in equipment. We estimate parameters of the model using indirect inference based on the
reduced-form responses of production, purchases and inputs in the investment sector to
investment tax subsidies.
       The structural estimates indicate the import supply of equipment is quite elastic and thus
the purchase/production distinction that is central to our analysis is quantitatively important. For
typical changes in investment incentives, in the short run about half the increase in demand for
investment is met by imports over the duration of the change. Moreover, because imports limit
the increase in the price of investment goods, an investment tax incentive causes a greater
increase in the stock of productive capital relative to an economy where all investment goods
were produced domestically. On the other hand, production of domestic capital goods expands
less than it would in an economy without international trade in capital goods, so the stimulus of
domestic capital producers is less than it would be in the no-trade case during the period of the
subsidy. Because capacity has increased, domestic producers export equipment following the
expiration of the subsidy.




                                                38
                                          REFERENCES

Abel, Andrew B. 1982. “Dynamic Effects of Permanent and Temporary Tax Policies in a q
Model of Investment.” Journal of Monetary Economics 9(3): 353-373.

Atalay, Enghin. 2014. “How Important are Sectoral Shocks?” University of Chicago Working
Paper.

Auerbach, Alan J., and Kevin A. Hassett. 1991. “Recent U.S. Investment Behavior and the Tax
Reform Act of 1986: A Disaggregate View.” Carnegie-Rochester Conference Series on Public
Policy 35: 185–215.

Auerbach, Alan J., and Kevin A. Hassett. 1992. “Tax Policy and Business Fixed Investment in
the United States.” Journal of Public Economics 47(2): 141–170.

Bartelsman, Eric J., and Wayne B. Gray. 1996. “The NBER Manufacturing Productivity
Database,” National Bureau of Economics Research Technical Working Paper 205.

Barsky, Robert B., F. Thomas Juster, Miles S. Kimball, and Matthew D. Shapiro. 1997.
“Preference Parameters and Behavioral Heterogeneity: An Experimental Approach in the Health
and Retirement Study.” Quarterly Journal of Economics 112(2): 537–579.

Boehm, Christoph, Aaron Flaaen, and Nitya Pandalai Nayar. 2014. “Input Linkages and the
Transmission of Shocks: Firm-Level Evidence from the 2011 Tohoku Earthquake.” University of
Michigan Working Paper.

Caballero, Ricardo, and Eduardo Engel. 1993. “Microeconomic Adjustment Hazards and
Aggregate Dynamics.” The Quarterly Journal of Economics 108(2): 359–383.

Campbell, John, and Gregory N. Mankiw. 1989. “Consumption, Income and Interest Rates:
Reinterpreting the Time Series Evidence.” NBER Macroeconomics Annual 4: 185–216.

Chirinko, Robert S., and Daniel J. Wilson. 2006. “State Investment Tax Incentives: What Are the
Facts?” Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco Working Paper 2006–49.

Chow, Gregory C., and An-loh Lin. 1971. “Best linear unbiased interpolation, distribution, and
extrapolation of time series by related series.” The Review of Economics and Statistics (53): 372–
375.

Cooper, Russell, and Joao Ejarque. 2003. “Financial frictions and investment: requiem in q.”
Review of Economic Dynamics 6(4): 710–728.

Cooper, Russell, and Jonathan L. Willis. 2009. “The cost of labor adjustment: Inferences from
the gap.” Review of Economic Dynamics 12(4): 632–647.

Cummins, Jason G., and Giovanni L. Violante. 2002. “Investment-Specific Technical Change in
the US (1947–2000): Measurement and Macroeconomic Consequences.” Review of Economic
Dynamics 5(2): 243–284.

                                               39
Driscoll, John C., and Aart C. Kraay. 1998. “Consistent Covariance Matrix Estimation with
Spatially Dependent Panel Data.” The Review of Economics and Statistics 80: 549–560.

Eberly, Janice, Sergio Rebelo, and Nicolas Vincent. 2008. “Investment and value: A neoclassical
benchmark.” National Bureau of Economic Research Working Paper 13866.

Edgerton, Jesse. 2010. “Estimating Machinery Supply Elasticities Using Output Price Booms.”
Federal Reserve Board Working Paper 2011–03.

Edgerton, Jesse. 2011. “The Effects of Taxation on Business Investment: New Evidence from
Used Equipment.” Unpublished manuscript.

Elsby, Michael; Bart Hobijn, and Aysegul Sahin. 2013. “The Decline of the U.S. Labor Share.”
Brookings Papers on Economic Activity 2013(2): 1–63.

Farber, Henry S. 2005. “Is Tomorrow Another Day? The Labor Supply of New York City Cab
Drivers.” Journal of Political Economy 113(1): 46–82.

Feenstra, Robert C., John Romalis, and Peter K. Schott. 2002. “U.S.Imports, Exports and Tariff
Data, 1989–2001.” National Bureau of Economic Research Working Paper 9387.

Fraumeni, Barbara M. 1997. “The Measurement of Depreciation in the U.S. National Income and
Product Accounts.” Survey of Current Business July, 7–23.

Gilchrist, Simon, and Charles P. Himmelberg. 1995. “Evidence on the role of cash flow for
investment.” Journal of Monetary Economics 36: 541–572.

Gomes, J., 2001. “Financing investment.” American Economic Review 91(5): 1263–1285.

Goolsbee, Austan. 1998. “Investment Tax Incentives, Prices, and the Supply of Capital Goods.”
Quarterly Journal of Economics 113(1): 121–148.

Gordon, Robert J. 1990. The Measurement of Durable Goods Prices. Chicago: University of
Chicago Press, Chicago, IL.

Gourieroux, Christian, Alain Monfort, and Eric Renault. 1993. “Indirect inference.” Journal of
applied econometrics 8: S85–S85.

Gravelle, Jane H. 1994. The Economics Effects of Taxing Capital Income. MIT Press,
Cambridge, MA.

Hall, Robert E., and Dale W. Jorgenson. 1967. “Tax Policy and Investment Behavior.” American
Economic Review 57(3): 391–414.

Hall, Robert E. 1988. “Intertemporal Substitution in Consumption.” Journal of Political
Economy 96(2): 339–357.



                                              40
Hall, Robert E. 2004. “Measuring Factor Adjustment Costs.” Quarterly Journal of Economics
119(3): 899-927.

Handbook, N.I.P.A. 2014. “Concepts and methods of the US national income and product
accounts, Bureau of Economic Analysis.” http://www.bea.gov/methodologies/.

House, Christopher L., and Matthew Shapiro. 2008. “Temporary Investment Tax Incentives:
Theory with Evidence from Bonus Depreciation.” American Economic Review 93(3): 737–768.

Hulten, Charles R., and Frank C Wykoff. 1981a. “The Estimation of Economic Depreciation
Using Vintage Asset Prices: An Application of the Box-Cox Power Transformation.” Journal of
Econometrics 15(3): 367–396.

Hulten, Charles R., and Frank C Wykoff. 1981b. “The Measurement of Economic Depreciation.”
In Depreciation, Inflation, and the Taxation of Income from Capital, pp. 81–125. Washington,
D.C: Urban Institute Press.

Jorgenson, Dale W. 1963. “Capital Theory and Investment Behavior.” American Economic
Review Papers and Proceedings 53(2): 247–259.

Jorgenson, Dale W., and Kun-Young Yun. 1990. “Tax Reform and U.S. Economic Growth.”
Journal of Political Economy 98(5): S151–S193.

Jorgenson, Dale W., and Kun-Young Yun. 1991. Tax Reform and the Cost of Capital. Oxford:
Oxford University Press.

Kimball, Miles, and Matthew D. Shapiro. 2008. “Labor Supply: Are Income and Substitution
Effects Both Large or Both Small?” NBER Working Paper No. 14208.

Liu, Zheng, Daniel F. Waggoner, and Tao Zha. 2009. “Sources of the Great Moderation: Shocks,
Friction, or Monetary Policy?” Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco Working Paper 2009–01.

Mertens, Karel, and Morten O. Ravn. 2012. “Empirical Evidence on the Aggregate Effects of
Anticipated and Unanticipated US Tax Policy Shocks.” American Economic Journal: Economic
Policy 4(2): 145-81.

Mertens, Karel, and Morten O. Ravn. 2013. “The Dynamic Effects of Personal and Corporate
Income Tax Changes in the United States.” American Economic Review 103(4): 1212-47.

Mussa, Michael L. 1977. “External and Internal Adjustment Costs and the Theory of Aggregate
and Firm Investment.” Economica 44: 163–178.

Mian, Atif, and Amir Sufi. 2012. “The Effects of Fiscal Stimulus: Evidence from the 2009 ‘Cash
for Clunkers’ Program.” Quarterly Journal of Economics 127 (3): 1107–1142.

Ramey, Valerie A., and Matthew D. Shapiro. 1998. “Costly Capital Reallocation and the Effects
of Government Spending.” Carnegie-Rochester Conference Series on Public Policy 48: 145–
194.
                                             41
Ramey, Valerie A., and Matthew D. Shapiro. 2001. “Displaced Capital: A Study of Aerospace
Plant Closings.” Journal of Political Economy, 109: 958–992.

Romer, Christina D., and David H. Romer. 2009. “A Narrative Analysis of Postwar Tax
Changes.” Online appendix to Romer, Christina D., and David H. Romer. 2010. “The
Macroeconomic Effects of Tax Changes: Estimates Based on a New Measure of Fiscal Shocks.”
American Economic Review 100(3), 763-801.

Sallee, James M. 2011. “The Surprising Incidence of Tax Credits for the Toyota Prius.”
American Economic Journal: Economic Policy 3(2): 189–219.

Shapiro, Matthew D. 1986. “The Dynamic Demand for Capital and Labor.” Quarterly Journal of
Economics 101: 513–542.

Sinn, Hans-Werner. 1991. “Taxation and the Cost of Capital: The “Old” View, the “New” View,
and Another View,” in Tax Policy and the Economy Vol 5, D. Bradford Ed., pp. 25–54.
Cambridge MA: MIT Press.

Summers, Lawrence H. 1981. “Taxation and Corporate Investment: a q-Theory Approach.”
Brookings Papers on Economic Activity 1981(1): 67–127.

U.S. Department of Commerce, Bureau of Economic Analysis. 1993. Fixed Reproducible
Tangible Wealth in the United States: 1925–1989. Washington, DC: U. S. Government Printing
Office.

Whelan, Karl. 1999. “Tax incentives, material inputs, and the supply curve for capital
equipment.” Federal Reserve Board of Governors Working Paper 99-21.

Zwick, Eric, and James Mahon. 2017. “Tax Policy and Heterogeneous Investment Behavior.”
American Economic Review 107(1): 217-48.




                                            42
         FIGURE 1. EXPORTS AND IMPORTS OF CAPITAL EQUIPMENT, RELATIVE TO EQUIPMENT INVESTMENT


0.7



0.6



0.5



0.4



0.3



0.2



0.1



 0
      1967   1971   1975   1979    1983   1987       1991   1995      1999   2003   2007   2011
                                           Exports          Imports




                                                 43
           FIGURE 2. PURCHASES, PRODUCTION AND PRICES, GENERAL INDUSTRIAL EQUIPMENT (LOG)

                                         A. Real Purchases and Production


6.5



  6



5.5


                                                                                      Purchases (BEA Data)
  5
                                                                                      Production (NBER Data)


       60.Q1   65.Q1    70.Q1    75.Q1       80.Q1     85.Q1       90.Q1    95.Q1   00.Q1      05.Q1




                                                  B. Real Prices


  0



-0.1



-0.2



-0.3                                                                                  Purchases (BEA Data)
                                                                                      Production(NBER Data)


       60.Q1   65.Q1    70.Q1    75.Q1       80.Q1     85.Q1       90.Q1    95.Q1   00.Q1      05.Q1




                                                     44
                       FIGURE 3. INVESTMENT SUBSIDY, GENERAL INDUSTRIAL EQUIPMENT

 0.5
                                                                                    Investment Tax Credit
                                                                                    Comprehensive Subsidy
                                                                                    User Cost Tax Adjustment
0.45



 0.4



0.35



 0.3



0.25



 0.2



0.15



 0.1



0.05



  0
       60.Q1   65.Q1      70.Q1    75.Q1    80.Q1        85.Q1   90.Q1   95.Q1   00.Q1        05.Q1




                                                    45
FIGURE 4. COMPREHENSIVE SUBSIDY BY INVESTMENT TYPE




                       46
                                                              FIGURE 5. TEMPORARY INVESTMENT SUBSIDY FOR EQUIPMENT: UNCERTAIN EXPIRATION
Log Deviation from Steady State




                                  Notes: The figure reports the simulated impulse response functions for the selected variables. The investment subsidy is a 10 percent subsidy for equipment
                                  (structures are not eligible) and has an expected horizon of 3 years as described in the text. The figure plots a sample realization in which the policy sunsets in
                                  exactly 3 years.

                                                                                                                 47
                                                     FIGURE 6. AGGREGATE RESPONSE TO TEMPORARY INVESTMENT SUBSIDY: BASELINE VERSUS NO TRADE
Log Deviation from Steady State




                                  Notes: The figure reports the simulated impulse response functions for the selected variables. The policy experiment is identical to the one in Figure 4. The solid
                                  line corresponds to the model with parameters set to the baseline simulation in Figure 4. The dashed line shows results for the model with no international trade.

                                                                                                                  48
                                                                  FIGURE 7. TEMPORARY INVESTMENT SUBSIDY FOR EQUIPMENT: AR(1) PHASE OUT
Log Deviation from Steady State




                                  Notes: The figure reports the simulated impulse response functions for the selected variables. The investment subsidy is a 10 percent subsidy for equipment
                                  (structures are not eligible) and has an expected horizon of 3 years as described in the text. The figure plots a sample realization in which the policy sunsets in
                                  exactly 3 years.

                                                                                                                 49
                                                                FIGURE 8. TEMPORARY INVESTMENT SUBSIDY FOR EQUIPMENT: KNOWN EXPIRATION
Log Deviation from Steady State




                                  Notes: The figure reports the simulated impulse response functions for the selected variables. The investment subsidy is a 10 percent subsidy for equipment
                                  (structures are not eligible) and has an expected horizon of 3 years as described in the text. The figure plots a sample realization in which the policy sunsets in
                                  exactly 3 years.

                                                                                                                 50
                                                                           FIGURE 9. PERMANENT INVESTMENT SUBSIDY FOR EQUIPMENT
Log Deviation from Steady State




                                  Notes: The figure reports the simulated impulse response functions for the selected variables. The investment policy is a permanent 10 percent subsidy for
                                  equipment (structures are not eligible).


                                                                                                             51
                                       FIGURE 10. TEMPORARY INVESTMENT SUBSIDY FOR EQUIPMENT: UNCERTAIN EXPIRATION, ALTERNATIVE PARAMETER VALUES
Log Deviation from Steady State




                                  Notes: The figure reports the simulated impulse response functions for the selected variables. The investment subsidy is a 10 percent subsidy for equipment
                                  (structures are not eligible) and has an expected horizon of 3 years as described in the text. The figure plots a sample realization in which the policy sunsets in
                                  exactly 3 years.

                                                                                                                 52
  TABLE 1A. EQUIPMENT TYPES WITH DEPRECIATION RATES, INVESTMENT SHARES AND
                             AVERAGE SUBSIDIES

                                           Depreciation   Investment   Average
                                               (d )         Share      Subsidy
Computers and peripheral equipment              0.30        5.26%       0.40
Software                                        0.30        9.81%       0.40
Communication equipment                         0.15        5.64%       0.38
Electro-medical equipment                       0.18        1.10%       0.39
Medical instruments                             0.14        1.53%       0.39
Nonmedical instruments                          0.14        1.36%       0.39
Photocopy and related equipment                 0.18        0.82%       0.40
Office and accounting equipment                 0.30        0.43%       0.40
Fabricated metal products                       0.09        0.92%       0.39
Steam engines                                   0.05        0.31%       0.35
Internal combustion engines                     0.21        0.14%       0.35
Metalworking machinery                          0.12        1.81%       0.39
Special industrial equipment                    0.10        2.25%       0.39
General industrial equipment                    0.11        3.26%       0.39
Electrical transmission and distribution        0.05        1.51%       0.38
Trucks, buses, and truck trailers               0.19        4.44%       0.40
Autos                                           0.17        2.84%       0.40
Aircraft                                        0.07        1.46%       0.40
Ships and boats                                 0.06        0.23%       0.37
Railroad equipment                              0.06        0.41%       0.38
Household furniture                             0.13        0.14%       0.40
Other furniture                                 0.12        2.16%       0.40
Farm tractors                                   0.15        0.42%       0.39
Other agricultural machinery                    0.12        0.82%       0.39
Construction tractors                           0.16        0.15%       0.40
Other construction machinery                    0.16        1.32%       0.40
Mining and oilfield machinery                   0.15        0.40%       0.40
Service industry machinery                      0.17        1.29%       0.40
Household appliances                            0.17        0.05%       0.40
Miscellaneous electrical                        0.18        0.25%       0.39




                                           53
      TABLE 1B. STRUCTURES TYPES WITH DEPRECIATION RATES, INVESTMENT SHARES AND
                                  AVERAGE SUBSIDIES
                                                      Depreciation            Investment             Average
                                                          (d )                  Share                Subsidy
    Hospitals                                               0.02                 1.08%                 0.23
    Special care                                            0.02                 0.25%                 0.23
    Medical buildings                                       0.02                 0.39%                 0.23
    Multi-merchandise shopping                              0.03                 1.17%                 0.30
    Food and beverage establishments                        0.03                 0.55%                 0.30
    Warehouses                                              0.02                 0.76%                 0.23
    Other commercial structures                             0.03                 1.04%                 0.30
    Warehouses                                              0.03                 2.62%                 0.26
    Manufacturing                                           0.02                 1.63%                 0.31
    Electric                                                0.02                 0.58%                 0.31
    Other power structures                                  0.02                 1.10%                 0.32
    Communication                                           0.08                 2.38%                 0.31
    Mining                                                  0.05                 0.18%                 0.39
    Religious structures                                    0.02                 0.44%                 0.23
    Educational structures                                  0.02                 0.75%                 0.23
    Railroads                                               0.02                 0.37%                 0.25
    Farm structures                                         0.02                 0.33%                 0.29
    Single-family structures                                0.01                15.21%                  n/aa
    Multifamily structures                                  0.01                 1.93%                  n/aa
    Other residential structures                            0.01                14.75%                  n/aa
a
 In the United States, residential structures get either business and household treatment depending on the tenancy.
For business treatment, the average business tax subsidy is 0.26; for residential treatment, it is zero.




                                                       54
                                TABLE 2. LEGISLATIVE HISTORY OF INVESTMENT TAX INCENTIVES


                                Public    Stated       Actual         Change to Investment Change to Depreciation
Law Name
                                Law No.   Duration     Duration       Tax Credit           Allowance


Internal Revenue Code of 1954   83-591    Permanent    4 years                                        Double-declining balance method

Small Business Investment Act   85-699    Permanent    4 years                                        First-year depreciation for long-lived
of 1958                                                                                               assets

Tax Rate Extension Act of       87-507    Permanent    1.6 years      Public utilities eligible for
1962                                                                  3% ITC

Revenue Act of 1962             87-834    Permanent    1.6 years      Introduced 7% ITC;              Long Amendment (100% basis
                                                                      Limited for short-lived         adjustment for ITC)
                                                                      assets; Public utilities
                                                                      excluded

Revenue Act of 1964             88-272    Permanent    1.75 years     Simplified ITC                  Removed basis adjustment


Suspension of Investment Tax    89-800    Temporary:   0.6 years      Suspended ITC                   Limited accelerated depreciation
Credit of 1966                            1 year

Restoration of Investment Tax   90-26     Permanent    2.5 years      Reinstated ITC and
Credit                                                                increased ceiling

Tax Reform Act of 1969          91-172    Permanent    1 year         Repealed ITC


Reform of Depreciation Rules    n.a.      Permanent    0.9 years                                      Shortened the assumed life of
(1971)                                                                                                equipment and allowed more first year
                                                                                                      depreciation




                                                                 55
                                Public    Stated       Actual        Change to Investment Change to Depreciation
Law Name
                                Law No.   Duration     Duration      Tax Credit           Allowance


Revenue Act of 1971             92-178    Permanent    3.25 years    Restored ITC at 7%;        Introduced ADR system
                                                                     Limited for short-lived    Lowered asset lifetimes
                                                                     assets; Public utilities
                                                                     eligible for 4%
Tax Reduction Act of 1975       94-12     Permanent    1.6 years     Increased to 10%;
                                                                     Extended 10% ITC to
                                                                     public utilities
Tax Reform Act of 1976          94-455    Temporary:   2.1 years     Extended 10% ITC
                                          4.2 years                  through 1980

Revenue Act of 1978             95-600    Permanent    2.75 years    Made 10% ITC
                                                                     permanent

Economic Recovery Tax Act of    97-34     Permanent    1 year        Extended 10% ITC to        Replaced ADR with ACRS; Simplified
1981                                                                 short-lived assets         asset-life classes; Introduced
                                                                                                Accelerated depreciation deductions

Tax Equity and Fiscal           97-248    Permanent    1.8 years                                Repealed accelerated depreciation
Responsibility Act of 1982

Deficit Reduction Act of 1984   98-369    Permanent    2.3 years                                Lengthened asset lives from 15 years to
                                                                                                18 years

Tax Reform Act of 1986          99-514    Permanent    10.8 years    Repealed ITC               Replaced ACRS with MACRS;
                                                                                                Reduced depreciation allowances

Taxpayer Relief Act of 1997     105-34    Permanent    4.6 years                                Harmonized asset lives for alternative
                                                                                                minimum tax with regular tax lives

Job Creation and Worker         107-147   Temporary:   1.2 years                                Introduced 30% bonus depreciation
Assistance Act of 2002                    3 years




                                                                56
                                        Public        Stated          Actual         Change to Investment Change to Depreciation
      Law Name
                                        Law No.       Duration        Duration       Tax Credit           Allowance


      Jobs and Growth Tax Relief        108–27        Temporary:      1.6 years                                   Increased bonus depreciation to 50%
      Reconciliation Act of 2003                      1.6 years                                                   for given asset classes

      The Economic Stimulus Act of      110–185       Temporary:      1 year                                      Reintroduced 50% bonus depreciation
      2008                                            1 year

      American Recovery and             111-5         Temporary:      1 year                                      Extended 50% bonus depreciation
      Reinvestment Act of 2009                        1 year

      Small Business Jobs Act of        111-240       Temporary:      0.2 years                                   Extended 50% bonus depreciation
      2010                                            1 year

      Tax Relief, Unemployment          111-312       Temporary:      2.1 years                                   Extended and increased bonus
      Insurance Reauthorization, Job                  3 years                                                     depreciation to 100%
      Creation Act of 2010
      The American Taxpayer Relief      112–240       Temporary:      1 year                                      Extended and reduced bonus
      Act of 2012                                     1 year                                                      depreciation to 50%

      The Tax Increase Prevention       113-295       Temporary: 1    1 year                                      Extended 50% bonus depreciation
      Act of 2014                                     year



Notes. The legislative history from 1954–2003 comes from Romer and Romer (2009) and Yang (2007). Details on the effects of each law on the ITC and
depreciation allowances are based on the author’s calculations using information from Gravelle (1994). Narrative legislative information for investment subsidies
from 2002–2015 provided by the authors and also using House and Shapiro (2008). Table A.1 provides Romer and Romer (2009) classification of tax changes
according to their stated motivation and whether they were influenced by contemporaneous economic events. The table does not include the passage of the
Protecting Americans from Tax Hikes (PATH) act in late 2015 which again extended bonus depreciation. As written, the PATH act is temporary in that it calls
for bonus depreciation to be phased-out in 2018—2019.




                                                                               57
                           TABLE 3. EFFECTS OF INVESTMENT SUBSIDIES: EQUIPMENT PRODUCTION AND PURCHASES

                                                                                           Specification

                                        Constant and linear              Macro covariates                                              Leads and lags of
                                                                                                        Macro covariates
Dependent Variable                            trend                       excluding oil                                                    subsidy

Production                                       1.12                           1.14                            1.08                           1.19
                                                (0.36)                         (0.32)                          (0.40)                         (0.41)
Purchases                                        1.94                           1.97                            1.76                           1.97
                                                (0.44)                         (0.36)                          (0.43)                         (0.43)

Difference of coefficients:                      0.82                           0.83                            0.68                           0.77
Purchases - Production                          (0.15)                         (0.13)                          (0.13)                         (0.15)

Notes. The dependent variable is the natural logarithm of equipment production or equipment purchases as indicated. The coefficients are semi-elasticities of
production or purchases with respect to the comprehensive subsidy z tm (b1 in equation 5). The columns report specifications with alternative control variables or
lags. The specification in the last column reports the sum of the coefficients on the current and two leads and lags of the subsidy. This last specification also
includes the macro covariates. Driscoll-Kraay standard errors are shown in parentheses. The data are a quarterly panel of 28 types of equipment from 1959:1 to
2009:4 from the BEA (types in Table 1A excluding computers and software). See Appendix A for description of data.




                                                                              58
    TABLE 4. EFFECTS OF INVESTMENT SUBSIDIES: EQUIPMENT PRICES, INPUTS, AND TFP AND STRUCTURES PRODUCTION AND PRICES
                                                                                        Specification

                                       Constant and linear            Macro covariates                                                 Leads and lags of
                                                                                                    Macro covariates
Dependent Variable                           trend                     excluding oil                                                       subsidy

                                                                                       A. Equipment
                   a
Production Prices                              -0.12                         -0.02                          0.07                               0.08
                                               (0.10)                        (0.06)                        (0.08)                             (0.08)
Production Employeesb                           1.01                          1.05                          0.76                               0.95
                                               (0.46)                        (0.45)                        (0.55)                            (0S.61)
Production Hoursb                               0.77                          0.82                          0.65                               0.76
                                               (0.45)                        (0.43)                        (0.54)                             (0.57)
Production Wagesb                               1.28                          1.37                          0.12                               -0.70
                                               (0.91)                        (0.89)                        (0.96)                             (0.90)
TFPb                                            0.32                          0.32                          0.28                               0.37
                                               (0.14)                        (0.12)                        (0.15)                             (0.16)
Cost of Materialsb                              0.87                          0.93                          0.81                               1.12
                                               (0.46)                        (0.41)                        (0.51)                             (0.55)
Cost of Energyb                                 2.22                          2.31                          0.23                               -1.22
                                               (1.05)                        (1.03)                        (1.08)                             (0.89)
                                                                                        B. Structures
            c
Production                                      0.87                          1.06                          0.46                               0.56
                                               (0.32)                        (0.32)                        (0.31)                             (0.32)
Pricesc                                         0.54                          0.39                          0.22                               0.20
                                               (0.12)                        (0.08)                        (0.09)                             (0.09)
Notes. See notes to Table 3. Time period is 1959:1 to 2009:4 for all estimates.
a
  Quarterly data on 28 equipment types (BEA data). b Annual data on 28 equipment types (NBER productivity database).   c
                                                                                                                           Quarterly data on 17 structures types
(BEA data). See Appendix A for description of data.

                                                                           59
              TABLE 5.A CALIBRATED PARAMETERS

             Baseline
Parameter                                           Notes
            calibration
   b            0.99        Corresponds to annual discount rate of 4 percent
            See Tables 1A
   dm          and 1B
                            Set according to Fraumeni (1997)
            See Tables 1A
   gm                       Set to imply empirical investment shares.
               and 1B

   s            0.2         Intertemporal elasticity of substitution

   h            0.5         Frisch labor supply elasticity

   r            0.01        Elasticity of substitution for materials

   a            0.38        Capital share

   tN           0.36        Marginal tax rate on labor income

   tp           0.43        Marginal tax rate on business profits

   g                        Steady state ratio of government spending to
               0.333        consumption
             Implied by
   mx                       Materials share for investment producers
            Equation (41)
   mh           0.75        Capital sub-elasticity for investment producers




                                60
                                  TABLE 5.B. BASELINE AND ALTERNATIVE CALIBRATIONS

                        Baseline
    Parameter                           Low value         High value                                 Notes
                       calibration
         l              0. 9167            0.8750           0.9375         Persistence of tax changes (quarterly autocorrelation)

        xn                1.00              0.00              4.00         Labor adjustment cost

        xh                8.00              2.00             16.00         Capital adjustment cost

         q                0.50              0.01              0.99         Production elasticity of effort

        yn                1.00              0.25              1.75         Sectoral labor supply substitution




Notes: The baseline value for the tax persistence parameter corresponds to a 3-year expected duration. The upper and lower values for
the persistence parameter imply 4-year and 2-year expected durations. The baseline value for the adjustment cost parameter implies a
doubling time for labor of 1 quarter and a doubling time for capital of 2 years. The high adjustment cost calibration implies a doubling
time for labor of 1 year and a doubling time for capital of 4 years.




                                                                  61
                                             TABLE 6. INDIRECT INFERENCE ESTIMATES AND MODEL COMPARISON

                                                                                                                           Low adj.     High adj.
Model Specification                       Data          Baseline      Low l         High l       Low q         High q                                  Low yn       High yn
                                                                                                                            costs         costs

Estimated Import Supply                                   6.53         7.22          5.17         3.06         24.14        13.99          3.13         5.02         16.31
Elasticity ( c )                                         (1.56)       (1.61)        (1.36)       (0.84)       (11.68)       (2.43)        (0.95)       (1.12)        (5.41)
Targeted Reduced-form
                                                                                  Reduced-Form Coefficients Implied by Model
coefficients
Equipment Production                      1.08            1.02         1.03          1.01         1.00          1.13         1.03          0.99         1.03          0.98
                                         (0.40)

Equipment Investment                      1.76            1.59         1.73          1.45         1.42          1.88         1.73          1.43         1.54          1.74
                                         (0.43)

Hours                                     0.65            0.58         0.59          0.58         0.64          0.57         0.56          0.61         0.45          0.81
                                         (0.54)

Material Inputs                           0.81            1.02         1.03          1.01         1.00          1.13         1.03          0.99         1.03          0.98
                                         (0.51)

Productivity (TFP)                        0.28            0.04         0.04          0.04         0.00          0.08         0.04          0.04         0.05          0.02
                                         (0.15)


Notes: The first row reports indirect inference estimates of the import supply elasticity under baseline and alternative values of the calibrated parameters. The inferences are
based on targeting the reduced-form regression coefficients shown in the first column. The model-implied estimates of these parameters are given in the balance of the table.




                                                                                     62
