NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

THE FALL OF THE LABOR SHARE AND THE RISE OF SUPERSTAR FIRMS
David Autor
David Dorn
Lawrence F. Katz
Christina Patterson
John Van Reenen
Working Paper 23396
http://www.nber.org/papers/w23396

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
May 2017

We would like to thank Daron Acemoglu, Eric Bartelsman, Erik Brynjolfsson, Jason Furman,
Richard Schmalensee, Larry Summers and participants in several seminars for helpful
discussions. This research was funded by the National Science Foundation, the European
Research Council, the Economic and Social Research Council, the MIT Initiative on the Digital
Economy, and the Swiss National Science Foundation. Disclaimer: Any opinions and conclusions
expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily represent the views of the U.S.
Census Bureau. All results have been reviewed to ensure that no confidential information is
disclosed. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the
views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.
© 2017 by David Autor, David Dorn, Lawrence F. Katz, Christina Patterson, and John Van
Reenen. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted
without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

The Fall of the Labor Share and the Rise of Superstar Firms
David Autor, David Dorn, Lawrence F. Katz, Christina Patterson, and John Van Reenen
NBER Working Paper No. 23396
May 2017
JEL No. D33,J31,L11
ABSTRACT
The fall of labor's share of GDP in the United States and many other countries in recent decades
is well documented but its causes remain uncertain. Existing empirical assessments of trends in
labor's share typically have relied on industry or macro data, obscuring heterogeneity among
firms. In this paper, we analyze micro panel data from the U.S. Economic Census since 1982 and
international sources and document empirical patterns to assess a new interpretation of the fall in
the labor share based on the rise of “superstar firms.” If globalization or technological changes
advantage the most productive firms in each industry, product market concentration will rise as
industries become increasingly dominated by superstar firms with high profits and a low share of
labor in firm value-added and sales. As the importance of superstar firms increases, the aggregate
labor share will tend to fall. Our hypothesis offers several testable predictions: industry sales will
increasingly concentrate in a small number of firms; industries where concentration rises most
will have the largest declines in the labor share; the fall in the labor share will be driven largely
by between-firm reallocation rather than (primarily) a fall in the unweighted mean labor share
within firms; the between-firm reallocation component of the fall in the labor share will be
greatest in the sectors with the largest increases in market concentration; and finally, such
patterns will be observed not only in U.S. firms, but also internationally. We find support for all
of these predictions.
David Autor
Department of Economics, E52-438
MIT
77 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02139
and NBER
dautor@mit.edu
David Dorn
University of Zurich
Department of Economics
Schoenberggasse 1
CH-8001 Zurich - Switzerland
and CEPR
david.dorn@econ.uzh.ch
Lawrence F. Katz
Department of Economics
Harvard University
Cambridge, MA 02138
and NBER
lkatz@harvard.edu

Christina Patterson
Department of Economics
MIT
77 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02139
cpatt@mit.edu
John Van Reenen
MIT Department of Economics
The Morris and Sophie Chang Building
E62-518
50 Memorial Drive
Cambridge, MA 02142
and NBER
vanreene@mit.edu

I

Introduction

Much research has documented a decline in the share of GDP going to labor in many nations
over recent decades (e.g., Blanchard, 1997; Elsby, Hobjin and Sahin, 2013; Karabarbounis and
Neiman, 2013; Piketty 2014). Dao et al. (2017) point to a decline in the labor share between 1991
and 2014 in 29 large countries that account for about two-thirds of world GDP in 2014. Figure
1 illustrates this general decline in labor’s share with the fall in the United States particularly
evident since 2000. The erstwhile stability of the labor share of GDP throughout much of the
twentieth century was one of the famous Kaldor (1961) “stylized facts” of growth. Macro-level
stability of labor’s share was always, as Keynes remarked, “something of a miracle,” and indeed
disguised a lot of instability at the industry level (Elsby, Hobijn and Sahin, 2013; Jones, 2003).
Karabarbounis and Neiman (2013) emphasize that the decline in labor’s share both in the U.S.
and overseas represents primarily a within-industry rather than a between-industry phenomenon.
Although there is controversy over the degree to which the fall in the labor share of GDP is due
to measurement issues such as the treatment of capital depreciation (Bridgman, 2014), housing
(Rognlie, 2015), self-employment and proprietor’s income (Elsby, Hobjin, and Sahin, 2013; Gollin,
2002) and intangible capital (Koh, Santaeulalia-Lopis and Zheng, 2016), there is a general consensus
that the fall is real and significant.
There is less consensus, however, on what are the causes of the recent decline in the labor
share. Karabarbounis and Neiman (2013) put forward the argument that the cost of capital relative to labor has fallen, driven by rapid declines in quality-adjusted equipment prices especially of
Information and Communication Technologies (ICT). Although such a relative capital price decline
should have no effect on factor shares if production technologies are Cobb-Douglas, there will be a
decline in the labor share if the capital-labor elasticity of substitution is greater than one. Karabarbounis and Neiman provide some evidence that the elasticity is greater than one, but the bulk of
the empirical literature suggests an elasticity of below one (e.g., Lawrence, 2015; Oberfield and
Raval, 2014; Antras, 2004; Hamermesh, 1990), casting some doubt on this explanation.1 Another
implication of models based on representative firms (even at the industry level) is that the fall in
labor’s share should primarily occur within firms as the fall in relative factor prices is something
that all firms face simultaneously. We will show, by contrast, that the fall in the aggregate labor
share has a large element of reallocation between firms with shifts in output toward firms with low
1
Piketty (2014) also argues for a high capital-labor elasticity in his r > g formulation, but again evidence for this
view is limited.

1

(and declining) labor shares.
Elsby, Hobjin and Sahin (2013) argue for the importance of trade and international outsourcing,
and they present evidence indicating that the labor share declines the most in U.S. industries that
were strongly affected by increasing imports (e.g., from China). We explore the role of trade as
well, but do not find that manufacturing industries with greater exposure to exogenous trade shocks
differentially lose labor share relative to other manufacturing industries (although they do decline
in terms of employment). Additionally, we observe similar patterns of a decline in labor’s share in
largely non-traded sectors such as wholesale trade, retail trade, and utilities. Elsby, Hobjin and
Sahin (2013) and Piketty (2014) also stress the role of social norms and labor market institutions,
such as unions and the real value of the minimum wage. The common experience of a decline in
labor shares across countries with different levels and evolution of unionization and other labor
market institutions somewhat vitiates against this argument.2
Our contribution is threefold. First, we provide microeconomic evidence on the evolution of
labor shares at the firm and establishment level. The existing empirical evidence is largely based
on macroeconomic and industry-level variation which makes it harder to shed light on the distinctive implications of competing theories, particularly the contrasts between theories implying
heterogeneous vs. homogeneous changes in the labor share across firms in an industry.3 Second,
we present a new “superstar firm” model of the labor share change. The model is based on the
idea that industries are increasingly characterized by a “winner take most” feature where a small
number of firms gain a very large share of the market. A possible explanation for this phenomenon
is that consumers have become more sensitive to price and quality due to greater product market
competition (e.g., through globalization) or new technologies (e.g., if consumers or corporate buyers
become more sensitive to price due to greater availability of price comparisons on the Internet, as
in Akerman, Leuven and Mogstad, 2017). Stronger network effects are a related explanation for
the increasing dominance of companies such as Google, Facebook, Apple, Amazon, Uber, AirBNB,
Walmart, and Federal Express in their sectors. The superstar firm model emphasizes firm heterogeneity in the evolution of industry-level and aggregate labor share. Third, we present an array of
evidence consistent with the superstar firm model over the last 30 years using a variety of datasets,
including firm- and establishment-level U.S. Census panel data covering the six major sectors of
2

Blanchard (1997) and Blanchard and Giavazzi (2003) stress labor market institutions. Azmat, Manning and Van
Reenen (2012) put more weight on privatization at least in the network industries.
3
An exception is Bockerman and Maliranta (2012) who use longitudinal plant-level data to decompose changes in
the labor share in Finnish manufacturing into between and within plant components.

2

manufacturing, retail trade, wholesale trade, services, utilities and transportation, and finance.
We establish the following facts that are broadly consistent with our model’s predictions for
how the rise of superstar firms can lead to a fall of labor’s share: (i) there has been a rise in
sales concentration within four-digit industries across the vast bulk of the U.S. private sector; (ii)
industries with larger increases in product market concentration have experienced larger declines
in the labor share; (iii) the fall in the labor share is largely due to the reallocation of sales between
firms rather than a general fall in the labor share within incumbent firms; (iv) the reallocationdriven fall in the labor share is most pronounced in precisely the industries which had the largest
increase in sales concentration; and (v) these patterns are also present in firm- and industry-level
datasets from other OECD countries. Although we do not provide clean causal identification of
our superstar firm model, the facts we document push us towards a somewhat neglected firm-level
perspective on the changes in the labor share (Furman and Orszag, 2015).4
Our paper is closest to Barkai (2016), who independently discovered a negative industry-level
relationship between changes in labor share and changes in concentration for the United States.
Barkai also presents evidence at the aggregate level that profits appear to have risen as a share of
GDP and that the pure capital share of income (defined as the value of the capital stock times the
required rate of return on capital over GDP) has fallen, a pattern consistent with our superstar firm
model.5 His analysis uses exclusively industry and macro data. A major difference is that we can
delve in depth into the firm-level reasons for these patterns and link it to our model, particularly the
implications and evidence on between-firm (output reallocation) versus within-firm contributors to
falling industry- and aggregate-level labor share. We thus view our contribution and that of Barkai
(2016) as complementary.6
The structure of the paper is as follows. Section II sketches our model. Section III presents
the data and Section IV the results. Section V provides concluding remarks. More details on the
model and data are in Appendices A and B respectively.
4

Berkowitz, Ma and Nishioka (2017) also stress how an increase in market power could generate a decline in the
labor share and find some evidence in support of this in Chinese micro-data.
5
In this paper we focus on the labor share of value added as it is empirically difficult to separate out the non-labor
share into the part due to profits (Π) and the part due to to capital costs evaluated at the competitive return (rK).
Similarly, it is challenging to map profits in company accounts to economic profits. Nevertheless, in a large sample
of firms across many countries, Dobbs et al. (2015) do find that accounting profits rose as a share of GDP risen from
7.6% to 9.8% between 1980 and 2013.
6
Barkai (2016) finds an even larger role for rising concentration in accounting for the fall in the aggregate labor
share. This is likely because his data covers only the latter half of our sample period (omitting the 1982-1997 period)
and pools across all sectors (while we allow the effects of concentration on the labor share to be industry specific).

3

II

An Illustrative Model of Superstar Firms

To provide intuition for why the fall in labor share may be linked to the rise of superstar firms,
we consider a production function Yi = Ai Vi1−α Kiα where Yi is value-added, Vi is variable labor,
Ki is capital and Ai is Hicks-neutral efficiency (TFPQ) in firm i.7 Consistent with a wealth of
evidence, we assume that Ai is heterogeneous across firms (Melitz, 2003; Hopenhayn, 1992). More
productive, higher Ai firms will have higher levels of factor inputs and greater sales. We follow
Bartelsman, Haltiwanger and Scarpetta (2013) in assuming that there is a fixed amount of overhead
labor F needed for production,8 so total labor is given by L = V + F . Factor markets are assumed
to be competitive (with wage w and cost of capital r), but we allow for imperfect competition in
the product market. From the static first order condition for labor we can write the share of labor
costs (wLi ) in nominal value-added (Pi Yi ) as:

Si ≡

wLi
Pi Yi


=

wF
1−α
+
µi
Pi Yi

(1)

where µi = (Pi /ci ) is the mark-up, the ratio of product price Pi to marginal cost ci . The firm i
subscripts indicate that for given economy-wide values of (α, w, F ), a firm will have a lower labor
share if (i) its mark-up is higher and/or (ii) its share of fixed labor costs in total value-added is
lower. Superstar firms (those with high Ai ) will be larger as they produce more efficiently and
capture a higher share of industry output. They will also therefore tend to have lower labor shares.
In some models of imperfect competition, there are larger price-cost mark-ups for firms with a
P
higher market share ωi = Pi Yi / i (Pi Yi ). For example, the homogeneous product Cournot model
generates a mark-up µi =

ρ
ρ−ωi ,

where ρ is the absolute value of price elasticity of demand. In

monopolistically competitive models the mark-up is the same across firms in an industry, µ =

ρ
ρ−1 ,

but because high Ai firms are larger, they will have a lower share of fixed costs in value-added

wF
P i Yi ,

and so their overall labor share will be lower. In either case, when there is an exogenous shock that
favors more productive firms and thereby in equilibrium allocates more market share to superstar
firms, the aggregate labor share will fall from a reallocation effect between firms as the weight of
the economy shifts to the larger, low labor share firms.
7

We treat output and value-added interchangeably here as we are abstracting away from intermediate inputs. We
distinguish intermediate inputs in the empirical application. We model firm heterogeneity in terms of efficiency, but
our model is broadly isomorphic to ones where firms are exogenously heterogeneous in firm specific quality. In such
an alternative interpretation, superstar firms would have a particularly high product quality draw.
8
Adding in a fixed cost in capital makes no qualitative difference to any of the results below. Aggregate capital
costs (evaluated at the competitive rate of return) as a share of value added will also fall alongside the labor share
as the profit share rises (see Barkai, 2016).

4

Appendix A formalizes this idea in a simple example of a superstar firm model in a monopolistically competitive setting. Entrepreneurs enter an industry and are ex ante uncertain of their
productivity Ai . They can pay a sunk cost of entry κ and then take a draw from a known productivity distribution. Since there is a fixed cost of production, some low productivity firms will
then choose to exit. If they choose to remain in the industry and produce, the high productivity
firms will employ more inputs and enjoy a higher market share. In the presence of fixed overhead
labor costs the more productive firms will also have higher revenue-based TFP (TFPR), as shown
in Bartelsman, Haltiwanger and Scarpetta (2013). The implication is that more productive firms
will have a higher share of profits in value-added and hence a lower labor share. The degree of
concentration in the industry will depend, inter alia, on the degree of competition as measured by
consumer sensitivity to prices. If consumers or corporate buyers become more sensitive to price,
relatively more output will be allocated to the more productive firms. This reallocation of market
share will increase the degree of sales concentration and will be a force decreasing the labor share
because a larger fraction of output is being produced by more productive “superstar” firms.9
An increase in product market competition (i.e. ρ up) will lead the high productivity superstar
firms to capture a larger share of the market. Several predictions follow from a rise in ρ that we
can take to the data: (i) within-industry concentration rates of firm sales will rise; (ii) in those
industries where concentration rises the most, labor shares will fall the most; (iii) the fall in the
labor share will have a substantial reallocation component between firms, rather than being a
purely within-firm phenomenon; (iv) in those industries where concentration rises the most, the
reallocation from firms with high to low labor shares will be the greatest; (v) similar patterns of
changes in concentration and labor’s share should be found across countries (to the extent that
the shock that benefits superstar firms is global). We take these predictions to a series of newly
constructed micro-datasets in the United States and around the world.
Our stylized model is meant to illustrate our intuition about the connection of the rise of superstar firms and decline in labor’s share. Similar results could occur from any force that makes
the industry more concentrated—more “winner take most”—such as an increased importance of
9

Note that for an individual firm the change in labor share is actually likely to be positive, as increased competition
will put downward pressure on the profit margins of firms (and therefore increase the labor share) as in equation (1).
Indeed, employer market power was emphasized by Kalecki (1938) as the reason for variations in labor shares over
the business cycle. Our key difference is that we have a heterogeneous (rather than representative) firm model, as in
Demsetz (1973). Indeed, we show below that for five of our six sectors, there is actually a rise in incumbent firm’s
labor share over time which is consistent with an increase in competition. Appendix A discusses conditions under
which the aggregate labor share will fall after an increase in competition.

5

network effects, as long as high market share firms have lower labor shares.10 A high level of
concentration does not necessarily mean that there is persistent dominance—one dominant firm
could swiftly replace another as in standard neo-Schumpeterian models of creative destruction
(Aghion and Howitt, 1992). But dynamic models could create incumbent advantages for high market share firms. Such a phenomenon could occur through innovation incentives—as in the Gilbert
and Newbery (1982) model, where incumbents are more likely to innovate than entrants. A more
sophisticated version of these ideas is found in Acemoglu and Hildebrand (2017), who develop a
Klette and Kortum (2004) style model that generates persistent dominance through innovation
incentives. A more worrying explanation of growing concentration would be if incumbent advantage were enhanced through erecting barriers to entry (e.g., the growth of occupational licensing
highlighted by Kleiner and Krueger, 2013, or a weakening of anti-trust enforcement). Explanations
for growing concentration from regulatory entry barriers have starkly different welfare implications
than explanations based on stronger enhanced competition or innovation. We partially assess these
alternative explanations of growing sales concentration by examining whether changes in concentration are larger in dynamic industries (where innovation is increasing) or in declining sectors.
Finally, one could imagine that the increase in concentration does not arise from an increase
in competition, but rather from an increase in the sunk costs of entry, κ. Increased entry barriers
would mean that there are fewer firms in the industry, profit mark-ups are larger, and the labor
share declines as average margins rise.11 However, in this case, we would predict that the fall in
the labor share is a within-firm phenomenon as all incumbent firms benefit from higher equilibrium
prices deriving from greater entry barriers. We shall see below that, instead, the reallocation
component between firms is a central factor in the fall of the labor share.

III

Data

We next describe the main features of our data. Further details on the datasets are contained in
Appendix B.
10

If, for example, the underlying distribution of entrepreneurial ability becomes more skewed, the industry will also
become more concentrated.
11
The interpretation of the relationship between profit margins and the concentration level is a classic issue in industrial organization. In the Bain (1951) “Structure-Conduct-Performance” tradition, higher concentration reflected
greater entry barriers which led to an increased risk of explicit or implicit collusion. Demsetz (1973), by contrast,
posited a “Differential Efficiency” model closer to ours, where increases in competition allocated more output to more
productive firms. In either case, however, concentration would be associated with higher profit shares of revenue and,
in our context, a lower labor share. See Schmalensee (1987) for an effort to empirically distinguish these hypotheses.

6

III.A

Data Construction

The data for our main analysis come from the U.S. Economic Census, which is conducted every
five years and surveys all establishments in selected sectors based on their current economic activity. Specifically, we focus on the Economic Census for the three decade interval of 1982 - 2012
for six large sectors: manufacturing, retail trade, wholesale trade, services, finance, and utilities
and transportation.12 The covered establishments in these six sectors comprise approximately 80
percent of total private sector employment. To implement our industry-level analysis, we assign
each establishment in each year to a 1987 SIC-based time-consistent industry code, the details of
which are described in Appendix B. We are able to observe 676 industries, 388 of which are in
manufacturing.
For each of the six sectors, the Census reports each establishment’s total annual payroll, total
output, total employment, and, importantly for our purposes, an identifier for the firm to which the
establishment belongs. Annual payroll includes all forms of paid compensation, such as salaries,
wages, commissions, sick leave, and also employer contributions to pension plans, all reported in
pre-tax dollars. The Census of Manufacturing also includes a wider definition of compensation
that includes all fringe benefits, the most important of which is employer contributions to health
insurance, and we also present results using this broader measure of labor costs.13 The exact
definition of output differs based on the nature of the industry, but the measure intends to capture
total sales, shipments, receipts, revenue, or business done by the establishment.
In addition to payroll and sales which are reported for all sectors, the Census of Manufacturing
further includes information on value-added at the establishment level. Value-added is calculated
by subtracting the total cost of materials, supplies, fuel, purchased electricity and contract work
from the total value of shipments, and then adjusting for changes in inventories over that year.
Thus, we can present a more in-depth analysis of key variables in manufacturing.
Because industry definitions have changed over time, we construct a consistent set of industry
definitions for the full 1982-2012 period (as is documented in Appendix B). We build all of our
industry-level measures using these time-consistent industry definitions, and thus our measures
12

Within these six sectors, several industries are excluded from the Economic Census: rail transportation is excluded
from transportation; postal service is excluded from wholesale trade; funds, trusts and other financial vehicles are excluded from finance; and schools (elementary, secondary, and colleges), religious organizations, political organizations,
labor unions and private households are excluded from services. The Census also does not cover government-owned
establishments within the covered industries. We also drop some industries in Finance, Services, and Manufacturing
that are not consistently covered across these 6 sectors. See Appendix B for details.
13
Additional compensation costs are only collected for the subset of Census establishments in the Annual Survey
of Manufacturers (ASM), but are imputed by the Census Bureau for the remainder.

7

of industry concentration differ slightly from published statistics. The correlation between our
calculated measures and those based on published data is almost perfect, however, when using the
native but time-varying industry definitions.14
We supplement the U.S. Census-based measures of industry labor share and industry concentration with additional international datasets. First, we draw on KLEMS (see O’Mahony and Timmer,
2009, http://www.euklems.net/), an industry level panel dataset covering OECD countries since
1980. We use the KLEMS to measure international trends in the labor share and also to augment
the measurement of the labor share in the Census by exploiting KLEMS data on intermediate
service inputs (see Appendix B).
Second, we use data on industry imports from the UN Comtrade Database from 1992-2012 to
construct adjusted measures of industry concentration that account for changes in the size of the
domestic market. To compare these data to the industry data in the Census, we convert six-digit
HS product codes to 1987 SIC codes using a crosswalk from Autor, Dorn and Hanson (2013), and
slightly aggregate industries to obtain our time-consistent 1987 SIC-based codes. Our approach
yields for each industry a time series of the dollar value of imports from six country groups.15
Third, to examine the relationship between sales concentration and the labor share internationally, we turn to a database of firm-level balance sheets from 14 European countries that covers
the 2000-2012 period. The data, compiled by the European Central Bank’s Competitiveness Research Network (CompNet), draws on various administrative and public sources across countries,
and aims at collecting information for all non-financial corporations.16 This source aggregates data
from all firms and provides aggregate information on the labor share and industry concentration for
various two-digit industries. Although great effort was made to make these measures comparable
across countries, there are some important differences that affect the reliability of cross-country
comparisons.17 Consequently, we estimate specifications separately for each country.
Finally, to implement firm level decompositions internationally, we use the BVD Orbis database
to obtain panel data on firm-level labor shares in the manufacturing sectors of six European coun14

One minor difference emerges because we drop a handful of establishments that do not have the LBDNUM
identifier variable, which is needed to track establishments over time.
15
The six country groups are Canada, eight other developed countries (Australia, Denmark, Finland, Germany,
Japan, New Zealand, Spain and Switzerland), Mexico and CAFTA, China, all low income countries other than China,
and rest of the world.
16
See Lopez-Garcia, di Mauro and CompNet Task Force (2015) for details.
17
Most importantly, for our purposes, countries use different reporting thresholds in the definition of their sampling
frames. For example, the Belgian data cover all firms, while French data include only firms with high sales, and
the Polish data cover only firms with more than five employees. Consequently, countries differ in the fraction of
employment or value-added included in the sample.

8

tries for private and publicly listed firms. BVD Orbis is the best publicly available database for
comparing firm panels across countries (Kalemli-Ozcan, Sorensen, Villegas-Sanchez, Volosovych
and Yesiltas, 2015).18

III.B

Initial Data Description

Figure 1 plots labor’s share of value-added since the 1970s in 12 developed countries. A decline
in the labor share is evident in almost all countries, especially in the later part of the sample
period.19 Focusing in on the United States, Figure 2 presents labor’s share of value-added in U.S.
manufacturing. The figure includes three measures of labor’s share. We first construct the labor
share using payroll, which is the standard labor cost measure that is available for all sectors, as
the numerator and value-added in the denominator. We modify this baseline measure to include
a broader measure of compensation that includes non-wage labor costs (such as employer health
insurance contributions), which are only provided in the Census of Manufacturing and not the
other parts of the Economic Census. Lastly, we also plot payroll normalized by sales, rather than
value-added, as this is the measure that can be constructed beyond manufacturing. Figure 2 shows
the levels vary across these three measures, but all three series show a clear downward trend.
To what extent is manufacturing different from other sectors? We do not have firm-level measures of value-added data from the Census outside of manufacturing, so we have to use the cruder
measure of the ratio of payroll to sales. The benefit of this measure is that it can be computed for
all six broad sectors covered in the Census. The ratio of payroll to sales is plotted separately for
each sector in the panels of Figure 3. Finance stands out as the only sector where there is a clear
upwards trend in the labor share. In all non-financial sectors, there has been a fall in the labor
share since 2002—indeed the labor share is lower at the end of the sample than at the beginning
in all sectors except wholesale (where there is a rise followed by a fall). One other feature is that
the 1997-2002 period stands out as a notable deviation from the overall downward trend, as the
labor share rose in all sectors except manufacturing, and even here the secular downward trend
temporarily stabilized. One possible explanation for this temporary deviation is that the late 1990s
was an unusually strong period for the labor market with high wage and employment growth.
18

Unfortunately BVD Orbis does not contain data that can readily be used to comprehensively construct reliable
sales concentration measures due to partial reporting of revenues.
19
Of the 12 countries, Sweden and the UK seem the exceptions with no clear trend. Bell (2015) suggests that
the UK does have a downward trend in the labor share when the data is corrected for the accounting treatment of
payments into (under-funded) private pension schemes for retirees. Payments into these schemes, which benefit only
those workers who have already retired, are counted as current labor compensation in the national accounts data,
therefore overstating the non-wage compensation of current employees.

9

We next turn to concentration in the product market, which in the superstar firm model should
be connected with the decline in the labor share. We measure industry concentration as (i) the
fraction of total sales that is accrued by the four largest firms in an industry (denoted CR4), (ii)
the fraction of sales accrued by the 20 largest firms (CR20), and (iii) the industry’s HerfindahlHirschman Index (HHI).20 In addition, we also compute the CR4 and CR20 concentration measures
based on employment rather than sales. Following Autor, Dorn, Katz, Patterson and Van Reenen
(2017), Figure 4 plots the average sales- and employment-based CR4 and CR20 measures of concentration across four-digit industries for each of the six major sectors. Appendix Figure A.1 shows
a corresponding plot for the Herfindahl-Hirschman Index (denoted HHI). Figure 4 shows a remarkably consistent pattern. First, there is a clear upward trend over time—according to all measures,
industries have become more concentrated on average. Second, the trend is much stronger when
measuring concentration in sales rather than employment. This suggests that firms may attain
large market shares with relatively few workers - what Brynjolfsson, McAfee, Sorrell and Zhou
(2008) term “scale without mass.” Third, a comparison of Figure 4 and Figure A.1 shows that
the upward trend is slightly weaker for the HHI, presumably because this metric is giving some
weight to concentration among firms outside the top 20 where concentration has risen less. Table
1 provides descriptive statistics for sample size, labor share, and sales concentration in each of the
six sectors.
Finally, before more formally exploring the implications of the model, we present preliminary
evidence of the cross-sectional relationship between firm size and labor share. As discussed in
Section II, superstar firms produce more efficiently and therefore are both larger and have lower
labor shares. Figure 5 shows the relationship between a firm’s labor share, defined as the ratio of
payroll to sales, and the firm’s share of their industry’s annual sales. The figure shows that across
most sectors, there is a negative relationship between labor share and firm size, supporting the
model’s prediction that large firms have lower labor shares.
20

Since we calculate concentration at the industry level, we define a firm as the sum of all establishments that
belong to the the same parent company and industry. If a company has establishments in three industries, it will be
counted as three different firms in this analysis. About 20% of manufacturing companies span multiple industries.

10

IV
IV.A

Results

Concentration and the Fall of the Labor Share

Manufacturing
Table 2 presents the results of regressing the change in the labor share on the change in industrial
concentration for our sample window of 1982 through 2012. We begin with the manufacturing
sector as these data are richest, but then move on to results from the other sectors. We estimate
OLS regressions for each of the six sectors separately of the form:

∆Sjt = α∆CON C jt + τt + ujt

(2)

where Sjt is the labor share of industry j at time t , CON Cjt is a measure of sales concentration,
τt is a full set of time dummies and ujt is an error term. We allow for the standard errors to be
correlated over time by clustering at the industry level.
All cells in Table 2 show estimates of α from equation (2). The first three columns present
five-year long differences (∆) and the last three columns present ten-year long-differences. The
coefficients are comparable across the two blocks of results as both sides are scaled in the same
way.
Our baseline specification in row 1 indicates the relationship between changes in concentration
and changes in the share of payroll in value-added. The results are striking: across all specifications,
industries where concentration rose the most were also those where the labor share fell by the most.
These correlations are statistically significant at the 10% level or greater in all columns.21
The other rows of Table 2 present various robustness tests of this basic association. In row 2, we
use a broader measure of labor compensation that includes employer contributions to fringe benefits
such as private health insurance. Non-wage costs such as employer contributions to health insurance
and private pensions account for a growing fraction of labor costs (Pessoa and Van Reenen, 2013).
Row 3 uses an adjusted value-added measure. While the value-added measure in the Census deducts
materials from gross output, it does not reflect all intermediate service inputs. We use information
from the KLEMS data to correct our value-added measure for use of intermediate services (see
Appendix B for details), and again find robust results. We present a stringent robustness test
of the model in row 4 by including a full set of four-digit industry dummies, thus allowing for
21

The HHI results are the most imprecise, presumably because, as noted above, they give some weight to concentration levels of the firms outside the top 20, which are unlikely to have “superstar” characteristics.

11

different trends in concentration by industry and therefore obtaining identification exclusively from
acceleration or deceleration of labor shares and concentration over and above these trends. The
coefficients on concentration remain significant with larger point estimates than row 1.
A concern with our core measure of concentration is that it captures exclusively domestic
U.S. concentration levels and thereby overstates effective concentration for traded-goods industries,
particularly in the manufacturing sector, where there is substantial international market penetration
(this is not a big concern in services where there are comparatively few imports). If firms operate in
global markets and the trends in U.S. concentration do not follow the trends in global concentration,
then our results may be misleading. We address this issue in various ways. Since import penetration
data are not available on a consistent basis across our whole time period, we focus on 1992-2012.
Row 5 of Table 2 re-estimates our baseline model for the shortened period and finds a slightly
stronger relationship. Row 6 controls for the growth in imports over value-added in each five year
period, and redefines industry concentration to include imports. In augmenting our concentration
measures, we treat each block of source countries for U.S. imports as its own firm, and calculate
industry concentration including imports both in the numerator (if an industry receives a large
volume of imports from a country group) and in the denominator, reflecting the total domestic
market. Using this augmented concentration measure, the coefficients on all concentration measures
remain negative and are all significant except for the HHI.22
Our measure of concentration is based on firm sales, but it is also possible to construct concentration indices based on employment. The relationship of the labor share with these alternative
measures of concentration is presented in the seventh row of Table 2. Interestingly, the coefficients
switch sign and are positive (although with one exception, insignificant). This is not a problematic result from the perspective of our conceptual framework; sales are the appropriate measure
of concentration, not employment. Indeed, many of the canonical superstar firms such as Google
and Facebook employ relatively few workers compared to revenue, as their market value is based
on intellectual property and a cadre of highly-skilled workers. Measuring concentration using employment rather than sales fails to capture this revenue-based concentration among IP and human
capital-intensive firms.
22

The Census data enumerate shipments and value-added from each firm’s U.S. establishments, which may include
exports. We do not believe that an analogous adjustment is appropriate for exports, however. Since the labor used at
the firm goes into the production of output destined for exports as well as domestic consumption, it seems natural to
use total sales (including exports) when creating concentration measures. The concentration measures published by
the U.S. Census Bureau also follow this convention. If we wanted a purely domestic measure of market concentration,
we would want to deduct exports as well as incorporating imports.

12

All Sectors
We next broaden our focus to include a larger range of Census sectors than just manufacturing:
Retail, Wholesale, Utilities and Transportation, Finance, and Services. We repeat our baseline
specification on these sectors, although the sample window is shorter for Finance (1992-2012)
and Utilities and Transportation (1992-2007). Further, we do not have value-added available for
industries outside of manufacturing, and thus instead present results for payroll over sales. To
assess whether this change in definition affects our results, we repeat the manufacturing sector
analysis from Table 2 in Table 3 using payroll normalized by sales rather than value-added, the
results of which are reported in row 1. All the coefficients remain negative, statistically significant
and quantitatively similar.23
Figure 6 plots the coefficients that result from the estimation of equation (2) separately for
each sector, using the CR20 as the measure of concentration and looking at changes over 5 year
periods (column (2) of Table 3). It is clear that rising concentration is uniformly associated with
a fall in the labor share, both outside of manufacturing as well as within it. The coefficient on the
concentration measure is negative and significant at the 5% level in each sector. Additionally, the
final row of Table 3 pools all six sectors and estimates equation (2) with sector-specific fixed effects.
The pooled specification shows a strong negative association between changes in the labor share and
concentration. Table 3 also shows additional variants of this regression using alternate measures
of concentration as well as stacked 10-year changes rather than five-year changes. The negative
relationship is extremely robust across specifications: it is negative in all 30 specifications in rows 2
to 6 of Table 3, and significantly so at the 10% or greater level in 26 cases. Since most employment
and output is produced outside of manufacturing, these results underscore the pervasiveness and
relevance of the concentration-labor-share relationship for almost the entire U.S. economy.24
Period-specific Estimates
We have implemented a large number of robustness tests on these regressions and discuss a few of
them here. Our main estimating equation (2) imposes a common coefficient over time on the con23

Figure 3 shows that the mean fall in payroll as a share of sales in manufacturing is 7 percentage points, which
is less than half of the 16.5 percentage point fall for payroll normalized on value-added (Figure 2). Similarly, the
coefficient on concentration in the share of value-added equation is just over twice as large as the that in the share
of sales equation (e.g. -0.148 for the CR4 in column (1) of Table 2 compared to -0.064 in Table 3).
24
To see whether the results are driven by just the number of firms in the industry, we included this as a separate
control variable in changes and/or initial levels. Although the coefficient on concentration tends to fall slightly in such
specifications, it remains generally significant, suggesting that it is the distribution of market shares that matters and
not just the number or average size of firms.

13

centration measures and only takes heterogeneity between years into account through the inclusion
of time dummies. Figure 7 shows the regression coefficients that result from separate period-byperiod estimates of equation (2), again using CR20 as the measure of industry concentration as
an illustration. Focus first on manufacturing, shown in Panels A and B. Using either definition
of the labor share denominator (value-added or sales), we find that the relationship between the
change in the labor share and the change in concentration is significantly negative in all periods
(except in 1982-1987), and generally strengthens over the sample period. Although the numbers
of individual industries within each of the the five non-manufacturing sectors are fewer than in the
manufacturing sector and therefore provide noisier measurement, the same broad patterns emerge:
a negative relationship is evident across most years, and tends to become stronger over time. Appendix Figures A.2 through A.7 present scatterplots of the data underlying the coefficient estimates
presented in Figure 7. Figure A.2 contains the results for manufacturing, for example, presenting
the scatterplot of the change in the payroll share of sales on the y−axis and the change in the CR20
on the x−axis. The size of each industry is represented by its initial 1982 level of sales. Looking
across all 31 panels in different time periods and sectors, there is a clear negative relationship
between concentration and labor share in 28 of them.
Magnitudes
We perform a simple exercise to illustrate the quantitative importance of concentration changes
in accounting for the fall in the labor share. We recover the time dummies from our estimates of
equation (2), which condition on the change in concentration, and compare these dummies to the
“unconditional” time dummies obtained from estimates that exclude the concentration variable.
Figure 8 plots the unconditional and conditional time dummies, both cumulated over time. The
difference between the two lines illustrates the proximate contribution of concentration to the falling
labor share, i.e., what the regression estimates imply would have been the change in the labor share
had concentration not risen. Observed measures of concentration can account for some of the fall
of the labor share, but not the majority. In services for example, the labor share of sales fell from
37% to 34.5% (2.5 percentage points). We predict that this fall would counterfactually have been to
35.2% in the absence of the rise in concentration, i.e. a 1.7 percentage point decline, implying that
about a third of the reduction in labor share is proximately explained by rising concentration—a
non-trivial fraction. Similarly, rising concentration accounts for 10% of the decline in the labor
share in manufacturing, 25% percent in utilities and transportation, and more than 100% in retail

14

trade. While the labor share actually rose in both wholesale trade and finance, our regressions
imply that it would have risen by an additional 50% and 150% in these two sectors, respectively,
had concentration not increased.
Although the magnitude of the effects is modest when looking over the entire period, Figure 7
shows, consistent with earlier results, that the importance of concentration has risen over time. For
example, if we restrict attention to the second half the sample (1997-2012), where the relationship
between concentration and labor share strengthened and where the rise in concentration was more
dramatic, we calculate that rising CR20 concentration in manufacturing accounts for a third of the
fall in the labor share.25

IV.B

Decomposing Changes in the Labor Share Within and Between Firms

Methodology
An implication of the superstar firm model is that the growth of the labor share should have an
important between-firm (reallocation) component, as firms with low labor share (or firms with
declining labor shares) capture a rising fraction of industry sales or value-added. To explore this
implication, we implement the Melitz and Polanec (2015) decomposition, which generalizes the
Olley and Pakes (1996) method to allow for entry and exit. While these tools were originally
developed for productivity decompositions, they can be applied straightforwardly to labor shares.
We write the level of the aggregate labor share as:

S=

X

ωi Si = S̄ +

X

(ωi − ω̄) Si − S̄



where the size-weight, ωi , is firm i’s share of value-added in an industry, ωi =

(3)
PPi Yi ,
i P i Yi

S̄ is the

unweighted mean labor share of the firms in the industry and ω̄ is the unweighted mean value-added
share.26
Consider the change (∆) in the aggregate labor share from the the base year (t = 1) to the
current period (t = 2).27
25

The fraction of the overall decline in the labor share that is explained by rising concentration comes from a simple
back of the envelope calculation. From 1997-2012, the CR20 in manufacturing went up by around 6 percentage points
and the labor share fell by around 6 percentage points. From Figure 7, the average coefficient relating the change in
concentration to the change in labor share in manufacturing over this period was −0.345, implying that concentration
explained −0.345×6
× 100 = 34.5% of the fall in the labor share in manufacturing over this period.
6
26
The weight ωi used in these calculations is the denominator of the relevant labor share measure. Thus, within
manufacturing, when we consider decompositions of the payroll-to-value-added ratio, we use the value-added share
as the firm’s weight. In all other decompositions, we use the payroll-to-sales ratio, and use the firm’s share of total
sales as the firm’s weight.
27
Note that 5 year changes in the Census data form the bulk of our analysis.

15

∆S = S2 − S1 = ∆S̄ + ∆

hX

i
¯ i − S)
¯
(ωi − ω)(S

(4)

Melitz and Polanec (2015) generalize this Olley-Pakes decomposition to account for exit and entry:

∆S = ∆S̄S + ∆

hX

(ωi − ω̄) Si − S̄

i
S

+ ωX,1 (SS,1 − SX,1 ) + ωE,2 (SE,2 − SS,2 )

(5)

where subscript S denotes survivors, subscript X denotes exiters and subscript E denotes entrants.
The variable ωX,1 is the value-added weighted mean labor share of exiters (by definition all measured
in period 1) and ωE,2 is the value-added weighted mean labor share of entrants (measured in period
2). The term SS,t is the aggregate labor share of survivors in period t (i.e. firms that survived
between periods 2 and 1), SE,2 is the aggregate value-added share of entrants in period 2, and SX,1
is the value-added share of exiters in period 1. One can think of the first two terms as splitting the
change in the labor share among survivors into a within-firm component, ∆S̄S , and a reallocation
P
¯  , which reflects the change in the covariance between firm
(ωi − ω̄) Si − S)
component, ∆
S
size and firm labor shares for surviving incumbents. The last two terms account for contributions
from exiting and entering firms, respectively.
Main Decomposition Results
In Figure 9, we show an illustrative plot for the Melitz-Polanec decomposition calculated for adjacent five-year periods for manufacturing payroll over value-added and then cumulated over two
15-year periods, 1982-1997 and 1997-2012. The labor share declined substantially in both periods:
-10.35 percentage points between 1982 and 1997 and -6.15 percentage points between 1997 and
2012. Importantly, the reallocation among incumbents (“between”) was the main component of
the fall (-7.85 percentage points in the early period and -4.92 percentage points in the later period).
While the within-firm component is negative over both periods, the reallocation component among
incumbents is three (1982-1997) to seven (1997-2012) times as large as the within-firm component.
For example, the fact that the within-incumbent contribution to the falling labor share is only 0.7
percentage points 1997-2012 indicates that for the unweighted average firm, the labor share fell by
under a percentage point over the entire 15 year period.
The reallocation term captures changes in activity among incumbent firms, but there is an
additional reallocation effect coming from entry and exit. Exiting firms contribute to the fall in
the labor share over both periods (-2.2 and -2.8 percentage points in the early and later period
respectively). High labor share firms are disproportionately likely to exit, which makes sense
16

as these firms are generally the less profitable. Conversely, the contribution from firm entry is
positive in both periods (2.3 percentage points); new firms also tend to have elevated labor shares,
presumably because they set relatively low output prices and endure low margins in a bid to build
market share (see Foster, Haltiwanger and Syverson (2008, 2016) for supporting evidence from the
Census of Manufacturers). Since the contribution of entry and exit is broadly similar, these two
terms approximately cancel each other out in our decomposition exercise.
Table 4 reports the decompositions of labor share change in manufacturing for each of the
individual five-year periods covered by the data. In the first five columns we detail the payroll to
value-added results. Reallocation among incumbent firms contributes negatively to the labor share
in every five-year period whereas within-firm movements contribute positively in two of the six time
periods (1987-92 and 2007-12). The right panel of Table 4 repeats the decompositions using the
broader measure of compensation over value-added, and shows that the patterns are even stronger
for this metric: almost all of the fall in the labor share can be explained by a between-incumbent
reallocation of value-added. For example, the last row shows that the compensation share fell by
18.9 percentage points between 1982 and 2012 and 96% of this change (= 18.21/18.9) is accounted
for by a reallocation amongst incumbent firms. The unweighted labor share for incumbents fell by
only 0.69 percentage points.
The finding that the reallocation of market share among incumbent firms contributes negatively
to the overall labor share generalizes to all of the six sectors that we consider.28 Figure 10 plots
the Melitz-Polanec decomposition for each sector cumulated now over the entire sample period
for which data is available (e.g., 1982-2012 for manufacturing, but only 1992-2012 for finance).
Recall that we do not have firm-level value-added data outside of manufacturing, so this analysis
decomposes payroll over sales, using a firm’s sales share as its weight. As in Figure 9 for payroll
over value added, within manufacturing the total contribution of market share reallocation among
incumbent firms (5 percentage points) is about four times as large as the within-firm component
(1.2 percentage points) for payroll over sales. Echoing the findings in manufacturing, we find that
the between-incumbent reallocation effect contributes strongly to the decline in the payroll share in
each of the other five sectors except services where the entry component dominates. By contrast,
the within-incumbent contribution is positive in all sectors except for manufacturing. Table 5
28

The level of the payroll to sales ratio differs substantially across sectors due in part to differences in intermediate
input costs (see Figure 3), and we thus implement decompositions separately by sector. Using the more aggregate
NIPA data on payroll to value-added ratio, Elsby, Hobjin and Sahin (2013) show that the overall decline in the labor
share is driven primarily by within rather than between sector movements.

17

reports the decompositions over five-year periods underlying the sample totals plotted in Figure
10. The table shows that the between incumbent reallocation component is the dominant term.
For example, the reallocation term contributes to the fall in the labor share in 25 of the 31 potential
5 year differences, whereas the within incumbent component only contributes to a fall in the labor
share in 5 out of the 31 possible 5 year differences.29
Robustness of the decomposition analysis
We have subjected the decomposition findings to a large number of robustness tests, some of
which are reported below. For example, the above analysis is performed at the firm rather than
establishment level. While this is appealing because it closely aligns with the model, there is a
potential complication as entry and exit can occur through merger and acquisition activity rather
than start-up or bankruptcy. In Appendix Table A.1, we conduct the decomposition analysis at
the establishment level (Panel A) and find qualitatively similar patterns, reflecting the fact that
the overwhelming number of firms only have a single establishment. We also perform the analysis
using firm-by-industry cells (Panel B) in place of firms that can overlap multiple industries (the
definition used in the previous analysis linking changes in labor shares to changes in industrylevel concentration). Again, the results that are quite similar. Finally, in Panel C, we perform
the decomposition at 15-year intervals rather than five-year intervals. Although the definition of
an incumbent firm is thus changed to comprise only firms that survived 15 years, the pattern of
findings persists.30
Compustat Data
We also implemented our decomposition analysis using U.S. publicly listed firms in the Compustat
database. There are several data issues in implementing these analyses. First, labor costs are not
a mandatory reporting item for publicly listed U.S. firms. Only about 13 percent of firms report
“staff expenses,” and those reporting are mainly larger firms. Second, value-added is not reported in
Compustat as there is no consistent definition of intermediate inputs. We considered decompositions
based on both sales and value-added as measured by the wage bill plus gross profits. Third, firms
report their consolidated global value which includes the wage bill of workers who are employed
29

The general increase in the within-firm component of the labor share is consistent with our simple model in
Appendix A where an increase in competition reduces margins for individual firms, even though it reallocates more
market share to the low labor share firms.
30
Kehrig and Vincent (2017) similarly find that the between-firm reallocation term dominates in accounting for
the aggregate fall in the labor share using a variety of other decomposition analyses.

18

overseas; hence, this concept is not directly comparable to Census data which record activities
within the United States. Finally, as is well known, Compustat does not cover privately-held firms
so the sample is much smaller than the Census. Despite these multiple caveats, we obtain broadly
similar patterns of results when examining Compustat data for manufacturing (which is likely to
be most comparably reported to representative datasets by Compustat). There is a clear decline
in the labor share and it is dominated by between-firm (rather than within-firm) movements using
the Melitz-Polanec decomposition (see Table A.5).31 Compustat data also enable us to examine
Tobin’s average Q (the ratio of stock market value to capital stock), which may proxy for expected
future rents and/or a firms’s intangible capital. We would expect to see a negative relationship
between the change in the labor share and the change in Tobin’s Q at the firm level and a positive
relationship between changes in Q and sales concentration at the industry level. This is indeed
what we observe.32

IV.C

The Between-Firm Component of the Fall in the Labor Share is Related
to Rising Concentration

We have established that, across most of the U.S. private economy, there has been a fall in the
labor share and a rise in sales concentration; that the fall in the labor share is greatest in the
four digit sub-industries of these sectors where concentration rose the most; and that the fall in
labor share is primarily a between-firm reallocation story rather than a within-firm phenomenon.
Figure 11 examines another prediction of the superstar firm model, which is that the industries
where concentration rose the most were those that experienced the largest fall in the reallocation
component of the labor share. If, contrary to our hypothesis, the rise in concentration weakened
competition and thereby allowed firms to raise prices across the board (e.g. through explicit or
implicit price coordination), the higher mark-ups would tend to spur a rising profit share/falling
labor share among all firms within an industry. Our superstar firm hypothesis, by contrast, focuses
on rises in size of the most profitable firms.
In Figure 11, the dark grey bars show the coefficient estimates and standard errors from regressions of the reallocation component of the fall in the labor share (recovered from Table 5), on the
31

Hartman-Glaser, Lustig and Zhang (2016) find a somewhat different overall trend from us, but they impute
missing values by using industry averages and they use non-manufacturing data.
32
For example, regressing the five year change in firm labor shares on the five year change in Tobin’s Q and time
dummies in all Census years 1982-2007 generates a coefficient (standard error) on Q of −0.085(0.013) with 3,533
observations. An industry regression of the change in Tobin’s Q on the change in the CR20 for industries where we
have consistent industry definitions (Census years 1992-2007) has a coefficient (standard error) on concentration of
0.411(0.224) with 32 observations.

19

change in the CR20. The lighter bars directly underneath report the estimates that result from
regressions of the within-incumbent component of the change in the labor share on concentration,
and the white and black bars show the estimates for the firm entry and exit components, respectively. Appendix Table A.2 (column (2)) shows the corresponding regressions underlying Figure 11
alongside results using the other measures of concentration. The pattern of results in Figure 11 is
consistent across all sectors: the tight correlations between changes in concentration and changes in
labor shares reported in Figure 6 are driven by the reallocation component. The between-incumbent
reallocation component shows up as negative and significant in all sectors, while the coefficients on
the within-firm component are small, generally insignificant, and occasionally positive. Firm entry
and exit correlate with concentration differently across sectors, but these components always play a
small role compared to the between-incumbent reallocation component. The results provide further
evidence, consistent with the superstar firm hypothesis, that concentrating industries experienced
a differential reallocation of economic activity towards firms that had lower labor shares.
A further extension we considered was to implement our decompositions of changes in the labor
share into between- and within-firm components using alternative techniques such as a traditional
shift-share analysis (Bailey, Hulten and Campbell, 1992) or a modified shift-share approach where
the covariance term is allocated equally to the within- and between-components as in Autor, Katz
and Krueger (1998). We implemented a variety of such approaches and performed decompositions
such as those underlying Figure 10. We continue to find a large role for the between-firm reallocation
component of the fall in the labor share but the within-firm component becomes more important
as well. In contrast to Figure 11, we also find for the shift-share decompositions that concentration
loads significantly on the within-firm component. These shift-share decompositions give greater
weight to the within-firm changes of initially larger firms than do the Olley-Pakes and MelitzPolanec methodologies, where the within component is simply the unweighted mean of withinfirm changes. The shift-share models therefore suggest that within-firm declines in labor share
make some contribution to the aggregate decline in labor share, but this within-firm contribution
primarily comes from larger firms. In short, increases in concentration are associated with decreases
in labor share among the largest firms.33
33


P
The covariance term in the shift-share analysis
[∆ωi ∆S]S is a non-trivial component although it does not
seem related to increases in concentration. This appears to be related to outliers to which the double difference in
the covariance term is particularly sensitive.

20

IV.D

International Evidence

Karabarbounis and Neiman (2013) and Piketty (2014) have documented that the fall in the labor
share is an international phenomenon. We explore the international evidence further using industry
and firm-level data from various OECD countries.
Industry labor shares: KLEMS
Figure 1 documented the pervasive decline in the labor share across several OECD countries. We
begin our industry and firm-level analysis by exploring the correlation of the labor share (measured
in levels) across the 32 industries that comprise the market sector. Figure 12 reports these correlations for each country over the 1997-2007 period (where the data are most abundant). Panel A
reports, for each country, the average correlation of their labor share levels with each of the other
11 countries. The correlation is high in all cases, with average correlation coefficients between 0.7
and 0.9. Panel B correlates the change in labor shares by country pairs, and reports the average
correlation for each country as well as the fraction of the country’s pairwise correlations that are
negative. The correlations in changes are weaker than those in levels, but the bulk of the evidence
still indicates that declines in the labor share tend to occur in the same industries across countries:
the average correlation is positive for each country, and there is a positive correlation across industries between country pairs in over three-quarters of all cases (51 of 66). The correlation matrices
underlying these summary tables are reported in Table A.3.
Industry labor shares and concentration
We next examine the relationship between the change in the labor share and the change in concentration across countries. Although we do not have access to the equivalent of the Census
Bureau firm-level data for all countries outside of the United States, we can draw on cross-national,
industry-level data for a shorter period from the COMPNET database, developed by the European
Central Bank. COMPNET is originally a firm-level data set constructed from a variety of countryspecific sources through the Central Banks of the contributor nations. These data are collapsed to
the industry-year level when made available to external researchers. The data set contains measures of the labor share and of concentration (defined as the fraction of industry sales produced by
the top ten firms in the country). We estimate equation (2) in five-year (2011-2006) or ten-year
(2011-2001) long differences separately across all of the 14 countries for which data are available.
Table 6 has the results from this exercise, and shows that in the five-year difference specifications

21

of column (1), 12 out of the 14 countries have the expected negative sign that is predicted by the
superstar firm model, while all countries but Belgium have a negative sign in the longer differences
in column 2 (for which fewer countries have available data). The coefficients are imprecise, however, and often insignificant. In the 10-year difference specification, five of the 10 coefficients are
negative and significant at the 10% level or greater, while four additional countries have negative
but insignificant coefficients.
Firm-level decompositions
In this subsection, we use data from BVD Orbis, which is currently the best available source for
comparable, cross-national firm-level data to decompose changes in labor share into between- and
within-firm components for 6 OECD countries. Orbis is a compilation of firm accounts in electronic
form from essentially all countries in the world. Accounting regulations and Orbis coverage differ
across countries, however, so we confine the analysis to a set of European countries where reasonable
quality data are available for the 2000s. We use the earliest five-year periods available where Orbis
has comprehensive data. These are 2003-2008 for the UK, Sweden and France, and 2005-2010 for
Germany, Italy and Portugal. Firms in all six countries have seen a decline in the aggregate labor
share of value-added over this period. Figure 13 presents this decomposition for the manufacturing
sector for all six countries.34 Just as in the more comprehensive U.S. data, it is the between-firm
reallocation component that is the main contributor to the decline in the labor share in all countries.
This reallocation component is always negative, whereas the within-firm component is positive in
half of the countries.
Summary on international evidence
Although our international data are not as rich as those available for the United States, the pattern
of findings for other countries mirrors the evidence from the more detailed U.S. data: (i) the decline
in the labor share has occurred in broadly similar industries across countries; (ii) the industries
with the greatest increases in concentration exhibited the sharpest falls in the labor share; and
(iii) the fall in the labor share is primarily a between-firm (reallocation) rather than within-firm
phenomenon. Thus, the international evidence is broadly consistent with the hypothesis that a rise
in superstar firms has played a major role in the decline in labor’s share throughout the OECD.
34

We focus on manufacturing as measurement of the labor share is more reliable for this sector. Appendix Table
A.4 shows the details of the data and the decomposition.

22

IV.E

What Explains the Rise in Concentration?

Technology
The superstar firm model is most immediately applicable to high-tech industries, where we think
that many sectors may have developed a “winner takes most” character. It is less obviously applicable to rapidly declining sectors. This observation leads us to explore whether rising concentration is
more prevalent in dynamic industries exhibiting rapid technological advances, or if it is not specific
to these industries. We employ two commonly used measures of technical change, patent-intensity
and total factor productivity (TFP), as well as four ancillary proxies for output, costs, investment
and expenditure: output per worker, material costs per worker, assets per worker, and payroll per
hour. Figure 14 presents the coefficient estimates from regressions of growth in various industry
characteristics on growth in CR20 measure of concentration in U.S. manufacturing industries.35
The rise in industry concentration is positively and significantly correlated with the growth of
patenting intensity. The relationship is economically and statistically significant. As an alternative
measure of technical progress we also show that concentration rates were rising faster in sectors
where labor productivity (output per worker) rose faster (second row of Figure 14). Of course, this
might be because of faster growth in material inputs or capital in these industries (third and fourth
rows). Nevertheless, even when we control for output increases arising from five possible factor
inputs (labor, structures capital, equipment capital, energy inputs and non-energy material inputs)
in our TFP measure, we find a significantly positive correlation between concentration growth and
TFP growth. These correlations suggest that the industries becoming more concentrated are those
with faster technological progress. Interestingly, the final row of Figure 14 shows that we do not
find any correlation of concentration growth with average wage (payroll per hour) changes. This
suggests that concentrating sectors are not those where average wages are systematically falling,
even though the share of labor is.
Recent work by the OECD (Andrews, Criscuolo and Gal, 2015) examines firm-level data in
24 OECD countries between 2001 and 2013 and finds that productivity differences have widened
between the top 5 percent of firms and the rest of the distribution. They attribute the widening
to a slowdown in technological diffusion between the frontier firms and the laggards, arising from
the way that leading firms can better protect their advantages and contributing to a slowdown
in aggregate productivity growth. They do not look directly at labor shares, but a slowdown in
35
The independent variable in these regressions is the change in CR20 concentration and the dependent variable is
the industry characteristic. All regressions include year dummies.

23

technological diffusion could be a reason for the growth of superstar firms. We investigate this idea
by examining a measure of technology diffusion based on the speed of patent citations. Consistent
with the hypothesis of Andrews et al. (2015), we find that in industries where the speed of diffusion
had slowed (as indicated by a drop in the speed of citations), concentration had risen by more and
labor shares had fallen by more. For example, in industries where the percent of total citations
received in the first five years was 10 percentage points lower, concentration rose by an extra 3.3
percentage points.
Trade
Using data from both manufacturing and non-manufacturing industries, Elsby, Hobijn and Sahin
(2013) find a negative industry-level association between the change in the labor share and growth
of total import intensity.36 They conclude that the offshoring of the labor-intensive components
of U.S. manufacturing may have contributed to the falling domestic labor share during the 1990s
and 2000s. Following their work, we explore the relationship between changes in labor’s share and
changes in Chinese import intensity. Appendix Table A.6 summarizes regressions of changes in
industry-level outcomes in U.S. manufacturing on changes in Chinese imports intensity. We report
both OLS regressions and 2SLS models using the Autor, Dorn and Hanson (2013) approach of
instrumenting for import exposure using contemporaneous import growth in the same industries in
eight other developed countries. As a sensitivity test, we report results both including and excluding
the post-2007 Great Recession. The first three columns of Appendix Table A.6 corroborate the
well-documented finding that industries that were more exposed to Chinese imports had greater
falls in sales, payroll and value-added than other sectors (significantly so in almost all cases). The
next three columns find a positive correlation between the growth of Chinese import penetration
and the rise of industry concentration, although this relationship is imprecisely estimated. The last
two columns find that an increase in Chinese imports predicts a rise in industry labor share (though
this relationship is often insignificant). While this result is unexpected in light of Elsby, Hobijn
and Sahin (2013), it is implied by the estimates in columns (1) through (3). Specifically, because
the negative effect of rising Chinese import exposure on industry payroll is smaller in absolute
magnitude than its negative effect on industry value-added and industry sales, the labor share of
sales and value-added tends to rise with growth of industry import exposure.37
36

They define total import intensity using the 1993-2010 input-output tables as the percentage increase in valueadded needed to satisfy U.S. final demand were the U.S. to produce all goods domestically.
37
In addition to using different measures of industry trade exposure, the analysis in Elsby, Hobijn and Sahin (2013)
differs from ours in their use of data from both manufacturing and non-manufacturing industries. While we are able

24

Other factors
We also examined the correlation of the change in concentration with a large number of other candidate explanatory variables. These include measures of business dynamism, computer investment,
and susceptibility to routine task-replacing technical change, among others. We do not find these
variables to be systematically or robustly correlated with changes in concentration.

V

Conclusions

In this paper we have considered a new “superstar firm” explanation for the widely remarked fall in
the labor share of GDP. We hypothesize that markets have changed such that firms with superior
quality, lower costs, or greater innovation reap disproportionate rewards relative to prior eras. Since
these superstar firms have higher profit levels, they also tend to have a lower share of labor in sales
and value-added. As superstar firms gain market share across a wide range of sectors, the aggregate
share of labor falls. Our model, combined with technological or institutional changes advantaging
the most productive firms in many industries, yields predictions that are supported by Census
micro-data across the bulk of the U.S. private sector. First, sales concentration levels rise across
large swathes of industries. Second, those industries where concentration rises the most have the
sharpest falls in the labor share. Third, the fall in the labor share has an important reallocation
component between firms—the unweighted mean of labor share has not fallen much. Fourth, this
between-firm reallocation of the labor share is greatest in the sectors that are concentrating the
most. Fifth, these broad patterns are observed not only in U.S. data, but also internationally in
European OECD countries. Notably, the growth of concentration is disproportionately apparent
in industries experiencing faster technical change as measured by the growth of patent-intensity
or total factor productivity, suggesting that technological dynamism, rather than simply anticompetitive forces, is an important driver of this trend.
The work in this paper is of course descriptive and suggestive rather than the final word in this
area. Future work needs to understand more precisely the shocks that lead to the emergence of
superstar firms. We have presented our model as one where productivity (or quality) differences
between firms are magnified when the competitive environment changes, turning leading firms into
to replicate their finding of a negative association between rising imports and falling labor share, we find that this
negative relationship is eliminated when we include a dummy variable for the manufacturing sector. This pattern
likely reflects the facts that (1) the fall in the labor share has been greater in manufacturing than in other sectors;
and (2) manufacturing is more subject to import exposure then non-manufacturing. Import exposure variable has
little explanatory power for within-manufacturing, cross-industry variation in the fall in the labor share, however,
and it cannot readily explain why labor’s share has fallen outside of manufacturing.

25

dominating superstars. One source for the change in the environment could be technological: high
tech sectors and parts of retail and transportation as well have an increasingly “winner takes all”
aspect. But an alternative story is that leading firms are now able to lobby better and create
barriers to entry, making it more difficult for smaller firms to grow or for new firms to enter. In its
pure form, this “rigged economy” view seems unlikely as a complete explanation. The industries
where concentration has grown are those that have been increasing their innovation most rapidly as
indicated by patents (Figure 14). One might be concerned that these patents are designed to thwart
innovation and enshrine monopolies (e.g., Boldrin and Levine, 2008). However, we also observe
similar relationships when measuring innovation by citation-weighted patents or TFP growth.
A more subtle story, however, is that firms initially gain high market shares by legitimately
competing on the merits of their innovations or superior efficiency. Once they have gained a
commanding position, however, they use their market power to erect various barriers to entry to
protect their position. Nothing in our analysis rules out this mechanism, and we regard it as an
important area for subsequent research.
The rise of superstar firms and decline in the labor share also appears to be related to changes in
the boundaries of large dominant employers with such firms increasingly using domestic outsourcing to contracting firms, temporary help agencies, and independent contractors and freelancers for
a wider range of activities previously done in-house, including janitorial work, food services, logistics, and clerical work (Weil, 2014; Katz and Krueger 2016). This fissuring of the workplace can
directly reduce the labor share by saving on the wage premia (firm effects) typically paid by large
high-wage employers to ordinary workers and by reducing the bargaining power of both in-house
and outsourced workers in occupations subject to outsourcing threats and increased labor market
competition (Dube and Kaplan, 2010; Goldschmidt and Schmieder, 2017). The increased fissuring
of the workplace has been associated with a rising correlation of firm wage effects and person effects
(skills) that accounts for a significant portion of the increase in U.S. wage inequality since 1980
(Song et al., 2016). Linking the rise of superstar firms and the fall of the labor share with the
trends in inequality between employees should also be an important avenue of future research.

26

VI

References

Acemoglu, Daron and Nikolaus Hildebrand. 2017. “Increasing Concentration and Persistence of
Innovation: Facts and Theory.” MIT mimeo.
Aghion, Philippe and Peter Howitt. 1992. “A Model of Growth. Through Creative Destruction.”
Econometrica 60(2) 323-351.
Akerman, Anders, Edwin Leuven, and Magne Mogstad. 2017. “Information Frictions, Broadband
Internet and the Relationship between Distance and Trade.” mimeo, University of Chicago.
Andrews, Dan, Chiara Criscuolo, and Peter Gal. 2015. “Frontier Firms, Technology Diffusion and
Public Policy.” OECD Future of Productivity Background Paper.
Antràs, Pol. 2004. “Is the U.S. Aggregate Production Function Cobb-Douglas? New Estimates of
the Elasticity of Substitution.” The B.E. Journal of Macroeconomics, 4(1): 1-36.
Autor, David H., David Dorn, and Gordon H. Hanson. 2013. “The China Syndrome: Local Labor
Market Effects of Import Competition in the United States.” American Economic Review, 103(6):
2121–2168.
Autor, David, David Dorn, Lawrence F. Katz, Christina Patterson, and John Van Reenen. 2017.
“Concentrating on the Fall of the Labor Share.” American Economic Review Papers and
Proceedings, forthcoming.
Autor, David, Lawrence Katz, and Alan Krueger. 1998. “Computing Inequality: Have Computers
Changed the Labor Market?” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 113 (4):1169-1214.
Azmat, Ghazala, Alan Manning, and John Van Reenen. 2012. “Privatization and the Decline of
Labor Share: International Evidence from Network Industries.” Economica, 79, 470-492.
Bailey, Martin, Charles Hulten and David Campbell. 1992. “Productivity Dynamics in
Manufacturing Plants” Brookings Papers on Economic Activity: Microeconomics, 187-267.
Bain, Joseph. 1951. “Relation of Profit Rate to Industry Concentration: American
Manufacturing 1936-1940” Quarterly Journal of Economics 65(3), 293-324.
Barkai, Simcha. 2016. “Declining Labor and Capital Shares.” Working Paper, University of
Chicago.
Bartelsman, Eric, John Haltiwanger and Stefano Scarpetta. 2013. “Cross-Country Differences in
Productivity: The Role of Allocation and Selection.” American Economic Review, 103(1): 305-34.
Bell, Brian. 2015. “Wage Stagnation and the Legacy Costs of Employment” Centrepiece, Fall,
20-23.
Berkowitz, Daniel, Hong Ma, and Shuichiro Nishioka. 2017. “Does Capital-Labor Substitution or
Do Institutions Explain Declining Labor Shares?” University of Pittsburgh.
27

Blanchard, Olivier. 1997. “The Medium Run.” Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, 2, 89-158.
Blanchard, Olivier and Francesco Giavazzi. 2003. “Macroeconomic Effects of Regulation And
Deregulation In Goods and Labor Markets.” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 118, 879-907.
Bockerman, Petri and Mika Maliranta. 2012. “Globalization, Creative Destruction, and Labour
Share Change: Evidence on the Determinants and Mechanisms from Longitudinal Plant-Level
Data,” Oxford Economic Papers, 64, 259-80.
Boldrin, Michele and David K. Levine. 2008. Against Intellectual Monopoly. Cambridge
University Press.
Bridgman, Benjamin. 2014. “Is labor’s loss capital’s gain? Gross versus net labor shares.”
Bureau of Economic Analysis, Washington DC.
Brynjolfsson, Erik, Andrew McAfee, Michael Sorell, and Feng Zhu. 2008. “Scale Without Mass:
Business Process Replication and Industry Dynamics” Harvard Business School Technology and
Operations Management Unit Research Paper No 07-016.
Dao, Mai, Mitali Das, Zsoka Koczan, and Weicheng Lian. 2017. “Why is Labor Receiving a
Smaller Share of Global Income? Theory and Empirical Evidence,” IMF Working Paper.
Dobbs Richard, Tim Koller, Sree Ramaswamy, Jonathan Woetzel, James Manyika, Rohit
Krishnan and Nicoló Andreula. 2015. “Playing to Win: the new global competition for corporate
profits” London: McKinsey Global Institute
Demsetz, Harold. 1973. “Industry Structure, Market Rivalry and Public Policy.” Journal of Law
and Economics, 16: 1-10.
Dube, Arindrajit and Ethan Kaplan. 2010. “Does Outsourcing Reduce Wages in the Low-Wage
Service Occupations? Evidence from Janitors and Guards.” Industrial & Labor Relations Review,
63(2), 287-306.
Elsby, Mike, Bart Hobijn, and Aysegul Sahin. 2013. “The Decline of the U.S. Labor Share.”
Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, 1-42.
Foster, Lucia, John Haltiwanger, and Chad Syverson. 2008. “Reallocation, Firm Turnover, and
Efficiency: Selection on Productivity or Profitability?” American Economic Review, 98(1):
394-425.
Foster, Lucia, John Haltiwanger, and Chad Syverson. 2016. “The Slow Growth of New Plants:
Learning about Demand?” Economica, 83(329): 91-129.
Furman, Jason and Peter Orszag. 2015. “A Firm-Level Perspective on the Role of Rents in the
Rise in Inequality”, Working Paper.
Gilbert, Richard and David Newbery. 1982. “Preemptive Patenting and the Persistence of
Monopoly,” American Economic Review, 72(3) 514-526.
Gollin , Douglas. 2002. “Getting Income Shares Right.” Journal of Political Economy, 110(2),
458-74
28

Godschmidt, Deborah and Johannes F. Schmieder. 2017. “The Rise of Domestic Outsourcing and
the Evolution of the German Wage Structure.” Quarterly Journal of Economics, forthcoming.
Hamermesh, Daniel S. 1993. Labor Demand. Princeton University Press.
Hartman-Glaser, Barney, Hanno Lustig, and Mindy Zhang. 2016. “National Income Accounting
when Firms Insure Managers: Understanding Firm Size and Compensation Inequality.” NBER
Working Paper 22651.
Hopenhayn, Hugo. 1992. “Entry and Exit in Long Run Equilibria.” Econometrica, 60(5)
1127-1150
Hsieh, Chang-Tai and Peter J. Klenow. 2009. “Misallocation and Manufacturing TFP in China
and India.”Quarterly Journal of Economics, 124, 1403-1448.
Jones, Charles. 2003. “Growth, Capital Shares, and a New Perspective on Production
Functions.” Working Paper, UC Berkeley.
Kaldor, Nicholas. 1961. “Capital Accumulation and Economic Growth,” in The Theory of
Capital, ed. F. A. Lutz and D. C. Hague, New York: St. Martin’s Press: 177-222.
Kalecki, Michal. 1938.“The Determinants of the Distribution of National Income.” Econometrica,
6(2), 97-112.
Kalemli-Ozcan, Sebnem, Bent Sorensen, Carolina Villegas-Sanchez, Vadym Volosovych, and
Sevcan Yesiltas. 2015. “How to Construct Nationally Representative Firm Level data from the
ORBIS Global Database” NBER Working Paper 21558.
Karabarbounis, Loukas and Brent Neiman. 2013. “The Global Decline of the Labor Share.”
Quarterly Journal of Economics, 129(1), 61-103.
Katz, Lawrence F. and Alan B. Krueger. 2016. “The Rise and Nature of Alternative Work
Arrangements in the United States, 1995-2015.” NBER Working Paper No. 22667.
Kehrig, Matthias and Nicolas Vincent. 2017. “Growing Productivity without Growing Wages:
The Micro-Level Anatomy of the Aggregate Labor Share Decline”, mimeo Duke University.
Kleiner, Morris and Alan Krueger. 2013. “Analyzing the Extent and Influence of Occupational
Licensing on the Labor Market.” Journal of Labor Economics, 31, S173–S202.
Klette, Toe and Samuel Kortum. 2004. “Innovating Firms and Aggregate Innovation” Journal of
Political Economy, 112(5) 986-1018.
Koh, Dongya, Raul Santaeulalia-Lopis, and Yu Zheng. 2016. “Labor Share Decline and
Intellectual Property Products Capital.” SSRN Working Paper.
Lawrence, Robert. 2015. “Recent Declines in Labor’s Share in Us Income: A Preliminary
Neoclassical Account.” NBER Working Paper No. 21296.
Lopez-Garcia, P., F. di Mauro, and the CompNet Task Force. 2015. “Assessing European
competitiveness: the new CompNet micro-based database.” European Central Bank, Working
Paper Series No 1764.
29

Lucas, Robert E. 1978. “On the Size Distribution of Business Firms.” Bell Journal of Economics,
9, 2, 508-523.
Melitz, Marc. 2003. “The Impact of Trade on Intra-Industry Reallocations and Aggregate
Industry Productivity.” Econometrica, 71, 1695–1725.
Melitz, Marc and Saso Polanec. 2015. “Dynamic Olley-Pakes Productivity Decomposition with
Entry and Exit.” RAND Journal of Economics, 46 (2): 362-375.
Oberfield, Ezra and Devesh Raval. 2014. “Micro Data and Macro Technology.” Working Paper,
Princeton University.
Olley, Steven and Pakes, Ariel. 1996. “The Dynamics of Productivity in the Telecommunications
Industry.” Econometrica, 64(6): 1263-1298.
O’Mahony, Mary and Marcel Timmer. 2009. “Output, Input and Productivity Measures at the
Industry Level: the EU KLEMS Database,” Economic Journal, 119(538) F374-503.
Paunov, Caroline and Dominique Guellec. 2017. “Digital Innovation and the Distribution of
Income”, OECD mimeo
Pessoa, Joao P. and John Van Reenen. 2013. “ Decoupling of Wage Growth and Productivity
Growth? Myth and Reality”, CEP Discussion Paper 1246.
Piketty, Thomas. 2014. Capital in the Twenty-First Century. Harvard University Press.
Rognlie, Matthew. 2015. “Deciphering the Fall and Rise in the Net Capital Share: Accumulation
or Scarcity?” Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, 1-69.
Schmalensee, Richard. 1987. “Collusion Versus Differential Efficiency: Testing Alternative
Hypotheses.” Journal of Industrial Economics, 35(4), June, 399-425.
Song, Jae, David J. Price, Fatih Guvenen, Nicholas Bloom, and Till von Wachter. 2016. “Firming
up Inequality.” Working Paper, Stanford University.
Weil, David. 2014. The Fissured Workplace. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.

30

Labor Share: Compensation / Value Added
.56
.57
.58
.59
.6

Labor Share: Compensation / Value Added
.6
.65
.7
.75

Labor Share: Compensation / Value Added
.65
.7
.75

1970

1970

1970
1980

1980

1980
Labor Share: Compensation / Value Added
.65
.7
.75
.8

Labor Share: Compensation / Value Added
.65
.7
.75
.8

1990
year

1990
year

1990
year

1990
year
2000

2000

2000

2000
2010

2010

2010

2010
Labor Share: Compensation / Value Added
.64
.66
.68
.7
.72
.74

.6

.6

1980

Labor Share: Compensation / Value Added
.65
.7
.75
.8

.55

.6

1970

Labor Share: Compensation / Value Added
.6
.62
.64
.66
.68

Labor Share: Compensation / Value Added
.68
.7
.72
.74

.55

.6

.6

Labor Share: Compensation / Value Added
.62
.64
.66
.68

Labor Share: Compensation / Value Added
.61
.62
.63
.64

Labor Share: Compensation / Value Added
.65
.7
.75

VII

1970

1970

1970

1970

Figures

Figure 1: International Comparison: Labor Share by Country
AUT
BEL

1980
1990
year

FIN

1980
1990
year

ITA

1980
1990
year

SWE

1980
1990
year

a country based on KLEMS data.

31

ESP

2000

2000

2000

2000

2010

2010

1970

2010
1970

2010
1970

1970

1980

FRA

1980

JPN

1980

UK

1980

1990
year

GER

1990
year

1990
year

1990
year

2000
2010

2000
2010

NLD

2000

2000

Notes: Each panel plots the ratio of aggregate compensation over value-added for all industries in
2010

USA

2010

Figure 2: The Labor Share in Manufacturing

Notes: This figure plots the aggregate labor share in manufacturing from 1982-2012. The green
circles (plotted on the left axis) represent the ratio of wages and salaries (payroll) to value-added.
The red diamonds (also plotted on the left axis) include a broader definition of labor income and
plots the ratio of wages, salaries and fringe benefits (compensation) to value-added. The blue squares
(plotted on the right axis) show wages and salaries normalized by sales rather than value-added.

32

Figure 3: Average Payroll-to-Sales Ratio

Payroll
to Sales Ratio
Wage−to−Sales
Ratio
12
13
14
11

10

Payroll to Sales Ratio
Wage−to−Sales
Ratio
12
14
16

15

Panel B: Finance
Average Wage−to−Sales
Ratio for Finance

18

Average Wage−to−Sales
Ratio for Manufacturing
Panel A: Manufacturing

1980

1990

2000

2010

1990

1995

2000
year

year

2010

Panel D: Utilities
and
Average Wage−to−Sales
Ratio
forTransportation
Utilities and Transportation

16.5

37

Payroll
to Sales Ratio
Wage−to−Sales
Ratio
17
17.5
18

Payroll
to Sales Ratio
Wage−to−Sales
Ratio
37.2
37.4
37.6
37.8

38

18.5

Average Wage−to−Sales
Ratio for Services
Panel C: Services

2005

1990
year

2000

2010

1990

1995

2000
year

2005

2010

Average Wage−to−Sales
Panel E: Retail Ratio
Trade for Retail Trade

Panel F: Wholesale
Average Wage−to−Sales
Ratio Trade
for Wholesale Trade

4.5

10.6

10.8

Payroll
to Sales Ratio
Wage−to−Sales
Ratio
5

Payroll
to Sales Ratio
Wage−to−Sales
Ratio
11
11.2
11.4

5.5

11.6

1980

1980

1990

2000

2010

1980

year

1990

2000

2010

year

Notes: Each panel plots the overall payroll-to-sales ratio in one of the six major sectors covered by the U.S.
Economic Census.

33

Figure 4: Average Concentration Across Four Digit Industries by Major Sector
Average Concentration

Average Concentration

4−digit Industries in Manufacturing

4−digit Industries in Finance

1980

1990

2000

50
55
Top 20 Concentration

60

35

2010

45

Top 4 Concentration
25
30
20

60

34

65
70
Top 20 Concentration

Top 4 Concentration
36
38
40
42

75

Panel B: Finance

44

Panel A: Manufacturing

1990

1995

2000
year

year
CR4 with Sales
CR20 with Sales

CR4 with Employment
CR20 with Employment

CR4 with Sales
CR20 with Sales

Average Concentration

Panel D: Utilities and Transportation

58
60
62
Top 20 Concentration

64

40
Top 4 Concentration
30
35

56

18

25

28
20
22
24
26
Top 20 Concentration

16
Top 4 Concentration
10
12
14

2000

2010

1990

1995

year
CR4 with Sales
CR20 with Sales

CR4 with Employment
CR20 with Employment

Average Concentration

CR4 with Employment
CR20 with Employment

Panel F: Wholesale Trade

60
30
40
50
Top 20 Concentration

30
Top 4 Concentration
15
20
25

20

25

10

30
35
40
Top 20 Concentration

45

30
Top 4 Concentration
15
20
25

2010

1980

1990

year
CR4 with Sales
CR20 with Sales

2010

4−digit Industries in Wholesale Trade

10

2000

2005

Average Concentration

Panel E: Retail Trade

1990

2000
year

CR4 with Sales
CR20 with Sales

4−digit Industries in Retail Trade

1980

CR4 with Employment
CR20 with Employment

4−digit Industries in Utilities and Transportation

8

1990

2010

Average Concentration

Panel C: Services

4−digit Industries in Services

1980

2005

2000

2010

year
CR4 with Employment
CR20 with Employment

CR4 with Sales
CR20 with Sales

CR4 with Employment
CR20 with Employment

Notes: This figure plots the average concentration ratio in six major sectors of the U.S. economy. Industry concentration is calculated for each time-consistent four-digit industry code, and then averaged across all industries within
each of the six sectors. The solid blue line (circles), plotted on the left axis, shows the average fraction of total
industry sales that is accounted for by the largest four firms in that industry, and the solid red line (triangles), also
plotted on the left axis, shows the average fraction of industry employment utilized in the four largest firms in the
industry. Similarly, the dashed green line (circles), plotted on the right axis, shows the average fraction of total
industry sales that is accounted for by the largest 20 firms in that industry, and the dashed orange line (triangles),
also plotted on the right axis, shows the average fraction of industry employment utilized in the 20 largest firms in
the industry.

34

Figure 5: The Relationship Between Firm Size and Labor Share

Notes: The dots indicate the coefficient estimates of a regression of a firm’s labor share on
its share of overall sales in its four-digit industry. The regressions include all years available
for that sector, and year fixed effects. The labor share is defined as the payroll-to-sales ratio
in each sector. The blue lines represent the 95% confidence intervals.

35

Figure 6: The Relationship Between the Change in Labor Share and the Change
in Concentration Across Six Sectors

Notes: The figure indicates OLS regression estimates from ∆Labor Share (payroll over
sales) on ∆CR20 (stacked five-year changes from 1982-2012 with dummies for each time
period). Dots indicate coefficient estimates and lines indicate 95% confidence intervals.
Table 3 tabulates the full regression results.

36

Figure 7: Correlation Between the Change in Labor Share and the Change in Concentration: Period
Specific Estimates
Panel A: Manufacturing
Payroll to Value-Added
0.6

Coefficient Estimates

0.4

0.2
0.124
0.0
-0.140
-0.2

-0.238

-0.265
-0.366

-0.4

-0.404

-0.6

-0.8
1982-1987

1987-1992

1992-1997

1997-2002

2002-2007

2007-2012

Panel C: Finance

Panel B: Manufacturing
Payroll to Sales

0.6

0.2
0.4

0.067

Coefficient Estimates

Coefficient Estimates

0.1

0.0
-0.060
-0.081
-0.1

-0.108

0.252
0.2

0.0
-0.008

-0.087

-0.2

-0.136
-0.194

-0.2

-0.4
-0.484
-0.3

-0.6

-0.8

-0.4
1982-1987

1987-1992

1992-1997

1997-2002

2002-2007

1982-1987

2007-2012

1987-1992

0.3

0.1

0.2

Coefficient Estimates

Coefficient Estimates

Panel D: Services
0.2

0.0
-0.050

-0.057
-0.080
-0.1

1992-1997

1997-2002

2002-2007

2007-2012

Panel E: Utilities and Transportation

-0.114
-0.160

0.1

0.0
-0.039
-0.1

-0.2

-0.121
-0.264

-0.167

-0.3

-0.2

-0.4

-0.3

-0.4

-0.5
1982-1987

1987-1992

1992-1997

1997-2002

2002-2007

1982-1987

2007-2012

1987-1992

Panel F: Retail Trade

1992-1997

1997-2002

2002-2007

2007-2012

Table G: Wholesale Trade

0.2

0.04

Coefficient Estimates

0.02
Coefficient Estimates

0.1

0.0
-0.028
-0.058
-0.1

-0.109

-0.098

0.00

-0.02
-0.025
-0.04

-0.137

-0.051

-0.048

-0.051

-0.06

-0.189

-0.2

-0.041

-0.071
-0.08

-0.3
-0.10

-0.4

-0.12
1982-1987

1987-1992

1992-1997

1997-2002

2002-2007

2007-2012

1982-1987

1987-1992

1992-1997

1997-2002

2002-2007

2007-2012

Notes: For manufacturing, the labor share is defined using the payroll to value-added ratio in panel A, and each
industry is weighted by the industry’s 1982 share of value-added. For all other panels, the labor share is defined as the
ratio of payroll to sales, and each industry is weighted by its initial share of sales in 1982 (except for the finance and
utilities and transportation sectors, where initial sales shares are based on 1992 data due to shorter sample periods).
Concentration is measured using CR20. The lines represent the 95% confidence intervals.

37

Figure 8: The Role of Concentration in Explaining the Evolution of the Change in Labor Share
5 Year Change Dummies With and Without CR20

5 Year Change Dummies With and Without CR20

Panel A: Manufacturing

Panel
B: Finance
Finance

12

12

13

14

14

15

16

16

18

17

Manufacturing

1980

1990

2000

2010

1990

1995

2000
year

year
Including
effects of
concentration
Including
Concentration

Excluding
effects
of concentration
Without
Concentration

Including
effects Concentration
of concentration
Including

Dependent variable is the wage−to−sales ratio.
Concentration is defined using sales

2005

2010

Excluding
effects
of concentration
Without
Concentration

Dependent variable is the wage−to−sales ratio.
Concentration is defined using sales

5 Year Change Dummies With and Without CR20

5 Year Change Dummies With and Without CR20

Services

Utilities and Transportation

Panel D: Utilities and Transportation

16.5

34.5

35

17

35.5

17.5

36

18

36.5

37

18.5

Panel C: Services

1980

1990

2000

2010

1990

1995

year
Including
effects of
concentration
Including
Concentration

2000
year

Including
effects of
concentration
Including
Concentration

Excluding
effects
of concentration
Without
Concentration

Dependent variable is the wage−to−sales ratio.
Concentration is defined using sales

2005

2010

Excluding
effects
of concentration
Without
Concentration

Dependent variable is the wage−to−sales ratio.
Concentration is defined using sales

5 Year Change Dummies With and Without CR20

5 Year Change Dummies With and Without CR20

Retail Trade

Wholesale Trade

Panel E: Retail Trade

4.5

11

11.5

5

12

5.5

12.5

6

13

Panel F: Wholesale Trade

1980

1990

2000

2010

1980

1990

year
Including
effects of
concentration
Including
Concentration

2000

2010

year
Including
effects of
concentration
Including
Concentration

Excluding
effects
of concentration
Without
Concentration

Dependent variable is the wage−to−sales ratio.
Concentration is defined using sales

Excluding
effects
of concentration
Without
Concentration

Dependent variable is the wage−to−sales ratio.
Concentration is defined using sales

Notes: The red line plots the cumulated coefficients that result from a regression of the five-year change in the
payroll-to-sales ratio within a four-digit industry on time dummies, with each industry weighted by its initial share
of total sales. This corresponds to the weighted average payroll-to-sales ratio in each year. The dashed blue line
plots the cumulated coefficients on the time dummies when the regression controls for the contemporaneous five-year
change in sales-based CR20, and thus indicates a time trend that excludes the contribution of changing concentration
to the evolution of the labor share.

38

Figure 9: Melitz-Polanec Decomposition of the Change in Labor Share in
Manufacturing

Notes: Each bar represents the cumulated sum of the Melitz-Polanec decomposition
components calculated over adjacent five-year intervals. The left panel shows the sum
of the decompositions from 1982-1987, 1987-1992 and 1992-1997 and the right panel
shows the sum of the decompositions from 1997-2002, 2002-2007, and 2007-2012. Table
4 reports the underlying year-by-year estimates.

39

Figure 10: Melitz-Polanec Decomposition of the Change in Labor Share
in Six Sectors

Notes: Each bar represents the cumulated sum of the Melitz-Polanec decomposition
components calculated over adjacent five-year intervals. Table 5 reports the underlying
year-by-year estimates.

40

Figure 11: Regressions of the Components of the Change in Labor Share on the Change
in Concentration

Notes: Each bar plots the regression coefficient resulting from regressions of the Melitz-Polanec decomposition components on the change in CR20 concentration. Regressions include year dummies and standard
errors are clustered at the four-digit industry level. Each industry is weighted by its initial share of total
sales. Whisker lines represent 95% confidence interval.

41

Figure 12: Industry-Level Cross-Country Comparisons of Labor Shares
Panel A: Levels

Panel B: Changes

Notes: Panel A plots, for each country, the correlation of the levels of its labor shares
in 32 industries with the corresponding industry-level labor shares in 11 other countries,
averaged over the 11 pairwise correlations with each other country. Note that each crosscountry correlation appears twice in the figure, as the correlation between the USA and
the UK would enter the average correlation for the U.S. and the average correlation for
the UK. The light grey bars in Panel B plot the industry-level correlation of the tenyear change in the labor share, averaged over 11 country pairs. The darker solid bars
in panel B show the fraction of the country pair correlations that are negative. In each
panel, the sample period is 1997-2007. Each industry in the correlation is weighted by
the value-added share of that industry averaged over the two countries in comparison.
In order to reduce measurement error, the correlations are calculated using centered
five-year moving averages.

42

Figure 13: Decomposing the Payroll Share Using Firm Level Data from Different Countries

Notes: This figure plots Olley-Pakes decompositions of the change of the payroll share into
between-firm and within-firm components (equation 4 in the text) using BVD Orbis Data.
Between-firm refers to the reallocation component occurring between incumbent firms, while
within-firm refers to the unweighted average change in the labor share. (BVD does not provide
reliable data on entry and exit.) These calculations are performed over five-year periods within
reliably-measured manufacturing data in indicated European countries. Labor share is payroll
divided by value-added (equal to gross profits plus payroll). See Appendix for details of the
firm-level panel data and exact numbers underlying the decompositions.

43

Figure 14: Change in Concentration in U.S. Manufacturing and Change in
Industry Characteristics
Patents
Per Worker

Output
Per Worker

Mat. Costs Per
Worker

Assets
Per Worker

5-factor TFP

Payroll
Per Hour

-2

-1

0

1

2

Regression Coefficient

Notes: The figure indicates coefficient estimates and 95% confidence intervals from six separate regressions of the change in CR 20 concentration ratio on the industry characteristic
indicated in the figure and year fixed effects. The regressions are based on four-digit manufacturing industries and include pooled five-year changes for the full sample period 19822012. Standard errors are clustered at the four-digit industry level. Patents are the sum of all
USPTO patents from a cross-walk between patent technology classes and industry codes. (We
thank William Kerr for providing these data.) TFP is Total Factor Productivity constructed
using five factors of production.

44

VIII

Tables

Table 1: Summary Statistics

Manufacturing (388 industries, 2,328 obs)
Number of establishments
Number of Firms
Payroll to Sales Ratio
Change in Payroll to Sales Ratio
CR4
Change in CR4
CR20
Change in CR20
Retail Trade (58 industries, 348 obs)
Number of establishments
Number of Firms
Payroll to Sales Ratio
Change in Payroll to Sales Ratio
CR4
Change in CR4
CR20
Change in CR20
Wholesale Trade (56 industries, 336 obs)
Number of establishments
Number of Firms
Payroll to Sales Ratio
Change in Payroll to Sales Ratio
CR4
Change in CR4
CR20
Change in CR20

Mean
(1)

SD
(2)

Minimum
(3)

Maximum
(4)

197,530
151,936
15.2386
-0.9611
40.6642
0.7476
68.7607
0.7566

10,635
10,386
8.3752
1.9821
22.5451
6.4473
23.2561
4.3078

169,107
129,080
0.872
-17.616
3.344041
-39.725
8.376
-32.526

216,730
171,233
48.582
14.614
100
39.505
100
24.002

1,598,458
1,115,863
11.258
-0.0588
19.9905
2.5071
35.0778
2.6928

74,292
17,814
5.7401
0.9862
18.9734
4.8131
26.4192
4.2785

1,562,915
1,104,697
2.748
-11.703
0.635
-23.844
1.824
-35.006

1,722,947
1,152,079
29.112
10.259
79.133
32.407
99.983
49.889

411,651
324,899
5.0694
-0.1811
24.6336
0.3548
46.4094
1.0315

22,275
20,452
3.1859
0.8854
13.4093
6.8544
17.3136
7.0595

400,878
306,174
0.45
-3.742
4.32
-30.894
11.326
-26.108

442,693
355,052
14.093
4.372
65.046
35.26
83.67
33.956

45

Services (95 industries, 570 obs)
Number of establishments
Number of Firms
Payroll to Sales Ratio
Change in Payroll to Sales Ratio
CR4
Change in CR4
CR20
Change in CR20

2,039,671
1,725,578
37.4223
-0.352
12.1406
0.7283
22.7854
0.9533

412,831
287,188
10.9437
2.4102
11.4397
4.409
17.1222
4.7568

1,769,458
1,586,300
5.489
-14.288
0.316
-32.727
0.848
-27.768

2,698,102
2,256,011
74.268
19.654
77.131
35.399
100
31.461

Finance (31 industries, 124 obs)
Number of establishments
Number of Firms
Payroll to Sales Ratio
Change in Payroll to Sales Ratio
CR4
Change in CR4
CR20
Change in CR20

676,357
456,175
12.8464
-0.7437
26.0744
2.0704
53.0273
3.6006

101,246
65,420
9.1203
3.5948
15.1231
6.2006
19.7478
5.8551

637,839
432,753
1.152
-20.704
2.634
-21.075
6.102
-25.22

842,694
561,940
39.701
17.068
97.387
34.552
100
31.261

Utilities and Transportation (48 industries, 144 obs)
Number of establishments
Number of Firms
Payroll to Sales Ratio
Change in Payroll to Sales Ratio
CR4
Change in CR4
CR20
Change in CR20

286,939
203,626
18.0455
-0.658
31.0864
1.9307
59.6948
1.203

30,476
17,563
8.4094
2.3697
19.7924
8.5871
24.2405
6.4252

292,474
213,349
4.484
-11.528
3.042
-27.318
9.221
-25.247

345,951
228,854
53.536
10.021
91.645
27.699
100
25.538

Notes: The number of establishments and number of firms reflect totals for the entire sector. All other variables are the
weighted averages of the underlying four-digit industries, where the weight is the industry's share of sales in the initial year.
Changes refer to five year averages. Data period is 1982-2012 for maufacturing, services, wholesale trade and retail trade,
1992-2012 for finance and 1992-2007 for utilities and transportation. CR4 and CR20 are defined in terms of sales. In future
drafts, this table will include summary statistics on the payroll to value-added share in manufacturing. Those summary
stiatistics have not yet been disclosed by the census.

46

Table 2: Industry Regressions of Change in Share of Labor on Change in Concentration,
Manufacturing

1 Baseline

CR4
(1)
-0.148
(0.036)

**

5 year Change
CR20
(2)
-0.234 **
(0.047)

HHI
(3)
-0.189 *
(0.096)

CR4
(4)
-0.135 **
(0.043)

10 year Change
CR20
(5)
-0.165
**
(0.058)

HHI
(6)
-0.173 ~
(0.096)

2 Compensation Share
of Value Added

-0.175
(0.046)

**

-0.264
(0.061)

**

-0.231 ~
(0.121)

-0.143 *
(0.056)

-0.166
(0.076)

*

-0.193
(0.129)

3 Deduct Service
Intermediates from VA

-0.331
(0.062)

**

-0.517
(0.071)

**

-0.501 **
(0.176)

-0.269 **
(0.055)

-0.347
(0.066)

**

-0.313
(0.261)

4 Industry Trends
(Four-Digit Dummies)

-0.171
(0.042)

**

-0.307
(0.053)

**

-0.208 ~
(0.118)

-0.198 **
(0.065)

-0.275
(0.093)

**

-0.219 ~
(0.129)

5 1992 - 2012 Sub-Period

-0.181
(0.044)

**

-0.316
(0.063)

**

-0.230 *
(0.117)

---

---

---

6 Including Imports
(1992 - 2012)

-0.104
(0.045)

*

-0.327
(0.060)

**

-0.052
(0.174)

---

---

---

7 Employment-Based
Concentration Measure

0.048
(0.036)

0.039
(0.036)

0.024
(0.035)

0.032
(0.044)

0.081
(0.080)

0.69

0.6

1.38

1.2

0.28

8 Average Change in
Concentration

0.195 *
(0.082)
0.14

Notes: ~ p ≤ 0.10, * p ≤ 0.05, ** p ≤ 0.01. obs=2,328 except in row 3 (obs=1,164) and rows 5 and 6 (obs=1,552). Each cell is the
coefficient on a concentration measure from a separate OLS regression (standard errors in parentheses clustered by industry) of the
change in the labor share on the change in concentration. “CR4” (“CR20”) is the share of sales in the largest four (twenty) firms in the
four digit industry. HHI is the Herfindahl Index. Time period is 1982-2012 using the Census of Manufacturing aggregated up to four-digit
industry-level (except in rows 5 and 6 where we use 1992-2012) and regressions include dummies for each time period. Regressions are
weighted by the share of value added of the four digit industry in total manufacturing value added in the initial year (1982). “Baseline” in
row 1 defines the labor share as wages and salaries over value-added. “Compensation” in row 2 is wider definition of payroll including all
fringe benefits. Service intermediates in row 3 from KLEMS. Row 4 adds four-digit industry dummies. Row 6 redefines concentration to
include imports, and includes as an additional control the change in the ratio of imports to value-added. Row 7 defines concentration in
terms of employment instead of our preferred sales-based measure. The weighted average 5 and 10 year change in labor share over our
sample period is 2.2 and 4.4, respectively.

47

Table 3: Industry Regressions of the Change in the Payroll-to-Sales Ratio on the Change in
Concentration, Different Sectors
Stacked Five-Year Changes
CR4
CR20
HHI

CR4

Stacked Ten-Year Changes
CR20
HHI

1 Manufacturing
n = 2,328; 1,164

(1)
-0.064 **
(0.013)

(2)
-0.087 **
(0.024)

(3)
-0.107 **
(0.027)

(4)
-0.044 *
(0.022)

(5)
-0.044
(0.034)

(6)
-0.096 **
(0.037)

2 Retail
n = 348; 174

-0.036 ~
(0.021)

-0.085 *
(0.037)

-0.045 ~
(0.026)

-0.045 *
(0.018)

-0.070 *
(0.029)

-0.075 **
(0.023)

3 Services
n = 570; 285

-0.090
(0.057)

-0.127 **
(0.037)

-0.354 **
(0.083)

-0.087
(0.070)

-0.129 **
(0.043)

-0.378 *
(0.158)

4 Wholesale
n = 336; 168

-0.035 **
(0.012)

-0.039 *
(0.016)

-0.079 *
(0.039)

-0.037 *
(0.018)

-0.036 *
(0.018)

-0.067
(0.050)

5 Finance
n = 124; 62

-0.230 **
(0.083)

-0.265 **
(0.080)

-0.565 **
(0.204)

-0.252 **
(0.091)

-0.291 **
(0.070)

-0.740 *
(0.294)

6 Utilities + Transport
n = 144; 48

-0.118 **
(0.026)

-0.116 **
(0.044)

-0.434 **
(0.054)

-0.048
(0.072)

-0.122 *
(0.051)

-0.269 **
(0.104)

7 All combined
n = 3,850; 1,901

-0.076 **
(0.016)

-0.093 **
(0.022)

-0.144 **
(0.028)

-0.063 **
(0.019)

-0.083 **
(0.024)

-0.122 **
(0.033)

Notes: ~ p ≤ 0.10, * p ≤ 0.05, ** p ≤ 0.01. Number of observations (n = x; y) are indicated below each sector for
the first 3 columns (x) and the last 3 columns (y). Each cell displays the coefficient on a concentration measure from
a separate OLS regression (standard errors in parentheses clustered by industry). Data is aggregated up to timeconsistent four digit industries. In manufacturing, retail, services and wholesale, we pool data from 1982-2012, in
finance, we pool data from 1992-2012, and in Utilities + Transport, we pool data from 1992-2007. The combined
regression in row 7 includes 6 sector fixed effects. Regressions are weighted by the share of sales of the four digit
industry in total sector sales in the initial year and each regression includes fixed effects for each 5-year period.

48

49

-16.50

Overall
1982-2012
-3.37

-2.65
-0.72

-3.29
2.66
-2.02
-0.15
-2.90
2.33
-0.56

-12.78

-7.85
-4.92

-1.28
-5.28
-1.30
-0.70
-1.86
-2.37
-2.13

-4.92

-2.16
-2.76

-0.58
-0.75
-0.84
-0.87
-1.09
-0.80
-0.82

Wage Bill share of value added
Within
Between
Exit
(2)
(3)
(4)

4.56

2.31
2.25

0.68
0.94
0.69
0.63
1.14
0.48
0.76

Entry
(5)

-18.90

-12.30
-6.63

-5.75
-1.74
-4.81
-1.27
-4.87
-0.47

Total
(6)

-0.69

0.03
-0.72

-1.04
3.81
-2.74
-2.20
1.45
0.04
-0.11

-18.21

-12.71
-5.50

-5.05
-5.73
-1.94
1.12
-6.59
-0.03
-3.03

-5.24

-2.16
-3.08

-0.45
-0.83
-0.88
-0.92
-1.17
-0.98
-0.87

Compensation share of value added
Within
Between
Exit
(7)
(8)
(9)

5.21

2.54
2.67

0.79
1.01
0.75
0.73
1.44
0.50
0.87

Entry
(10)

Notes: This table shows the results of a decomposition of the change in the labor share using the dynamic Melitz-Polanec (2015) methodology as described in the
text. We divide the change in the overall labor share (columns (1) and (6)) into four components. “Within” is the change in the labor share due to a general fall in
the share across all incumbent firms. “Between” is incumbent reallocation from the change due to the growing relative size of low labor share incumbent firms
(and the interaction of the growth in their size and the growth in their labor share). “Exit” is the contribution to the change from the exit of high labor share
firms and “Entry” is the contribution from the entry of low labor share firms. These all use the micro-data from the five yearly Census of Manufacturing. “15 year
period” is the cumulated sum of each 5 year change over two 15 year periods: e.g. -10.35% in column (1) for 1982-1997 is comprised of the sum of each 5 year
period (-4.47% - 2.43% - 3.47%). “Overall” is the cumulated sum over the entire 1982-2012 period.

-10.35
-6.15

-4.47
-2.43
-3.47
-1.09
-4.71
-0.36

15 yr period
1982-1997
1997-2012

5 yr period
1982-1987
1987-1992
1992-1997
1997-2002
2002-2007
2007-2012
Mean

Total
(1)

Table 4: Decompositions of the Change in the Payroll-to-Value-Added Ratio, Manufacturing

Table 5: Decompositions of the Change in the Payroll to Sales Ratio, All Sectors
Panel A
Total

Within

Manufacturing
Between

Exit

Entry

Total

Within

Wholesale
Between

Exit

Entry

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

(6)

(7)

(8)

(9)

(10)

-0.08
-0.93
-1.43
-0.26
-3.11
-1.2

-0.48
1
-0.74
0.65
-1.94
0.33
-0.2

0.47
-1.77
-0.63
-0.63
-1.02
-1.39
-0.83

-0.33
-0.38
-0.31
-0.36
-0.45
-0.35
-0.36

0.26
0.22
0.25
0.08
0.3
0.21
0.22

0.54
0.12
0.15
0.22
-0.44
-0.4

0.6
0.57
1.02
1.44
-0.38
0.76
0.67

-0.29
-0.47
-0.98
-1.43
-0.18
-1.04
-0.73

-0.02
-0.12
-0.06
-0.07
-0.06
-0.21
-0.09

0.25
0.14
0.17
0.28
0.18
0.09
0.19

15 yr period
1982-1997
1997-2012

-2.43
-4.57

-0.22
-0.97

-1.92
-3.05

-1.02
-1.15

0.73
0.6

0.8
-0.62

2.19
1.82

-1.74
-2.64

-0.2
-0.35

0.55
0.55

Overall
1982-2012

-7.01

-1.19

-4.97

-2.17

1.32

0.19

4.01

-4.38

-0.55

1.11

Total
(1)

Within
(2)

Retail
Between
(3)

Exit
(4)

Entry
(5)

Total
(6)

Within
(7)

Services
Between
(8)

Exit
(9)

Entry
(10)

0.02
-0.14
-0.34
0.4
-0.67
-0.07

0.09
0.82
1.26
1.27
0.11
0.19
0.62

-0.02
-0.71
-1.52
-0.8
-0.75
-0.23
-0.67

-0.07
-0.17
-0.21
-0.07
-0.21
-0.1
-0.14

0.02
-0.08
0.13
0
0.18
0.07
0.05

0.34
-0.01
-0.15
0.61
-0.78
-0.2

0.15
-0.23
1.82
-2.02
2.2
0.51
0.41

0.58
0.82
-2.05
2.86
-2.69
0.04
-0.07

0.98
1.02
1.14
0.12
0.34
-0.01
0.6

-1.37
-1.62
-1.06
-0.35
-0.63
-0.74
-0.96

15 yr period
1982-1997
1997-2012

-0.45
-0.34

2.17
1.57

-2.25
-1.78

-0.45
-0.38

0.07
0.25

0.18
-0.37

1.74
0.69

-0.65
0.21

3.14
0.45

-4.05
-1.72

Overall
1982-2012

-0.79

3.74

-4.03

-0.83

0.32

-0.19

2.43

-0.44

3.59

-5.77

Total
(1)

Within
(2)

Finance
Between
(3)

Exit
(4)

Entry
(5)

Total
(6)

Utilities & Transportation
Within
Between
Exit
(7)
(8)
(9)

Entry
(10)

5 yr period
1992-1997
1997-2002
2002-2007
2007-2012
Mean

0.97
1.5
0.19
0.6
0.82

1.43
0.32
2.02
2.51
1.57

-0.57
0.89
-1.99
-1.94
-0.9

-0.2
-0.4
-0.68
-0.29
-0.39

0.31
0.69
0.84
0.32
0.54

-1.23
1.12
-1.78

1.21
0.25
-0.88

-1.67
0.53
-1.25

0.17
0.75
-0.02

-0.94
-0.41
0.37

-0.63

0.19

-0.8

0.3

-0.33

10 yr period
1992-2002
2002-2012

2.46
0.8

1.75
4.54

0.32
-3.93

-0.6
-0.97

0.99
1.16

3.25

6.29

-3.62

-1.57

2.15
-1.89

0.58

-2.39

0.91

-0.98

5 yr period
1982-1987
1987-1992
1992-1997
1997-2002
2002-2007
2007-2012
Mean

Panel B

5 yr period
1982-1987
1987-1992
1992-1997
1997-2002
2002-2007
2007-2012
Mean

Panel C

Overall
1992-2012
1992-2007

Notes: This Table shows the results of a decomposition of the change in the labor share using the dynamic Melitz and Polanec (2015) methodology as
described in the text and notes to the previous Table. These all use the micro-data from the five yearly Censuses in the relevant industry. “15 year period” is the
same calculation over 15 year periods and “overall” is over the entire period 1982-2012.

50

Table 6: International COMPNET Regressions of the Change in
Labor Share on the Change in Concentration (Industry level, all
sectors)

5 yr. Change
Italy
Estonia
Portugal
Slovenia
Slovakia
Finland
Belgium
Germany
Poland
France
Latvia
Romania
Austria
Lithuania

-0.124
(0.052)
-0.140
(0.197)
-0.083
(0.063)
-0.106
(0.140)
-0.153
(0.060)
-0.208
(0.059)
-0.008
(0.053)
-0.091
(0.060)
0.007
(0.076)
0.325
(0.255)
-0.039
(0.108)
-0.137
(0.096)
-0.297
(0.098)
-0.124
(0.156)

10 yr. Change
**

-0.200
(0.095)
-0.125
(0.084)
-----0.101
(0.187)
-0.343
(0.100)
-0.181
(0.076)
0.330
(0.176)
-0.151
(0.094)
-----0.183
(0.087)
---------0.275
(0.108)
-0.045
(0.201)

**
***

***

No. Obs.
**

53
53
53
53

***

52

**

53

*

53
44
53

**

53
52
53

**

37
53

Notes: Concentration is defined at the fraction of output produced by the 10 largest
firms. Regression includes 5-year changes from 2006-2011 and 10-year changes (when
available) from 2001-2011. Observations are weighted by the sector's share of the
country's total value added. Estimates by OLS with standard errors clustered at the sector
level.

51

IX

APPENDICES (NOT INTENDED FOR PUBLICATION UNLESS
REQUESTED)

APPENDIX A: MODEL OF SUPERSTAR FIRMS
We present a simple model of an industry characterized by heterogeneous firms, imperfect competition in the product market and fixed costs of overhead labor. We then consider a change in the
economic environment (such as increase in product market competition as indexed by consumers’
sensitivity to price) that will generate more output being allocated to the more productive companies (“superstar firms”). Since these firms have higher labor shares and higher market shares,
this will cause both an increase in concentration and a tendency for the industry’s aggregate labor
share to decline.
Firms enter an industry and obtain an idiosyncratic draw of productivity (Ai = T F P Qi ,
quantity based Total Factor Productivity) from a known distribution.38 We assume capital cannot
be adjusted for one period, but then after this it is completely flexible (as in Olley and Pakes,
1996). There is overhead labor, F, needed to produce output.39 We allow for potentially decreasing
returns to scale γ in a Cobb-Douglas production function (we imposed γ = 1 in the main text for
simplicity). Value-added, Yi , for firm i is:
Yi = Ai Vi γ−α Kiα = Ai (Li − F )γ−α Kiα

(6)

where K is the capital stock and total labor is Li = Vi + F , the sum of variable labor V plus fixed
labor. Factor markets are competitive so that all firms face the same wage, w, and cost of capital,
1
r. Each firm faces an inverse demand curve with elasticity ρ, Pi = (b/Yi ) ρ where b is a demand
shifter and Pi is firm i0 s price (each firm produces a single variety). There is a sunk cost of entry,
κ, and potential firms will choose to enter an industry until the point where expected profits (i.e.,
net of the sunk cost) are zero, thereby pinning down the equilibrium number of firms.
eρ such that if the productivity draw is below
We can define a threshold level of productivity, A
this threshold, the firm will immediately exit because it does not expect to be able to recover its
fixed costs. The productivity threshold can be derived as:
eρ =
A

bρ−1 rαρ w1−ρα F 1−ργ
αρα (γ − α) ρ(γ−α) ρρ (1 − γρ) 1−γρ

(7)

This productivity threshold is increasing in the level of fixed costs and the degree of product market
competition. None of the terms on the right hand side of equation (7) vary across firms.
A firm’s optimal capital stock is
ρ

Ki∗ = Ai1−ργ Ω (w, r)

(8)

where Ω(w, r) > 0 is a constant that does not vary across firms.40 Optimal variable labor is:
ρ

Vi∗ = L∗i − F = Ai1−ργ
38

r (γ − α)
Ω
wα

(9)

A heterogeneous initial draw of productivity is isomorphic to a draw in firm-specific quality in this class of models.
We can think generically of Ai as the entrepreneurial-managerial quality of the founder.
39
Allowing for fixed costs in capital would make no difference to the propositions below. The capital share evaluated
at the competitive return also falls as the profit share rises (see Barkai, 2016).
40
Ω (w, r) = [b1−ρ ρr(γ−α)ρ−1 α1−(γ−α)ρ w−(γ−α)ρ (γ − α) (γ−α)ρ ]1/(1−ργ)

52

For all operating firms, nominal value-added over variable labor is:
Pi Yi
= b1−ρ
Vi



r (γ − α)
wα

ρ(γ−α)−1

Ω ργ−1

(10)

This ratio is constant across all firms, so there is no variation in the average revenue productivity
of variable labor. However, what is observed in the data is value-added over all labor (empirical
labor productivity) that includes both fixed and variable employment:
P i Yi
P i Yi
=
=
L∗i
F + Vi∗

(

F
+ bρ−1
P i Yi



r (γ − α)
wα

)−1

1−ρ(γ−α)
Ω

1−ργ

(11)

In the absence of fixed costs (F = 0 ) labor productivity (equation (11)) is constant across all firms
as the second term within the curly brackets is constant across firms in an industry (as in Hsieh
and Klenow, 2009). However, as noted by Bartelsman, Haltiwanger and Scarpetta (2013), when
there are fixed costs (F > 0), laborproductivity
is increasing in the size of the firm since the share

F
of fixed overhead labor in revenue Pi Yi is decreasing in size. Since size increases in Ai , the high
A firms will have higher nominal value-added to employment ratios. Intuitively, the share of fixed
labor costs in total labor costs is declining as the firm grows larger. As this ratio falls so does the
overall labor share, so for larger firms there is a smaller share of labor.
Proposition 1. Superstar firms have a lower labor share.
Proof. Inverting equation (11) and multiplying each side by the wage gives:
wL∗i
wF
Si ≡
=
+ wbρ−1
Pi Yi
P i Yi



r (γ − α)
wα

1−ρ(γ−α)

Ω 1−ργ

(12)

wL∗

Superstar (high A) firms will have a lower Pi Yii and therefore a lower labor share.

Proposition 2. An increase in product market competition (as measured by ρ) increases
concentration.
Proof. Consider two firms i and j with Ai >Aj . Given our functional forms we can write their
relative market shares, ωi /ωj = (Ai /Aj )(ρ−1)/ρ(1−ργ) > 1 where ωi = PPiPYiiYi . The market share of
i
high A firm i is increasing in its productivity advantage over the low A firm j. Furthermore, for
any given productivity difference, an increase in product market competition (ρ rises)
n 2will increase
o
∂ (ωi /ωj )
the relative market share of the more productive firm. This follows since sign ∂(Ai /A
=
j )∂ρ
sign {1 + ργ(ρ − 2)} > 0 because ρ > 1 and γ ≤ 1. Since the market share of the higher market
share firms will rise when competition rises (and those of the low market share firms are falling),
concentration will rise.

Proposition 3. An increase in product market competition reallocates output to the low
labor share firms.

53

P
P
i
= i ωi Si . Proposition 2 estabProof. Define the industry aggregate labor share as S ≡ i PwL
i Yi
lished that an increase in competition allocates more market share to the high A firms. Since these
firms have a lower labor share, there is a reallocation effect towards lowering the aggregate labor
share.

Proposition 4. An increase in product market competition will decrease the aggregate
labor share, as long as the reallocation effect between firms effect dominate the withinfirm effect.
Proof. From proposition 3, there is a shift in market share towards the low labor share firms when
ρ rises. This is reinforced by an effect on the extensive margin. An increase in competition raises
the productivity threshold (equation (7)). This will cut off some of the tail of low A, high labor
share firms. Note, however, that there is also an offsetting within-firm effect since an individual
ρ
firm’s price cost margins are declining in ρ: µi = Pcii = ρ−1
. Since the labor share is declining in the
price-cost margin, and so increasing in ρ, within firms the labor share will tend to rise with higher
competition. Hence the overall effect of competition on the labor share is ambiguous and depends
on the balance of the within and between-firm effects. In simplified cases of the general model we
can characterize sufficient conditions under which there will be an unambiguous rise in the labor
share following an increase in ρ.

APPENDIX B: DATA
Data Details
Our primary data are from the U.S. Economic Census conducted every 5 years by the Census
Bureau.41 We focus on six sectors for which we could access micro-data over a significant period of time: Manufacturing, Retail trade, Wholesale trade, Services, Finance and Utilities and
Transportation. There is also a Census of Construction, but it does not provide a consistent firm
identifier. Within these six sectors, several industries are excluded from the Economic Census: rail
transportation from Transportation; postal service from Wholesale trade; funds, trusts and other
financial vehicles are excluded from Finance; and schools (elementary, secondary, and colleges),
religious organizations, political organizations, labor unions and private households are excluded
from Services. The Economic Census also does not cover government-owned establishments within
covered industries.
Our analysis includes only establishments that have at least one employee (“employer firms”),
a positive value of annual sales, and are assigned a code that allows us to link them over time in
the Census (LBDNUM). We exclude any observations that are drawn from administrative records,
as these observations are largely imputed and are not included in official statistics published by
the Census Bureau. We also Winsorize the establishment-level labor share at the 99th percentile
to account for outliers. As an establishment’s value-added goes towards zero, the labor share
41

More details on Economic Census are available at https://factfinder.census.gov/faces/affhelp/jsf/pages/
metadata.xhtml?lang=en&type=survey&id=survey.en.ECN_ECN_US

54

can become arbitrarily large. While this has little effect on the industry-level analysis, where we
weight observations by their share of value-added, these large outliers can affect the decompositions
of changes in labor share into between-firm reallocation and within-firm components in Figure 9
and 10. We confirmed the robustness of our results to alternate treatments of outliers, including
dropping them altogether or top-coding the labor share at one.
While each establishment is assigned to one primary industry, firms with multiple establishments
are often active in several industries. In all of our industry-level analyses, we define firms separately
by four-digit SIC industry, meaning that a firm with establishments in three different industries
will be treated as three separate firms in our analysis. This definition of the firm is motivated by
our focus on concentration ratios, where the relevant measure is not the total size of the firm but
rather the importance of that firm in a given industry. In manufacturing, about 20 percent of firms
are active in multiple industries, and on average, firms span 2.6 industries. These numbers are
slightly lower in retail and wholesale trade and services, but are slightly higher in finance where
about a quarter of firms span multiple industries. The only analysis in which we do not define a
firm as a firm-by-industry pair is the overall within-between decompositions in Table 4 and 5. In
this table, we define a firm using all establishments, regardless of industry. However, in Appendix
Table A.1, we present decompositions in which we define a firm using the firm-by-industry pair.
Constructing Time-Consistent Industry Codes
Since we analyze cross-industry variation in concentration, accurate classification of industries is
central to our analysis. In the raw data, each establishment is assigned an industry code that
is based on the primary activity of the establishment. In 1982, the establishments are given a
1972 SIC code, from 1987-1997, the establishments are given a 1987 SIC code, and from 2002 to
2012, the establishments are given a NAICS code based on the classification corresponding to that
year (i.e. 2002 is in 2002 NAICS codes). While most of our regressions are run at the industry
level, the definition of industry concentration ratios and firm-level decompositions require that each
establishment is assigned to a single industry, meaning that a weighed (i.e., fractional) crosswalk
of NAICS to SIC codes is not suitable. To construct a one-to-one crosswalk, we utilize the panel
structure of the Census data and the fact that in 1997, each establishment is given both a 1987
SIC code and a 1997 NAICS code. If the establishment has the same NAICS code in the following
years, we assign the given 1987 SIC code that is reported for the year 1997 to the later years as well.
Then, if either the establishment was not in the sample in 1997 or the NAICS code changed in the
later years, we use a modal mapping from the NAICS codes to the 1987 SIC code, meaning that
we assign each NAICS industry to the SIC code that is it most likely to map to in the probabilistic
mappings provided by the Census.
There are, however, some 1987 SIC codes that are not the most likely industry for any NAICS
code, meaning that those 1987 SIC industries would not exist in the post-1997 data (“orphaned SIC
codes”). To avoid the creation of such an artifact in the data, we aggregate SIC codes so that each
aggregate SIC codes is observed both before and after the SIC-NAICS seam. In deciding which
industries to group, we find the 1997 NAICS codes that establishments from the orphaned SIC
codes are most likely to be reclassified as, and then we combine that SIC code with the SIC codes
that were the most likely 1987 SIC codes for that NAICS code. For example, establishments from
1987 SIC code 2259 “Knitting Mills, Not Elsewhere Classified”’ are most likely to be re-classified
as NAICS code 315191 “Outerwear Knitting Mills,” but of all the establishments that were given
code 315191, the most common 1987 SIC code was 2253 “Knit Outerwear Mills.” Therefore, we
aggregate the 1987 SIC codes 2253 and 2259. We follow the same procedure for bridging the

55

1972-1987 SIC reclassification.
Our final industry panel corresponds to a slight aggregation of four-digit SIC industries, and
comprises 388 industries in manufacturing, 58 industries in retail trade, 95 industries in services,
31 industries in finance, 56 industries in wholesale trade, and 48 industries in utilities and transportation.
Correcting Census Value-Added for Service Intermediate Inputs using KLEMS
The measure of value-added in the Census adjusts for intermediate purchased goods but does not
adjust for intermediate purchased services, meaning that an increase over time in intermediate
purchased services will appear in the Census data as an increase in value-added (and possibly exaggerate the fall in the labor share). The KLEMS data allow us to roughly adjust value-added in the
Census to account for any trends in intermediate purchased services over time. Since the KLEMS
data are only available at the two- to three-digit industry level, we make the adjustment at the establishment level in two ways, both of which use the fact that the Census data include information
on the value of material costs for each establishment. First, we calculate in KLEMS the ratio of
intermediate purchased services to intermediate materials and assume that each establishment in
a given two-digit industry utilizes purchased services in that proportion. This is the method we
report in Row 3 in Table 2. As a second alternative, we calculate the fraction of total two-digit
industry intermediate material costs that are accounted for by each four-digit industry, and assume
that four-digit industries purchase the same fraction of total intermediate services. The level of
the labor share is higher (as value-added is lower) when correcting for purchases of intermediate
services, but the trends are similar across the original and adjusted data series, as well as across
both methods of adjustment.
Comparing Census and NIPA/BEA data
In this section, we compare the Census data that we use throughout the analysis to the broad
industry-level NIPA data produced by the Bureau of Economic Analysis (which is used by Elsby,
Hobjin and Sahin, 2013, for example). The goal of this exercise is twofold. First, we aim to validate
the construction of establishment-level data by showing that, when aggregated, it is similar to the
aggregate trends discussed widely in the literature. Second, we use the NIPA data to benchmark
the payroll-to-sales ratio outside of manufacturing to Census data. Since the Census does not
collect sufficient information outside manufacturing to construct measures of value-added, our main
analysis uses the payroll-to-sales ratio as a alternate measure.
The Census derives its estimates from mandatory report forms. The NIPA estimates are instead
derived from a compilation of data sources. One of these sources is the Economic Census, but it
also includes annual, quarterly and monthly surveys, financial reports, government budgets and IRS
tax data. A reason for these additional data is that NIPA data are reported at a higher frequency
(quarterly) than Census data. They are also reported at a higher level of industry aggregation
than Census. For our purposes, this difference leads to two important distinctions between the
Census and NIPA data. First, the industry definition varies across the two sources. The Census
unit of analysis is an establishment whereas in NIPA it is the firm. Consider a firm whose primary
industry is retail but that also has a manufacturing plant. In Census data, the employment of
the manufacturing establishment is counted towards the manufacturing sector while the remainder
of the firm’s establishments are classified as retail. By contrast, NIPA could attribute all the
firm’s employment (including that of the manufacturing establishment) to retail. Additionally, the

56

BEA/NIPA includes some sub-industries that are not included in the Census, such as management
and private households.
Second, and more importantly, the two agencies define the components of the labor share
differently. Panel A of Figure A.8 displays the payroll-to-value-added ratio for manufacturing
in NIPA and Census, and shows that while the trends are similar, the level of the series differs
substantially across the two data sources. As is shown in Panel B of Figure A.8, this discrepancy
stems from a small difference in the numerator (compensation) and a larger difference in the
denominator (value-added). The left figure in Panel B plots the compensation series in the two
datasets, which appear reasonably comparable. As discussed above, there is a narrow and broad
definition of payroll in the Census. There is also a narrow and broad definition in NIPA, although
the broad NIPA definition is even wider than in the Census. Indeed, the broader definition of
compensation in the Census data closely tracks the narrower definition of compensation in the
NIPA data.42
NIPA and Census data diverge more in their definition of value-added. The right figure in Panel
B shows that value-added in the Census data is significantly higher than value-added in the NIPA
data. While there are several differences in the two series, the largest difference is in their treatment
of intermediate purchased services. Since the Census does not collect information on intermediate
purchased services, it does not subtract these from value-added, and therefore measures value-added
as the establishment’s output less its material costs.43 However, the BEA does collect information
on intermediate purchased services and subtracts it from its value-added measure. In order to
explore the importance of this mechanism, as discussed in the previous subsection we use industrylevel estimates of intermediate purchased services from the KLEMS data. These data are reported
annually beginning in 1997 at the three-digit NAICS level. As the red line in the right figure of
Panel B shows, subtracting off the intermediate purchased services within manufacturing almost
completely closes the gap in value-added across the two data sources. Indeed, using this modified
value-added series results in aggregate labor shares that are much closer—near identical in fact
when we use the broader measure of Census compensation (see Panel A of Figure A.8).
As discussed above, the Census does not collect detailed information on intermediate inputs
outside manufacturing. Therefore we analyze the behavior of the payroll-to-sales ratio. Figure A.9
shows for each sector the payroll-to-sales ratio in the Census compared with its closest counterpart
in NIPA: the payroll to gross output ratio. We also include the NIPA payroll to value-added ratio
which is not available in the Census except for the manufacturing sector. Each series is normalized
to one in 1987.
Starting with manufacturing in the top left panel, the series are relatively aligned in terms of
trends, but diverge a bit, especially after 1997. This is mainly because the NIPA data are released
in 1987 SIC codes pre-1997 and in 1997 NAICS codes post-1997, creating a discrepancy in the
NIPA series.
Looking at the other five sectors, two patterns emerge. First, there is a general trend downwards
in the labor share measured across almost all sectors. Second, the NIPA trends are more closely
correlated with each other than they are with the Census trends, which is unsurprising as the
denominator is identical. Third, the Census trends diverge from the NIPA more strongly outside
42
The BEA also includes a more comprehensive measure of compensation that includes employer contributions to
insurance plans as well as government social insurance programs. This is reported on an accrual basis, and reflects
liabilities rather than actual payments.
43
Note that the Census does collect information on the costs of contract work that is done by others on materials
furnished by the reporting establishment. Since this cost is included in their measure of intermediate costs, it is
subtracted from value-added. However, this does not include the costs of contracted services such as advertising,
insurance, or professional consultants.

57

manufacturing, especially around the industry re-classification seam of 1997.
Disaggregating the numerator and denominator reveals that the payroll measures in Census
and NIPA move much more in tandem than the sales and output measures. Apart from the
industry reclassification, there may be several reasons for this divergence. First, Census sales differ
from NIPA output primarily because of inventories, so output will exceed sales when inventories
are rising as a fraction of output. This may particularly be an issue for wholesaling, which will
plausibly be strongly affected by inventory behavior, and where we do see large divergences with
labor shares rising in the 1987-2002 period in the Census while declining in NIPA. Second, we have
excluded some industries that are not defined consistently over time in the Census but are unable
to remove these industries from NIPA. So to the extent these sub-industries exhibit different growth
trends, this will show up in the aggregates. These dropped industries are exclusively in Finance,
Services and Manufacturing. From Finance, we drop SIC codes 6722 (Management Investment
Offices), 6726 (Unit Investment Trusts), 6552 (Land Subdividers and Developers), 6712 (Offices
of Bank Holding Companies) and 6719 (Offices of Holding Companies not elsewhere classified).
From Services, we drop SIC codes 7338 (Secretarial and Court Reporting Services), 8734 (Testing
Laboratories), 8062 (General Medical and Surgical Hospitals), 8063 (Psychiatric Hospitals), and
8069 (Specialty Hospitals, Except Psychiatric). Lastly, from Manufacturing, we drop industries
the move outside manufacturing in the 1997 SIC-NAICS redefinition. These are 2411 (Logging),
2711 (Newspaper Publishing and Printing), 2721 (Periodical Publishing and Printing), 2731 (Book
Publishing and Printing), 2741 (Miscellaneous Publishing), 2771 (Greeting Cards) and 3732 (Boat
Building and Repair). This could be a reason for the large discrepancies we see in Finance where
the labor share falls in NIPA after 1992 but rises in the Census data (at least until 2002). This
is because the NIPA output series for Finance increases much more strongly, which could be due
to how assets are valued during the financial boom. It is difficult to know what difference, if any,
these would make to our results.

International Datasets
In addition to the KLEMS dataset discussed above, we draw on two other international datasets:
BVD Orbis and COMPNET. Bureau Van Dijk (BVD) is a private sector aggregator of company
accounting data. Orbis is its most comprehensive product covering in principle the population of
all public and private company accounts in the world (Kalemli-Ozcan, Sorensen, Villegas-Sanchez,
Volosovych and Yesiltas, 2015). Orbis is a panel data set. BVD seeks to harmonize the data in
a common format focusing on a sub-set of the variables that are used for investment analysis.
Orbis has been built up over time, so it is less comprehensive the further back in time one goes.
Furthermore, the data are constrained by what firms report in their accounts. Accounting regulations differ across countries with some countries requiring more comprehensive reporting than
others. For example, the U.S. requires private firms to report very little information in the public
domain compared to European countries such as France. Across all countries, more information is
demanded from larger firms than smaller firms.
For our analysis we require firms have information on their primary industry and their payroll. To construct value-added, we sum payroll with gross profits (i.e. before tax, depreciation
and interest have been deducted, sometimes known as EBITA, Earnings Before Interest Tax and
Amortization). Intermediate inputs are rarely reported in company accounts, so deducting these
from sales (as we do with the Census data) is not feasible. The labor share is then the ratio of
payroll to this measure of value-added. We also do some robustness checks comparing this measure
58

with the ratio of wage bill to sales. We focused on the sub-sample of countries where we could get
reasonably comprehensive data which were the sub-set of European countries Table A.3. We used
the 5 year period for which we could get the largest panel between 2003 and 2008.
The second international firm database is Compnet. This has balance sheet data from 14
European countries that cover the 2000-2012 period. These data, compiled by the European Central Bank’s Competitiveness Research Network, draw on various administrative and public sources
across countries, and aim to collect information for all non-financial corporations (see Lopez-Garcia,
di Mauro and CompNet Task Force 2015 for details). This was an initiative led by the European
Central Bank in a effort to obtain systematic micro-data to help inform its macro-economic modeling. It was able to coordinate with the Central Banks from different European Union member
states to get access to micro-data that were not always in the public domain.
The version of Compnet made available to us (kindly through Erik Bartelsman) aggregates
the firm level data to the industry level. It contains information on the labor share and industry
concentration (both the fraction of sales produced by the largest ten firms and the HerfindahlHirschman Index for various two-digit industries. Although great effort was made to make these
measures comparable across countries, there are some important differences that affect the reliability
of cross-country comparisons. Most importantly for our purposes, countries use different reporting
thresholds in the definition of their sampling frames. These data are weighted to try to account for
different firm sizes and sample response probabilities.

59

X

Appendix Figures

Figure A.1: Average Herfindahl-Hirschman Index by Sector
Average HHI

Average HHI

4−digit Industries in Manufacturing

4−digit Industries in Finance

Panel B: Finance

2

5

3

6

4

7

5

8

6

9

7

Panel A: Manufacturing

1980

1990

2000

2010

1990

1995

2000
year

year
HHI with Sales

HHI with Employment

HHI with Sales

Average HHI

2005

2010

HHI with Employment

Average HHI

Panel C: Service

Panel D: Utilities and Transportation

4−digit Industries in Utilities and Transportation

4

.8

5

1

6

1.2

7

8

1.4

4−digit Industries in Services

1980

1990

2000

2010

1990

1995

2000
year

year
HHI with Sales

HHI with Employment

HHI with Sales

Average HHI

2005

2010

HHI with Employment

Average HHI

Panel E: Retail Trade

Panel F: Wholesale Trade

4−digit Industries in Wholesale Trade

0

0

1

2

2

4

3

6

4

4−digit Industries in Retail Trade

1980

1990

2000

2010

1980

1990

year
HHI with Sales

2000

2010

year
HHI with Employment

HHI with Sales

HHI with Employment

Notes: Each figure plots the average HHI calculated within four-digit industries. Industry concentration is calculated
for each time-consistent four-digit industry code, and then averaged across all industries within each of the six
sectors. The blue circles plot the HHI calculated using firm sales and the red triangles plot the HHI calculated using
employment.

60

Figure A.2: The Change in Concentration Versus the Change in the Payroll-to-Sales Ratio in Each
Five-Year Period: Manufacturing
Change in Labor Share
Change in Concentration
PanelVersus
A: 1982-1987

Change in Labor Share
Change in Concentration
PanelVersus
B: 1987-1992

ChangeininWage
Payroll
Change
BilltotoSales
SalesRatio
Ratio
−5
0
5
−10

ChangeininWage
Payroll
Change
BilltotoSales
SalesRatio
Ratio
−5
0
5
10

10

Manufacturing: 5−year change from 1987−1992

15

Manufacturing: 5−year change from 1982−1987

−20

−10

0
Change in CR20

10

−20

20

Change in Labor Share
Change in Concentration
PanelVersus
C: 1992-1997

−10

0
Change in CR20

10

20

Change in Labor Share
Change in Concentration
PanelVersus
D: 1997-2002
Manufacturing: 5−year change from 1997−2002

−10

−20

ChangeininWage
Payroll
Change
BilltotoSales
SalesRatio
Ratio
−10
0

ChangeininWage
Payroll
Change
BilltotoSales
SalesRatio
Ratio
−5
0
5
10

10

Manufacturing: 5−year change from 1997−1997

−10

−5

0
5
Change in CR20

10

−20

15

Change in Labor Share
Change in Concentration
PanelVersus
E: 2002-2007

−10

0
Change in CR20

10

20

Change in Labor Share
Versus
Change in Concentration
Panel
F: 2007-2012

ChangeininWage
Payroll
Change
BilltotoSales
SalesRatio
Ratio
−5
0
5
10
−10

−20

ChangeininWage
Payroll
Change
BilltotoSales
SalesRatio
Ratio
−10
0
10

15

Manufacturing: 5−year change from 2007−2012

20

Manufacturing: 5−year change from 2002−2007

−30

−20

−10
0
Change in CR20

10

−20

20

−10

0
Change in CR20

10

20

Notes: Each dot represents a four-digit industry, with its size reflecting the industry’s 1982 share of sales. The red
line shows the best-fit line, using the 1982 share of sales as the industry weight. Concentration is defined using CR20.

61

Figure A.3: The Change in Concentration Versus the Change in the Payroll-to-Sales Ratio in Each
Five-Year Period: Finance
Change in Labor Share
Versus
Change in Concentration
Panel
A: 1992-1997

Change in Labor Share
Versus
Change in Concentration
Panel
B: 1997-2002
Finance: 5−year change from 1997−2002

−5

−20

ChangeininWage
Payroll
Change
BilltotoSales
SalesRatio
Ratio
0
5
10
15

ChangeininWage
Payroll
Change
BilltotoSales
SalesRatio
Ratio
−10
0
10

Finance: 5−year change from 1997−1997

−30

−20

−10
0
Change in CR20

10

−5

20

Change in Labor Share
Change in Concentration
PanelVersus
C: 2002-2007

0

5
Change in CR20

10

15

Change in Labor Share
Change in Concentration
PanelVersus
D: 2007-2012
Finance: 5−year change from 2007−2012

−15

−8

ChangeininWage
Payroll
Change
BilltotoSales
SalesRatio
Ratio
−10
−5
0
5
10

ChangeininWage
Payroll
Change
BilltotoSales
SalesRatio
Ratio
−6
−4
−2
0
2

Finance: 5−year change from 2002−2007

−20

−10

0
Change in CR20

−20

10

−10

0
10
Change in CR20

20

30

Notes: Each dot represents a four-digit industry, with its size reflecting the industry’s 1992 share of sales. The red
line shows the best-fit line, using the 1992 share of sales as the industry weight. Concentration is defined using CR20.

62

Figure A.4: The Change in Concentration Versus the Change in the Payroll-to-Sales Ratio in Each
Five-Year Period: Services
Change in Labor Share
Change in Concentration
PanelVersus
A: 1982-1987

Change in Labor Share
Change in Concentration
PanelVersus
B: 1987-1992
Services: 5−year change from 1987−1992

−5

−10

ChangeininWage
Payroll
Change
BilltotoSales
SalesRatio
Ratio
0
5

ChangeininWage
Payroll
Change
BilltotoSales
SalesRatio
Ratio
−5
0
5
10

15

10

Services: 5−year change from 1982−1987

−30

−20

−10
0
Change in CR20

10

−20

20

Change in Labor Share
Change in Concentration
Panel Versus
C: 1992-1997

−10

0
Change in CR20

10

20

Change in Labor Share
Change in Concentration
PanelVersus
D: 1997-2002
Services: 5−year change from 1997−2002

−10

−15

ChangeininWage
Payroll
Change
BilltotoSales
SalesRatio
Ratio
−5
0
5

ChangeininWage
Payroll
Change
BilltotoSales
SalesRatio
Ratio
−10
−5
0
5

10

Services: 5−year change from 1997−1997

−10

0

10
Change in CR20

20

−20

30

Change in Labor Share
Change in Concentration
PanelVersus
E: 2002-2007

−10

0
Change in CR20

10

20

Change in Labor Share
Change in Concentration
PanelVersus
F: 2007-2012
Services: 5−year change from 2007−2012

−5

−10

ChangeininWage
Payroll
Change
BilltotoSales
SalesRatio
Ratio
0
5
10
15

ChangeininWage
Payroll
Change
BilltotoSales
SalesRatio
Ratio
−5
0
5

20

Services: 5−year change from 2002−2007

−20

−10

0
Change in CR20

10

−20

20

−10

0
Change in CR20

10

20

Notes: Each dot represents a four-digit industry, with its size reflecting the industry’s 1982 share of sales. The red
line shows the best-fit line, using the 1982 share of sales as the industry weight. Concentration is defined using
CR20.

63

Figure A.5: The Change in Concentration Versus the Change in the Payroll-to-Sales Ratio in Each
Five-Year Period: Utilities and Transportation
Change in Labor Share
Versus
Change in Concentration
Panel
A: 1992-1997

Change in Labor Share
Versus
Change in Concentration
Panel
B: 1997-2002

ChangeininWage
Payroll
Change
BilltotoSales
SalesRatio
Ratio
−10
−5
0
5

−5

ChangeininWage
Payroll
Change
BilltotoSales
SalesRatio
Ratio
0
5

10

Utilities and Transportation: 5−year change from 1997−2002

10

Utilities and Transportation: 5−year change from 1997−1997

−20

−10

0
Change in CR20

10

−20

20

0
Change in CR20

20

40

Change in Labor Share
Change in Concentration
PanelVersus
C: 2002-2007

−10

ChangeininWage
Payroll
Change
BilltotoSales
SalesRatio
Ratio
−5
0
5

10

Utilities and Transportation: 5−year change from 2002−2007

−10

0

10

20

Change in CR20

Notes: Each dot represents a four-digit industry, with its size reflecting the industry’s 1992 share of sales. The red
line shows the best-fit line, using the 1992 share of sales as the industry weight. Concentration is defined using
CR20.

64

Figure A.6: The Change in Concentration Versus the Change in the Payroll-to-Sales Ratio in Each
Five-Year Period: Retail Trade
Change in Labor Share
Change in Concentration
PanelVersus
A: 1982-1987

Change in Labor Share
Change in Concentration
PanelVersus
B: 1987-1992
Retail Trade: 5−year change from 1987−1992

−3

ChangeininWage
Payroll
Change
BilltotoSales
SalesRatio
Ratio
−2
−1
0
1

ChangeininWage
Payroll
Change
BilltotoSales
SalesRatio
Ratio
−2
0
2
4

2

Retail Trade: 5−year change from 1982−1987

−10

0

10

−10

Change in CR20

20

10
Change in CR20

Change in Labor Share
Change in Concentration
PanelVersus
C: 1992-1997

Change in Labor Share
Change in Concentration
PanelVersus
D: 1997-2002

20

30

Retail Trade: 5−year change from 1997−2002

−15

ChangeininWage
Payroll
Change
BilltotoSales
SalesRatio
Ratio
−10
−5
0

ChangeininWage
Payroll
Change
BilltotoSales
SalesRatio
Ratio
−2
−1
0
1

5

Retail Trade: 5−year change from 1997−1997

0

−5

0

5
Change in CR20

10

−20

15

Change in Labor Share
Change in Concentration
PanelVersus
E: 2002-2007

0

20
Change in CR20

40

60

Change in Labor Share
Change in Concentration
PanelVersus
F: 2007-2012
Retail Trade: 5−year change from 2007−2012

−5

−6

ChangeininWage
Payroll
Change
BilltotoSales
SalesRatio
Ratio
0
5

ChangeininWage
Payroll
Change
BilltotoSales
SalesRatio
Ratio
−4
−2
0

10

2

Retail Trade: 5−year change from 2002−2007

−10

0

10
Change in CR20

20

−40

30

−20

0

20

Change in CR20

Notes: Each dot represents a four-digit industry, with its size reflecting the industry’s 1982 share of sales. The red
line shows the best-fit line, using the 1982 share of sales as the industry weight. Concentration is defined using
CR20.

65

Figure A.7: The Change in Concentration Versus the Change in the Payroll-to-Sales Ratio in Each
Five-Year Period: Wholesale Trade
Change in Labor Share
Versus Change in Concentration
Panel A: 1982-1987

Change in Labor Share
Change in Concentration
PanelVersus
B: 1987-1992
Wholesale Trade: 5−year change from 1987−1992

−2

−2

ChangeininWage
Payroll
Change
BilltotoSales
SalesRatio
Ratio
−1
0
1

ChangeininWage
Payroll
Change
BilltotoSales
SalesRatio
Ratio
−1
0
1

2

2

Wholesale Trade: 5−year change from 1982−1987

−10

0

10
Change in CR20

20

−15

30

Change in Labor Share
Change in Concentration
PanelVersus
C: 1992-1997

−10

−5
0
Change in CR20

5

10

Change in Labor Share
Change in Concentration
PanelVersus
D: 1997-2002
Wholesale Trade: 5−year change from 1997−2002

−3

ChangeininWage
Payroll
Change
BilltotoSales
SalesRatio
Ratio
−2
−1
0
1

ChangeininWage
Payroll
Change
BilltotoSales
SalesRatio
Ratio
−2
0
2
4

2

Wholesale Trade: 5−year change from 1997−1997

−20

−10

0
Change in CR20

10

−40

20

Change in Labor Share
Versus
Change in Concentration
Panel
E: 2002-2007

−20

0
Change in CR20

20

40

Change in Labor Share
Versus
Change in Concentration
Panel
F: 2007-2012
Wholesale Trade: 5−year change from 2007−2012

−4

−1

ChangeininWage
Payroll
Change
BilltotoSales
SalesRatio
Ratio
0
1
2

ChangeininWage
Payroll
Change
BilltotoSales
SalesRatio
Ratio
−2
0
2

3

Wholesale Trade: 5−year change from 2002−2007

−10

0

10
Change in CR20

20

−20

30

−10

0
Change in CR20

10

20

Notes: Each dot represents a four-digit industry, with its size reflecting the industry’s 1982 share of sales. The red
line shows the best-fit line, using the 1982 share of sales as the industry weight. Concentration is defined using
CR20.

66

Figure A.8: Comparing Labor Share in NIPA and Census: Manufacturing Only
Panel A: The Labor Share

Comparing Census and NIPA: Labor Share

20

30

40

50

60

Manufacturing

1980

1990

2000

2010

Survey Year
Census: Payroll
Wages over
over Value-Added
Value Added
Census:
Census:
Census: Payroll
Wages over
overAdjusted
AdjustedValue-Added
Value Added
Census:Total
TotalCompensation
Compensationover
overAdjusted
AdjustedValue-Added
Value Added
Census:
NIPA:
NIPA: Payroll
Wagesover
overValue-Added
Value Added

Panel B: Components of the Labor Share
Comparing Census and NIPA: Value−Added

Manufacturing

Manufacturing

500

300

Billions of US Dollars
1000 1500 2000

Billions of US Dollars
400 500 600 700

800

2500

Comparing Census and NIPA: Value−Added
Wage Bill

1980

1990

2000

2010

Survey Year

1980

1990

2000
Survey Year

Census: Wages and Salary
Census: Total Compensation
NIPA: Compensation

Census: Value Added
Census: Adjusted Value Added
NIPA: Value Added

Notes: Panel A plots the aggregate labor share in Manufacturing calculated from the Census and NIPA/BEA data.
Blue circles show the labor share calculated in the Census as the ratio of payroll to value-added. Red squares show the
same ratio, but here value-added is adjusted by subtracting intermediate purchased services as described in Appendix
B. Green triangles further augment the labor share to include additional labor costs to payroll. Lastly, the yellow
diamonds plot the payroll over value-added from the NIPA data. Panel B plots the various components of the labor
share used in the construction of the labor shares in Panel A. In the left figure, we plot three measures of the wage
bill and on the right, we plot 3 measures of value-added.

67

2010

Figure A.9: Comparing the Payroll-to-Sales Ratio in the Census with the Labor Share in NIPA
Wage−to−Sales Versus Labor Share

Wage−to−Sales Versus Labor Share

Manufacturing

Finance

Panel B: Finance

.8

.6

.9

.7

1

.8

1.1

.9

1.2

1

1.3

Panel A: Manufacturing

1980

1990

2000

2010

1980

1990

year

2000

2010

year

NIPA:
to Sales
NIPA:Payroll
Wage−to−Sales

CENSUS:
Wage−to−Sales
Census:
Payroll
to Sales
NIPA: Payroll
Labor Share
NIPA:
to Value-Added

CENSUS:
Wage−to−Sales
Census:
Payroll
to Sales
NIPA:Payroll
Labor Share
NIPA:
to Value-Added

NIPA: Payroll
Wage−to−Sales
to Sales

Wage−to−Sales Versus Labor Share

Wage−to−Sales Versus Labor Share

Services

Utilities and Transportation

Panel D: Utilities and Transportation

.9

.85

.9

1

.95

1.1

1

1.2

1.05

Panel C: Services

1980

1990

2000

2010

1980

1990

year

2000

2010

year

CENSUS:
Wage−to−Sales
Census:
Payroll
to Sales
NIPA:Payroll
Labor Share
NIPA:
to Value-Added

NIPA: Payroll
Wage−to−Sales
to Sales

CENSUS:
Wage−to−Sales
Census:
Payroll
to Sales
NIPA:Payroll
Labor Share
NIPA:
to Value-Added

NIPA: Payroll
Wage−to−Sales
to Sales

Wage−to−Sales Versus Labor Share

Wage−to−Sales Versus Labor Share

Retail Trade

Wholesale Trade

1.05
1
.95
.9
.85

.85

.9

.95

1

1.05

1.1

Panel F: Wholesale Trade

1.1

Panel E: Retail Trade

1980

1990

2000

2010

1980

year
CENSUS:
Wage−to−Sales
Census:
Payroll
to Sales
NIPA:Payroll
Labor Share
NIPA:
to Value-Added

1990

2000

2010

year
NIPA: Payroll
Wage−to−Sales
to Sales

CENSUS:
Wage−to−Sales
Census:
Payroll
to Sales
NIPA:Payroll
Labor Share
NIPA:
to Value-Added

NIPA: Payroll
Wage−to−Sales
to Sales

Notes: Each panel shows the payroll to sales ratio in the Census, the payroll to gross-output ratio in the NIPA/BEA
data, and the payroll to value-added ratio in the NIPA/BEA data. All series are normalized to one in 1987.

68

XI

Appendix Tables

Table A.1: Decompositions of the Change in the Labor Share in Manufacturing:
Alternative Aggregation Levels
Panel A: Plant Level
Within
(1)

Wage Bill share of value added
Between
Exit
(2)
(3)

Entry
(4)

Within
(5)

Compensation share of value added
Between
Exit
Entry
(6)
(7)
(8)

5 yr period
1982-1987
1987-1992
1992-1997
1997-2002
2002-2007
2007-2012
Mean

-3.75
2.36
-2.00
0.27
-2.58
1.98
-0.62

-0.30
-4.24
-1.40
-0.67
-1.84
-2.26
-1.79

-0.88
-0.78
-0.51
-0.69
-0.78
-0.46
-0.68

0.47
0.24
0.45
0.01
0.48
0.38
0.34

-2.16
3.71
-2.72
-0.95
0.86
0.34
-0.15

-3.10
-4.69
-1.97
0.60
-5.40
-0.61
-2.53

-1.02
-0.92
-0.57
-0.78
-0.90
-0.57
-0.79

0.52
0.17
0.46
-0.14
0.56
0.35
0.32

15 yr Period
1982-1997
1997-2012

-3.39
-0.33

-5.94
-4.77

-2.17
-1.93

1.16
0.87

-1.17
0.25

-9.76
-5.41

-2.51
-2.25

1.15
0.77

Overall
1982-2012

-3.72

-10.71

-4.10

2.03

-0.92

-15.17

-4.76

1.92

Panel B: Firm by Industry Level
Wage Bill share of value added

Compensation share of value added

Within
(1)

Between
(2)

Exit
(3)

Entry
(4)

Within
(5)

Between
(6)

Exit
(7)

Entry
(8)

5 yr period
1982-1987
1987-1992
1992-1997
1997-2002
2002-2007
2007-2012
Mean

-3.75
2.29
-2.22
-0.28
-2.81
2.10
-0.78

-0.65
-4.80
-1.14
-0.68
-1.94
-2.11
-1.89

-1.19
-1.40
-1.49
-1.34
-1.80
-1.43
-1.44

1.12
1.48
1.38
1.23
1.84
1.08
1.35

-1.84
3.46
-3.01
-2.05
1.22
0.00
-0.37

-4.02
-5.18
-1.70
0.95
-6.44
0.11
-2.71

-1.18
-1.63
-1.63
-1.54
-1.98
-1.78
-1.62

1.30
1.60
1.54
1.37
2.32
1.20
1.55

15 yr Period
1982-1997
1997-2012

-3.67
-0.99

-6.58
-4.74

-4.08
-4.57

3.98
4.14

-1.39
-0.82

-10.90
-5.38

-4.44
-5.31

4.44
4.88

Overall
1982-2012

-4.66

-11.32

-8.65

8.12

-2.21

-16.28

-9.75

9.32

Panel C: 15-Year Decompositions, Firm Level
Wage Bill share of value added
Compensation share of value added

15yr Period
1982-1997
1997-2012

Within
(1)

Between
(2)

Exit
(3)

Entry
(4)

Within
(5)

Between
(6)

Exit
(7)

Entry
(8)

-3.79
-2.29

-7.17
-3.70

-1.58
-2.08

2.18
1.91

-1.21
-2.49

-12.07
-4.03

-1.39
-2.25

2.39
2.14

Notes: This Table shows the results of a decomposition of the change in the labor share using the dynamic Melitz-Polanec
methodology as described in the text. Essentially we divide the change in the overall labor share into four components. “Within” is
the change in the labor share due to a general fall in the share across all incumbent plants. “Between” is the change due to the
growing relative size of low labor share incumbent plants. “Exit” is the contribution to the change from the exit of high labor share
plants and “Entry” is contribution from the entry of low labor share plants. These all use the micro-data from the five yearly
Censuses of Manufacturing. Panel A shows the decomposition at the plant level, panel B shows the decomposition at the firm-byindustry level, and Panel C does the decomposition with only adjacent 15-year periods.

69

Table A.2: Regressions of the Components of the Change in the
Payroll-to-Sales Ratio on the Change in Concentration
CR4
(1)
Panel A. Between
Retail
Wholesale
Services
Manufacturing
Utilities/Transportation
Finance
Combined

-0.039
-0.01
-0.165
-0.082
-0.128
-0.262
-0.086

Panel B. Within
Retail
Wholesale
Services
Manufacturing
Utilities/Transportation
Finance
Combined

0.004
-0.016
0.03
0.02
0.01
0.005
0.009

Panel C. Entrants
Retail
Wholesale
Services
Manufacturing
Utilities/Transportation
Finance
Combined

0.006
-0.007
0.012
-0.007
0.016
0.038
0.002

Panel D: Exiters
Retail
Wholesale
Services
Finance
Manufacturing
Utilities/Transportation
Combined

-0.007
-0.002
0.041
0.005
-0.015
-0.01
0

CR20
(2)
*
**
**
**
*
**

*
*

*

*

-0.072
-0.025
-0.161
-0.104
-0.12
-0.263
-0.096

0.006
-0.003
0.017
0.033
-0.024
-0.023
0.006

-0.015
-0.01
0.03
-0.021
0.026
0.045
0

-0.003
-0.002
-0.006
0.005
0.004
-0.024
-0.002

HHI
(3)
**
*
**
**
*
*
**

-0.044
-0.029
-0.491
-0.104
-0.453
-0.546
-0.136

*

0.009
-0.019
0.092 *
0.006
0.011
-0.038
-0.002

**
**
~

*

**
*
**
*
**

0.018
-0.016
0.018
-0.005
0.014
0.056
0.005

-0.028 *
-0.014
0.042
-0.004
-0.004
-0.035 ~
-0.011

Notes: ~ p ≤ 0.10, * p ≤ 0.05, ** p ≤ 0.01. Each cell is the coefficient on a concentration
measure from a separate OLS regression (standard errors in parentheses clustered by four digit
industry). Dependent variable is a component of the decomposition as in Table 5. Regressions are
weighted by the share of sales of the four digit industry in total sector sales in the initial year.

70

71

Change
-0.6
-0.61
-0.48
-0.53
-0.36
-0.88
-0.53
-1.02
-1
-0.93
-1.06
-1.02

Av Level
65.47
64.95
67.17
65.79
64.9
64.52
63.82
62.89
65.33
62.93
65.91
62.48

Austria
1
-0.063
0.222
0.534
-0.232
0.517
0.094
0.233
0.112
0.163
-0.138
0.069

Austria
1
0.731
0.54
0.731
0.822
0.753
0.75
0.631
0.757
0.451
0.741
0.817

1
0.451
0.217
0.432
-0.153
0.283
0.291
0.236
-0.017
0.438
0.208

Belgium

1
0.93
0.814
0.926
0.867
0.943
0.805
0.818
0.87
0.922
0.927

Belgium

1
0.476
0.399
-0.198
0.259
-0.089
0.012
-0.388
0.525
0.112

Spain

1
0.747
0.851
0.713
0.867
0.799
0.748
0.815
0.829
0.869

Spain

1
0.11
0.231
-0.163
0.152
0.227
0.275
0.058
0.321*

Finland

1
0.911
0.801
0.843
0.814
0.808
0.815
0.83
0.883

Finland

1
-0.129
0.132
0.035
0.29
0.056
0.508
0.22

France

1
0.894
0.952
0.815
0.918
0.819
0.927
0.949

France

1
-0.02
0.274
0.238
0.281
-0.387
0.112

Germany

1
0.893
0.749
0.669
0.773
0.757
0.803

Germany

1
0.083
0.093
-0.338
0.084
-0.313

Italy

1
0.821
0.877
0.813
0.891
0.896

Italy

1
0.227
0.294
-0.083
-0.047

Japan

1
0.778
0.825
0.798
0.858

Japan

1
0.804
0.862

1
0.106
-0.096
0.266

1
0.055
0.525

Netherlands Sweden

1
0.785
0.895
0.923

Netherlands Sweden

1
0.181

UK

1
0.948

UK

1

USA

1

USA

Notes: Correlations include 32 industries both within and outside manufacturing. In each correlation, industries are weighted by the value-added share of that industry averaged over the two countries in
the comparison. Levels in panel A are averages between 1997 and 2007. Panel B correlations are 10-year changes from 1997-2007. In order to reduce measurement error, we run these correlations using
the centered 5-year moving average.

Austria
Belgium
Spain
Finland
France
Germany
Italy
Japan
Netherlands
Sweden
UK
USA

Panel B

Austria
Belgium
Spain
Finland
France
Germany
Italy
Japan
Netherlands
Sweden
UK
USA

Panel A

Table A.3: Industry-Level Cross-Country Comparisons of Labor Shares

Table A.4: Decomposing the Wage Bill Share Using Firm-Level Data from Different Countries

UK
Sweden
France
Germany
Italy
Portugal

Years
(1)

Observations
(2)

Base level of
labor share
(3)

2003-2008
2003-2008
2003-2008
2005-2010
2005-2010
2005-2010

112,007
154,741
704,276
117,817
697,939
202,590

68%
74%
76%
81%
74%
72%

Change in
Between firm
aggregate share component
(4)
(5)
-7.5%
-2.7%
-1.7%
-4.5%
2.5%
-4.8%

-7.0
-10.4
-1.3
-4.3
-2.2
-6.8

Within firm
component
(6)

Exit
(7)

Entry
(8)

-0.1
0.1
1.3
0.0
5.7
2.9

-2.5
7.1
-1.5
-0.2
-0.9
-1.9

2.2
0.2
0.0
0.1
0.0
1.0

Notes: This uses firm data from BVD Orbis. Value added is constructed by adding wage bill to pre-tax profits (EBIT). Sample includes firms whose
primary three digit industry is in manufacturing. We use the MP method to break down the aggregate change into a between and within firm
component.

Table A.5: Decomposition of the Change in the Wage-Bill Share in Manufacturing (using Compustat)
Total fall in the
labor share
(1)
1993-1998
1998-2003
2003-2008
Mean

-6.0
-5.4
-14.2

Within

Between

Exit

Entry

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

-4.7
2.1
-6.8

-2.0
-6.0
-7.4

0.8
-0.1
-1.6

-0.3
-1.5
1.6

-3.1

-5.1

-0.3

-0.1

Note: Melitz-Polanec (2015) decomposition method. Value added measured as sum of
wage bill and value added. There is a break in accounting treatment of wage bill in 1993
which is why we focus on the post 1993 period. Sample includes Compustat firms (US
publicly listed) who report wage bill and profits.

72

Table A.6: The Labor Share and the Rise in Chinese Imports

Sales
(1)

Value
Added
(3)

Wages
(2)

CR4
(4)

CR20
(5)

HHI
(6)

Labor
Share
(7)

Payrollto-Sales
(8)

0.563
(4.66)

0.234
(5.11)

1.630
(2.12)

7.070
(3.16)

*

2.034
(1.85)

-12.514
(10.48)

-2.577
(11.80)

-4.780
(4.20)

13.634
(3.16)

**

5.506
(3.54)

6.695
(3.24)

*

2.457
(1.83)

**

8.067
(3.72)

OLS Estimates
Sample 1: 1992-2012
5 year Changes

10 year Changes

-1.967
(0.76)

**

-0.485
(0.28)

-1.717
(0.75)

*

-0.487
(0.67)

-3.693
(1.42)

**

-0.855
(0.36)

-4.553
(1.75)

**

-1.043
(0.80)

-2.667
(1.00)

**

-1.125
(0.41)

-3.024
(1.01)

**

-1.961
(0.73)

~

-0.805
(0.36)

*

-1.026
(0.89)

IV Estimates
Sample 1: 1992-2012
5 year Changes

10 year Changes

Sample 2: 1992-2007
5 year Changes

10 year Changes

*

-1.156
(0.42)

**

6.027
(5.07)

4.765
(4.94)

6.814
(3.38)

*

-1.788
(0.98)

~

-1.973
(13.60)

11.178
(13.76)

4.962
(7.49)

16.375
(3.24)

**

-1.237
(0.42)

**

16.295 ~
(9.00)

10.442 *
(4.56)

12.681 *
(5.90)

0.321
(3.24)

-1.29
(1.48)

**

-2.314
(0.81)

**

20.47
(15.22)

11.974 ~
(6.99)

18.405 *
(9.22)

6.443
(6.05)

0.21
(1.70)

*

Notes: ~ p ≤ 0.10, * p ≤ 0.05, ** p ≤ 0.01. Regressions reflect 2SLS estimates, using the growth in imports from China to 8 other developed countries as an
instrument for the growth in Chinese imports to the U.S. (as in Autor et al. 2013) and various industry-level outcome measures, denoted by the column header.
For example, column 1 shows estimates of the effect of Chinese imports on industy sales. Industries are weighted by their 1982 share of sales. Regressions
include year dummies and standard errors are clustered at the slightly aggregated SIC codes, consistent with Autor, Dorn and Hanson (2013). The partial Fstatistic for the first stage in sample 1 for 5 and 10 year change is 76.25 and 50.30, respectively. The partial F-statistic for the first stage in sample 2 for 5 and 10
year changes is 89.79 and 97.25, respectively.

73

