                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




  BORN TO LEAD? THE EFFECT OF BIRTH ORDER ON NON-COGNITIVE ABILITIES

                                        Sandra E. Black
                                        Erik Grönqvist
                                         Björn Öckert

                                      Working Paper 23393
                              http://www.nber.org/papers/w23393


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     May 2017




We have benefitted from comments and suggestions from Helena Holmlund, Edwin Leuven,
Stefan Schmukle, Frank Sulloway, Helena Svaleryd, participants at SOLE 2016 and Society for
Institutional & Organizational Economics 2016, and at seminars at the Institute for Evaluation of
Labour Market and Education Policy (IFAU), University of Oslo, Stockholm University, and
Linneaus University. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily
reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2017 by Sandra E. Black, Erik Grönqvist, and Björn Öckert. All rights reserved. Short sections
of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that
full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Born to Lead? The Effect of Birth Order on Non-Cognitive Abilities
Sandra E. Black, Erik Grönqvist, and Björn Öckert
NBER Working Paper No. 23393
May 2017
JEL No. J13,J24

                                            ABSTRACT

We study the effect of birth order on personality traits among men using population data on
enlistment records and occupations for Sweden. We find that earlier born men are more
emotionally stable, persistent, socially outgoing, willing to assume responsibility, and able to take
initiative than later-borns. In addition, we find that birth order affects occupational sorting; first-
born children are more likely to be managers, while later-born children are more likely to be self-
employed. We also find that earlier born children are more likely to be in occupations that require
leadership ability, social ability and the Big Five personality traits. Finally, we find a significant
role of sex composition within the family. Later-born boys suffer an additional penalty the larger
the share of boys among the older siblings. When we investigate possible mechanisms, we find
that the negative effects of birth order are driven by post-natal environmental factors. We also
find evidence of lower parental human capital investments in later-born children.

Sandra E. Black                                         Björn Öckert
Department of Economics                                 Institute for Evaluation of Labour Market
University of Texas at Austin                           and Education Policy
Austin, TX 78712                                        P.O. Box 513
and IZA and NBER                                        SE-751 20 Uppsala
sblack@austin.utexas.edu                                Sweden
                                                        bjorn.ockert@ifau.uu.se
Erik Grönqvist
Institute for Evaluation of Labour Market
and Education Policy
Kyrkogårdsgatan 6
Box 513
751 20 Uppsala
SWEDEN
erik.gronqvist@ifau.uu.se
Introduction

What are the origins of personality? Are some people born leaders, while others are followers?

Research has shown that personality—for example leadership abilities or motivation—matters

greatly for life success.2 While evidence shows that the family is important in the formation of

personalities3, there are still large differences among children from the same family, with at least a

third of the total variation being within family. The question then becomes, where do these within-

family differences come from? Is there a role for birth order in the formation of personalities?

       As early as 1927 with the work of Alfred Adler, psychologists have hypothesized that at least

some of these personality differences are systematically related to birth order, with the oldest child

developing a taste for power.4 Since that time, there has been much work on the topic, with a recent

focus on evolutionary theory as the dominant explanation for birth order differences in personality

(Sulloway, 1996). Siblings are thought to strategically compete for limited parental resources, and

do so by differentiating themselves by filling different “niches” within the family. The first born is

believed to be more responsible and focused on pleasing the parents, thus acting as a role-model

for the later born children, while later-born children are hypothesized to be more easy-going and

sociable and with a need to be more innovative in filling a family niche.5

       To date, however, there is little conclusive evidence on this relationship. This is likely due to

the stringent data requirements for estimating the relationship between birth order and personality.

Later born children only exist in larger families, and to the extent that parents who choose to have


2
  See work by Lindqvist and Vestman (2011); Heckman, Stixrud and Urzua (2006); Heckman and Rubinstein (2001); Borghans,
Duckworth, Heckman and Ter Weel (2008); Bowles, Gintis, and Osborne (2001).
3
  Plomin and Daniel (1987); Plomin (2011); Grönqvist, Öckert and Vlachos (forthcoming); Björklund and Jäntti (2012); Anger (2012).
4
  Alder’s hypothesis was that the oldest child develops a taste for power but suffers from the dethronement at the arrival of siblings;
the youngest is pampered with lack of independence and social empathy; while the middle child is ambitious and competitive (Adler
1927; 1928).
5
  Sulloway (1995, 1996) hypothesizes that first-borns rate higher than later borns in conscientiousness, neuroticism, the dominance
aspect of extraversion and lower on agreeableness, openness and the sociability facet of extraversion.

                                                                  2
larger families are inherently different, calculating a simple correlation between birth order and

measures of personality without conditioning on family size would spuriously attribute these

differences to birth order. In addition, mothers tend to be older when they have later born children,

so estimates that do not control for mother’s age might mistakenly attribute that effect to birth

order. And later born children are born in more recent cohorts than their siblings, so to the extent

that there are trends in outcomes over time, estimation strategies that do not adequately control for

cohort effects might again mistakenly attribute these trends to birth order. As a result, estimating

the relationship between birth order and personality characteristics requires large datasets in order

to control for all possible confounders.6

        Recent research on the relationship between birth order and other child outcomes has been

able to address these issues using administrative datasets that have become available. These studies

have documented that first-borns have higher educational attainment and earnings, have a higher

IQ, and are likely to be healthier.7 However, there is little convincing evidence on the effect of

birth order on personality.8 This is primarily due to the difficulty in obtaining measures of an

individual’s personality in a large representative dataset.


6
  The previous psychological literature is mainly based on small data sets. Ernst and Angst (1983) concluded from a review of the
literature from 1946-1980 that findings of birth order effects on personality are artifacts of poor research design: in studies accounting
for family size and socio-economic differences the effects of birth order on personality is negligible. Sulloway (1995, 1996, 2010)
strongly contested this conclusion. Based on the same studies that control for family size and socioeconomic status and using a Meta-
analytic strategy, Sulloway argues that the literature is in support of birth order influencing the Big Five dimensions of personality.
Also the more recent literature is based on small samples with results both in support (see Dixon et al. 2008; Healey and Ellis 2007;
Michalski and Shackelford 2001; Paulhus, Trapnell and Chen 1999; Pollet et al. 2010; Rohde et al. 2003) and with no, or limited
support, (see Bleske-Rechek and Kelley 2014; Dunkel, Harbke and Papini 2009; Jefferson, Herbst and McCrae 1998; Marini and
Kurtz 2011; Parker 1998; Saroglou and Fiasse 2003) of birth order effects on personality.
7
  See Barclay (2015); Black, Devereux and Salvanes (2005, 2011, 2016); Kristensen and Bjerkedal (2007); Kantarevic and Mechoulan
(2006); Booth and Kee (2008); Bu (2014).
8
   There are some notable exceptions in the psychology and economics literature. A few studies use large data sets and a between-
family strategy, but these studies are based on only one or few cohorts (see Rohrer, Egloff and Schmukle 2015; Damian and Roberts
2015; Avarett, Argys and Rees 2011; Silles 2010; Argys et al. 2006). By implicitly conditioning on cohort they introduce a potential
bias since children with different birth order who are born the same year also have mothers who are either born in different years,
initiated their fertility at different ages, or have different spacing. Other studies use a within-family strategy but with smaller samples
(see Rohrer, Egloff and Schmukle 2015; Lehmann, Nuevo-Chiquero and Vidal-Fernandez forthcoming). These studies do not find
any birth order effects. Sulloway (1999, 2001) uses a within-family strategy with survey data and find birth order effects on the Big
Five domains of personality, but the sample is non-representative and with only one respondent per family rating themselves as well
as their closest siblings’ personalities the result may capture contrast effects and stereotype bias. See section III for a methodological
discussion.

                                                                    3
        To address this issue, we use data on the population of men in Sweden, where personality is

measured in an evaluation by a certified psychologist conducted when one enlists in the military as

well as revealed by occupational sorting.9 In the economics literature, personality traits are often

referred to as non-cognitive abilities, and denote traits that can be distinguished from intelligence

(Borghans et al. 2008). Even if cognitive abilities and personality traits can be unrelated from a

theoretical perspective, empirical measures of cognitive abilities and personality traits are likely

correlated. However, we are able to address this by controlling for measures of cognitive ability as

well.

        This is the first study using representative population data from multiple cohorts on objective

measures of personality assessed at the same age and exploiting within-family variation in birth

order to account for (e.g. socioeconomic) confounders. We also examine the underlying causes of

the relationships we observe. More generally, this paper relates to the literature on how malleable

non-cognitive abilities are to influences in childhood and adolescence.10 In addition we propose an

alternative, less data-demanding estimator that yields the same results as a family fixed effects

model.

        We find that first-born children are advantaged on non-cognitive dimensions capturing

emotional stability, persistence, social outgoingness, willingness to assume responsibility and

ability to take initiative, and these conclusions are robust to the inclusion of family fixed effects.

Third-born children have non-cognitive abilities that are 0.2 standard deviations below first-born

children. Importantly, we also demonstrate that occupational sorting is systematically related to

birth order. First-born children are almost 30 percent more likely to be Top Managers compared to


9
  Grinberg (2015) study the impact of birth order on occupational choice with a between-family design using NLSY79 data, but by
implicitly conditioning on cohort she is introducing a potential bias.
10
   This literature has focused on the acquisition of skills in childhood (Cunha et al. 2006; Cunha and Heckman 2007, 2008; Fredriksson,
Öckert and Oosterbeek 2013) and adolescence (Grönqvist and Lindqvist 2016) or used data on twins or adoptees to separate nature
and nurture in the transmission of non-cognitive abilities (Cesarini 2009; Grönqvist, Öckert and Vlachos forthcoming).

                                                                  4
third-borns, and managerial positions tend to require higher non-cognitive abilities. We also find

that first-born children are more likely to be employed in occupations requiring all Big Five

domains of personality—openness to experience, conscientiousness, extraversion, agreeableness,

and emotional stability. Later-born children are more likely to be self-employed.

          We are also able to examine how birth order interacts with sibling sex composition.

Interestingly, we find that birth order patterns vary depending on the sex composition of the older

children—effect sizes are exacerbated when the later-born son has older brothers relative to older

sisters.

          There are a number of possible explanations as to why birth order may be related to non-

cognitive abilities. There could be biological reasons—as the mother has more children, her womb

becomes more effective at nurturing the fetus (Khong, Adema and Erwich 2003), or successive

children may be hypo-masculinized by maternal immunization to the H-Y antigen (Beer and Horn

2000).

          Beyond biology, parents could have other influences. Childhood inputs, especially in the first

years of life, are considered crucial for skill formation (Cunha and Heckman 2007; Heckman,

Stixrud and Urzua 2006). First-born children have the full attention of parents, but as families grow

the family environment is diluted and parental resources become scarcer (Zajonc 1976; Zajonc and

Marcus 1975; Price 2008). In contrast, parents are more experienced and tend to have higher

incomes when raising later born children. In addition, for a given amount of resources, parents may

treat first-born children differently from second or later-born children.11 Parents may have

incentives for more strict parenting practices towards the first born so as to gain a reputation for

“toughness” necessary to induce effort among later born children (Hotz and Pantano 2015).



11
     See Becker and Tomes (1976) and Yi et al. (2015) for discussions on how parents differentiate resources across children.

                                                                   5
      Children, on the other hand, may also act strategically in competing for parental resources.

Rivalry and conflict are common features of sibling dynamics (Furman and Buhrmester 1985;

Dunn 1993; Shantz and Hartup 1992), where such conflicts, at least in early childhood, tend to

center around possession, personal property and access to the mother (Dunn and Munn 1987).

Older siblings take a more dominant role in such conflicts and engage in more elaborate conflict

strategies (Howe et al. 2002; Phinney 1986). In this context Havnes (2010) proposes an economic

model where conflict between siblings causes parents to optimally invest more in the dominant,

older, sibling. Sulloway (1996) offers a similar argument for birth order effects, based on

evolutionary psychology, suggesting that first borns have an advantage in following the status quo,

while later borns—by having incentives to engage in investments aimed at differentiating

themselves—become more sociable and unconventional in order to attract parental resources. This

also implies that the peer environment that each child grows up in is different—first born children

have no role models aside from parents but may themselves act as role models, while later-born

children can learn from their elder siblings.

      Even if we are unable to disentangle many of these possible mechanisms, we do attempt to

understand the differential role of family environment and biology. Taking advantage of the

distinction between social and biological birth order induced by adoption or the death of older

siblings combined with the richness of our dataset, we first show that the negative birth order

patterns we observe are driven by post-natal environmental differences. In fact, we find that

biological factors tend to favor later-born children. We then augment our data with a survey of

children at age 13 and their parents to identify differences in children’s study behavior and parental

investments. We find that later-born children spend substantially less time on homework and more

time watching TV. Interestingly, parents are less likely to discuss school work with later-born



                                                  6
children, suggesting that lower parental investment and attention may be one driving force behind

the negative birth order effects.

       The paper unfolds as follows. Section 2 describes the data we are using. Sections 3 and 4

describe our estimation strategy and present our main results along with heterogeneous effects by

sex composition. Section 5 then discusses possible mechanisms, including biological differences

and parental time investment. Finally, Section 6 concludes.


II. Data

To analyze the impact of birth order on personality and occupational choice, we combine

information from a variety of Swedish data registers. We begin with the Swedish population

register compiled by Statistics Sweden that includes all individuals born in Sweden since 1932.

The population register contains information on birth year, a link to biological (and adoptive)

parents, and a link to biological (and adoptive) siblings. We use this information to define birth

order on the maternal side.

       The population register is combined with military enlistment data from the Swedish War

Archive. Until 2010, all Swedish men were required by law to enlist in the military. The enlistment

consists of a series of physical, psychological and intellectual tests and evaluations. In most cases,

the enlistment took place the year a man turned 18. In our sample, over 85 percent of all men in

each cohort are represented; only the physically and mentally handicapped were exempted.12 This

data is available for Swedish male citizens born between 1952 and 1982. From this data, we extract




12
   The consequences of refusing the military service included up to one year in prison (1994:1809 Lag om totalförsvarsplikt).
Importantly, the probability of having valid enlistment records is unrelated to birth order in our main (family fixed) effects
specification.

                                                              7
information on non-cognitive and cognitive abilities. These abilities have been shown to be highly

correlated with later outcomes such as employment and earnings.13

        We also incorporate information on employment and occupation. Annual data on

employment and self-employment are available from 1985 to 2009 from Statistics Sweden.

Employment is measured during a specific week in November and defined in accordance with

ILO’s employment definition of at least one hour of paid work during the measurement week. Self-

employment is defined according to occupational status at the workplace where an individual

receives the highest income in November.14 We utilize the information at age 45; if employment

and self-employment are not observed at age 45 we take the observation closest to age 45.

        The occupation data is available for the 1996 to 2009 period and includes individuals

between the ages of 16 and 74 who are in the labor market. This data set covers the population of

public sector workers and approximately 50 percent of workers in the private sector. In particular,

the private sector data cover all firms with more than 500 employees and a stratified random

sample of smaller firms by industry. In most cases the information is provided by the employers’

organizations (including employers in the public sector) as part of an agreement between unions

and the employer organizations. Firms not covered by this agreement are surveyed by Statistics

Sweden. To make the most of the occupational data, we take the five observations closest to age

45, but restrict the window to ages 35-55. We then calculate the average of each individual’s yearly

observations, weighted by the inverse of the sampling probability.




13
   Lindqvist and Vestman (2011) show that non-cognitive ability is a stronger predictor of unemployment, having low annual earnings,
as well as having a managerial position, than is cognitive ability, while cognitive ability is a stronger predictor for higher earnings.
Furthermore, Grönqvist, Vlachos and Öckert (forthcoming) find that both parents’ cognitive and non-cognitive abilities are strongly
related to the educational and labor market outcomes of their offspring; in particular, parental cognitive abilities are more important
for schooling outcomes, while parental non-cognitive abilities are particularly important for labor force participation.
14
   Income from self-employment is scaled up by a factor 1.6 to account for under-reporting of income from business, for details see
Statistics Sweden (2009).

                                                                   8
Outcome Variable: Non-Cognitive Abilities15

Our measure of non-cognitive abilities is based on a standardized psychological evaluation aimed

at determining the conscripts’ capacity to fulfill the requirements of military duty and armed

combat. Central to this are the abilities to cope with stress and to contribute to group cohesion. The

evaluation is performed by a certified psychologist, who conducts a 20-30 minute interview with

the conscript.16 The interview follows a specific, and secret, manual that states topics to discuss and

also how to grade different answers. A conscript is given a high score if he is considered to be

emotionally stable, persistent, socially outgoing, willing to assume responsibility, and able to take

initiative. The non-cognitive abilities are graded by the psychologist in four sub scores measured

on a 1-5 scale, which are transformed to an overall measure of non-cognitive abilities on a 1-9

(stanine) scale. In the analysis we use the full interaction of the four sub-measures standardized by

year.

        The conscript’s cognitive ability is also evaluated; this consists of several subtests of logical,

verbal, and spatial abilities, as well as a test of technical comprehension. The cognitive tests are

speeded multiple-choice tests,17 and have been subject to minor revisions in 1980, 1994 and 2000.

The raw test scores on these four subtests are combined to a discrete variable of general cognitive

ability on a 1-9 (stanine) scale, which has been found to be a good measure of general intelligence




15
   See Lindqvist and Vestman (2011) for additional details of the enlistment procedure.
16
   As a basis for the interview, the psychologist has information about the conscript’s results on the tests of cognitive ability, physical
endurance, muscular strength, as well as grades from school and the answers from a questionnaire on friends, family, hobbies, but the
questionnaire does not ask for birth order. The former chief psychologist at the Swedish National Service Administration, Johan
Lothigius, who constructed and oversaw the implementation of the instrument, states (telephone interview 16 February 2016) that
while relationships with parents and friends were covered in the interview, there was no focus on the relationships with siblings or
birth order. It is highly unlikely that the psychologist knew the birth order of the draftee.
17
   The logic test contains verbally formulated instructions as to which answer the test-taker should mark, created to test logical
reasoning. The verbal test asks for the synonym of a given word, out of four alternatives. The spatial test asks for the three-
dimensional object that corresponds to a two-dimensional unfolded piece of paper. Finally, the technical test consists of illustrated
technical and physical problems. See Carlsson et al. (2015) for an example of the test questions.

                                                                    9
(Carlstedt 2000). We use the sum of the four sub-scores, standardized by enlistment year, as a

measure of cognitive ability.


Outcome Variable: Occupation

We also use occupation as an additional measure of personality independent from the measurement

at enlistment. While both cognitive and non-cognitive abilities determine occupational choice,

research shows that non-cognitive abilities can be more important for having managerial position

(Lindqvist and Vestman 2011).

       We first break occupations into a number of broad categories that are generally associated

with particular personality characteristics and then relate birth order to the likelihood of being in

one of these occupations. At the broadest level, occupations are divided into ten groups. One such

group is classified as Managerial Work, and we define Managers as individuals belonging to this

group.18 This category contains a broad range of managerial positions, from top-level managers to

middle- and lower-level management. We then characterize Top Managers in the private and

public sector using 3-digit codes that include Directors and Chief Executives (ISCO 121) and

Legislators and Senior Government Officials (ISCO 111). About 8 percent of the individuals in our

population are Managers and 0.6 percent are Top Managers. We contrast Managers to Creative

Occupations since the psychological literature suggests that later borns are more creative and open

to experience (Sulloway 1995 and 1996). Using the 4-digit level occupational codes, we define

architects, writers, painters, musicians, and actors, among others, as Creative Occupations.19 In our

data, we see that individuals who are Managers have substantially higher cognitive and non-


18
   The occupation data is coded according to the Swedish modification of the International Standard for Classifications of
Occupations 1988 (ISCO88); at the 3 digit level the Swedish occupational codes are more or less identical to ISCO88.
19
   The creative occupations comprise the following ISCO88 codes: Architects, town and traffic planners (2141), Writers and creative
or performing artists (245), Photographers (3131), Image and sound recording equipment operators (3132), Decorators and
commercial designers (3471), Radio, television and other announcers (3472), Street, night-club and related musicians, singers and
dancers (3473), Clowns, magicians, acrobats, and related professionals (3474), and Fashion and other models (5210).

                                                               10
cognitive abilities than non-managers, and there is a marked difference in non-cognitive abilities

between individuals in managerial positions and creative occupations (see Appendix Table A1).

       We also use detailed information on skill requirements and abilities of incumbents in specific

occupations, using the Occupational Information Network (O*NET), to create measures of

personality based on the importance of particular personality characteristics in the daily functioning

of jobs. In particular, we construct variables capturing the importance of (1) social abilities and (2)

leadership abilities in performing the tasks required in occupations. We also categorize the personal

attributes into the Big Five domains of personality: Conscientiousness, Agreeableness, Emotional

Stability, Extraversion, and Openness. See Appendix C for details.


Outcome variable: Parental investments

We examine parental investment behavior using self-reported data on human capital investments at

age 13 from the Evaluation-Through-Follow-up (ETF) study in which children are surveyed about

their effort outside of school and parents are asked about their investments in their children.20 The

ETF-data consists of 10 percent stratified samples of the cohorts born in 1967, 1972, 1982, 1987,

1992 and a 5 percent stratified sample of the cohort born in 1977.


Analysis Sample

In order to observe completed family size, we consider children whose mother was born between

1917 and 1964. We restrict attention to families with at least two children and at most five

children.21 We also exclude all families with twins, as twinning confounds birth order designations.

Because we only have military enlistment data for males, our main analyses focuses on men. In



20
   The survey is run by the Department of Education at the University of Gothenburg; see Härnquist (2000) for a description of the
data. For some of the cohorts a few of the questions that we use were not answered at age 13, but instead at age 10 or 16. In these
cases we use this alternative information.
21
   We lose about 3 percent of the families by only including families with fewer than 6 children.

                                                               11
analyses of non-cognitive abilities from military enlistment we retain individuals from our

underlying population with a valid enlistment record. Moreover, since we want to utilize the within

family variation we also restrict attention to families with at least two sons; in total we observe

564,789 boys from 260,807 families.22 When we consider occupations, we again limit our sample

to those individuals for whom we observe a valid occupation for at least two sons in the same

family.23

        In the birth order analyses on human capital investments at age 13 we retain males and

females with data from the ETF-survey. In total we observe 36,799 individuals (in the analyses the

number of observations varies between 11,833-32,639, as some questions are not asked for all

cohorts and there is some missing data).24

        Table 1 and Table 2 present summary statistics for our analytic samples. In both Tables,

Column 1 shows the means for the full sample and Columns 2-6 break them down by birth order.

For most outcomes there is a clear pattern by birth order; e.g. that later-borns have lower non-

cognitive ability. However, these simple descriptive statistics can be misleading. When one looks

at background variables by birth order, one sees the same patterns—characteristics such as

mother’s education and mother’s age at first birth are declining with birth order and average family

size is increasing, suggesting the need for a more rigorous analysis.


III. Empirical Strategy

It may be conceptually hard to think about causal effects of birth order, since the birth order of

siblings cannot easily be manipulated. The hypothetical experiment we have in mind, however, is



22
   Appendix Table A2 compares mean values for the full population of males to those of our analysis sample.
23
   The cognitive abilities and personality traits measured at the enlistment or as manifested in the occupational choice are strongly and
independently related to mid-life wages, see Appendix Table A3. In Appendix Table A4a-b we also report the correlation between the
non-cognitive and cognitive ability scores and the different measures of personality traits.
24
   Appendix Table A5 presents summary statistics for this sample.

                                                                  12
to randomly assign the order in which two fertilized eggs are placed into a woman’s womb.

Although this thought experiment is more or less infeasible – with the possible exception of IVF

treatments – it makes clear that birth order effects should capture any difference in prenatal or

postnatal environment between siblings, but hold the genetic makeup constant. As it turns out,

nature provides a close to ideal experiment for studying birth order effects. At conception, each

child receives a random half of each parent’s genes, which makes them share on average half their

genes. Thus, the genetic makeup is not expected to differ systematically between siblings in

general or by birth order in particular. The effect of birth order can, thus, be identified by simply

comparing personalities of siblings within the same family.

       In practice, most studies of birth order estimate versions of the following parsimonious

model for individual i in family j:

                              -                          -                           ;

                !"# = % +          '( ) *+"# = , +            01 ) 23)45# = 6 +           89 ) !+*"# = : +
                             (./                        1.7                         9./

                        A                               G

                             => ) ?!+*# = @ +                BC ) ?DE5# = F + HI# + J"# ,                                    1
                       >./                            C./


       where !"# is a measure of non-cognitive abilities, *+"# is birth order (the omitted category is

first-born child), 23)45# is family size, !+*"# is the child’s year of birth, ?!+*# is mother’s year

of birth, ?DE5# is mother’s age at first birth, and I# is a vector with family background variables.

       The family size controls address the fact that later-born children are more likely to be

observed in larger families, and that outcomes of children may differ by family size. When data

include all siblings in a family, any time-invariant family characteristic (e.g. mother’s year of birth

and mother’s education) is balanced by birth order once family size is controlled for.25 More


25
  To see this, assume there are 1,000 families with two children. Then, the 1,000 first-born children will on average have the same
parental background as the 1,000 second-born children since they all come from the same 1,000 families.

                                                                13
generally, family background for a given sibship size is expected to be balanced by birth order in

random samples of the population. In earlier studies based on non-representative samples

conditioning on family size does not, per se, break the correlation between birth order and family

background.

        With representative data it is sufficient to control for family size to estimate the reduced form

effects of birth order. But in order to get a more structural interpretation of the estimates, many

studies on birth order also control for the child’s year of birth (or age). This is because children

with a higher birth order come from more recent cohorts, and the birth order estimates may

therefore pick up cohort trends in non-cognitive abilities.26 An unintended consequence of adding

these controls is that it introduces imbalances in family background by birth order. This is because

children of higher parity, who are born the same year as children with lower birth order, on

average, have mothers who are born earlier, started to have children at a younger age, and have

shorter child spacing. This tends to bias the estimates downwards.27

        It is common that studies also condition on the mother’s year of birth, which both accounts

for cohort differences in mothers’ socio-economic status and mother’s age at child’s birth. But this

may exacerbate the negative bias.28 In addition, some studies control for mother’s age at first birth

to account for the correlation between birth order and early childbearing. Much of the remaining

between-family variation in birth order then comes from differences in child spacing. To the extent

that spacing between children is related to unobserved family characteristics, the estimates of birth



26
   Note that the common practice to standardize outcomes by birth cohort (or age) may not be enough to account for cohort effects,
since standardization does not hold family size or birth order constant.
27
   In our data, mothers to third-born children are on average born 7.3 years earlier, and had their first child 0.9 years earlier, than
mothers to first-born children, after controlling for dummy variables for family size and child’s year of birth. Mothers to third-born
children also have 0.8 years less schooling, on average, than mothers to first-born children.
28
   Mothers to third-born children where 6.8 years younger when they had their first child compared to mother’s to first-born children,
after controlling for dummy variables for family size, child’s year of birth and mother’s year of birth in our data. They also had 1.3
years less schooling. The net effect of adding the controls for mother’s year of birth depends, however, on (1) the selection into early
childbearing, (2) the cohort trends in mother’s socio-economic status and (3) the effect of mother’s age at child’s birth.

                                                                  14
order may still be biased. In an attempt to reduce any remaining bias, most studies on birth order

add socio-economic controls. In this study, we condition on mother’s educational level when we

estimate equation (1).29

       In our main specification, we include family fixed effects, thereby differencing out any time-

invariant characteristics within a family. This will eliminate any remaining association between

birth order and family background. Formally we estimate the following model:
                                            -                            M
                                                                                                       L
                             !"# = % L +            '(L ) *+"# = , +           01L ) !+*"# = 6 + N# + J"#                    (2)
                                           (./                           1./


where N# is a family fixed effect. We are thus comparing siblings within the same family to

estimate our birth order effects. Note that we are still including indicators for children’s year of

birth, although family size, mother’s year of birth, mother’s age at first birth and mother’s

education drop out.

       Estimating family fixed effects is not feasible in many data sets, since it requires repeated

observations of siblings from the same family along with a family identifier. We therefore propose

a third, less data demanding, specification that yields the same results as the family fixed effects.

The defining characteristic of the family fixed effects estimator is that it exploits only the variation

in birth order within families of the same type. In particular, it compares differences in outcomes

by birth order in families of the same size and with children born in specific years. This can,

however, also be obtained by adding fixed effects for all combinations of family size and sibling’s

year of birth. Formally, we would estimate the following family type fixed effects model:
               -                                M

!"# = % +LL
                    '(LL )   *+"# = , +             01LL ) !+*"# = 6 +
              (./                           1./



29
  The education categories are: less than 9 years of primary education; 9 years of primary education, 1-2 years of upper-secondary
education, 3-4 years of upper-secondary education; 1-2 years of post-secondary education; 3 years or more of post-secondary
education; second stage of tertiary education.

                                                                 15
        ;    A    G    W    V

                                O9>CPQ ) !+*#R = :, !+*#/ = @, !+*#7 = F, !+*#S = T, !+*#- = U + J"#
                                                                                                  LL
                                                                                                     ,                            (3)
      9./ >./ C./ P./ Q./




where !+*#( is the year of birth for a sibling with birth order k in family j.30 Although this estimator

has less stringent data requirements than the family fixed effects estimator, it still balances family

background by birth order.31 It also reduces the number of fixed effects substantially.32 We will use

the family type fixed effects estimator when studying possible mechanisms behind the effects in the

smaller ETF-dataset.

        One identifying assumption that we implicitly are imposing—that we share with all studies

on birth order effects—is that family size is pre-determined, or at least not endogenous to

children’s realized outcomes. For example, if parents followed an optimal stopping rule where they

stopped having children when they had a “bad draw”, we would find negative effects of being later

born even if there were no such birth order effects. We attempt to check how sensitive our

estimates are to violations of the assumption of pre-determined family size by making the

alternative extreme assumption—that all families ideally want to have the same family size but are

following the optimal stopping rule and, because of that, some stop before reaching that size. For

these families, we then impute the “missing”—or unobserved—child and estimate birth order

effects; we are thus bounding the potential bias induced by our original assumption.

        More specifically, we take advantage of the fact that, in Sweden, there is a strong two-child

norm, and we therefore investigate how the effect of being second-born would have changed if



30
   We set year of birth to zero when birth order exceeds family size.
31
   For example, for the family type with two children born 1970 and 1973, the first-born children born in 1970 will on average have
the same background as the second-born children born in 1973. Since the dummy variables for birth order and year of birth are exactly
collinear with the same family type, the cohort effects are identified by comparing the within-family difference in personality by birth
order for families with different combinations of children’s year of birth.
32
   In our data, the number of fixed effects is reduced by more than 90 percent in the family type fixed effects estimator compared to
the family fixed effects estimator.

                                                                  16
single-child families had not deviated from this norm.33 To do so, we randomly draw a hypothetical

second child for single-child families under the assumption of no birth order effects.34 The

observed sample of first-born children, along with the randomly drawn second-born children in

single-child families, is then added to the observed sample of first- and second-born children in

larger families, and the effect of being second born is re-estimated. We repeat this procedure 1,000

times and report the average point estimates and standard errors.

        It is likely that this exercise tends to bias the estimates toward zero for two reasons. First, we

draw the potentially missing children from the outcome distribution of first-born children,

implicitly assuming that there are no birth order effects. Second, we assume that all single-child

families would have had another child if the outcome of the first child would have been different.

In practice, all single-child families cannot get a second child for biological reasons even if they

want more children. To restrict the number of missing children somewhat, we also draw second-

born children only until we reach women’s age-specific fertility (Eijkemans et al. 2014).

        Under the assumption that all single-child families would have had another child, and

assuming no birth order effects in the imputation of “missing” children, the estimated effect of

being second-born falls by roughly 30 percent.35 Thus, even under extreme assumptions, the lion’s

share of the effect of the birth order remains. If we instead impose the restriction that older women

are less likely to have additional children, the estimated effects of being second-born fall by about

20 percent. Analogously, if we were to reduce the share of “missing” second-born children further,

we would slowly come back to our baseline estimate. In sum, this exercise suggests that the birth

order effects may be somewhat overstated if families determine family size in response to the


33
   In Sweden, about 80 percent of all families have at least two children, and almost 50 percent have exactly two children.
34
   In practice, we divide families into different strata defined by the interaction between mother’s year of birth (10 classes), mother’s
age at first birth (30 classes), mother’s highest educational level (7 classes) and father’s income (20 classes). Within each stratum, the
missing second-born children are randomly drawn from the outcome distribution of first-born children.
35
   See Appendix Table A6.

                                                                   17
realization of their offspring’s outcomes. Still, it is not possible to rule out quite substantial birth

order effects even in the extreme case that all observed single-child families had endogenously

decided to stop having children.36


IV. Results

In Table 3, Panel A, Column 1, we estimate the relationship between the standardized non-

cognitive ability measure and birth order using the equation (1) model, with the first born as the

omitted category, controlling for dummy variables for family size, child’s year of birth, mother’s

year of birth, mother’s age at first birth and mother’s educational level. Columns 2-5 then estimate

the birth order effects by family size, to allow for heterogeneous effects of birth order by family

size. Two things are clear from these results. First, non-cognitive ability is monotonically declining

by birth order, with second-borns performing worse than first-borns and third-borns performing

worse than second-borns, etc. Second, the patterns are similar when we estimate the model with

family size dummies and when we estimate effects separately by family size.

          In Panel B of Table 3 we show the results from the family fixed effects model presented in

equation (2). We observe very similar patterns to those from the previous specification, although

the magnitudes are larger with family fixed effects. Moving from a first born to a third born child

will result in approximately 0.20 standard deviations lower non-cognitive ability, and the results

are similar when estimated by family size.37 Below we concentrate the analysis on the family fixed

effects model (equation 2) unless otherwise noted.

          Given that cognitive and non-cognitive abilities are correlated (they have a correlation of

0.38 in our data), an obvious issue is whether the effect of birth order on non-cognitive abilities




36
     The results reported below are estimated under the assumption of pre-determined family size.
37
     Appendix Table A7 presents the corresponding results for cognitive abilities.

                                                                  18
merely reflects the effect of cognitive abilities. Table 3 Column 6 addresses this issue by

examining the effects of birth order on non-cognitive abilities, controlling for cognitive ability. The

effects of birth order on non-cognitive ability are reduced by almost 40% with the inclusion of

controls for cognitive ability. However, there remain sizable effects of birth order on non-cognitive

ability, with a move from first born to third born resulting in 0.11 standard deviations decline in

non-cognitive ability.38

        These birth order effects are larger and more stable than those found by Damian and Roberts

(2015) but smaller than the estimates reported in the meta-analysis by Sulloway (2010).39


Occupation40

Another metric of personality is reflected in occupational sorting. Before considering occupation,

we first examine employment probabilities. Table 4 Column 1 shows the estimated relationship

between birth order and employment. Note that in all models we are estimating linear probability

models. There is a clear pattern of declining employment with increasing birth order, with third-

born children almost one percentage point less likely to be employed, from a mean of 0.88. This is

consistent with non-cognitive abilities being especially important for explaining outcomes in the

lower end of the distribution (e.g. Lindqvist and Vestman 2011).41

        We next consider the probability of self-employment; because of the uncertainty in earnings,



38
   Since cognitive abilities is an outcome variable the results should be interpreted with some caution. However, if we instead use the
correlation between the skill measures (0.38), and reduce the estimates with this share, we find very similar results.
39
   To compare our estimates with Damian and Roberts (2015) and Sulloway (2010) we have estimated the partial correlations for first
borns versus later borns. Damian and Roberts find the partial correlation for first versus later borns in the range between 0.00 (Vigor
dimension of Extraversion) and 0.04 (Mature personality dimension of Conscientiousness). The correlations reported by Sulloway are
in the range 0.00 to 0.18, but these estimates may be inflated by contrast effects and stereotype effects since subjects explicitly rate
their personality relative to their older/younger sibling. We find the correlation for birth order to be 0.041 for overall non-cognitive
ability, and we find almost identical birth order effects for each of the non-cognitive sub-measures which suggest that there may not
be any significant cost to considering the aggregate measures of non-cognitive abilities.
40
   While we only report results for men in the text, the corresponding results for women are qualitatively the same. These results are
available in Appendix B.
41
   In appendix Table A1 we see that a one standard deviation increase in non-cognitive skills is associated with 4.25 percentage points
higher employment probability in our data. The corresponding number for cognitive abilities is 3 percentage points.

                                                                  19
self-employment is often considered a decision undertaken by more risk-loving individuals. We

find that later born children are more likely to be self-employed than first-born children. Note,

however, that while self-employment may be viewed as a risk-loving choice, we cannot distinguish

whether the higher likelihood of self-employment is a response to worse labor market prospects or

due to a lower level of risk aversion.

       Columns 3 and 4 consider the likelihood that an individual will be in a management position,

with the first column (Top Managers) the most narrowly defined to include only CEOs and top

executives, and the second column to include a broader definition of managers. It is interesting to

note that, in both cases, we see that later-born children are less likely to be in a management

position, regardless of definition. In fact, first-borns are 28 % more likely to be a Top Manager

compared to third borns. Finally, when we examine creative occupations (Column 5), we see no

such pattern. 42

       To more directly relate occupations to non-cognitive abilities, we next consider the

probability of being in an occupation where success is dependent upon certain personality traits,

with these personality traits taken from the O*NET dataset and measured on a scale of one to five

(with five being most important) and then standardized. The traits we consider are Sociability,

Leadership Ability, Conscientiousness, Agreeableness, Emotional Stability, Extraversion, and

Openness. The five latter characteristics correspond to the Big Five personality traits, which is

often used by psychologists to describe personality. When we examine birth order patterns, we see

in Table 5 that there are very strong birth order effects, with first-born children being in

occupations with the highest requirements along all these dimensions. Interestingly, the magnitudes




42
  For women (see Appendix Table B2) we however find that birth order is positively related to the likelihood of being in a creative
occupation, thus suggesting that later-born daughters may be more creative and open to new experiences than older sisters are. (See
Sulloway 1995 and 1996.)

                                                                20
of the coefficients are quite similar across characteristics. Openness and Conscientiousness appear

to have the strongest relationship to birth order.

        Given our earlier findings, it is not surprising that later born children are in jobs requiring

less Conscientiousness or Leadership ability. However, it is surprising that later-borns are sorted

into occupations that require less Social ability, Agreeableness, Emotional stability and Openness

to experience—characteristics that are associated with later born children by Sulloway (1995,

1996). The pattern that first borns are stronger in all Big Five dimension is however consistent with

the overall findings by Damian and Roberts (2015) 43


Heterogeneous Effects

The next question that we consider is whether the effects of birth order differ depending on the sex

composition of the family. For example, a third born son who is the first male child in the family

may have a different experience, and outcome, from a third born son who is the third male child in

the family. Existing research has been mixed as to the effect of the sex composition of siblings on

children’s outcomes—work by Dahl and Moretti (2004), Butcher and Case (1994), Conley (2000),

and Deschenes (2007) all find some evidence of sex-composition effects, while Kaestner (1997)

and Hauser and Kuo (1998) find no evidence for such heterogeneities.

        Table 6 addresses this issue by allowing for heterogeneous effects of birth order depending

on the sex composition of the family. We parameterize the gender composition of the siblings by

allowing for two birth order variables—the standard measure and then a measure of the birth order

among the boys in the family.44 When we estimate this new specification, again including family

fixed effects and cohort effects, we find that there are differential effects for being born late when



43
   The partial correlations for first borns versus later borns with our data are 0.025 for Social ability, 0.024 for Leadership ability,
0.029 for Conscientiousness, 0.021 for Agreeableness, 0.024 for Emotional stability, 0.025 for Extraversion, 0.033 for Openness.
44
   Using a measure of the share of boys among the older siblings generated very similar results.

                                                                    21
there are more boys among the older siblings. In Column 1 we see that for the composite measure

of non-cognitive ability, the negative effects of birth order are more than twice as large if one is a

later-born boy with older brothers.45 Birth order among boys is also strongly related to

employment, as is shown in column 2. When we examine occupational outcomes in Columns 3-6,

the effects are less consistent. However, it is notable that when we consider creative occupations,

later-born boys are less likely to enter these occupations if they have older sisters while being more

likely to enter these occupations if they have older brothers.46 Unfortunately, we cannot determine

whether these effects are due to parental investments or male peer influence such as increased

sibling competition where younger brothers have problems competing with older brothers.

V. Mechanisms

Given the patterns we observe, we next attempt to disentangle possible underlying mechanisms.


Nature v. Nurture

As noted earlier, there are a number of possible explanations for birth order effects in non-

cognitive abilities. The first is biological: Is there something about the experiences in-utero that

affect the development of a child’s personality?

        To attempt to isolate this mechanism, we exploit two features of our data that allow us to

distinguish biological from social birth order. Building on earlier work by Kristensen and Bjerkedal

(2007), we exploit the fact that some families experienced the death of an older sibling or if an

older sibling was put up for adoption—as a result, the biological birth order is different from the

social birth order in these families. Table 7 presents the results when we estimate the relationship

between biological and social birth order and non-cognitive abilities.47 Column 1 presents the


45
   Table A8 reveals that the effects of birth order among brothers are smaller for cognitive abilities than for non-cognitive abilities.
46
   Appendix Table A9 presents heterogeneity by sex composition for job skill requirements. Point estimates suggest that the negative
effects of birth order tend to be exacerbated among boys with older brothers, but the results are not statistically significant.
47
   When we estimate the results separately for adoptees and deaths, our results are consistent but much less precisely estimated.

                                                                  22
results from the earlier specification with family fixed effects and Column 2 shows results where

social and biological birth order are allowed to vary.48 The results support the idea that the negative

effect of birth order works entirely through social birth order, suggesting that earlier born children

have better outcomes as a result of their postnatal experiences.49 In fact, we find evidence for a

positive effect of biological birth order, which is consistent with studies documenting higher birth

weight and better placenta for later-born children (e.g. Brenøe and Molitor 2015; Juntunen, Laara

and Kauppila 1997; Khong, Adema and Erwich 2003; Wilcox Chang and Johnson 1996). The

overall effect is thus an underestimate of the social influence of the family, as it also incorporates

the positive biological impact of birth order on non-cognitive abilities.


Parental Investment Behavior

Given the environmental nature of birth order effects, we next incorporate survey data of children

at age 13 to examine how parental investments and children’s study habits relate to birth order.

        While there has always been much interest in parental investment in children, there is

surprisingly little compelling work on differences in parental behavior by birth order of children,

most likely due to the stringent data requirements. One of the first convincing studies was done by

Price (2008), who used data from the American Time Use Survey to examine the relationship

between parental time with children and birth order. He finds that parental quality time with

children is declining with birth order. Unfortunately, he is limited in that he does not observe time

spent with each child and is unable to look within families. Monfardini and See (2012) also find

significant birth order effects in parental time, although these differences cannot explain the


48
   To separate social and biological birth order we use families where either a child has died before 3 months of age or where a child
was put up for adoption. For most adopted children we unfortunately cannot observe the exact date for when they were given up.
However, for children born in 1960, 87 (94) percent of adopted children were given up before they were 3 (6) months old. Families
receiving an adopted child are excluded from the analysis. Stillborns are not included in the analysis as they never enter the population
registers. However, children born alive but who die short after delivery – possibly the same day – are included in the analysis. About
2.5 percent of the families in our sample have either lost a child or given one up for adoption.
49
   The results for both cognitive and non-cognitive abilities are reported in Appendix Table A10.

                                                                  23
differences in cognitive abilities across birth order. Hotz and Pantano (2015) document that later-

born children are treated differently in that parents are more strict with first-borns, and the authors

provide a model of reputation in which strict rules for earlier born children spill over into the

behavior of later-born children. In the same vein Avarett, Argys and Rees (2011) find that later

born children receive less adult supervision. Most recently, work by Lehmann, Nuevo-Chiquero

and Vidal-Fernandez (forthcoming) uses data from the Children of the National Longitudinal

Survey of Youth 1979 (NLSY79) and document differences in parental behavior and home

environment that they argue can explain a substantial fraction of the early birth order effects they

document.

       We examine the issue of parental investment behavior in the Swedish context using the ETF-

survey, which is a substantially larger dataset than earlier studies used. The ETF-survey samples

one individual from each household, which makes it impossible to estimate our preferred

specification that includes family fixed effects. However, as discussed above, we can still obtain

balance in family background by birth order by including fixed effects for all possible

combinations of the sibling’s year of birth. For example, if a particular family has children born in

1993, 1995, and 1997, we would create an indicator equal to one if there were three children in the

family and those three children were born in 1993, 1995, and 1997. Although we are not looking

within families, we are still comparing children of different birth order but whose family birth

composition, including children’s ages and child spacing, is exactly the same.50

       The results on children’s effort and parental investments are presented in Table 8. Not

surprising, given our results on non-cognitive abilities and the existing literature on the effects of


50
  To verify that this is equivalent to family fixed effects specifications, Appendix Table A11 presents the results when we estimate
the relationship between birth order and non-cognitive abilities using the two specifications: the first panel presents our preferred
specification with family fixed effects and the second panel uses the family type fixed effects described above. Because we are so
precisely controlling for family type, the results are identical, suggesting that this approach is sufficient to avoid concerns about
omitted variable bias. We have also verified that covariates are balanced when we run the alternative specification.

                                                                24
birth order on education, earnings and cognitive abilities, we find that the number of hours per

week doing homework is declining significantly with birth order, with later born children spending

almost an hour less per week on homework. They are also much less likely to read books, and they

spend substantially more time watching TV or playing on the computer. Interestingly, parents

report that they spend less time discussing school work with later-born children, suggesting that

parental investment falls by birth order. We find no consistent difference in whether or not parents

help with homework or in parental expectations by birth order.

      Taken together, we think these results suggest that parents invest less in later borns; e.g.

being less strict and providing less parental supervision, as suggested by Hotz and Pantano (2015)

and Avarett, Argys and Rees (2011). However, an alternative interpretation is that birth order

affects children’s personality through sibling rivalry, and that parents adapt and treat children

differently.


VI. Conclusion

Popular press is replete with articles and books touting the relationship between birth order and

personality. However, due to data limitations, there is very little convincing evidence documenting

these relationships. Using unique registry data from Sweden on a large sample of men, we are able

to estimate the relationship between birth order and measures of non-cognitive ability and

occupational characteristics, all of which serve as reasonable proxies for individual personalities.

      Consistent with the existing literature on earnings and IQ, we find evidence that non-

cognitive abilities are declining with birth order. This is true across a variety of measures of

abilities, including the Big Five dimensions of personality. These results are somewhat at odds with

the psychology literature, where later borns are expected to be more emotionally stable, open to

experience and social. We also find systematic differences in occupational sorting by birth order—


                                                  25
first-born children are more likely to be managers, while later-born children are more likely to be

self-employed. This occupational sorting is consistent with predictions from evolutionary

psychology where first borns are suggested to dominate younger siblings, whereas later borns are

assumed to use more unorthodox strategies to attract attention.

      The patterns vary by the sex composition of the children—later born boys are particularly

affected when their older siblings are brothers. For non-cognitive ability, the effects of birth order

are more than twice as large if one is later born with older brothers. However, when we consider

creative occupations, later-born boys are less likely to enter these occupations if they have older

sisters while later-born boys are more likely to enter these occupations if they have older brothers.

      When we examine possible mechanisms underlying the observed birth order patterns, we find

support for post-birth environmental factors driving the negative birth order effects, while

biological factors go in the other direction. Additionally, we find that study behaviors vary by birth

order; teenagers are more likely to read books, spend more time on homework, and less time

watching TV if they are first-born. We also find that some parental investments decline by birth

order, which could partly explain the negative effects of birth order on non-cognitive abilities.

However, this does not rule out that other factors—including parental resources or sibling

competition—can help to explain these patterns.




                                                  26
References
Adler, Alfred, Menschenkenntnis (Leipzig: Fischer, 1927).
Adler, Alfred, “Characteristics of the first, second, and third child.” Children 3(1928), 14-52.
Anger, Silke, “Intergenerational Transmission of Cognitive and Non–Cognitive Skills.” In John
      Ermisch, Markus Jäntti, and Timothy Smeeding, eds., From Parents to Children: The
      Intergenerational Transmission of Advantage (New York: Russell Sage Foundation, 2012).
Argys, Laura M., Daniel I. Rees, Susan L. Avarett, and Benjamin Witoonchart, “Birth order and
      risky adolescent behavior.” Economic Inquiry 44 (2006), 215–233.
Averett, Susan L., Laura M. Argys, and Daniel I. Rees, “Older siblings and adolescent risky
      behavior: does parenting play a role?” Journal of Population Economics 24 (2011), 957–978.
Barclay, Kieron J., “A within–family analysis of birth order and intelligence using population
      conscription data on Swedish men.” Intelligence 49 (2015), 134–143.
Becker, Gary S., and Nigel Tomes, “Child Endowments and the Quantity and Quality of Children.”
      Journal of Political Economy 84 (1976), S143–S162
Beer, Jeremy M., and Joseph M. Horn, “The influence of rearing order on personality development
      within two adoption cohorts.” Journal of Personality 68 (2000), 789–819.
Björklund, Anders, and Markus Jäntti, “How important is family background for labor–economic
      outcomes?” Labour Economics 19 (2012), 465–474.
Black, Sandra E., Paul J. Devereux, and Kjell G. Salvanes, “The more the merrier? The effect of
      family size and birth order on children's education.” The Quarterly Journal of Economics 120
      (2005), 669–700.
Black, Sandra E., Paul J. Devereux, and Kjell G. Salvanes, “Older and wiser? Birth order and IQ of
      young men.” CESifo Economic Studies 57 (2011), 103–120.
Black, Sandra E., Paul J. Devereux, and Kjell G. Salvanes, “Healthy (?), Wealthy and Wise: Birth
      Order and Adult Health.” Economics & Human Biology 23 (2016), 27–45.
Bleske–Rechek, April, and Jenna A. Kelley, “Birth order and personality: A within–family test
      using independent self–reports from both firstborn and laterborn siblings.” Personality and
      Individual Differences 56 (2014), 15–18.
Booth, Allison L., and Hiau Joo Kee, “Birth order matters: the effect of family size and birth order
      on educational attainment.” Journal of Population Economics 22 (2008), 367–397.
Borghans, Lex, Angela Lee Duckworth, James J. Heckman, and Bas ter Weel, “The economics and
      psychology of personality traits.” Journal of Human Resources 43 (2008), 972–1059.
Bowles, Samuel, Herbert Gintis, and Melissa Osborne, “The determinants of earnings: A
      behavioral approach.” Journal of economic literature 39 (2001), 1137–1176.
Brenøe, Anne Ardila, and Ramona Molitor, “Birth Order and Health of Newborns: What Can We
      Learn from Danish Registry Data?” CINCH Working Paper 13 (2015).
Bu, Feifei, “Sibling Configurations, educational aspiration and attainment.” ISER Working Paper
      2014–11 (2014).
Butcher, Kristin F., and Anne Case, “The Effect of Sibling Sex Composition on Women’s
      Education and Earnings.” Quarterly Journal of Economics 109 (1994), 531–563.
Carlsson, Magnus, Gordon B. Dahl, Björn Öckert, and Dan–Olof Rooth, “The Effect of Schooling
      on Cognitive Skills.” Review of Economics and Statistics 97 (2015), 533–547.
Carlstedt, Berit, Cognitive Abilities – Aspects of Structure, Process, and Measurement (Göteborg :
      Acta Universitatis Gothoburgensis, 2000).
Cesarini, David, “Family Influence on Productive Skills, Human Capital and Lifecycle Income.”
      Unpublished manuscript, MIT (2009).

                                                27
Conley, Dalton, “Sibling Sex Composition: Effects on Educational Attainment,” Social Science
      Research 29 (2000), 441–457.
Cunha, Flavio, James J. Heckman, Lance Lochner, and Dimitriy Masterov, “Interpreting the
      Evidence on Life Cycle Skill Formation.” In Eric Hanushek, and Finis Welch, eds.,
      Handbook of the Economics of Education, Volume 1 (Amsterdam: North Holland, 2006).
Cunha, Flavio, and James J. Heckman, “The Technology of Skill Formation.” American Economic
      Review 97 (2007), 31–47.
Cunha, Flavio, and James J. Heckman, “Formulating, Identifying, and Estimating the Technology
      of Cognitive and Noncognitive Skill Formation,” Journal of Human Resources 43 (2008),
      729–737.
Dahl, Gordon. B., and Enrico Moretti, “The demand for sons: Evidence from divorce, fertility, and
      shotgun marriage.” NBER Working Paper 10281 (2004).
Damian, Rodica Ioana, and Brent W. Roberts, “The associations of birth order with personality and
      intelligence in a representative sample of U.S. high school students.” Journal of Research in
      Personality 58 (2015), 96–10.
Deschenes, Olivier, “Estimating the Effects of Family Background on the Return to Schooling.”
      Journal of Business & Economic Statistics 25 (2007), 265–277.
Dixon, Melissa M., Carla J. Reyes, Mark F. Leppert, and Lisa M. Pappas, “Personality and birth
      order in large families.” Personality and Individual Differences 44 (2008), 119–128.
Dunkel, Curtis S., Colin R. Harbke, and Dennis R. Papini, ”Direct and indirect effects of birth
      order on personality and identity: Support for the null hypothesis.” The Journal of Genetic
      Psychology 170 (2009), 159–175.
Dunn, Judy, Young children's close relationships: Beyond attachment (Newbury: Sage
      Publications, 1993).
Dunn, Judy, and Penny Munn, “Development of justification in disputes with mother and sibling.”
      Developmental Psychology 23 (1987), 791–798.
Ejikemans, Marinus, Frans van Poppel, Dik Habbema, Ken Smith, Henri Leridon, and Egbert te
      Velde, “To old to have children? Lessons from natural fertility populations.” Human
      Reproduction 29 (2014), 1304–1312.
Ernst, C., and J. Angst, Birth order: Its influence on personality (New York: Springer Verlag,
      1983).
Fredriksson, Peter, Björn Öckert, and Hessel Oosterbeek, “Long–Term Effects of Class Size.”
      Quarterly Journal of Economics 128 (2013), 249–85.
Furman, Wyndol, and Duane Buhrmester, “Children’s perceptions of the personal relationships in
      their social networks.” Developmental Psychology 21 (1985), 1016–1024.
Grinberg, Alice, “The effect of birth order on occupational choice.” Atlantic Economic Journal 43
      (2015), 463–476.
Grönqvist, Erik, and Erik Lindqvist, “The Making of a Manager: Evidence from Military Officer
      Training.” Journal of Labor Economics 34 (2016), 869–898.
Grönqvist, Erik, Björn Öckert, and Jonas Vlachos, “The Intergenerational transmission of cognitive
      and non–cognitive abilities.” Journal of Human Resources (Forthcoming).
Härnquist, Kent, “Evaluation through follow–up: A longitudinal program for studying education
      and career development.” In Carl–Gunnar Janson, ed., Seven Swedish longitudinal studies in
      behavioral science (Stockholm: Forskningsrådsnämnden, 2000).
Hauser, Robert M., and Hsiang–Hui Daphne Kuo, “Does the Gender Composition of Sibships
      Affect Women’s Educational Attainment?’’ Journal of Human Resources 33 (1988), 644–
      657.

                                                28
Havnes, Tarjei, “Sibling rivalry over parental care. Intra–household conflict and child investment.”
      Unpublished manuscript, University of Oslo (2010).
Healey, Matthew D., and Bruce J. Ellis, “Birth order, conscientiousness, and openness to
      experience: Tests of the family–niche model of personality using a within–family
      methodology.” Evolution and Human Behavior 28 (2007), 55–59.
Heckman, James J., and Yona Rubinstein, “The importance of noncognitive skills: Lessons from
      the GED testing program.” American Economic Review 91 (2001), 145–149.
Heckman, James J., Jora Stixrud, and Sergio Urzua, “The effects of cognitive and noncognitive
      abilities on labor market outcomes and social behavior.” Journal of Labor Economics 24
      (2006), 411–482.
Hotz, V. Joseph, and Juan Pantano, “Strategic parenting, birth order and school performance.”
      Journal of Population Economics 28 (2015), 911–936.
Howe, Nina, Christina M. Rinaldi, Melissa Jennings, and Harriet Petrakos, “No! The Lambs Can
      Stay out Because They Got Cozies: Constructive and Destructive Sibling Conflict, Pretend
      Play, and Social Understanding.” Child Development 73 (2002), 1460–1473.
Jefferson, Tyrone Jr., Jeffrey H. Herbst, and Robert R. McCrae, “Associations between Birth Order
      and Personality Traits: Evidence from Self–Reports and Observer Ratings.” Journal of
      Research in Personality 32 (1998), 498–509.
Juntunen, Kaisa, Esa Laara, and Antti Kauppila, “Grand Grand Multiparity and Birth Weight.”
      Obstetrics & Gynecology 90 (1997), 495–499.
Kaestner, Robert, “Are Brothers Really Better? Sibling Sex Composition and Educational
      Achievement Revisited.” Journal of Human Resources 32 (1997), 250–84.
Kantarevic, Jasim,, and Stéphane Mechoulan, ”Birth order, educational attainment, and earnings an
      investigation using the PSID.” Journal of Human Resources 41 (2006), 755–777.
Khong T. Y., E. D. Adema, and J. J. Erwich, “On an anatomical basis for the increase in birth
      weight in second and subsequent born children.” Placenta 24 (2003), 348–353.
Kristensen, Petter., and Tor Bjerkedal, “Explaining the relation between birth order and
      intelligence.” Science 316 (2007), 1717–1717.
Lehmann, Jee–Yeon K, Ana Nuevo–Chiquero, and Marian Vidal–Fernandez, “The Early Origins
      of Birth Order Differences in Children’s Outcomes and Parental Behavior.” Journal of
      Human Resources (Forthcoming).
Lindqvist, Erik, and Roine Vestman, “The Labor Market Returns to Cognitive and Noncognitive
      Ability: Evidence from the Swedish Enlistment.” American Economic Journal: Applied
      Economics, 3 (2011), 101–128.
Marini, Victoria A., and John E. Kurtz, “Birth order differences in normal personality traits:
      Perspectives from within and outside the family.” Personality and Individual Differences 51
      (2011), 910–914.
Michalski, Richard L., and Todd K. Shackelford, “An Attempted Replication of the Relationships
      between Birth Order and Personality.” Journal of Research in Personality 36 (2002), 182–
      188.
Monfardini, Chiara, and Sarah Grace See, “Birth Order and Child Outcomes: Does Maternal
      Quality Time Matter?” IZA Discussion paper 6825 (2012).
Parker, Wayne D., “Birth–order effects in the academically talented.” Gifted Child Quarterly 42
      (1998), 29–38.
Paulhus, Delroy L., Paul D. Trapnell, and David Chen, “Birth Order Effects on Personality and
      Achievement within Families.” Psychological Science 10 (1999), 482–488.


                                                 29
Phinney, Jean S., “The structure of 5–year olds' verbal quarrels with peers and siblings.” Journal of
       Genetic Psychology 147 (1986), 47–60.
Plomin, Robert, and Denise Daniels, “Why are children in the same family so different from each
       other?” Behavioral Brain Science 10 (1987), 1–16.
Plomin, Robert, “Commentary: Why are children in the same family so different? Non–shared
       environment three decades later.” International Journal of Epidemiology 40 (2011), 582–
       592.
Pollet, Thomas V., Pieternel Dijkstra, Dick P.H. Barelds, and Abraham P. Buunk, “Birth order and
       the dominance aspect of extraversion: Are firstborns more extraverted, in the sense of being
       dominant, than laterborns?” Journal of Research in Personality 44 (2010), 742–745.
Price, Joseph, “Parent–Child Quality Time: Does Birth Order Matter?” Journal of Human
       Resources, 43 (2008), 240–265.
Rohde, Percy A, Klaus Atzwanger, Marina Butovskaya, Ada Lampert, Iver Mysterud, Angeles
       Sanchez–Andres, and Frank J. Sulloway, “Perceived parental favoritism, closeness to kin,
       and the rebel of the family: The effects of birth order and sex.” Evolution and Human
       Behavior 24 (2003), 261–276.
Rohrer, Julia M., Boris Egloff, and Stefan C. Schmukle, “Examining the effects of birth order on
       personality.” Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, 1128 (2015), 14224–14229.
Saroglou, Vassilis, and Laure Fiasse, “Birth order, personality, and religion: a study among young
       adults from a three–sibling family,” Personality and Individual Differences 35 (2003), 19–
       29.
Shantz, Carolyn. U., and Willard W. Hartup, “Conflict and development: An introduction. Conflict
       in child and adolescent development.” In Shantz, Carolyn. U., and Willard W. Hartup, eds.,
       Conflict in Child and Adolescent Development (New York: Cambridge University Press,
       1992).
Silles, Mary A, “The implications of family size and birth order for test scores and behavioral
       development.” Economics of Education Review 29 (2010), 795–803.
Sulloway, Frank J., “Birth order and evolutionary psychology: A meta–analytic overview.”
       Psychological Inquiry 6 (1995), 75–80.
Sulloway, Frank J., Born to rebel: Birth order family dynamics, and creative lives (New York:
       Pantheon, 1996).
Sulloway, Frank J., “Birth order.” In Mark A. Runco, and Steven R. Pritzker, eds., Encyclopedia of
       Creativity, Vol. 1 (San Diego: Academic Press, 1999).
Sulloway, Frank J., “Birth order, sibling competition, and human behavior.” In Harmon R
       Holcomb III, ed., Conceptual challenges in evolutionary psychology (Dordrecht: Kluwer
       Academic Publichers, 2001).
Sulloway, Frank J., “Why Siblings Are Like Darwin's Finches: Birth Order, Sibling Competition,
       and Adaptive Divergence within the Family.” In Patricia H. Hawley, ed., The Evolution of
       Personality and Individual Differences (New York: Oxford University Press, 2010).
Statistics Sweden, Longitudinell integrationsdatabas för sjukförsäkrings– och
       arbetsmarknadsstudier (LISA) 1990–2011 (Stockholm: SCB, 2009).
Wilcox, Mark A., Allan M. Z. Chang, and Ian R. Johnson, “The Effects of Parity on Birth Weight
       Using Successive Pregnancies.” Acta Obstetricia et Gynecologica Scandinavica 75 (1996),
       459–463.
Zajonc, Robert B., and Gregory B. Markus, “Family configuration and intellectual development.”
       Psychological Review 82 (1975), 74–88.
Zajonc, Robert B., “Family Configuration and Intelligence.” Science, 192 (1976), 227–236.

                                                 30
Yi, Junjian, James J. Heckman, Junsen Zhang, and Gabriella Conti, “Early Health Shocks, Intra–
      household Resource Allocation and Child Outcomes.” The Economic Journal, 125 (2015),
      F347–F371.




                                               31
Table 1. Descriptive statistics – main data
                                   Full Sample First child Second child Third child Fourth child Fifth child
 Outcome variable:
 Non-cognitive ability                 0.032          0.124         0.035         -0.065        -0.190         -0.302
                                      (0.989)        (0.978)       (0.983)        (0.996)       (0.994)        (0.994)
 Background variables:
 Family size                           2.974         2.708          2.748         3.430          4.265         5.000
                                      (0.897)       (0.799)        (0.815)       (0.639)        (0.441)       (0.000)
 Age, 2010                            43.387        45.268         42.444        41.904         42.645        42.642
                                      (7.853)       (7.460)        (7.985)       (7.827)        (7.427)       (6.661)
 Mother’s age at first birth           0.063         0.064          0.064         0.062          0.060         0.058
                                      (0.011)       (0.011)        (0.011)       (0.010)        (0.009)       (0.009)
 Mother’s years of schooling          10.064        10.303         10.191         9.756          9.039         8.460
                                      (2.720)       (2.717)        (2.719)       (2.698)        (2.480)       (2.147)

 Observations                        564,788        205,619       215,913        103,845        31,851         7,560
Notes: The sample is restricted to men in families with at least two males born 1952-82 with valid draft records. Non-
cognitive abilities are measured at approximately age 18 and standardized by year of draft in the full sample of
draftees. Family size is the number of children to whom the mother has given birth. Mother’s years of schooling are
measured at age 45.




                                                          32
Table 2. Descriptive statistics – employment and occupation data
                                   Full Sample First child Second child Third child Fourth child Fifth child
 Employment and
 occupation:
 Employed                              0.825         0.833          0.829         0.816         0.799         0.793
                                      (0.380)       (0.373)        (0.377)       (0.388)       (0.401)       (0.405)
 Self-employed                         0.057         0.057          0.057         0.059         0.060         0.057
                                      (0.233)       (0.232)        (0.232)       (0.236)       (0.237)       (0.232)
 Top managers                          0.006         0.007          0.005         0.004         0.003         0.002
                                      (0.068)       (0.077)        (0.066)       (0.059)       (0.052)       (0.035)
 Managers                              0.085         0.096          0.084         0.074         0.063         0.051
                                      (0.256)       (0.270)        (0.255)       (0.241)       (0.222)       (0.199)
 Creative Occupations                  0.006         0.006          0.006         0.007         0.007         0.007
                                      (0.073)       (0.069)        (0.075)       (0.079)       (0.076)       (0.079)
 Job Requirements:
 Social ability                       -0.096        -0.036         -0.091        -0.162        -0.261        -0.330
                                      (0.946)       (0.960)        (0.944)       (0.930)       (0.900)       (0.852)
 Leadership ability                    0.065         0.118          0.072         0.005        -0.083        -0.123
                                      (0.990)       (1.010)        (0.983)       (0.971)       (0.960)       (0.893)
 Conscientiousness                    -0.078        -0.016         -0.069        -0.148        -0.260        -0.325
                                      (0.969)       (0.978)        (0.964)       (0.961)       (0.943)       (0.899)
 Agreeableness                        -0.296        -0.248         -0.288        -0.351        -0.432        -0.492
                                      (0.933)       (0.944)        (0.932)       (0.921)       (0.896)       (0.857)
 Emotional Stability                  -0.294        -0.245         -0.285        -0.351        -0.439        -0.493
                                      (0.962)       (0.963)        (0.961)       (0.960)       (0.948)       (0.922)
 Extraversion                         -0.037         0.025         -0.031        -0.105        -0.208        -0.275
                                      (0.970)       (0.988)        (0.966)       (0.950)       (0.918)       (0.862)
 Openness to experience                0.065         0.129          0.073        -0.007        -0.122        -0.183
                                      (0.970)       (0.976)        (0.963)       (0.964)       (0.958)       (0.914)

 Observations                        727,111       267,923        271,373       132,665        44,108        11,042
Notes: The sample is restricted to men in families with at least two males born 1941-74. The information on occupation
covers the 1996-2009 period, and we have calculated the weighted average of the five observations closest to age 45
(but within ages 35-55) for each individual. The information on job requirements is derived from the O*NET
occupational descriptions and all measures are standardized in the full sample of workers. The data on employment and
occupations covers the full sample (employed and non-employed), while the job requirements are restricted to
employed individuals.




                                                         33
Table 3. Effects of birth order on children’s non-cognitive ability
                                                                                                                                               All Families
                                                        Two-child            Three-child    Four-child                    Five-child          w/control for
                                 All families            families             families        families                     families          cognitive ability
                                                                              Panel A: Family size FE
 Second child                       -0.096***             -0.075***           -0.088***       -0.080***                     -0.105***             -0.049***
                                    (0.004)               (0.007)             (0.006)         (0.009)                       (0.018)               (0.003)
 Third child                        -0.157***                                 -0.171 ***
                                                                                              -0.156***                     -0.178***             -0.101***
                                    (0.006)                                   (0.009)         (0.012)                       (0.020)               (0.005)
 Fourth child                       -0.181***                                                 -0.228***                     -0.245***             -0.159***
                                    (0.010)                                                   (0.017)                       (0.024)               (0.008)
 Fifth child                        -0.196***                                                                               -0.314***             -0.215***
                                    (0.016)                                                                                 (0.031)               (0.013)

 R-squared                           0.033                 0.016                 0.025                 0.028                 0.022                 0.159

                                                                                  Panel B: Family FE
                                            ***                   ***
 Second child                       -0.115                -0.111                -0.114***       -0.093***                   -0.126***             -0.061***
                                    (0.004)               (0.008)               (0.006)         (0.010)                     (0.018)               (0.004)
 Third child                        -0.199***                                   -0.224***       -0.194***                   -0.193***             -0.109***
                                    (0.007)                                     (0.011)         (0.014)                     (0.022)               (0.007)
 Fourth child                       -0.247***                                                   -0.290***                   -0.248***             -0.135***
                                    (0.012)                                                     (0.022)                     (0.031)               (0.011)
 Fifth child                        -0.302***                                                                               -0.334***             -0.172***
                                    (0.019)                                                                                 (0.043)               (0.018)

 R-squared                          0.008                 0.009                 0.010                 0.008                 0.009                  0.091
 Observations                      564,788               195,852               226,469               103,574                38,893                564,788
Notes: The sample is restricted to men in families with at least two males born 1952-82 with valid draft records. Non-cognitive abilities are measured at
approximately age 18 and standardized by year of draft in the full sample of draftees. Each column in each panel represents a separate regression. In Panel A
all regressions include dummy variables for child’s year of birth, mother’s year of birth, mother’s age at first birth, and mother’s educational attainment. In
Panel B all regressions control for family fixed effects and dummy variables for child’s year of birth. Omitted category is first child. Robust standard errors are
in parentheses. ***/**/*=the estimates are significantly different from zero at the 1/5/10 per cent level of confidence, respectively.



                                                                                 34
Table 4. Effects of birth order on children’s employment and occupation
                                                                                                                                           Creative
                                         Employed              Self-employed           Top Managers                 Managers              Occupations
 Second child                            -0.010***                 0.006***              -0.0017***                 -0.010***              -0.0002
                                         (0.002)                  (0.001)                (0.0005)                   (0.002)                (0.0005)
 Third child                             -0.017***                 0.008***              -0.0020**                  -0.015***              -0.0001
                                         (0.003)                  (0.002)                (0.0008)                   (0.003)                (0.0008)
 Fourth child                            -0.020***                 0.007***              -0.0018                    -0.016***              -0.0003
                                         (0.004)                  (0.003)                (0.0011)                   (0.004)                (0.0012)
 Fifth child                             -0.022***                 0.006                 -0.0026*                   -0.021***              -0.0006
                                         (0.007)                  (0.004)                (0.0015)                   (0.007)                (0.0018)

 R-squared                                 0.005                    0.001                   0.001                    0.006                    0.001
 Observations                             727,111                  727,111                 521,779                  521,779                  521,779
Notes: The sample is restricted to men in families with at least two males born 1941-74. Columns (3) – (5) are based on occupational data for the 1996-2009
period. We have calculated the weighted average of the five observations closest to age 45 (but within ages 35-55) for each individual, and weighted the
regressions by the inverse of the sampling probability. The data covers both employed and non-employed individuals. Each column represents a separate
regression. All regressions control for family fixed effects and dummy variables for child’s year of birth. Omitted category is first child. Robust standard errors are
in parentheses. ***/**/*=the estimates are significantly different from zero at the 1/5/10 per cent level of confidence, respectively.




                                                                                 35
Table 5. Effects of birth order on sorting into jobs with different skill requirements
                       Social       Leadership       Conscien-                        Emotional
                      Ability         Ability         tiousness     Agreeableness      Stability                             Extraversion        Openness
                             ***             ***              ***              ***
 Second child         -0.064          -0.048           -0.071           -0.048         -0.050***                               -0.064***            -0.075***
                      (0.008)         (0.009)          (0.008)          (0.008)        (0.009)                                 (0.009)              (0.008)
                             ***             ***              ***              ***
 Third child          -0.101          -0.084           -0.116           -0.080         -0.085***                               -0.102***            -0.122***
                      (0.015)         (0.016)          (0.015)          (0.015)        (0.015)                                 (0.015)              (0.015)
                             ***             ***              ***              ***
 Fourth child         -0.141          -0.111           -0.155           -0.102         -0.105***                               -0.142***            -0.161***
                      (0.022)         (0.025)          (0.023)          (0.023)        (0.024)                                 (0.023)              (0.023)
                             ***             **               ***              ***
 Fifth child          -0.141          -0.086           -0.145           -0.095         -0.090**                                -0.137***            -0.155***
                      (0.034)         (0.038)          (0.035)          (0.034)        (0.036)                                 (0.035)              (0.036)

 R-squared                 0.007               0.008                0.006               0.004                0.003               0.008                0.009
 Observations             375,540             375,540              375,540             375,540              375,540             375,540              375,540
Notes: The sample is restricted to men in families with at least two males born 1941-74. The occupational information covers the 1996-2009 period, and have been
matched to the O*NET database to obtain job requirements. All measures are standardized in the full sample of workers. We have calculated the weighted average
of the five observations closest to age 45 (but within ages 35-55) for each individual, and weighted the regressions by the inverse of the sampling probability. Each
column represents a separate regression. All regressions control for family fixed effects and dummy variables for child’s year of birth. Omitted category is first
child. Robust standard errors are in parentheses. ***/**/*=the estimates are significantly different from zero at the 1/5/10 per cent level of confidence,
respectively.




                                                                                36
Table 6. Effects of birth order and siblings’ gender composition on children’s abilities, employment and occupation
                     Non-Cognitive                                                                                Creative
                         Ability          Employed       Self-employed     Top Managers          Managers       Occupations
Birth order:
Second child            -0.052***          -0.001            0.003*            -0.0020**         -0.009***         -0.0025***
                        (0.009)            (0.003)          (0.002)            (0.0009)          (0.003)           (0.0009)
Third child             -0.101***          -0.001            0.005             -0.0020           -0.014**          -0.0031**
                        (0.014)            (0.005)          (0.003)            (0.0014)          (0.005)           (0.0015)
Fourth child            -0.121***           0.001            0.001             -0.0018           -0.014*           -0.0040*
                        (0.020)            (0.007)          (0.004)            (0.0019)          (0.007)           (0.0020)
Fifth child             -0.141***           0.002           -0.002             -0.0026           -0.017*           -0.0049*
                        (0.027)            (0.010)          (0.006)            (0.0024)          (0.010)           (0.0026)
Birth order
among boys:
Second boy              -0.071***          -0.010***         0.003              0.0003           -0.001             0.0026***
                        (0.009)            (0.003)          (0.002)            (0.0009)          (0.003)           (0.0009)
                               ***                ***
Third boy               -0.109             -0.020            0.004             -0.0005           -0.002             0.0028*
                        (0.014)            (0.005)          (0.003)            (0.0015)          (0.006)           (0.0015)
                               ***                ***              ***
Fourth boy              -0.147             -0.030            0.014              0.0006           -0.004             0.0043*
                        (0.023)            (0.008)          (0.005)            (0.0021)          (0.008)           (0.0023)
Fifth boy               -0.257***          -0.009           -0.001             -0.0011           -0.012             0.0058
                        (0.052)            (0.019)          (0.011)            (0.0033)          (0.017)           (0.0060)

R-squared                     0.009                   0.005                   0.001                  0.001                   0.006                   0.001

Observations                 564,788                 727,111                727,111                 521,779                 521,779                 521,779
Notes: The sample in column (1) is restricted to men in families with at least two males born 1952-82 with valid draft records, while the remaining columns are
restricted to men in families with at least two males born 1941-74. Columns (4) – (6) are based on occupational data for the 1996-2009 period. We have calculated
the weighted average of the five observations closest to age 45 (but within ages 35-55) for each individual, and weighted the regressions by the inverse of the
sampling probability. The data covers both employed and non-employed individuals. Non-cognitive abilities are measured at approximately age 18 and standardized
by year of draft in the full sample of draftees. Each column represents a separate regression. All regressions control for family fixed effects and dummy variables for
child’s year of birth. Omitted category is first child. Robust standard errors are in parentheses. ***/**/*=the estimates are significantly different from zero at the
1/5/10 per cent level of confidence, respectively.



                                                                                 37
Table 7. Effects of biological and social birth order on children’s non-cognitive abilities,
exploiting older siblings’ vital and adoption status
                                     Non-cognitive Ability
 Biological birth order
 Second child                    -0.103***              0.065*
                                 (0.004)               (0.036)
 Third child                     -0.202***              0.122**
                                 (0.007)               (0.060)
 Fourth child                    -0.258***              0.179**
                                 (0.011)               (0.082)
                                        ***
 Fifth child                     -0.303                 0.176*
                                 (0.017)               (0.105)
 Social birth order
 Second child                                          -0.170***
                                                       (0.037)
 Third child                                           -0.327***
                                                       (0.060)
 Fourth child                                          -0.441***
                                                       (0.082)
 Fifth child                                           -0.481***
                                                       (0.106)

 R-squared                               0.008                        0.009

 Observations                           442,244                      442,244
Notes: The analysis is restricted to families with at least two males born 1952-82 with valid draft records, and with a
family size of 3-6 children. Non-cognitive abilities are measured at approximately age 18 and standardized by year of
draft in the full sample of draftees. Social birth order is the birth order of the child excluding older siblings who have
been put up for adoption or who died within two months of birth. Each column represents a separate regression. Omitted
category is first child. The regressions control for family fixed effects, dummy variables for year of birth and a dummy
variable for the sixth biological birth order. All families are weighted to match families where at least one child has died
or been put up for adoption with respect to family size, sibling’s gender composition, mother’s year of birth, mother’s
age at first birth and mother’s highest educational level. Robust standard errors are in parentheses. ***/**/*=the
estimates are significantly different from zero at the 1/5/10 per cent level of confidence, respectively.




                                                             38
Table 8. Effects of birth order on pupil effort and parental investments
                                                          Watch TV or                             Parents help            Parents talk              Parents’
                        Homework         Read books      play computer                           with homework            about school            Expectations
                       (hours/week)          (std)        (hours/week)                             (incidence)                (std)                   (std)
 Second child            -0.132            -0.353***          0.193**                                 0.011                 -0.178**                -0.082
                         (0.085)           (0.069)           (0.085)                                 (0.022)                (0.083)                 (0.170)
 Third child             -0.282**          -0.500***          0.418***                                0.013                 -0.326**                 0.076
                         (0.133)           (0.111)           (0.133)                                 (0.036)                (0.136)                 (0.279)
                                **                 ***
 Fourth child            -0.482            -0.513             0.287                                   0.015                 -0.509**                -0.033
                         (0.205)           (0.172)           (0.213)                                 (0.054)                (0.205)                 (0.432)
 Fifth child             -0.996***         -0.769***          1.025***                               -0.077                 -0.689**                -0.300
                         (0.318)           (0.285)           (0.353)                                 (0.091)                (0.290)                 (0.618)

 R-squared                      0.048                   0.147                  0.095                   0.024                  0.027                   0.029
 p-value of F-test              0.033                   0.000                  0.003                   0.660                  0.121                   0.395

 Observations                   31,908                 26,145                  30,799                 32,636                  23,034                  11,829
Notes: The sample is restricted to individuals born 1967, 1972, 1977, 1982, 1987 or 1992 in the ETF-data. Each column represents a separate regression. Omitted
category is first child. All regressions control for the full interaction between all siblings’ year of birth, and dummy variables for child’s year of birth and gender.
Robust standard errors are in parentheses. The p-value reported at the bottom of the columns is for an F-test of the joint significance of the birth order dummy
variables. ***/**/*=the estimates are significantly different from zero at the 1/5/10 per cent level of confidence, respectively.




                                                                                   39
Supplementary material to
Born to Lead? The Effect of Birth Order on Non-Cognitive Abilities
By Sandra E Black, Erik Grönqvist and Björn Öckert

This appendix has three sections. Appendix A shows supporting results; Appendix B shows results
on occupational sorting for women; and Appendix C describe how we use O*NET to obtain
information on personal characteristics.




                                               1
Appendix A. Supporting results


Table A1. Average non-cognitive and cognitive abilities, by occupational status
                                              Non-cognitive Ability        Cognitive Ability

 Employed                                               0.077                     0.090
     [n=823,466]                                       (0.962)                   (0.964)
     whereof:
       - Top managers                                   0.815                     0.752
              [n=5,296]                                (0.854)                   (0.733)
        - Managers                                      0.545                     0.527
              [n=83,297]                               (0.875)                   (0.799)
        - Creative occupations                          0.120                     0.624
              [n=8,903]                                (1.007)                   (0.779)
 Self-employed                                          0.011                    -0.038
     [n=52,775]                                        (0.944)                   (0.922)
 Not employed                                          -0.425                    -0.301
     [n=105,624]                                       (1.104)                   (1.078)

 Observations                                         981,865                   981,865
Notes: The table shows mean (standard deviation) non-cognitive and cognitive abilities for men with different
occupations. The sample is restricted to men born 1952-74 with valid draft records. The occupational data covers the
1996-2009 period. We have taken the observation closest to age 45 (but within ages 35-55) for each individual,
weighted by the inverse of the sampling probability. The number of observations (sum of weights) for each occupation
is given in squared parentheses. Cognitive and non-cognitive abilities are measured at approximately age 18 and
standardized by year of draft in the full sample of draftees.




                                                         2
Table A2. Descriptive statistics in full sample and analysis sample
                                           Full sample               Analysis sample
 Outcome variables:
 Non-cognitive ability                         0.040                       0.032
                                              (0.985)                     (0.989)
 Employed                                      0.829                       0.825
                                              (0.377)                     (0.380)
 Self-employed                                 0.056                       0.057
                                              (0.230)                     (0.233)
 Top managers                                  0.006                       0.006
                                              (0.069)                     (0.069)
 Managers                                      0.070                       0.069
                                              (0.238)                     (0.236)
 Creative Occupations                          0.006                       0.006
                                              (0.074)                     (0.070)
 Background variables:
 Family size                                  2.759                        2.974
                                             (0.859)                      (0.897)
 Age, 2010                                   43.204                       43.387
                                             (8.440)                      (7.853)
 Mother’s age at first birth                 23.410                       23.180
                                             (3.936)                      (3.898)
 Mother’s years of schooling                 10.103                       10.064
                                             (2.726)                      (2.720)

 Observations                               1,102,497                     564,788
Notes: The full sample consists of all males born 1952-82 with valid draft records, while the analysis sample is
restricted to families with at least two males born 1952-82 with valid draft records. The employment and occupation
data are restricted to men born 1952-74. Non-cognitive abilities are measured at approximately age 18 and
standardized by year of draft in the full sample of draftees. The occupation information covers the 1996-2009 period,
and we have calculated the weighted average of the five observations closest to age 45 (but within ages 35-55) for each
individual. Family size is the number of children to whom the mother has given birth. Mother’s years of schooling are
measured at age 45.




                                                           3
Table A3. Wage premiums for individual abilities and job requirements
                                              (1)           (2)          (3)           (4)          (5)
 Individual abilities:
 Cognitive ability                          0.124***                                 0.063***     0.058***
                                           (0.000)                                  (0.000)      (0.000)
 Non-cognitive ability                      0.083***                                 0.050***     0.046***
                                           (0.000)                                  (0.000)      (0.000)
 Job requirements:
 Cognitive ability                                       0.183***      0.116***      0.140***     0.082***
                                                        (0.001)       (0.001)       (0.001)      (0.001)
 Social ability                                          0.053***                    0.044***
                                                        (0.001)                     (0.001)
 Conscientiousness                                                     0.177***                   0.156***
                                                                      (0.002)                    (0.002)
 Agreeableness                                                        -0.268***                  -0.265***
                                                                      (0.002)                    (0.002)
 Emotional Stability                                                  -0.010***                   0.000
                                                                      (0.001)                    (0.001)
 Extraversion                                                          0.225***                   0.221***
                                                                      (0.001)                    (0.001)
 Openness to experience                                               -0.046***                  -0.048***
                                                                      (0.001)                    (0.001)
 R2                                         0.266         0.360        0.427         0.410        0.469
 Observations                              518,159       518,159      518,159       518,159      518,159
Notes: The table shows estimates of the association between log-wages and different individual abilities and job
requirements. The sample is restricted to employed men born 1952-74 with valid draft records. Cognitive and non-
cognitive abilities are measured at approximately age 18 and standardized by year of draft in the full sample of
draftees. The wage and occupation data covers the 1996-2009 period, and have been matched to the O*NET database
to obtain job requirements. The job requirements are standardized in the full sample of workers. We have calculated
the weighted average of the five observations closest to age 45 (but within ages 35-55) for each individual, and
weighted the regressions by the inverse of the sampling probability. Each column represents a separate regression.
Robust standard errors are in parentheses. ***/**/*=the estimates are significantly different from zero at the 1/5/10 per
cent level of confidence, respectively.




                                                            4
Table A4a. Correlation matrix for ability measures obtained from the military draft records
                              Non-cognitive     Cognitive
                                  Ability         Ability
 Non-cognitive ability             1.0000
 Cognitive ability                           0.3756              1.0000

Notes: The sample is restricted to men in families with at least two males born 1952-82 with valid draft records (n=564,788). Cognitive and non-cognitive
abilities are measured at approximately age 18 and standardized by year of draft in the full sample of draftees.




                                                                               5
Table A4b. Correlation matrix for different ability measures obtained from occupation data
                      Social      Leadership      Conscien-                Emotional                                                               Cognitive
                      Ability       Ability       tiousness Agreeableness Stability    Extraversion                               Openness          ability
 Social Ability       1.0000
 Leadership Ability          0.8054           1.0000
 Conscientiousness           0.8978           0.8556           1.0000
 Agreeableness               0.9381           0.7921           0.8910             1.0000
 Emotional stability         0.8612           0.7773           0.8914             0.9470          1.0000
 Extraversion                0.9819           0.8853           0.9208             0.9183          0.8519          1.0000
 Openness                    0.7899           0.8760           0.9195             0.7319          0.7345          0.8538           1.0000
 Cognitive ability           0.6877           0.7112           0.7614             0.6019          0.6309          0.7140           0.8155            1.0000

Notes: The sample is restricted to men in families with at least two males born 1941-74 (n=727,111). The occupation information covers the 1996-2009 period,
and has been matched to the O*NET database to obtain job requirements. All measures are standardized in the full sample of workers. We have taken the
observation closest to age 45 (but within ages 35-55) for each individual, weighted by the inverse of the sampling probability.




                                                                              6
Table A5. Descriptive statistics – ETF-survey
                                            Full Sample           First child        Second child         Third child        Fourth child         Fifth child
Outcome variables:
Homework (hours/week)                           2.352               2.410               2.349               2.269               2.21                2.001
                                               (1.473)             (1.492)             (1.465)             (1.464)             (1.42)              (1.216)
Read books (std)                               -0.009               0.112              -0.085              -0.083              -0.081              -0.172
                                               (0.999)             (1.002)             (0.985)             (0.995)             (1.017)             (1.044)
Watch TV or play computer
(hours/week)                                    2.559               2.481               2.582               2.645               2.700               2.862
                                               (1.477)             (1.454)             (1.465)             (1.503)             (1.617)             (1.757)
Parents help with homework
(incidence)                                     0.823               0.833               0.824               0.808               0.777               0.755
                                               (0.382)             (0.373)             (0.381)             (0.394)             (0.416)             (0.431)
Parents talk about school (std)                -0.006               0.033              -0.018              -0.064              -0.052              -0.107
                                               (0.993)             (0.984)             (0.995)             (1.002)             (1.014)             (1.040)
Parents’ expectations (std)                    -0.032              -0.023              -0.033              -0.033              -0.100              -0.112
                                               (0.986)             (0.992)             (0.985)             (0.986)             (0.949)             (0.950)

Observations                                    36,796              14,332              14,988               5,782               1,387                307
Notes: The sample is restricted to individuals born 1967, 1972, 1977, 1982, 1987 or 1992 in the ETF-data. The number of observations varies for different outcome
variables.




                                                                                7
Table A6. Effects of birth order on children’s abilities, simulating “missing” children
                                          Simulating missing second-born
                                        children under the assumption of no
                                                 birth order effects
                                         Simulating all        Simulating
                      Observed data     missing children children likely to
                                                                be missing
                                 Panel A: Non-cognitive Ability
 Second child            -0.109***          -0.076***            -0.084***
                         (0.006)            (0.005)              (0.005)

                                            Panel B: Cognitive Ability
 Second child                  -0.167***             -0.123***         -0.133***
                               (0.005)               (0.005)           (0.005)

 Observations                  349,922                  436,382                 424,908
Notes: The table shows the effects of being second-born in the observed data and then when imputing potentially
“missing” second-born children in single-child families. The sample is restricted to first-born and second-born
children in all families, irrespective of family size. The first column shows the estimated effect of being second-born
in the observed data. In the second and third columns, “missing” second-born children in one-child families have
been randomly drawn from the skill distribution of all first-born children, within a given strata defined by the
interaction between mother’s year of birth (10 classes), mother’s age at first birth (30 classes), mother’s highest
educational level (7 classes) and father’s income (20 classes). In the second column all missing second-born
children have been simulated, while in the third column the number of missing second-born children has been
restricted by the probability of fertility for mothers at different ages. The second and third columns show the average
point estimates and standard errors from 1,000 repetitions. Cognitive and non-cognitive abilities are measured at
approximately age 18 and standardized by year of draft in the full sample of draftees. Each column in each panel
represents a separate regression. Omitted category is first child. All regressions control for family fixed effects and
dummy variables for year of birth. Robust standard errors are in parentheses. ***/**/*=the estimates are significantly
different from zero at the 1/5/10 per cent level of confidence, respectively.




                                                            8
Table A7. Effects of birth order on children’s cognitive ability
                                    Two-child      Three-child                        Four-child          Five-child
                   All families      families        families                          families            families
 Second child        -0.181***       -0.194***        -0.172***                        -0.145***           -0.163***
                     (0.003)         (0.007)          (0.005)                          (0.008)             (0.015)
 Third child         -0.299***                        -0.328***                        -0.278***           -0.283***
                     (0.007)                          (0.010)                          (0.013)             (0.020)
                            ***
 Fourth child        -0.372                                                            -0.390***           -0.383***
                     (0.010)                                                           (0.019)             (0.027)
 Fifth child         -0.422***                                                                             -0.469***
                     (0.017)                                                                               (0.038)

 Observations             564,788             195,852              226,469             103,574               38,893
Notes: The sample is restricted to men in families with at least two males born 1952-82 with valid draft records. Cognitive abilities are measured at
approximately age 18 and standardized by year of draft in the full sample of draftees. Each column represents a separate regression. All regressions control for
family fixed effects and dummy variables for child’s year of birth. Omitted category is first child. Robust standard errors are in parentheses. ***/**/*=the
estimates are significantly different from zero at the 1/5/10 per cent level of confidence, respectively.




                                                                                 9
Table A8. Effects of birth order and siblings’ gender composition on children’s non-cognitive and cognitive abilities
                             Non-Cognitive Ability                Cognitive Ability
Birth order:
Second child               -0.115***         -0.052***        -0.181***         -0.126***
                           (0.004)           (0.009)          (0.003)           (0.007)
                                  ***               ***              ***
Third child                -0.199            -0.101           -0.299            -0.207***
                           (0.007)           (0.014)          (0.007)           (0.012)
Fourth child               -0.247***         -0.121***        -0.372***         -0.250***
                           (0.012)           (0.020)          (0.010)           (0.017)
Fifth child                -0.302***         -0.141***        -0.422***         -0.277***
                           (0.019)           (0.027)          (0.017)           (0.024)
Birth order
among boys:
Second boy                                   -0.071***                          -0.063***
                                             (0.009)                            (0.007)
Third boy                                    -0.109***                          -0.107***
                                             (0.014)                            (0.013)
Fourth boy                                   -0.147***                          -0.149***
                                             (0.023)                            (0.020)
                                                    ***
Fifth boy                                    -0.257                             -0.142***
                                             (0.052)                            (0.044)

R-squared                         0.009                  0.009                  0.017                  0.017

Observations                    564,788                564,788                564,788                564,788
Notes: The sample is restricted to men in families with at least two males born 1952-82 with valid draft records. Non-cognitive and cognitive abilities are measured at
approximately age 18 and standardized by year of draft in the full sample of draftees. Each column represents a separate regression. All regressions control for family
fixed effects and dummy variables for child’s year of birth. Omitted category is first child. Robust standard errors are in parentheses. ***/**/*=the estimates are
significantly different from zero at the 1/5/10 per cent level of confidence, respectively.




                                                                                10
Table A9. Effects of birth order and siblings’ gender composition on occupation skill requirements
                         Social      Leadership      Conscien-                      Emotional
                         ability        ability       tiousness   Agreeableness      Stability   Extraversion                                        Openness
Birth order:
Second child            -0.058***      -0.031          -0.056***     -0.046***        -0.050***    -0.054***                                           -0.053***
                        (0.017)        (0.019)         (0.018)       (0.017)          (0.018)      (0.018)                                             (0.018)
Third child             -0.089***      -0.055*         -0.091***     -0.073***        -0.084***    -0.084***                                           -0.088***
                        (0.028)        (0.031)         (0.029)       (0.028)          (0.029)      (0.029)                                             (0.029)
                                ***            *              ***           **               ***
Fourth child            -0.127         -0.078          -0.128        -0.098           -0.112       -0.122***                                           -0.123***
                        (0.038)        (0.043)         (0.039)       (0.038)          (0.040)      (0.039)                                             (0.040)
                                **                            **            *                *
Fifth child             -0.119         -0.045          -0.109        -0.086           -0.096       -0.107**                                            -0.104*
                        (0.051)        (0.057)         (0.053)       (0.051)          (0.054)      (0.052)                                             (0.053)
Birth order
among boys:
Second boy              -0.006         -0.020          -0.017        -0.003           -0.001       -0.011                                              -0.025
                        (0.017)        (0.019)         (0.018)       (0.017)          (0.018)      (0.018)                                             (0.018)
Third boy               -0.018         -0.034          -0.031        -0.011           -0.002       -0.024                                              -0.037
                        (0.028)        (0.032)         (0.029)       (0.029)          (0.030)      (0.029)                                             (0.029)
Fourth boy              -0.007         -0.022          -0.014         0.012            0.032       -0.012                                              -0.032
                        (0.042)        (0.047)         (0.044)       (0.042)          (0.044)      (0.043)                                             (0.044)
Fifth boy               -0.073         -0.085          -0.091        -0.064           -0.042       -0.086                                              -0.118
                        (0.084)        (0.093)         (0.088)       (0.084)          (0.091)      (0.086)                                             (0.090)

R-squared                     0.007                0.008               0.006               0.004               0.003                0.008               0.010

Observations                 375,540             375,540              375,540             375,540             375,540             375,540              375,540
Notes: The sample is restricted to men in families with at least two males born 1941-74. The occupational information covers the 1996-2009 period, and has been
matched to the O*NET database to obtain job requirements. All measures are standardized in the full sample of workers. We have calculated the weighted average of
the five observations closest to age 45 (but within ages 35-55) for each individual, and weighted the regressions by the inverse of the sampling probability. Each
column represents a separate regression. All regressions control for family fixed effects and dummy variables for child’s year of birth. Omitted category is first child.
Robust standard errors are in parentheses. ***/**/*=the estimates are significantly different from zero at the 1/5/10 per cent level of confidence, respectively.




                                                                                 11
Table A10. Effects of biological and social birth order on children’s non-cognitive and cognitive abilities, exploiting older
siblings’ vital and adoption status
                                 Non-Cognitive Ability                  Cognitive Ability
 Biological birth order
 Second child                 -0.103***          0.065*            -0.160***           0.061*
                              (0.004)           (0.036)            (0.004)            (0.032)
 Third child                  -0.202***          0.122**           -0.299***           0.077
                              (0.007)           (0.060)            (0.006)            (0.053)
 Fourth child                 -0.258***          0.179**           -0.375***           0.118*
                              (0.011)           (0.082)            (0.010)            (0.072)
                                     ***               *                  ***
 Fifth child                  -0.303             0.176             -0.421              0.168*
                              (0.017)           (0.105)            (0.015)            (0.093)
 Social birth order
 Second child                                   -0.170***                             -0.224***
                                                (0.037)                               (0.032)
 Third child                                    -0.327***                             -0.379***
                                                (0.060)                               (0.053)
 Fourth child                                   -0.441***                             -0.497***
                                                (0.082)                               (0.072)
                                                       ***
 Fifth child                                    -0.481                                -0.594***
                                                (0.106)                               (0.094)

R-squared                             0.008                  0.009                     0.017                 0.017

Observations                        442,244                 442,244                   442,244               442,244
Notes: The analysis is restricted to families with at least two males born 1952-82 with valid draft records, and with a family size of 3-6 children. Cognitive and non-
cognitive abilities are measured at approximately age 18 and standardized by year of draft in the full sample of draftees. Social birth order is the birth order of the
child excluding older siblings who have been put up for adoption, who were still born or who died within two months of birth. Each column represents a separate
regression. Omitted category is first child. The regressions control for family fixed effects, dummy variables for year of birth and a dummy variable for the sixth
biological birth order. Robust standard errors are in parentheses. ***/**/*=the estimates are significantly different from zero at the 1/5/10 per cent level of
confidence, respectively.




                                                                                 12
Table A11. Effects of birth order on children’s non-cognitive ability
                                                Two-child             Three-child                                 Four-child                 Five-child
                           All families          families              families                                    families                   families
                                                                Panel A: Family FE
 Second child                -0.115***            -0.111***             -0.114***                                   -0.093***                  -0.126***
                             (0.005)              (0.009)               (0.007)                                     (0.011)                    (0.019)
 Third child                 -0.199***                                  -0.224***                                   -0.194***                  -0.193***
                             (0.008)                                    (0.013)                                     (0.016)                    (0.024)
 Fourth child                -0.247***                                                                              -0.290***                  -0.248***
                             (0.013)                                                                                (0.024)                    (0.032)
 Fifth child                 -0.302***                                                                                                         -0.334***
                             (0.019)                                                                                                           (0.045)

                                                                              Panel B: Family type FE
                                            ***                        ***
 Second child                       -0.115                     -0.111                  -0.114***                    -0.093***                  -0.126***
                                    (0.004)                    (0.008)                 (0.006)                      (0.010)                    (0.018)
 Third child                        -0.199***                                          -0.224***                    -0.194***                  -0.193***
                                    (0.007)                                            (0.011)                      (0.014)                    (0.022)
 Fourth child                       -0.247***                                                                       -0.290***                  -0.248***
                                    (0.012)                                                                         (0.022)                    (0.031)
 Fifth child                        -0.302***                                                                                                  -0.334***
                                    (0.019)                                                                                                    (0.043)

 Observations                       564,788                   195,852                    226,469                   103,574                     38,893
Notes: The sample is restricted to men in families with at least two males born 1952-82 with valid draft records. Non-cognitive abilities are measured at
approximately age 18 and standardized by year of draft in the full sample of draftees. Each column in each panel represents a separate regression. All regressions
control for dummy variables for year of birth. Family type FE specifications include dummy variables for the full interaction between all siblings’ year of birth.
Robust standard errors are in parentheses. ***/**/*=the estimates are significantly different from zero at the 1/5/10 per cent level of confidence, respectively.




                                                                                13
Appendix B. Results on occupational sorting for women

Table B1. Descriptive statistics, females
                                   Full Sample First child Second child Third child Fourth child Fifth child
 Employment and
 occupation:
 Employed                              0.833         0.844         0.834          0.821         0.810         0.794
                                      (0.373)       (0.363)       (0.372)        (0.383)       (0.392)       (0.404)
 Self-employed                         0.030         0.031         0.030          0.029         0.029         0.029
                                      (0.171)       (0.173)       (0.171)        (0.169)       (0.168)       (0.169)
 Top managers                          0.001         0.001         0.001          0.001         0.001         0.001
                                      (0.027)       (0.030)       (0.027)        (0.025)       (0.025)       (0.023)
 Managers                              0.036         0.039         0.035          0.033         0.029         0.023
                                      (0.165)       (0.173)       (0.164)        (0.158)       (0.148)       (0.131)
 Creative Occupations                  0.009         0.008         0.009          0.010         0.008         0.007
                                      (0.086)       (0.081)       (0.090)        (0.091)       (0.083)       (0.077)
 Job Requirements:
 Social ability                        0.151         0.207         0.153          0.094         0.012        -0.061
                                      (0.963)       (0.973)       (0.959)        (0.952)       (0.943)       (0.930)
 Leadership ability                   -0.004         0.053        -0.001         -0.064        -0.140        -0.210
                                      (0.919)       (0.931)       (0.915)        (0.909)       (0.879)       (0.863)
 Conscientiousness                     0.132         0.199         0.136          0.061        -0.031        -0.117
                                      (0.940)       (0.946)       (0.936)        (0.935)       (0.917)       (0.910)
 Agreeableness                         0.343         0.392         0.342          0.293         0.232         0.168
                                      (0.905)       (0.907)       (0.902)        (0.902)       (0.895)       (0.891)
 Emotional Stability                   0.343         0.388         0.344          0.297         0.239         0.181
                                      (0.865)       (0.855)       (0.863)        (0.875)       (0.879)       (0.888)
 Extraversion                          0.094         0.152         0.098          0.035        -0.049        -0.122
                                      (0.952)       (0.964)       (0.948)        (0.937)       (0.917)       (0.898)
 Openness to experience               -0.004         0.058         0.002         -0.073        -0.165        -0.249
                                      (0.949)       (0.955)       (0.945)        (0.941)       (0.923)       (0.906)

 Observations                        663,749       243,432        246,801       121,712        41,245        10,559
Notes: The sample is restricted to women in families with at least two females born 1941-74. The occupational
information covers the 1996-2009 period, and we have calculated the weighted average of the five observations closest
to age 45 (but within ages 35-55) for each individual. The information on job requirements is derived from the O*NET
occupation descriptions and all measures are standardized in the full sample of workers. The data on employment and
occupations covers to the full sample (employed and non-employed), while the job requirements are restricted to
employed individuals.




                                                         14
Table B2. Effects of birth order on children’s employment and occupation, females
                                                                                                                                  Creative
                               Employed             Self-Employed             Top Managers                 Managers              Occupations
 Second child                  -0.009***                 0.003***               -0.0004**                  -0.005***                0.0009**
                               (0.002)                  (0.001)                 (0.0002)                   (0.001)                 (0.0004)
 Third child                   -0.018***                 0.004***               -0.0006**                  -0.008***                0.0018**
                               (0.003)                  (0.001)                 (0.0003)                   (0.002)                 (0.0008)
 Fourth child                  -0.021***                 0.007***               -0.0006                    -0.009***                0.0017
                               (0.004)                  (0.002)                 (0.0004)                   (0.002)                 (0.0011)
 Fifth child                   -0.032***                 0.008**                -0.0003                    -0.012***                0.0010
                               (0.007)                  (0.003)                 (0.0006)                   (0.003)                 (0.0015)

 R-squared                       0.005                    0.001                    0.001                    0.006                    0.001
 Observations                   663,749                  663,749                  566,521                  566,521                  566,521
Notes: The sample is restricted to women in families with at least two females born 1941-74. Columns (3) – (5) are based on occupation data for the 1996-2009
period. We have calculated the weighted average of the five observations closest to age 45 (but within ages 35-55) for each individual, and weighted the
regressions by the inverse of the sampling probability. The data covers both employed and non-employed individuals. Each column represents a separate
regression. All regressions control for family fixed effects and dummy variables for child’s year of birth. Omitted category is first child. Robust standard errors are
in parentheses. ***/**/*=the estimates are significantly different from zero at the 1/5/10 per cent level of confidence, respectively.




                                                                                 15
Table B3. Effects of birth order on sorting into jobs with different skill requirements, females
                           Social      Leadership      Conscien-         Agree-      Emotional
                          Ability        Ability       tiousness        ableness      Stability                             Extraversion         Openness
                                  ***            ***            ***             ***
 Second child              -0.092         -0.086         -0.094          -0.079        -0.070***                              -0.091***           -0.093***
                           (0.006)        (0.006)        (0.006)         (0.006)       (0.006)                                (0.006)             (0.006)
                                  ***            ***            ***             ***
 Third child               -0.167         -0.157         -0.168          -0.148        -0.130***                              -0.166***           -0.168***
                           (0.011)        (0.011)        (0.011)         (0.011)       (0.011)                                (0.011)             (0.011)
 Fourth child              -0.233***      -0.200***      -0.215***       -0.204***     -0.182***                              -0.228***           -0.213***
                           (0.017)        (0.016)        (0.016)         (0.016)       (0.016)                                (0.016)             (0.016)
 Fifth child               -0.273***      -0.229***      -0.249***       -0.239***     -0.212***                              -0.264***           -0.255***
                           (0.026)        (0.024)        (0.025)         (0.025)       (0.025)                                (0.025)             (0.025)

 R-squared                       0.007              0.008              0.006              0.004              0.003              0.008              0.009
 Observations                   459,846            459,846            459,846            459,846            459,846            459,846            459,846
Notes: The sample is restricted to women in families with at least two females born 1941-74. The occupation information covers the 1996-2009 period and has
been matched to the O*NET database to obtain job requirements. All measures are standardized in the full sample of workers. We have calculated the weighted
average of the five observations closest to age 45 (but within ages 35-55) for each individual, and weighted the regressions by the inverse of the sampling
probability. Each column represents a separate regression. All regressions control for family fixed effects and dummy variables for child’s year of birth. Omitted
category is first child. Robust standard errors are in parentheses. ***/**/*=the estimates are significantly different from zero at the 1/5/10 per cent level of
confidence, respectively.




                                                                                16
Table B4. Effects of birth order and siblings’ gender composition on employment and occupation, females
                                                                                                   Creative
                           Employment       Self-employed     Top managers       Managers        Occupations
Birth order:
Second child                 -0.006**            0.001          -0.0005*         -0.005***         0.0004
                             (0.003)            (0.001)         (0.0003)         (0.002)          (0.0009)
Third child                  -0.013**            0.001          -0.0007          -0.008***         0.0007
                             (0.005)            (0.002)         (0.0005)         (0.003)          (0.0014)
Fourth child                 -0.015**            0.002          -0.0006          -0.008**          0.0004
                             (0.007)            (0.003)         (0.0006)         (0.004)          (0.0018)
Fifth child                  -0.024**            0.003          -0.0003          -0.011**         -0.0003
                             (0.010)            (0.004)         (0.0008)         (0.005)          (0.0023)
Birth order
among girls:                 -0.004              0.002           0.0001          -0.000            0.0006
Second girl                  (0.003)            (0.001)         (0.0003)         (0.002)          (0.0009)
                             -0.005              0.003          -0.0001          -0.001            0.0018
Third girl                   (0.005)            (0.002)         (0.0005)         (0.003)          (0.0014)
                             -0.008              0.008**         0.0000          -0.003            0.0005
Fourth girl                  (0.008)            (0.004)         (0.0008)         (0.004)          (0.0021)
                             -0.016              0.005          -0.0007           0.001            0.0010
Fifth girl                   (0.021)            (0.010)         (0.0009)         (0.010)          (0.0038)
                             (0.019)            (0.010)         (0.0010)         (0.010)          (0.0041)

R-squared                            0.009                   0.001                   0.001                  0.006                   0.001

Observations                        663,749                 663,749                566,521                 566,521                566,521
Notes: The sample is restricted to women in families with at least two females born 1941-74. Columns (3) – (5) are based on occupation data for the 1996-2009
period. We have calculated the weighted average of the five observations closest to age 45 (but within ages 35-55) for each individual, and weighted the regressions
by the inverse of the sampling probability. Each column represents a separate regression. All regressions control for family fixed effects and dummy variables for
child’s year of birth. Omitted category is first child. Robust standard errors are in parentheses. ***/**/*=the estimates are significantly different from zero at the
1/5/10 per cent level of confidence, respectively.




                                                                                17
Table B5. Effects of birth order and siblings’ gender composition on sorting into jobs with different skill requirements, females
                        Social      Leadership      Conscien-        Agree-        Emotional
                        ability        ability       tiousness      ableness        Stability    Extraversion      Openness
Birth order:
Second child           -0.064***      -0.062***       -0.067***     -0.051***       -0.042***      -0.064***       -0.070***
                       (0.013)        (0.012)         (0.012)       (0.012)         (0.012)        (0.012)         (0.012)
Third child            -0.126***      -0.117***       -0.125***     -0.107***       -0.088***      -0.124***       -0.129***
                       (0.021)        (0.019)         (0.020)       (0.020)         (0.019)        (0.020)         (0.020)
                              ***            ***             ***           ***             ***             ***
Fourth child           -0.180         -0.145          -0.154        -0.152          -0.126         -0.173          -0.159***
                       (0.028)        (0.026)         (0.027)       (0.027)         (0.026)        (0.027)         (0.027)
                              ***            ***             ***           ***             ***             ***
Fifth child            -0.220         -0.166          -0.178        -0.186          -0.152         -0.207          -0.192***
                       (0.038)        (0.036)         (0.036)       (0.036)         (0.036)        (0.037)         (0.036)
Birth order
Among girls:
Second girl            -0.032**       -0.028**        -0.031**      -0.032***       -0.032***      -0.031**        -0.027**
                       (0.013)        (0.012)         (0.012)       (0.012)         (0.012)        (0.012)         (0.012)
                              **             **              **            **              **              **
Third girl             -0.044         -0.047          -0.050        -0.045          -0.046         -0.046          -0.046**
                       (0.021)        (0.020)         (0.020)       (0.020)         (0.020)        (0.020)         (0.020)
Fourth girl            -0.066**       -0.080***       -0.091***     -0.063**        -0.076**       -0.072**        -0.079**
                       (0.032)        (0.030)         (0.031)       (0.031)         (0.031)        (0.031)         (0.031)
Fifth girl              0.021         -0.027          -0.045         0.018          -0.005          0.006          -0.035
                       (0.072)        (0.068)         (0.070)       (0.070)         (0.071)        (0.070)         (0.070)

R-squared                     0.007              0.008               0.006              0.004               0.003              0.008               0.010

Observations                 459,846            459,846             459,846            459,846             459,846            459,846             459,846
Notes: The sample is restricted to women in families with at least two females born 1941-74. The occupation information covers the 1996-2009 period, and have
been matched to the O*NET database to obtain job requirements. All measures are standardized in the full sample of workers. We have calculated the weighted
average of the five observations closest to age 45 (but within ages 35-55) for each individual, and weighted the regressions by the inverse of the sampling probability.
Each column represents a separate regression. All regressions control for family fixed effects and dummy variables for child’s year of birth. Omitted category is first
child. Robust standard errors are in parentheses. ***/**/*=the estimates are significantly different from zero at the 1/5/10 per cent level of confidence, respectively.




                                                                                 18
Appendix C. Using O*NET to obtain information on personal characteristics


In order to obtain metrics of personality based of occupation, we use information from the

Occupational Information Network (O*NET) database, developed by the U.S. Department of

Labor, which classifies and describes occupations based on their skill requirements and on the

incumbents’ abilities along several dimensions including tasks, work behavior, abilities, skills, and

work content. For each occupation, O*NET rates the importance of a large number of personal

attributes for success in that occupation (see www.onetcenter.org for more details). With this data,

we obtain information on non-cognitive abilities to the extent that they are rated important for job

performance in the workers’ occupation. In particular, we construct variables capturing the

importance of (1) social abilities and (2) leadership abilities in performing the tasks required in

occupations. We also categorize the personal attributes into the Big Five domains of personality:

Conscientiousness, Agreeableness, Emotional Stability, Extraversion, and Openness.


Linking O*NET to occupation data
The job attributes from O*NET are matched to our data on occupations using the following steps.

First, we merge the occupational codes (SOC 2000) in O*NET version 14.0 to ISCO88, using a

crosswalk table produced by The National Crosswalk Center. Second, we take the employment-

weighted average of the job attributes in O*NET, using US Occupational employment statistics.

Third, we translate the Swedish occupational classification into the ISCO88 using a crosswalk table

from Statistics Sweden. Fourth, we match the data sources together.


Categorizing personal attributes into the Big Five domains of personality

Following Sackett and Walmsley (2014) we categorize the personal attributes into the Big Five

domains of personality by adding the intensity of following elements (element id).

Conscientiousness: Social Perceptiveness (2.B.1.a), Service Orientation (2.B.1.f), Instructing

                                                  19
(2.B.1.e), Dependability (1.C.5.a), Integrity (1.C.5.c), Independence (1.C.6), Initiative (1.C.1.c),

Persistence (1.C.1.b), Achievement/Effort (1.C.1.a), Attention to Detail (1.C.5.b); Agreeableness:

Social Perceptiveness (2.B.1.a), Service Orientation (2.B.1.f), Coordination (2.B.1.b), Negotiation

(2.B.1.d), Instructing (2.B.1.e), Integrity (1.C.5.c), Cooperation (1.C.3.a), Concern for Others

(1.C.3.b), Social Orientation (1.C.3.c); Emotional Stability: Integrity (1.C.5.c), Self Control

(1.C.4.a), Stress Tolerance (1.C.4.b), Adaptability/Flexibility (1.C.4.c); Extraversion: Coordination

(2.B.1.b), Persuasion (2.B.1.c), Negotiation (2.B.1.d), Instructing (2.B.1.e), Social Orientation

(1.C.3.c), Leadership (1.C.2.b); Openness to Experience: Adaptability/Flexibility (1.C.4.c),

Independence (1.C.6), Analytical Thinking (1.C.7.b), Leadership (1.C.2.b), Innovation (1.C.7.a). If

the same element is used to build up more than one domain, we deflate the intensity weight for that

element with the number of times it is used.


Reference to Appendix C
Sackett, P. R., and P. T. Walmsley, (2014). “Which personality attributes are most important in the
  workplace?” Perspectives on Psychological Science, 9, 538–551.




                                                  20
