NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

MALE EARNINGS, MARRIAGEABLE MEN, AND NONMARITAL FERTILITY:
EVIDENCE FROM THE FRACKING BOOM
Melissa S. Kearney
Riley Wilson
Working Paper 23408
http://www.nber.org/papers/w23408

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
May 2017

We are grateful to Phil Levine, Kevin Lang, Seth Sanders, Na’ama Shenhav, and Jim Ziliak for
helpful comments. We also thank our University of Maryland colleagues for many helpful
comments during the applied microeconomics and population center workshops, as well as
seminar participants at the University of Virginia, Boston University, and University of
Kentucky. We gratefully acknowledge financial support from a University of Maryland
Population Research Center seed grant. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and
do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.
© 2017 by Melissa S. Kearney and Riley Wilson. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not
to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.

Male Earnings, Marriageable Men, and Nonmarital Fertility: Evidence from the Fracking
Boom
Melissa S. Kearney and Riley Wilson
NBER Working Paper No. 23408
May 2017
JEL No. I3,J1,J12,J13,J18,R2
ABSTRACT
There has been a well-documented retreat from marriage among less educated individuals in the
U.S. and non-marital childbearing has become the norm among young mothers and mothers with
low levels of education. One hypothesis is that the declining economic position of men in these
populations is at least partially responsible for these trends. That leads to the reverse hypothesis
that an increase in potential earnings of less-educated men would correspondingly lead to an
increase in marriage and a reduction in non-marital births. To investigate this possibility, we
empirically exploit the positive economic shock associated with localized “fracking booms”
throughout the U.S. in recent decades. We confirm that these localized fracking booms led to
increased wages for non-college-educated men. A reduced form analysis reveals that in response
to local-area fracking production, both marital and non-marital births increase and there is no
evidence of an increase in marriage rates. The pattern of results is consistent with positive income
effects on births, but no associated increase in marriage. We compare our findings to the family
formation response to the Appalachian coal boom experience of the 1970s and 1980s, when it
appears that marital births and marriage rates increased, but non-marital births did not. This
contrast potentially suggests important interactions between economic forces and social context.

Melissa S. Kearney
Department of Economics
University of Maryland
3105 Tydings Hall
College Park, MD 20742
and NBER
kearney@econ.umd.edu
Riley Wilson
University of Maryland, College Park
Department of Economics
3114 Tydings Hall
College Park, MD, 20742
wilson@econ.umd.edu

2

I. INTRODUCTION
There is widespread interest among social scientists and policy observers in the declining
rates of marriage among less-educated individuals and the concomitant rise in non-marital
childbearing. In 2014, over 40 percent of all births in the U.S. were to an unmarried mother, with
an even higher rate of 62 percent among non-college educated mothers.1 A leading conjecture as
to why so many less-educated women are choosing motherhood without marriage points to the
weak economic prospects of their male partners. The idea is that changing labor market
structures and economic conditions have adversely affected the economic prospects of less
educated men, making them less “marriageable” from the perspective of the women with whom
they sexually partner. This concept was first posited in the seminal work of Wilson and
Neckerman (1986) and Wilson (1987) who were writing about the rise in non-marital
childbearing among African American women in urban settings. But the rise in non-marital
childbearing is now much more widespread, reflecting a dramatic, steady shift over the past 50
years, and it is no longer a distinctly urban or minority experience.
Though conceptually compelling and generally consistent with empirical patterns, there
is scant empirical evidence about the causal link between male economic status and rates of
marriage or non-marital childbearing. It is very difficult to empirically isolate the causal
relationship of interest because high earning men might be more likely to marry for other
reasons, and places with better male economic opportunities might also be places where more
marriage- or family-inclined individuals choose to live for other reasons. A recent working paper
by Autor, Dorn, and Hansen (2017) provides a notable exception. Exploiting trade shocks during
the period 1990 to 2010, the authors find that a decline in male employment opportunities driven
1

For a recent review of the relevant literature and a conceptual framework for thinking about non-marital
childbearing from the perspective of children’s outcomes, see Kearney and Levine (2016).

3

by import shocks leads to a decline in births, a decline in marriage, a rise in births to teen
mothers, and an increase in the number of children being raised in single-mother families.2
We attempt to shed additional light on the causal relationship between improved labor
market opportunities for less educated men and subsequent fertility and marriage outcomes using
the “fracking boom” as a source of improved wage prospects for less educated men. We
investigate a reverse marriageable men hypothesis, asking if an improvement in the economic
position of men associated with local fracking production leads to a positive effect on marriage
and a corresponding decrease in non-marital birth rates. The notion underlying this empirical
approach is that fracking production occurred in some areas and not others due to pre-existing
geological factors that but for the fracking boom, would not otherwise have had a determinant
effect on subsequent marriage and birth trends.
Our empirical analysis examines the relationship between annual local-area fracking
production between 1997 and 2012 and family formation outcomes among 18 to 34 year olds.
Our baseline models define a local area as a Census Public Use Microdata Area (PUMA) and
econometrically control for fixed PUMA effects, state by year effects, and a set of time-varying
PUMA level characteristics. We use a continuous measure of simulated fracking production
from new wells (described in detail below) at the PUMA/year level as our measure of the extent

2

Earlier work offered some corroborating support for the notion. For example, work by Charles and Luoh (2010)
finds that increased rates of male incarceration due to policy shifts led to decreased rates of marriage in affected
marriage markets. McLanahan and Watson (2011) document that for a given earnings level, men who are lower
ranked among their peers are less likely to be married, perhaps because they view themselves as less “marriageable”.
Kearney and Levine (2014) find that conditional on becoming pregnant, low-socioeconomic status young women
are less likely to marry before having the baby if they live in a place with a greater level of income inequality,
consistent with a story of them being less likely to find their (presumably low-SES) male partners to be desirable
marriage partners. Cherlin et. al (2016) finds that part of that documented relationship appears to be due to fewer
middle-skill male jobs in more unequal places. The ethnographic work of Edin and Kafalas (2011) suggests that
among their sample of interviewed single mothers, an important factor in their decision not to marry the child’s
father relates to a perceived lack of economic security that he would bring to the family.

4

of the localized boom. In the years we study, 611 PUMA in the United States – out of a total of
2,057–had positive fracking production from new wells.
A key element to the strategy of using this context to advance our understanding about
the link between improved male economic opportunity and family formation is that the localized
fracking boom had a first order effect on the earning potential of less-educated males. We begin
by documenting this relationship. We then conduct a reduced form analysis documenting the
relationship between PUMA/year level simulated new fracking production and birth and
marriage outcomes. This analysis does not indicate a shift toward marriage in response to an
increase in the potential wages of less-educated men associated with localized fracking booms.
But, both marital and non-marital births increase significantly. This is consistent with the notion
that children are “normal goods,” offering further support for Becker’s (1960) observation and
confirmation of what previous empirical papers have found (e.g., Black et al, 2013; Dettling and
Kearney, 2014; Lindo, 2010; Lovenheim and Mumford, 2013). We confirm that the results do
not appear to be driven by two potential confounding factors: the sex composition (male/female
ratio) and house prices.
For the sake of comparison, we revisit the family formation response to the Appalachian
coal boom and bust of the 1970s and 1980s, building on the work of Black, Kolesnikova,
Sanders, and Taylor (2013). The data indicate that the increased earnings associated with the coal
boom during those earlier decades led to an increase in marriage rates, an increase in the marital
birth rate, and a decrease in the non-marital birth rate. This contrast in findings between periods
might suggest that as non-marital births have become increasingly common, individuals are more
likely to respond to increased income with increased fertility, whether or not they are married,
and not necessarily with an increased likelihood of marriage. We conclude by speculating that

5

social norms play an important role in determining the response of family formation outcomes to
economic conditions.
II. BACKGROUND ON FRACKING
The exogenous economic shock of fracking production underlying our empirical
approach arises from the technological advancements over time in the mining of shale gas and
tight oil, combined with predetermined geological differences across place in fracking potential.
For thousands of years, shale plays have trapped deposits of natural gas and oil far below the
surface of the earth. It wasn’t until the mid-2000’s that the technology behind hydraulic
fracturing and horizontal drilling made extraction of oil and natural gas from these shale plays
economically profitable, resulting in an explosion of growth and well drilling starting around
between 2004 and 2007. The geographic variation in fracking potential is dependent on the
predetermined location of shale plays and fuel deposits that took shape thousands of years ago.
As these deposits had no economic value and were relatively unknown for many years,
communities and economies grew and developed largely independent of shale play location.
Hydraulic fracturing (also fracing, fracking, hydrofracturing or hydrofracking) is a wellstimulation technique in which the rock is fractured by a pressurized liquid. The process involves
the high-pressure injection of 'fracking fluid' (primarily water, containing sand or other
thickening agents) into a wellbore to create cracks in the deep-rock formations that will release
natural gas, petroleum or brine. This technology has been in use since the 1950s, but
experimentation with the fracking fluid formulation in the late 1990s and early 2000s led to
cheaper, more cost effective applications that were capable of splitting shale rock and releasing
the oil and gas reserves (Gold, 2014). Because shale plays trap oil and gas at a molecular level
(rather than in a pool or pocket) conventional vertical drilling to extract resources from shale

6

plays was not economical. Horizontal drilling was first introduced in the 1980s, allowing wells to
be drilled at an angle following layers of fuel deposits, rather than vertically pass through the
deposits.
Together these two technologies made oil and gas extraction from shale plays both
feasible and economical, resulting in a flurry of drilling and production, and the widely
publicized (in both good and bad terms) “fracking boom”. In the popular press this boom has
been touted as creating tens of thousands of jobs and providing starting salaries at $50,000 for
recent high school graduates, with average earnings in oil and gas between $70,000 and
$80,000.3
Recent papers on the economic impacts of fracking
There are a number of recent papers and working papers investigating the impact of
fracking on wages and employment. Freyer, Mansur, and Sacerdote (2017) show that wage gains
not only accrue in oil and gas extraction industries and the counties where wells are located, but
in other industries and neighboring counties as well. Their estimates imply that every million
dollars of new oil and gas extracted produces $80,000 in wage income, $132,000 in royalty
payments and business income, and 0.85 jobs within the county in the year production occurs.
They find that total economic impacts in the region are three times larger than the countyspecific estimates. They also document that the impacts of new production on wages are
persistent, with 2/3 of the wage income increase persisting two years after the initial shock.
Working papers by
Allcot and Keniston (2014), Eliason & Timmins (2014), Fetzer (2014), and Maniloff and
Mastromanaco (2014) also reveal large wage gains associated with fracking, on the order of 5 to
3

See for example, https://www.minneapolisfed.org/publications/fedgazette/desperately-seeking-workers-in-the-oilpatch, http://www.newyorker.com/magazine/2011/04/25/kuwait-on-the-prairie, or
http://www.nytimes.com/2012/12/26/us/26montana.html?rref=collection%2Ftimestopic%2FGas%20(Fuel).

7

24 percent. A working paper by Cascio and Narayan (2015) suggests that by increasing the
wages of less educated men, fracking has led to an increased propensity among high school age
males to drop out of school.
Wilson (2016) examines the migration response to the higher wages brought about by the
fracking boom. His paper finds a substantial wage migration response in North Dakota, but much
smaller migration elasticities in other states involved in fracking in the West, South Central, and
Rust Belt. Migration increased the population of fracking counties in North Dakota by 12-25
percent, but by less than one percent in fracking counties in other states. His paper explores
potential explanations for the difference. Given the large migration response to the Bakken
region, we exclude North Dakota and Montana from our analysis and focus on states that where
the changes in the population composition was minimal.
There are also a few papers looking at outcomes other than labor market related
outcomes. Muehlenbachs, Spiller, & Timmins (2015) estimate hedonic models of property value
impacts of shale gas development in Pennsylvania and New York. They find that there are
negative impacts on the property valuation of groundwater-dependent homes close to wells, but
small positive impacts for piped-water dependent homes, which they interpret as consistent with
benefits from lease payments. Using data from a fracking county in Pennsylvania,
Gopalakrishnan & Klaiber (2014) also document heterogeneous impacts of shale gas exploration
activity on property values, with a modest reduction in property values for houses within one
mile of a shale well. A recent working paper by Bartik, Currie, Greenstone, and Knittel (2017)
estimates that households’ willingness to pay for allowing fracking ranges from $1,300 to $1,900
per household annually, reflecting a positive net valuation of improved economic conditions over

8

amenity losses (e.g., increased crime and noise.) The current paper fits into this new, innovative
line of research examining the economic and social consequences of the fracking boom.

III. EMPIRICAL APPROACH
We exploit cross-sectional, time-series variation in PUMA-level fracking production to
estimate a causal relationship between local economic shocks and subsequent family formation
outcomes among less-educated individuals. As described above, prior to the technological
innovations of the early 2000s, the oil and gas deposits extracted from shale plays through
fracking were previously unattainable and had no existing economic value. The sudden shock to
local economies when fracking came to their area led to increased labor demand, putting upward
pressure on wages, including the wages of less educated individuals. We thus use the fracking
boom of the late 2000’s as an exogenous positive shock to the potential wages of less-educated
men living in counties that cover a shale play. This gives us an opportunity to estimate a causal
relationship between a local economic shock and family formation decisions, and under certain
assumptions, interpret this as a response to an increase in male earnings.
Following Feyrer et al. (2017) we capture the extent of the fracking boom in county c by
assigning to that county a share of shale play j’s production, based on the existence of
geographic overlap and information about actual oil and gas production measured in dollar
terms. (We subsequently map counties to PUMAs.) The data on well location and production
was provided from a private company DrillingInfo through a special use agreement, as described
in Section IV below.

Because actual production might be correlated with unobservable

characteristics related to economic and demographic conditions, we simulate production using
only geographic variation in county exposure to a shale play interacted with year effects. The

9

year interaction serves to adjust production amounts for time-varying changes in relevant prices
and technology. We estimate equation [1] for all counties over shale plays, and then take the
exponential of the predicted value.

[1]

The main explanatory variables are a set of interactions between an indicator that equals one if
county c intersects shale play j (measured using ArcGIS software, as described below) and an
indicator that equals one in year y. This estimates the average impact of being in shale play j on
new production and allows this relationship to vary over time, as technology and prices change.
The variable new productioncy is the dollar value of oil and gas production from wells drilled in
the current year located in county c. This simulated measure is then aggregated up from the
county/year level to the PUMA/year level. The observed correlation between actual new
production and simulated new production is p=.69, suggesting that geological constraints and
temporal variation play an important role in determining production intensity. To better capture
the intensity of treatment on population outcomes, we divide our measure of simulated new
production by the baseline population in 2000, and scale the measure to represent simulated new
production per capita, in thousands of dollars.
We conduct our analysis at the PUMA-level rather than the county-level for several
reasons. First, public-use Census data on annual level marriage outcomes are not available at
areas smaller than the PUMA. Second, PUMA are constructed to encompass geographic areas
that will maintain a total population over 100,000 between 2000 and 2010. By conducting our

10

analysis at the PUMA-level, we thus avoid comparing sparsely populated counties to more
populous counties. We also avoid the issue of having observation cells with zero or close to zero
marital or non-marital births in any given year. Finally, previous work has suggested that the
labor market impacts of fracking propagate beyond county borders, and this is especially true
among less populated counties. PUMA-level analysis captures these cross-county spillovers.
To begin our analysis, we first estimate “first stage” effects of simulated new production
on the wages of men and women, separately by gender and education. Our baseline specification
is not a two-stage least squares model (2SLS) because of concerns about the exclusion restriction
(as we describe below), so this is not formally a first-stage model in a 2SLS estimation. The
model is described by the following equation:
[2]
The subscript p refers to PUMA and y refers to calendar year. The matrix

is a vector of time-

varying PUMA-level controls which includes the ratio of 18 to 34 year old females to males, the
log average house price, gender specific shares of 18 to 34 year olds Non-Hispanic black,
Hispanic, and Non-Hispanic other, and gender specific shares of 18 to 34 year olds with less than
high school, some college, or a four year college degree. Age specific sex ratios and race by
gender shares are calculated from the Surveillance, Epidemiology, and End Result Program
(SEER) population data, which are derived from the U.S. Census population estimates. The
housing price data is obtained from the Federal Housing Finance Agency three digit zip code
housing price index, which we then link to counties and PUMA and convert to dollars using the
median house value from the 2000 Census. We aggregate up the county level estimates from the
2000 Census and the ACS to calculate PUMA-level age specific gender by education shares.

11

The model also includes controls for time-invariant PUMA effects
year effects,

and state-specific

, to account for fixed differences across PUMA and time trends or shocks in

wage outcomes experienced at the state level.4 As described below, the data show a strong
positive relationship between simulated fracking production and the wages of men, and
especially non-college educated men, in the PUMA. We are not literally estimating this as a first
stage relationship because our main analysis is a reduced form analysis. This is an important
motivating equation, however, showing that the fracking boom had a first order effect on male
wages.
Figure 1 presents a map showing where shale plays are located and plots the total
production value from new wells per capita between 2000 and 2012, in bins, by county.
Production values were uniformly high in North Dakota. Of the 16 counties in North Dakota
with any new production, seven produced over one hundred thousand dollars per capita from
new wells between 2000 and 2012, with an average of $244 thousand per capita over the entire
period. This massive amount of production is due to the large oil reserves in the Bakken shale
play. The other locations with the highest levels of simulated production – over twenty five
thousand dollars per capita between 2000 and 2012 – include counties in Arkansas, Colorado,
Louisiana, Montana, New Mexico, Oklahoma, Pennsylvania, Texas, Utah, and Wyoming. As
noted above, we exclude North Dakota and Montana from our analysis. With that exclusion in
place, there are 88 PUMA with total simulated new production above $25 thousand per capita,
and an additional 516 with positive total simulated new production below $25 thousand per
capita.
4

We do not include PUMA-specific trends in the model because these will (over)control for the response to the
shock, an econometric point discussed by Wolfers (2006). When we do estimate the models with PUMA-specific
trends included, there is still a statistically significant increase in marital birth rates, albeit the point estimate is much
smaller, and there is no longer a discernible increase in the non-marital birth rate. There is still no discernible change
in marriage related outcomes.

12

We then estimate the reduced-form relationship between simulated fracking production
from new wells and subsequent birth and marriage outcomes:

[3]
The key outcome variables of interest (

) are defined at the level of a PUMA p and year y. We

separately examine the non-marital birth share, total births, married births, and non-marital
births. The year is the year of conception. We then consider a set of marriage related outcomes.
Simulated new productionpy is measured in thousands of dollars per capita. The matrix

is the

same vector of time-varying PUMA-level controls included in equation [2]. Again, the model
also includes controls for time-invariant PUMA effects

and state-specific year effects

, to

account for fixed differences across PUMA and time trends or shocks in birth and marriage
outcomes experienced at the state level. Estimation of equation [3] yields estimates of the
reduced-form impact of simulated fracking production on birth and marriage outcomes.
We are ultimately interested in identifying the effect of potential male earnings – an
indicator of the “marriageability” of men, in the conceptual framework of Wilson (1987) –
on family formation outcomes. Ordinary Least Squares (OLS) estimation of the relationship
between family formation outcomes and male earnings would likely yield a biased estimate of
the causal parameter of interest as there are almost certainly unobserved changes across time
within a county that affect both male wages and family formation outcomes. That is why we
instead attempt to gain insight from the reduced form effect of a localized economic shock that
increased the potential wages of men without a college degree.
For this reduced form approach to be informative about the relationship between male
economic prospects and family formation outcomes, it must be true that simulated fracking

13

production only, or at least primarily, affects subsequent trends in birth and marriage outcomes
through its effect on male economic prospects, as captured by measured wages. This condition
might not be satisfied if the fracking induced by the existence of shale play affected other factors
that might affect family formation, such as house prices. (Kearney and Dettling (2014) and
Lovenheim and Mumford (2013) have documented a relationship between house prices and birth
rates.) For this reason, our model includes house prices directly as a control variable. If the
estimated reduced form relationship changes with the inclusion of this variable, it would indicate
that such variables are potentially driving part of the observed relationship between the local
fracking boom and subsequent family formation outcomes. As it turns out, the data do not
indicate that to be the case.
Under strong assumptions, we can use simulated fracking production as an instrument for
male wages, and then relate predicted wages to birth and marriage outcomes. Two potential
confounders that we worry about are an increase in female wages and an increase in unearned
income from land leases and royalties from mineral rights. Nonetheless, for the sake of
comparison to existing studies, in particular Black et al. (2013), and to gauge what the implied
responsiveness would be if all of the effect on family formation came through the channel of
male earnings, we report the results of such an IV analysis below.
IV. DATA
This analysis requires detailed information on local level fracking production, wages, and
birth and marriage outcomes. In this section we provide an overview of the various data sources
we draw upon for our analysis. More detailed information is available in the Data Appendix.
Data on fracking production

14

To construct PUMA level measures of fracking production, we overlay shale play
boundary shapefiles from the Energy Information Administration (EIA) onto U.S. Census
Bureau county boundary shapefiles. ArcGIS software is used to if counties and shale play
intersect.5 These geographic measures are then combined with well level quarterly oil and gas
production data obtained through a restricted access agreement with DrillingInfo, a private firm
that collects lease, permit, and production data on all wells drilled in the United States.6 Relevant
to our data needs, the DrillingInfo data file indicates drill date, quarterly production amount,
reservoir name, drilling direction (vertical or non-vertical), and latitude and longitude, which
allows us to identify the county location of the well. Oil and gas production is reported in barrels
and thousands of cubic feet respectively. We use average annual national prices for oil and gas,
recorded by the Energy Information Administration (EIA), to convert production amounts into
dollar amounts. We then use the Personal Consumption Expenditure (PCE) price index
calculated by the United States Bureau of Economic Analysis to adjust all dollar amounts to year
2010 dollars. Actual production values as well as simulated production described above are then
aggregated up to the PUMA-level using county to PUMA mappings from the U.S. Census. In
large urban counties that contain multiple PUMA, production values are assigned according to
the population share.
Data on wages
We use the Quarterly Workforce Indicators (QWI) as our primary source of wage data.
The QWI is aggregated from the Longitudinal Employer-Household Dynamics (LEHD) microlevel data collected from unemployment insurance earnings data from participating states and
5

A special thanks to University of Maryland Geography students Lisa Boland and Michael Bender for their research
assistance using ArcGIS software.
6
These proprietary data are obtained through an academic use agreement with DrillingInfo, available through their
academic outreach initiative.

15

several other sources (U.S. Census, 2014). The QWI is aggregated to the county level, and can
be tabulated by firm characteristics (industry, size) or worker characteristics (gender, age,
education). When tabulating by worker characteristics, only two levels of tabulation are feasible:
gender by age or gender by education. Because the QWI is constructed from firm employment,
all measures are constructed for jobs, not individual people. Ideally we would have a measure of
potential wages to test the hypothesis that an improvement in male economic prospects
positively affect marriage rates and negatively affect non-marital birth rates. What we observe in
the data – e.g., job-level quarterly wages for jobs held by men or women with various levels of
education – is an imperfect proxy for potential wages of a particular group.7 As with the
production data, the wage data is aggregated up to the PUMA-level by summing total wage
earnings for a given group across all counties in the PUMA and dividing by the total number of
jobs for that same group.
Data on birth outcomes
We use restricted access Vital Statistics data obtained from the National Center of Health
Statistics to construct PUMA level measures of birth outcomes. These files provide the universe
of births between 1997 and 2013 with county identifiers, which we then aggregate to the PUMAlevel. We date births back to the time of conception by subtracting the length of gestation from
the fifteenth of the month of birth. We do this to consider the time the pregnancy decision was
made, or more accurately said, the time the decision was made to contracept or not. Our analysis
sample thus consists of live births that were conceived between 1997 and 2012. For most of our
7

It is conceptually appealing to use a measure of potential wages to test the hypothesis that male economic
prospects are a key driver of marriage and birth decisions. An alternative measure would be actual earnings, which
would account for employment, hours, and wages. This data could be obtained from the American Community
Survey (ACS), but public-use data from the ACS does not include information on geographic units smaller than a
Public Use Micro Area (PUMA), which rules out a county-level analysis. For the sake of exploration, we have
experimented with a commuting zone level analysis using ACS data on actual earnings; the results are generally in
line with what we find in our county level analyses, but less precise.

16

analysis we focus on births to women, ages 18 to 34. During our period of analysis over 71
percent of these births were to single women, consistent with the general finding that births to
young women are births to less-educated women. To construct age specific birth rates, we divide
the number of births by the number of 18-34 year old women in each county from the SEER
gender by age population estimates. We then multiply this by 1000 to be interpreted as birth per
1000 women.
Given our interest in the labor market opportunities and family formation decisions of
low-income, less-educated men and women, we would ideally examine births to non-college
women specifically. Our baseline analysis focuses on total births to 18 to 34 year old women
largely for data reasons. The non-reporting of maternal education in some state/year cells is a
well-known issue with using the natality files for group-level analyses. The NCHS began
requiring states to report maternal education according to a 2003 classification starting in 2009.
For the 20 states that did not comply with this requirement, maternal education is not recorded in
2009. Starting in 2010, some of these states’ education measures were included again. To limit
our sample to states with consistent reporting of maternal education severely limits the sample.
We thus do not limit the sample by education level in our main sets of analysis, but in a
subsequent analysis we examine birth and marriage outcomes for women separately by education
group for the restricted sample.
PUMA level data on marriage outcomes
We use the 2000 Decennial Census and 2005-2011 American Community Survey (ACS)
microdata to construct the PUMA-level share of 18 to 34 year old women who are never
married, married, divorced, and cohabitating (Ruggles, 2015). Recently, many partners that do
not marry still cohabitate, which is imperfectly captured in the Census and ACS. To measure

17

cohabitation we expand the method use previously and count women 18-34 as cohabitating if
they are either the head of the house and an unmarried partner is present, or if they are listed as
an unmarried partern (Shenav, 2016). The 2005-2011 ACS also includes an indicator that equals
one if the individual was married in the last year, which allows us to measure PUMA-level
marriage rates
Analysis sample construction
Our analysis is estimated at the level of PUMA by year. There are 2,057 total PUMA in
the lower 48 states (as compared to 3,109 counties). Two sample restrictions reduce our sample
to 2,044 PUMA. First, given the unique context of fracking in the Bakken region, in particular
the migration response documented in Wilson (2016), we exclude the 12 PUMA in North Dakota
and Montana. Second, we exclude the PUMA with the highest level of simulated new
production, which corresponds to Webb County, TX. Simulated production in this PUMA was
over 125 percent larger than the second highest producing PUMA, and it is excluded to limit the
influence of outliers.
The final sample consists of a balanced panel of 2,044 PUMA observed over the 16 years
from 1997 to 2012.8 PUMA in our analysis sample with any simulated new production are
located in the following 26 states: Alabama, Arkansas, California, Colorado, Georgia, Illinois,
Indiana, Kansas, Kentucky, Maryland, Michigan, Mississippi, Missouri, Nebraska, New Jersey,
New Mexico, New York, Ohio, Oklahoma, Pennsylvania, Tennessee, Texas, Utah, Virginia,
West Virginia, and Wyoming. Eight of these states (Alabama, Georgia, Illinois, Indiana,
Maryland, Missouri, NJ, and Tennessee) do not have any actual fracking production, but wind up
with predicted fracking production because they have land that overlaps with a shale play. For
8

When looking at marriage outcomes from the Census and ACS, we use PUMA-level measures created from the
2000 Census and 2005-2011 ACS.

18

the PUMA with positive simulated fracking that are in states with no actual production (,
simulated production is less than $30 per capita. Recall that our simulation method is intended to
create a measure that is a function of geological attributes, not choice variables like local
ordinances.
Summary Statistics
In Table 1 we present mean values from the year 2000 (before the fracking boom) for our
birth and marriage outcomes, labor market characteristics, and several population characteristics
for both non-fracking and fracking PUMA, where a fracking PUMA is defined as a PUMA with
positive simulated production at any point between 2000 and 2012. The statistics reported in this
table indicate that the fracking counties in our sample are not substantively different from other
counties in the country along the dimensions on which this paper is focused. In particular, preboom birth rates and non-marital birth shares are quite similar across county groups. The nonmarital birth share in 2000 for women age 18 to 34 was 34.2 percent in non-fracking PUMA and
33.4 percent in fracking PUMA. Marriage outcomes are also similar across non-fracking and
fracking PUMA at baseline, although women age 18 to 34 in fracking PUMA are slightly more
likely to have been married at some point in time (1.1 percent less likely to be never married,
one percent more likely to be married, 0.3 percent more likely to be divorced). The share of
women age 18 to 34 married was 37.6 percent in non-fracking PUMA and 38.6 percent in
fracking PUMA. Overall, labor markets and population characteristics were similar between
non-fracking and fracking PUMA, though fracking PUMA had a lower share of college educated
individuals (18.0 versus 15.5 among men and 21.5 versus 18.4 among women, with both
differences being statistically significant.)

19

The number of PUMA with active wells increased dramatically over the sample period.
The count of PUMA in our analysis sample with active fracking wells in a given year rises from
331 in 2004 to 581 in 2012. Summary statistics about fracking production are reported in
Appendix Table A1. Fracking production is highly skewed across fracking PUMA. For instance,
in the year 2012 (the end of our sample period), annual simulated new production for the median
fracking PUMA is three dollars per capita; but the PUMA at the 90th percentile of the production
distribution has simulated production of 71 dollars per capita. Annual simulated new production
among the top 10 percent of producing PUMA averaged between 500 and 600 dollars per capita.

IV. RESULTS
A. Effect of localized fracking boom on labor market outcomes
We begin our empirical analysis by verifying that local fracking activity led to an
increase in potential earnings for non-college educated men. Table 2 reports the results of the
estimation of OLS equation [2], specifying log average earnings in a PUMA/year cell (from the
QWI files) as a function of PUMA/year simulated fracking production. There are 29,471
PUMA/year cell observations in this regression, coming from 45 states.9 The coefficient of
interest in column (1) indicates that an additional thousand dollars of simulated new production
per capita is associated with a statistically significant 3.8 percent increase in average earnings for
men. If we separately look at earnings by educational attainment we see that this increase is
concentrated among non-college men, where an additional thousand dollars of simulated new
production per capita is associated with a statistically significant 4.4 percent increase in average
earnings.

9

Alaska, Hawaii, Montana, North Dakota, South Dakota and Massachusetts are excluded. During this period
earnings data from South Dakota and Massachusetts was not available through the QWI.

20

The increase in earnings is not limited to oil and gas extraction jobs. Column 2 reports
that one thousand dollars per capita of fracking production is associated with a 2.6 percent
increase in average earnings for men in jobs outside those industries, with impacts slightly larger
for non-college men (2.9 percent). This is consistent with positive spillover effects on other
earning opportunities. That is, the fracking boom leading to a localized economic boom that
extends beyond the new fracking jobs created. This finding is consistent with the findings of
Feyrer et. al (2017). In column (3) we see that fracking production is also associated with an
increase in the jobs to population ratio. Specifically, one thousand dollars per capita of fracking
production is associated with a 5.2 percent increase in the number of jobs (standard error 0.2).
This increase in jobs was experienced by both non-college and college educated men. Columns
(4), (5), and (6) report analogous results for regressions estimated for women. In earnings
specifications, the data indicate similar signed effects, with roughly half the estimated magnitude
as for men. However, non-college women do not observe an increase in jobs and college
educated women actually observe a small decrease in average earnings. This will be important to
keep in mind when we return to interpreting the results below.
B. Effect of localized fracking boom on birth and marriage outcomes
Having established that local fracking production has a positive effect on the economic
prospects of non-college educated men, as captured by earnings and jobs, we turn to an
estimation of the reduced form relationship between simulated fracking production and birth and
marriage outcomes. We start by looking at the impact on the non-marital birth share, defined as
the share of births that are born to an unmarried mother. A reduction in the non-marital birth
share would be consistent with a reverse marriageable male hypothesis, suggesting that a
localized economic shock that raises male earnings is associated with a decrease in the non-

21

marital birth share. However, to interpret this reduction as a response along those lines, it is
necessary to consider what happened to total births and to marriage rates. If the number of total
births remained constant, then a reduction in the non-marital birth share would reflect a shifting
from non-married births to married births, driven by an increase on the extensive margin of
marriage. As shown in Table 3, this is not what the data reveal.
Table 3 column (1) indicates that an additional thousand dollars of simulated fracking
production per capita leads to a statistically insignificant 0.11 percentage point decrease in the
non-marital birth share. The result in column (2) indicates that a localized fracking boom leads to
an increase in total births. The point estimate implies that one thousand dollar of fracking
production per capita is associated with an increase of 5.96 births per 1000 women (standard
error of 0.96). In the peak years of the boom, simulated production per capita in the most
intensive fracking counties was between $500-$600 per capita, which would suggest that total
births increased by 3-3.6 births per 1000 women, or around three percent. This is consistent with
a positive income effect of income on fertility, as has been found in previous work (for example,
Black et al, 2013; Dettling and Kearney, 2014; Lindo, 2010).
Results reported in Table 3 columns (3) and (4) show that both marital and non-marital
births increased. The point estimates imply a greater proportional increase in marital births, but
the estimated effects are not statistically different. The estimated coefficients are, respectively,
3.57 (standard error of 1.0) and 2.39 (standard error of 0.6). Though this is a reduced form result
and not a direct measure of the elasticity of fertility with respect to income, we know of no
previous work directly comparing marital and non-marital birth responses to the same economic
shock.

22

In Appendix Table A2 we explore the robustness of the estimated birth effects. The
response of both marital and non-marital birth rates is robust to excluding house prices and the
sex ratio in the regression model (column 2). It is also robust to estimating the model unweighted
(column 3), including year fixed effects rather than state by year (column 4), including shale play
by year fixed effects rather than state by year (column 5), and defining the outcome as the natural
log of birth rates (column 6).
We also investigate heterogeneous effects by demographic groups. The results are
reported in Appendix Table A3. Column (1) considers older women, and the results do indicate
that for women ages 35-44, there is an increase in the marital birth rate and a decrease in the nonmarital birth rate. The point estimates in columns (2) through (5) imply that the main effects are
being driven by non-Hispanic whites. There is a sizable increase in both the marital and nonmarital birth rate for non-Hispanic whites, whereas for other race/ethnic groups the effects are
not statistically different from zero. But, for those groups, the birth effects are imprecisely
measured and racial/ethnic differences cannot be confirmed. The final two columns in the table
show that for both the marital and non-marital birth rate, there is an increase in both first and
higher-parity births.
The pattern of results is consistent with a positive income effect on fertility for both
married and unmarried couples, but no obviously with a reverse marriageable men hypothesis.
To gain more insight into this, we look directly at marriage outcomes. Table 4 reports the results
from estimating equation [3] with the dependent variable defined as the percent of women 18 to
34 who are never married, married, divorced, cohabitating, or newly married (married in the last
year). The data give no indication that the economic activity associated with fracking production
led to a reduction in the percent never married (column 1) or an increase in the percent married

23

(column 2) or newly married (column 3). Nor does the data give any indication that divorce fell
(column 4). In fact, although the point estimates are small and not statistically different from
zero, they are all of the opposite sign of what the reverse marriageable men hypothesis would
predict; the direction of the point estimates suggest that the share married and newly married fell
and the share never married and divorced rose. 10 Given the rising secular trend in cohabitation,
we also test to see if the share of women cohabitating rises with simulated production. We find
no evidence of such an effect (column 5).11
We next consider whether the effect of the localized economic shock on fertility and
marriage outcomes varies by social context. In particular, we investigate whether the estimated
effects vary with the baseline non-marital birth share. If a higher rate of non-marital births is
associated with a more accepting social norm than in places where non-married births are less
common, we might expect to see a larger increase in non-marital births in response to the

10 A positive effect on non-marriage and divorce in this context is inconsistent with a reverse
marriageable men hypothesis, and also inconsistent with the predictions of a bargaining model based on
relative wages. The standard model of marriage in the economics literature posits that as female wages
rise relative to male wages, there will be a reduction in marriage, because the returns to marriage are
lower (Becker, 1974). Furthermore, there will be an increase in divorce because the female outside option
has increased (Browning et al, 1994). Shenhav (2016) provides empirical support for this prediction for
the time period 1980 and 2010. Exploiting demand shifts in industry/occupation employment cells as an
exogenous shock to sex-specific wages, she finds that increases in the relative wage of women led to a
decline in the likelihood of marriage for those on the margin of a first marriage. But, here we see that a
local economic shock that had the effect of decreasing the female/male wage ratio potentially led to an
increase in non-marriage and divorce, the opposite of what the bargaining model would predict. A
positive point estimate on divorce is consistent with prior evidence of the pro-cyclicality of divorce (e.g.,
Hellerstein and Morrill, 2011; Amato and Beattie, 2011; and Schaller, 2013).
11

As another check on specification, we consider whether the results are sensitive to using the simulated
production measure versus actual production. The results of using actual production are reported in
Appendix Table A4. The table shows that the pattern of results are similar to our baseline findings: there
is a significant increase in marital and non-marital birth rates with no significant impacts on marriage.
But, the magnitude of the point estimates is greatly attenuated because the simulated measure is much
lower than actual production; an additional one thousand dollars of simulated new production per capita is
associated with a five thousand dollar per capita increase in actual production.

24

positive economic shock associated with fracking in places with higher baseline non-marital
birth shares. As reported in Table 5, the data is consistent with this prediction.
In Table 5, we report the results of estimating equation [3] separately for counties with a
high or low non-marital birth share, where we define those categories as relative to the median
non-marital birth share among women age 18 to 34 in the year 2000, which is 33.6 percent of
births. The results indicate a pattern that is consistent with the social norms prediction stated
above. The impacts on marital and non-marital birth rates are more similar in places where nonmarital births were a larger share of all births and the point estimate on non-marital birth rates is
larger in “high” non-marital birth share PUMA than in “low” non-marital birth share PUMA.
However, some of these relationships are imprecisely estimated and we cannot rule out that
births responded similarly across “high” and “low” places. To push on this further, we also ran
the analysis at the county level (not reported in the table); in that case, the data indicate that the
response of non-marital births in “low” non-marital birth share counties is close to zero and
significantly different than the marital birth response as well as the non-marital birth response in
“high” non-marital birth share counties.12 Though not conclusive of social norm effects, these
patterns of responses are consistent with the notion that social context partially determines the
family formation response to a positive income or earnings shock. We return to this notion when
we explicitly compare the findings from the current fracking context to the experience of the
Appalachian coal boom and bust of the 1970s and 1980s.
12

In specifications not reported in the table, we also estimate the model with an interaction term
between simulated new production and a continuous variable measuring year 2000 county level
non-marital birth share. That specification yielded a statistically insignificant coefficient on the
interaction term of interest. In addition, we estimated the model with an interaction of simulated
new production and year 2000 measure of percent religious, as measured from the Association of
Religion Data Archives county level church membership. That interaction term did not enter the
model with statistical significance for any of the birth or marriage outcomes.

25

C. Alternative specifications
One possible explanation for the lack of a finding of a marriage effect is that any effect of
the positive economic shock associated with fracking on marriage rates might occur with a lag.
This could be because women need time to update their expectations about male economic status
or perhaps to observe whether economic improvements are persistent. (Recall that Freyer et al.
2017 document that the wage increases associated with fracking production show persistence.)
To allow for this possibility, we alternatively specify the regression analysis model as a long
difference. We define the outcome variables to be the difference in the birth or marriage
outcome of interest from 2000 and 2011 and estimate that as a function of total simulated
production in the PUMA between 2000 and 2011. This definition of fracking production is
meant to proxy for the total size of the economic shock during this extended period.
The results of this long-difference specification are reported in Table 6. As with the
annual specification of the regressions, the data indicate a sizable and statistically significant
increase in both the marital and non-marital birth rate. But now the marital birth effect is
statistically larger than the non-marital birth effect. An additional one thousand dollars of
simulated production per capita increased the marital birth rate by 0.8 births per one thousand
women age 18 to 34 and the non-marital birth rate by 0.2 births per one thousand women.
Counter to the marriageable men hypothesis, the long-difference results show an increase in the
percent never married, though there is no discernible change in the percent married, divorced, or
cohabiting. We are hesitant to draw too strong a conclusion from this one coefficient on percent
never married (column 3) and say that marriages fell. But, given the weight of the evidence in
Tables 2 through 6, we are fairly confident in concluding that there is no evidence to suggest that
the economic activity associated with fracking led to an increase in marriage, but there is

26

evidence that the positive income effects associated with the fracking boom led to an increase in
births among both married and unmarried women.
Another possible explanation for the lack of evidence of an increase in marriage is that
the effect is concentrated among less educated women, and since our analysis sample includes all
women age 18 to 34, we are unable to detect the group-specific changes. In Table 7 we report the
results of estimating our baseline birth and marriage regressions separately for women age 18 to
34 with and without a college degree. To do this requires limiting the sample to the subsample of
states that record maternal education in the vital statistics natality files for all years. This results
in a much smaller sample of 31 states plus the District of Columbia, yielding observations from
1,393 PUMAs. Panel A reports the results for all women estimated on this restricted sample.
Panel B reports the results for non-college women and Panel C reports the results for women
with a college degree.
As found with the full sample in the earlier tables, the results in Panel A show
statistically significant increases in the marital birth rate and the non-marital birth rate. Very
similar point estimates are found when the regressions are estimated for non-college educated
women (reported in Panel B). In contrast, for college educated women, the effect on the marital
birth rate is much smaller and the effect on the non-marital birth rate is small and negative. The
estimated impacts in columns (1) and (2) for marital and non-marital birth rates are statistically
different for non-college and college educated women. There are no statistically significant
effects on the marriage related outcomes for either non-college or college educated women.
D. Comparison to the effects of the Appalachian coal boom in the 1970s and 1980s

27

In a paper titled “Are Children Normal?” Black, Kolesnikova, Sanders, and Taylor
(2013) analyze how fertility among married couples responded to the increase in male earnings
in the Appalachian coal-mining region of the United States in the mid-1970s. The Appalachian
coal boom began in the 1970s when energy prices spiked and continued through the 1980s until
energy prices plummeted. Black et al. (2013) exploit variation in county level coal reserves and
yearly energy prices to estimate the causal effect of changes in earnings on marital birth rates.
Specifically, they estimate an IV regression of the marital birth rate in a county as a function of
total county earnings, where county earnings are predicted as a function of the value of coal
reserves in the county. (They estimate the model in first differences.) They motivate and interpret
their analysis as an empirical test of Becker’s (1960) contention that children are normal goods,
meaning that the demand for children increases in response to rising income. Black et al.
estimate that a 10 percent increase in county earnings associated with the coal boom leads to a 7
percent increase in the marital birth rate.
During the time period studied by Black et al., non-marital birth rates were much less
common than they are today. It is thus interesting to consider whether the non-marital birth
response to the coal boom might have been different than what we are observing in the context
of the localized fracking boom. In Table 8, we revisit the fertility response to the Appalachian
Coal Boom by looking at both married and unmarried births. This extension builds directly on
the reduced form results reported in Table 5 which suggested that places with low non-marital
birth shares saw a larger increase in marital births than non-marital births associated with
fracking production, but places with above-median rates of non-marital birth shares saw
similarly large impacts on both marital and non-marital births.

28

We follow the approach of Black et al. in estimating an IV regression of birth rates as a
function of earnings, but define earnings to be per capita and look specifically at PUMA-level
births to women age 18 to 34. For the sake of comparison, we estimate an analogous IV
regression of the relationship between PUMA-level earnings and birth and marriage in the
context of the localized fracking periods using simulated fracking production as a source of
exogenous variation in earnings (using all earnings, not just those recorded for jobs held by
men).
The IV specification requires the strong exclusion restriction assumption that the only
channel through which a localized fracking boom affected marriage and birth outcomes is
through earnings, an assumption which is almost surely violated. Two obvious threats to this
assumption are changes in house prices and changes in sex ratios. But, recall that these variables
are controlled for in our model, so the IV estimate is conditional on those variables. Results
reported in Appendix Table A2 confirm that the inclusion or exclusion of those variables does
not alter the reduced form estimated effect of fracking production in birth outcomes, which
suggests that these factors are not the mechanism through which fracking production is affecting
family formation outcomes. Other potential threats to the validity of the exclusion restriction are
changes in unearned income, changes in female earnings as opposed to male earnings, and
changes in the male/female wage ratio. Conceptually, all of these variables could have a direct
effect on marriage and birth outcomes and are affected by local fracking booms. Without
additional instruments, we are unable to adequately control for these confounding factors. The
estimated effects from this IV analysis should thus be interpreted with caution. Caveats
notwithstanding, we report the results of this IV analysis because it provides a useful benchmark
estimate that can be compared to estimates from the context studied by Black et. al (2013).

29

To conduct this analysis we use PUMA-level per capita earnings, which are aggregated
up from county-level measures provided by the U.S. Bureau of Economic Analysis (BEA). The
QWI data used in our earlier analyses only extends back to the 1990s and hence cannot be used
to revisit the context of the Appalachian Coal Boom. To implement the IV strategy, we use coal
reserve and price measures provided by Black et al. (2013) to instrument for the natural log of
earnings per capita. By looking at the natural log of our outcome measures and the natural log of
earnings we are able to interpret the coefficient as an elasticity estimate.
The estimates reported in Table 8, Panel A, Column (2) imply that a 10 percent increase
in earnings led to a 7.5 percent increase in the marital birth rate among women age 18 to 34. This
is comparable in magnitude to the estimated relationship during the fracking boom, as reported
in Panel B, Column (2). The IV estimate of the relationship between per capita earnings
associated with fracking and marital births implies that a 10 percent increase in earnings led to a
12.4 percent increase in the marital birth rate.
The non-marital birth response is very different between contexts. As reported in Table 7,
Panel A, Column (3), the estimated relationship between earnings and non-married births during
the Appalachian coal boom is negative and significant. A 10 percent increase in earnings
associated with the coal boom led to a 25.5 percent reduction in the non-marital birth rate. Off of
a mean of 12.8, this represents a reduction of 3.3 non-marital births per 1000 women. This
contrasts sharply with the estimated relationship identified from variation in fracking production
in the 2000s. As reported in Panel B, the IV results imply that a 10 percent increase in earnings
associated with fracking production led to a 12.4 percent increase in non-marital births. The data
also indicate a very different marriage response in the earlier and later periods. Column (4)
reports the results of estimating the IV model for the dependent variable “share of women age

30

15-34 never married”. The data suggest that in the earlier period, a 10 percent increase in per
capita earnings was associated with a 9.6 percent reduction in the share of women age 15 to 34
who were never married.13 The point estimate from the later period implies a statistically
insignificant 1.7 percent increase for a 10 percent increase in per capita earnings.
To make a more direct comparison, we estimate these regressions for a common set of
Appalachian PUMA in both periods. Unfortunately sample size limitations precludes a useful
analysis along these lines. The coefficients from estimating the regression model on the three
states from the Black et al. (2013) sample, suggest that during the fracking boom a 10 percent
increase in earnings increased the marital birth rate by an insignificant 5.4 percent (s.e. = 3.7);
increased the non-marital birth rate by a marginally significant 12.5 percent (s.e. = 6.3); and had
no impact on the share never married. The results from estimating the model for the sample of
Appalachian counties during the fracking boom are imprecisely estimated, but are consistent
with an increase in non-marital births and no increase in marriage during this more recent
context. (The point estimates on simulated new production for the key set of outcomes are as
follows: 0.54 (s.e. 0.37) for the marital birth rate; 1.25 (s.e. 0.63) for the non-marital birth rate;
and 0.03 (s.e. 0.59) for the female share never married.)
The contrast of findings between the context of the cool boom and bust of the 1970s and
1980s and the fracking boom of the 2000s is consistent with the notion that social context
matters. In the earlier period, when non-marital births were still far from the norm, couples
responded to the increase in earnings with increased rates of marriage and increased marital
births, but no increase in births outside of marriage. In the later period, both marital and nonmarital births increased significantly in response to the positive economic shock. And unlike
13

We use this modified age range because in the 1970 census there are two age groups available: 15-24 and 25-34.

31

during the Appalachian coal boom, there is no discernible increase in marriage in response to the
positive local economic shock associated with fracking.
Although this evidence is consistent with changing social norms, it is not definitive.
There are other potential explanations for the differential responses observed between periods.
For instance, the coal boom and bust particularly impacted male earnings (per Black et al, 2013).
But, as we saw in Table 2, fracking increased the potential earnings of women as well, albeit to a
lesser extent than for men. An increase in female earnings could mute the positive effect of male
earnings on marriage rates, leading to the null effect found in the later period, and also make it
more financially feasible for an unmarried woman to have a child without a spouse. It might also
be the case that fracking jobs are particularly onerous, so that an increase in earnings for men
directly employed in fracking-related jobs would make them less desirable marriage partners
than would an increase in earnings for men employed in other jobs. We thus view the
comparisons and contrasts of results between Panels A and B in Table 6 interesting, but our
interpretation of them is necessarily speculative.
V. CONCLUSION
The fracking boom of the post 2005 period led to sizable improvements in the earnings
potential of non-college educated men in counties located over geological shale plays. We use
this context as a rare opportunity to investigate whether an increase in the employment and
earnings potential of less educated men leads to an increase in marriage rates and a
corresponding decrease in non-marital births. Our analysis is motivated by an interest in testing
whether the reverse of the marriageable men hypothesis holds – as the economic prospects of
less educated men improves, are couples more likely to marry and are women less likely to have

32

a child outside a marital union? The data suggest that at least in the short term, if we extrapolate
from the experience of the fracking boom, the answer is likely no.
The results of our analysis suggest that local area fracking production led to an increase
in both marital and non-marital births, and no increase in marriage rates. The finding of a
positive birth response is consistent with a positive income effect on births as found in the
previous literature, and yields additional insight by considering marital and non-marital births
separately in the same context. The data also suggest that the marital birth response is larger than
the non-marital birth response in areas with relatively low non-marital birth shares at baseline,
while the marital and non-marital responses are similar in areas with high non-marital birth
shares at baseline. This would be consistent with a role of social norms in driving the family
formation response to a local economic shock.
To further investigate the possibility that social context matters, we have compared the
family formation response to the fracking boom of the 2000s to the family formation response to
the Appalachian coal boom and bust of the 1970s and 1980s. The data indicate that the increased
earnings associated with the coal boom during those earlier decades led to an increase in
marriage rates and marital births, and no increase in non-marital births. In contrast, the increase
in earnings associated with fracking in more recent years led to an increase in both marital and
non-marital births, and no increase in marriage rates. This contrast is consistent with the notion
that the family formation response to economic circumstances depends on social context. The
patterns of results we observe might suggest that as non-marital births become increasingly
common, individuals are more likely to respond to increased income with increased fertility, but
not necessarily with marriage.

33

In conclusion, we find no evidence to support the proposition that as the economic
prospects of less educated men improves, couples are more likely to marry before having
children, as a reverse marriageable men hypothesis might predict. Crucially, this does not imply
that the decline in the economic position of men in certain communities and demographic groups
over the past four decades has not been a primary driver of the increase in non-marital birth rates
and decrease in marriage rates in these communities and groups. It is quite possible that the
reduction in male marriageability among less educated men in earlier decades was the driving
force that led to a decline in marriage and a corresponding rise in non-marital childbearing, but
now that non-marital childbearing has become so commonplace, a new social norm has been set
and an increase in male economic prospects does not have the same effect as it would have in a
different time or place. In other words, economics might have led to a new social structure such
that now we are in a new paradigm. The proposition that individuals respond to economic
circumstances in ways that are shaped by prevailing social norms warrants further empirical
examination.

34

REFERENCES
Allcot, Hunt & Daniel Keniston. 2014. “Dutch Disease or Agglomeration? The Local Economic
Effects of Natural Resource Booms in Modern America,” Working Paper No. 20508, National
Bureau of Economic Research, Cambridge, MA.
Amato Paul and Brett Beattie. 2011. “Does the Unemployment Rate Affect the Divorce Rate: An
Analysis of State Data 1960-2005.” Social Science Research 40(3):704-715
Autor, David, & David Dorn. 2013. “The Growth of Low-Skill Service Jobs and the Polarization
of the US Labor Market,” American Economic Review 103(5): 1553-1597.
Autor, David, David Dorn, and Gordon Hanson. 2017. “When Work Disappears: Manufacturing
Decline and the Falling Marriage-Market Value of Men,” NBER working paper 23173,
February.
Bartik, Alexander, Janet Currie, Michael Greenstone, and Christopher Knittel. 2017. “The Local
Economic and Welfare Consequences of Hydraulic Fracturing,” NBER working paper 23060.
January.
Becker, Gary. 1960. “An Economic Analysis of Fertility,” in Becker, Gary, ed., Demographic
and Economic Change in Developed Countries. Princeton: Princeton University Press.
Becker, 1974. “A Theory of Marriage” in Theodore Shultz, ed., Economics of the Family:
Marriage, Children, and Human Capital. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
Black, Dan, Natalia Kolesnikova, Seth Sanders, & Lowell J. Taylor. 2013. “Are ‘Children
Normal’?” Review of Economics and Statistics, 95(1): 21-33.
Browning, M., F. Bourguignon, P.-A. Chiappori, and V. Lechene (1994): “Income and
Outcomes: A Structural Model of Intrahousehold Allocation,” Journal of Political Economy,
102: 1067–96.
Cascio, Elizabeth & Ayushi Narayan. 2015. “Who Needs a Fracking Education? The
Educational Response to Low-Skill Biased Technological Change,” Working Paper No. 21359,
National Bureau of Economic Research, Cambridge, MA.
Cherlin, Andrew, David Ribar, & Suzumi Yasutake. 2016. “Non-marital first births, marriage,
and income inequality,” American Sociological Review: pp. 1-22.
Charles, Kerwin Kofi, and Ching-Ming Luoh. 2010. “Male incarceration, the marriage market,
and female outcomes.” Review of Economics and Statistics, 92(August): 614–627.
Dettling, Lisa and Melisa S. Kearney. 2014. “House Prices and Birth Rates: The Impact of the
Real Estate Market on the Decision to Have a Baby,” Journal of Public Economics 110: 1-166.

35

Edin, Kathryn, & Maria Kefalas. 2005. Promises I Can Keep: Why Poor Women Put
Motherhood Before Marriage, Berkeley: University of California Press, 1 edition ed.
Eliason, Paul and Christopher Timmins. 2014. “Measuring the Employment Impacts of Shale
Gas Development,” Working Paper. Duke University.
Fetzer, Thiemo. 2014. “Fracking Growth,” Working Paper. Last accessed 11/21/2016:
http://www.trfetzer.com/wp-content/uploads/fracking-local.pdf.
Feyrer, James, Erin Mansur, & Bruce Sacerdote. 2015. “Geographic Dispersion of Economic
Shocks: Evidence from the Fracking Revolution,” Working Paper No. 21624, National Bureau of
Economic Research, Cambridge, MA.
Gold, Russell. 2014. “The Boom: How Fracking Ignited the American Energy Revolution and
Changed the World.” Simon & Schuster Paperbacks. New York , NY.
Gopalakrishnan, Sathya and H. Allen Klaiber. 2014. “Is the Shale Boom a Bust for Nearby
Residents? Evidence from Housing Values in Pennsylvania,” American Journal of Agricultural
Economics, 96(1): 43-66.
Greenstone, Michael and Adam Looney. 2012. “The Marriage Gap: The Impact of Economic
and Technological Change on Marriage Rates,” A Hamilton Project Economic Analysis:
http://www.hamiltonproject.org/assets/legacy/files/downloads_and_links/020312_jobs_greensto
ne_looney.pdf.
Hellerstein, Judith and Melinda Morrill. 2011. “Booms, Busts, and Divorce”. The B E Journal of
Economic Analysis & Policy 11(1):54-54.
Kearney, Melissa, and Phil Levine. 2016. “The Economics of Non-Marital Childbearing and the
“Marriage Premium for Children,” Annual Review of Economics, Forthcoming.
Lindo, Jason M. 2010. “Are children really inferior goods? Evidence from displacement driven
income shocks,” Journal of Human Resources 45(2), 301–327.
Lovenheim, Michael and Kevin Mumford. 2013. "Do Family Wealth Shocks Affect Fertility
Choices? Evidence from the Housing Market," Review of Economics and Statistics (2013) 95:2,
464-475.
Maniloff, Peter & Ralph Mastromonaco. 2014. “The Local Economic Impacts of Hydraulic
Fracturing and Determinants of Dutch Disease,” Division of Economic and Business Working
Paper Series, Colorado School of Mines.
McLanahan, Sara & Tara Watson. 2011. "Marriage Meets the Joneses: Relative Income, Identity,
and Marital Status," Journal of Human Resources, University of Wisconsin Press, vol. 46(3),
pages 482-517.

36

Muehlenbachs, Lucija, Elisheba Spiller, and Christopher Timmins. 2015. “The housing market
impacts of shale gas development,” American Economic Review 105(12), 3633-3659.
Ruggles, Steve, Katie Genadek, Ronald Geoken, Josiah Grover, & Matthew Sobek. 2015.
Integrated Public Use Microdata Series: Version 6.0 [dataset]. Minneapolis: University of
Minnesota. http://doi.org/10.18128/D010.V6.0.
Schaller, Jessamyn. 2012. “For Better if Not for Worse: Marriage and Divorce Over the Business
Cycle,” Journal of Population Economics.
Shenhav, Na’ama. 2016. “What Women Want: Family Formation and Labor Market Responses
to Marriage Incentives,” Job Market Paper. U.C. Davis Mimeo.
U.S. Census Bureau (Census). 2008. “A Compass for Understanding and Using American
Community Survey Data: What General Data Users Need to Know,” U.S. Government Printing
Office, Washington, DC.
U.S. Census Bureau (Census) 2014. Quarterly Workforce Indicators Data. LongitudinalEmployer Household Dynamics Program http://lehd.ces.census.gov/data/#qwi.
U.S. Census Bureau (Census). 2016. American FactFinder, http://factfinder2.census.gov.
Wilson, Riley. 2016. “Moving to Economic Opportunity: the Migration Response to the
Fracking Boom,” Available at SSRN: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2814147.
Wilson, William Julius. 1987. The Truly Disadvantaged: The Inner City the Underclass, and
Public Policy, Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
Wilson, William Julius and Kathryn Neckerman. 1986. “Poverty and Family Structure: The
Widening Gap between Evidence and Public Policy Issues.” In Fighting Poverty: What Works
and What Doesn’t,” ed. Sheldon Danziger

37

Table 1. Summary Statistics for Analysis Sample Public Use Microdata Areas, Year 2000 (pre-fracking boom)
Non-Fracking
PUMA

Fracking
PUMA

103.9
34.2
68.6
35.3

104.1
33.4
69.3
34.7

56.5
37.6
4.1
7.6

55.3
38.6
4.4
7.5

43,295
27,241
79,736
45,997

42,930
26,560
79,803
45,436

62.7
18.0
21.5

64.1
15.5
18.4

Marriage and Birth Outcomes
Total births per 1000, women age 18-34
Non-marital birth share, women 18-34
Marital births per 1000, women age 18-34
Non-marital births per 1000, women 18-34
Percent women 18-34 never married
Percent women 18-34 married
Percent women 18-34 divorced
Percent women 18-34 cohabitating
Labor Market Characteristics
Average Male Non-College Earnings (QWI)
Average Female Non-College Earnings (QWI)
Average Male College Earnings (QWI)
Average Female College Earnings (QWI)
Population Characteristics
Percent 18-34 year olds, White-NH
Percent Men 18-34 with Coll. Degree
Percent Women 18-34 with Coll. Degree

1,440
604
Number of Public Use Microdata Areas (PUMA)
Sources: Data on births comes from the Vital Statistics natality files. Population counts used in the denominator
come from the 2000 Decennial Census. Marital shares come from the 2000 Census. Wage data is obtained from
Quarterly Workforce Indicators (QWI). County population characteristics obtained from U.S. Census Bureau
using data from the 2000 Census and SEER population estimates, which are derived from the U.S. Census
Bureau’s population estimates. See data appendix for details.

38

Table 2. Effect of PUMA-level Simulated New Production on Labor Market Measures, 1997 to 2012
Men
Ln(Average Earnings)py
Exclude Oil & Gas
All Industries
Extraction
(1)
(2)

Women
Ln(Average Earnings)py
Exclude Oil & Gas
All Industries
Extraction
(3)
(4)
(5)
Panel A. All Workers
0.052***
0.019***
0.016***
(0.020)
(0.006)
(0.005)

Natural Log
Jobs/Poppy

0.038***
(0.013)

0.026**
(0.011)

54372
29,471

54129
29,471

0.044***
(0.014)

0.029**
(0.012)

Dependent Means (in levels)
Observations

43626
29,471

43365
29,471

Sim. New Productionpy
(Thousands 2010$ per Capita)

0.006
(0.012)

0.001
(0.011)

51.15
28531
29,471
29,471
Panel C. College Workers
0.048**
-0.014**
(0.023)
(0.006)

Dependent Means (in levels)
Observations

80785
29,466

80586
29,471

61.25
29,466

Sim. New Productionpy
(Thousands 2010$ per Capita)
Dependent Means (in levels)
Observations
Sim. New Productionpy
(Thousands 2010$ per Capita)

52.53
34183
29,471
29,471
Panel B. Non-College Workers
0.048**
0.023***
(0.019)
(0.007)

48004
29,469

Natural Log
Jobs/Poppy
(6)
0.012
(0.010)

34170
29,471

46.86
29,471

0.018***
(0.006)

-0.004
(0.011)

28518
29,471

44.09
29,471

-0.013**
(0.006)

0.038**
(0.019)

47991
29,471

60.47
29,469

Notes: Earnings and job data are from the U.S. Census Bureau Quarterly Workforce Indicators file (QWI). The unit of analysis is the
Public Use Microdata Area (PUMA)/year; the sample consists of the 1,985 PUMA in our analysis sample that participate in the QWI.
All monetary values are inflation-adjusted to 2010 dollars, using the BEA Personal Consumption Expenditure (PCE) index. To be
consistent with regressions estimated in the subsequent birth and marriage models, all regression models reported in this table include
controls for the female/male 18-34 sex ratio, the natural log of the average house price, gender by race shares for 18-34 year olds,
gender by education shares for18-34 year olds, and stateXyear and PUMA fixed effects. Estimates are weighted by the total number of
births to 18-34 year olds in 2000. Standard errors are adjusted for clustering at the PUMA level. *** p<.01, ** p<.05, * p<.1.

39

Table 3. Reduced Form Effect of Simulated New Production on PUMA-level Birth Outcomes for Women 18-34

Sim. New Productionpy
(Thousands 2010$ per Capita)

Percent
Births Non-Maritalpy
(1)

Total
Birth Ratepy
(2)

Marital
Birth Ratepy
(3)

Non-Marital
Birth Ratepy
(4)

-0.11
(0.41)

5.96***
(0.96)

3.57***
(1.00)

2.39***
(0.60)

38.42
101
62.33
38.68
Dependent Means
32,704
32,704
32,704
32,704
Observations
Notes: Birth data from U.S. Vital Statistics Natality Files. The unit of analysis is the public use microdata area (PUMA)/year,
including 2,044 PUMA from 1997 to 2012. In 2000, approximately 76 percent of births to women ages 18-34 were to women with
less than a college degree. Sixty seven percent of marital births and 94 percent of non-marital births were to women with less than a
college degree. The impact of simulated new production on marital and non-marital birth rates is not statistically different. All
monetary values are inflation-adjusted to 2010 dollars, using the Personal Consumption Expenditure (PCE) index. All regression
models include controls for the natural log average house price, the male/female sex ratio age 18-34, gender by race shares for 18-34
year olds, gender by education shares for 18-34 year olds, and state X year and PUMA fixed effects. Estimates are weighted by the
total number of births to 18-34 year olds in 2000. Standard errors are adjusted for clustering at the PUMA level. *** p<.01, ** p<.05,
* p<.1. ***

40

Table 4. Reduced Form Effect of Simulated New Production on PUMA-level Marriage Outcomes for Women Age 18 to 34

Sim. New Productionpy
(Thousands 2010$ per Capita)

Percent
Never Marriedpy
(1)

Percent
Marriedpy
(2)

Percent
Newly Marriedpy
(3)

Percent
Divorcedpy
(4)

Percent
Cohabitatingpy
(5)

1.17
(0.86)

-1.37
(0.85)

-0.22
(0.28)

0.11
(0.29)

0.25
(0.39)

65.90
29.33
0.954
3.338
8.242
Dependent Mean
16,334
16,334
14,287
16,334
16,334
Observations
Notes: All outcomes are at the PUMA level and are constructed from the 2000 Decennial Census and the 2005-2011 5-year ACS
public use microdata because county is only available for large counties in the public use census data. The unit of analysis is the
PUMA/year, including 2,044 PUMA from 2000 and 2005-2011. The share newly married cannot be constructed from the 2000
Decennial Census. All monetary values are inflation-adjusted to 2010 dollars, using the PCE index. All regression models include
controls for the natural log average house price, the male/female sex ratio age 18-34, gender by race shares for 18-34 year olds, gender
by education shares for 18-34 year olds, PUMA and stateXyear fixed effects. Estimates are weighted by the total number of births to
18-34 year olds in 2000. Standard errors are adjusted for clustering at the PUMA level. *** p<.01, ** p<.05, * p<.1. ***

41

Table 5. Reduced Form Effect of Simulated New Production by Baseline Non-Marital Birth Share for Women Age 18 to 34
Above median in 2000

Sim. New Productioncy
(Thousands 2010$ per
Capita)

Below median in 2000

Marital
Birth Ratepy
(1)

Non-Marital
Birth Ratepy
(2)

Percent
Never
Marriedpy
(3)

Marital Birth
Ratepy
(4)

Non-Marital
Birth Ratepy
(5)

Percent
Never
Marriedpy
(6)

2.26***

2.52***

0.63

3.84**

2.21*

2.07

(0.79)

(0.71)

(1.05)

(1.79)

(1.31)

(1.30)

Dependent Means
54.26
45.73
67.83
70.40
31.59
62.80
Observations
16,320
16,320
8,142
16,336
16,336
8,168
Notes: Birth data from U.S. Vital Statistics Natality Files. The unit of analysis is the public use microdata area (PUMA)/year including
2,044 PUMA from 1997-2012 in columns (1)-(3) and (5)-(7) and from 2000 and 2005-2011 in columns (4) and (8). PUMA are
defined as having a high baseline non-marital birth share if the non-marital birth share in 2000 was above the median of 33.6 All
monetary values are inflation-adjusted to 2010 dollars, using the Personal Consumption Expenditure (PCE) index. All regression
models include controls for the natural log average house price, the male/female sex ratio age 18-34, gender by race shares for 18-34
year olds, gender by education shares for 18-34 year olds, and stateXyear and PUMA fixed effects. Estimates are weighted by the total
number of births to 18-34 year olds in 2000. Standard errors are adjusted for clustering at the PUMA level. *** p<.01, ** p<.05, *
p<.1. ***

42

Table 6. Long Difference Reduced Form Effect of Simulated New Production on Birth and Marriage Outcomes for Women 18 to 34
Marital
Birth Ratep
(1)
Total Sim. New Productionp2000-2011
(Thousands 2010$ per Capita)

0.813***
(0.219)

Outcomes: 2000 to 2011 Long Difference
Non-Marital
Percent
Percent
Percent
Birth Ratep
Never Marriedp
Marriedp
Divorcedp
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
0.229*
(0.122)

0.376**
(0.190)

-0.303
(0.196)

-0.046
(0.067)

Percent
Cohabitatingp
(6)
0.041
(0.078)

Dependent Mean in 2000
68.81
35.15
56.13
37.92
4.201
7.589
Observations
2,044
2,044
2,041
2,041
2,041
2,041
Notes: Birth data from U.S. Vital Statistics Natality Files. Puma-level marriage outcomes are constructed from the 2000 Decennial
Census and 2005-2011 American Community Survey (ACS) microdata. The unit of analysis is the long difference between 2000 and
2011 for 2,044 Public Use Microdata Areas (PUMA). In the ACS three PUMA in New Orleans were disbanded after Hurricane
Katrina. The share cohabitating is defined (imperfectly) as the share of women 18-34 who are either recorded as an unmarried partner,
or as the household head with an unmarried partner present. The impact of total simulated production on marital and non-marital birth
rates is statistically different (p=.02). All monetary values are inflation-adjusted to 2010 dollars, using the PCE index. All regression
models include controls for the change in the natural log average house price, the male/female sex ratio age 18-34, gender by race
shares for 18-34 year olds, gender by education shares for 18-34 year olds, and state fixed effects. Estimates are weighted by the total
number of births to 18-34 year olds in 2000. Robust standard errors are reported *** p<.01, ** p<.05, * p<.1. ***

43

Table 7. Reduced Form Effects for Non-College and College Educated Women Separately
Marital
Birth Ratepy
(1)

Non-Marital
Birth Ratepy
(2)

Percent
Never
Marriedpy
(3)

Percent
Marriedpy
(4)

Percent
Newly
Marriedpy
(5)

Panel A. All Women 18-34
Sim. New Productionpy
(Thousands 2010$ per Capita)

3.49***
(1.13)

2.56***
(0.61)

1.23
(1.02)

-1.29
(1.01)

-0.20
(0.26)

0.09
(0.32)

0.28
(0.43)

Dependent Means (in Levels)
Observations

63.19
22,288

38.94
22,288

65.02
11,144

30.09
11,144

0.856
11,144

3.422
11,144

8.074
11,144

Panel B. Non-College Women 18-34
Sim. New Productionpy
(Thousands 2010$ per Capita)

3.97***
(1.25)

2.26***
(0.81)

1.59
(1.05)

-1.59
(1.04)

-0.13
(0.26)

0.14
(0.34)

0.12
(0.45)

Dependent Means (in Levels)
Observations

53.42
22,288

46.71
22,288

68.08
11,144

26.77
11,144

0.772
11,144

3.545
11,144

8.168
11,144

Panel C. College Women 18-34
Sim. New Productionpy
(Thousands 2010$ per Capita)

0.86**
(0.37)

-0.09*
(0.05)

-4.85
(3.26)

3.89
(3.00)

-1.14
(0.71)

-0.21
(0.92)

1.30
(1.23)

Percent
Percent
Divorcedpy Cohabitatingpy
(6)
(7)

Dependent Means (in Levels)
27
2.211
50.28
46.20
1.135
2.755
6.875
Observations
22,288
22,288
11,133
11,133
11,133
11,133
11,133
Notes: Birth data from U.S. Vital Statistics Natality Files. The unit of analysis is the Public Use Microdata Area (PUMA)/year,
including 1,393 PUMA from 1997 to 2012 for the 31 states (plus the District of Columbia) that have mother’s education available for
all years. Marriage outcomes are only observed in 2000, and 2005-2011. All monetary values are inflation-adjusted to 2010 dollars,
using the Personal Consumption Expenditure (PCE) index. All regression models include controls for the natural log average house
price, the male/female sex ratio age 18-34, gender by race shares for 18-34 year olds, gender by education shares for 18-34 year olds,
and stateXyear and PUMA fixed effects. Estimates are weighted by the total number of births to 18-34 year olds in 2000. Standard
errors are adjusted for clustering at the PUMA level. *** p<.01, ** p<.05, * p<.1. ***

44

Table 8: Comparison to the Appalachian Coal Boom Context: IV Estimates of the Effect of
Earnings on Marital Births, Non-Marital Births, and Share of Women Never Married
Panel A.
Natural Log of Ln Earnings Per Capitapy
First Stage F-statistic
Dependent Means (in Levels)
Observations

Percent Births
Non-Marital
(1)

Ln Earnings Per Capitapy

Women 15-34
Percent Never
Married
(4)

-3.03***
(0.55)

0.75***
(0.23)

-2.55***
(0.47)

-0.96***
(0.18)

56.3
13.94
2,546

56.3
81.63
2,546

56.3
12.81
2,546

34.0
51.69
268

Panel B.
Natural Log of -

Appalachian Coal Boom (1969-1987)
Women 18-34
Non-Marital Birth
Marital Birth Rate
Rate
(2)
(3)

Percent Births
Non-Marital
-0.11
(0.25)

Fracking Oil and Gas Boom (1997-2012)
Women 18-34
Non-Marital Birth
Marital Birth Rate
Rate
1.24***
(0.43)

1.24***
(0.43)

Women 15-34
Percent Never
Married
0.17
(0.21)

First Stage F-statistic
11.8
11.8
11.8
8.6
38.42
62.33
38.68
59.82
Dependent Means (in Levels)
32,704
32,704
32,704
4,088
Observations
Notes: All birth data from Vital Statistics. Share never married is calculated from the 1970 and
1980 censuses (provided by National Historical Geographic Information System) as well as the
2000 decennial census and 2011 5-year ACS. We use coal reserve values to instrument for the
natural log of total earnings per capita (from the BEA) for the Coal Boom, similar to Black et al.
(2013). Data on coal reserves for 1969-1988 are constructed using data provided by Black et al.,
(2013). Sample for the Coal Boom period includes 134 Public Use Microdata Areas (PUMA).
Sample for the fracking boom period includes 2,044 PUMA. All regression models include
controls for the female population 18-34, male/female sex ratio age 18-34, gender by race shares,
and stateXyear and county fixed effects. In Panel B we also control for the natural log average
house price. This measure is not available for the earlier period. Estimates are weighted by the
total number of births to 18-34 year olds in 1970 and 2000 respectively. Standard errors are
adjusted for clustering at the PUMA level. *** p<.01, ** p<.05, * p<.1. ***

45

Figure 1. Total Oil and Gas Production from Wells During First Year of Production, 2000-2012

Notes: Shale play boundaries outlined in black. Source: Constructed by the authors from DrillingInfo.

46

Appendix Tables
Table A1. Summary Statistics for Fracking Public Use Microdata Areas (PUMA)
2004

2006

2007

2008

2009

2010

2011

393
367
443
476
523
553
558
Simulated Annual New Production Value by Percentile (2010$ per Capita)
0.12
0.07
0.13
0.04
0.06
0.03
0.13
0.11
10th
1.46
1.42
1.72
1.43
2.45
1.48
2.51
2.88
50th
59.10
58.89
93.51
72.94
96.43
61.86
66.41
75.20
90th
Average Simulated Annual New Production Value (2010$ per Capita)
35.67
37.95
39.38
40.04
59.54
41.12
53.89
66.43
All Producing PUMA
316.75
338.57
338.17
357.86
538.72
373.01
512.66
606.53
Top 10%
Notes: The statistics in this table refer to counties in the analysis sample (consisting of 2,044 PUMA, per Table A1) that have any
simulated new production between 2004 to 2012.

Number of PUMA with Sim. New Production

331

2005

2012
581
0.20
3.05
71.01
65.66
592.69

47

Table A2. Robustness and Specification Sensitivity, Women Age 18 to 34

Sim. New Productionpy
(Thousands 2010$ per Capita)
Dependent Means
Observations
Sim. New Productionpy
(Thousands 2010$ per Capita)

Baseline
(1)

Exclude Sex
Ratio and
House Price
Controls
(2)

3.571***
(1.001)

3.419***
(1.099)

62.33
32,704

62.33
32,704

2.388***
(0.601)

2.713***
(0.723)

Year Fixed
Un-Weighted
Effect
(3)
(4)
Marital Birth Ratepy
3.442***
(0.831)

2.155**
(1.046)

62.33
62.33
32,704
32,704
Non-Marital Birth Ratepy
2.324***
(0.506)

3.516***
(0.784)

Shale Play by
Year Fixed
Effects
(5)

Natural Log of
Outcome
(6)

3.113***
(1.155)

0.053***
(0.013)

62.33
32,704

62.33
32,704

2.459***
(0.832)

0.039***
(0.009)

Dependent Means
38.68
38.68
38.68
38.68
38.68
38.68
Observations
32,704
32,704
32,704
32,704
32,704
32,704
Notes: Birth data from U.S. Vital Statistics Natality Files. The unit of analysis is the Public Use Microdata Area (PUMA)/year,
including 2,044 PUMA from 1997 to 2012. All monetary values are inflation-adjusted to 2010 dollars, using the Personal
Consumption Expenditure (PCE) index. Column (1) provides baseline estimates from Table 3. Column (2) excludes the female to
male sex ratio and natural log average house price. Column (3) provides unweighted estimates. Column (4) includes year effects,
rather than stateXyear, comparing PUMA across states. Column (5) includes shale playXyear effects, rather than stateXyear,
comparing PUMA within a shale play. Column (6) estimates the relationship when the outcome is measured in logs, to approximate
the percent change. All regression models include controls for the natural log average house price, the male/female sex ratio age 1834, gender by race shares for 18-34 year olds, gender by education shares for 18-34 year olds, and stateXyear and PUMA fixed effects
unless otherwise specified. Estimates are weighted by the total number of births to 18-34 year olds in 2000 unless otherwise specified.
Standard errors are adjusted for clustering at the PUMA level. *** p<.01, ** p<.05, * p<.1. ***

48

Table A3. Heterogeneity by Demographics, Women age 18 to 34 (Unless otherwise specified)
First Births
(6)

Higher Parity
Birth
(7)

-18.99
(17.75)

1.17***
(0.36)

2.40***
(0.82)

234.9
89.25
69.07
84.65
32,704
32,704
Non-Marital Birth Ratepy

347.1
19.43
32,704

759.5
42.91
32,704

1.26***
(0.46)

1.13**
(0.49)

Women 35-44
(1)

N.H. White
(2)

N.H. Black
(3)

Sim. New Productionpy
(Thousands 2010$ per Capita)

0.79**
(0.34)

4.35**
(2.11)

1.49
(1.59)

Mean Number of Births
Dependent Means
Observations

242.6
21.23
32,704

708.2
65.70
32,704

74.34
32.61
32,701

Sim. New Productionpy
(Thousands 2010$ per Capita)

-0.37**
(0.15)

4.14***
(0.69)

-0.49
(2.01)

Hispanic
N.H. Other
(4)
(5)
Marital Birth Ratepy
0.08
(2.06)

0.59
(1.62)

-9.40
(6.31)

51.95
253
189.6
215.3
28.31
254.4
431.9
Mean Number of Births
4.656
23.26
66.95
61.20
28.38
14.35
24.33
Dependent Means
32,704
32,704
32,701
32,704
32,704
32,704
32,704
Observations
Notes: Birth data from U.S. Vital Statistics Natality Files. The unit of analysis is the public use microdata area (PUMA)/year,
including 2,044 PUMA from 1997 to 2012. All monetary values are inflation-adjusted to 2010 dollars, using the Personal
Consumption Expenditure (PCE) index. All regression models include controls for the natural log average house price, the
male/female sex ratio age 18-34, gender by race shares for 18-34 year olds, gender by education shares for 18-34 year olds, and state
X year and PUMA fixed effects. Estimates are weighted by the total number of births to 18-34 year olds in 2000. Standard errors are
adjusted for clustering at the PUMA level. *** p<.01, ** p<.05, * p<.1. ***

49

Table A4. Reduced Form Effect of Actual New Production on Birth and Marriage Outcomes for Women Age 18 to 34

Actual New Productionpy
(Thousands 2010$ per Capita)

Marital
Birth Ratepy
(1)

Non-Marital
Birth Ratepy
(2)

Percent
Never Marriedpy
(3)

Percent
Marriedpy
(4)

Percent
Newly Marriedpy
(5)

Percent
Divorcedpy
(6)

Percent
Cohabitatingpy
(7)

0.426***
(0.145)

0.197**
(0.086)

-0.038
(0.106)

0.060
(0.107)

-0.011
(0.029)

-0.029
(0.044)

0.044
(0.044)

Dependent Means
62.33
38.68
65.31
29.87
0.852
3.362
8.101
Observations
32,704
32,704
16,334
16,334
16,334
16,334
16,334
Notes: Birth data from U.S. Vital Statistics Natality Files. The unit of analysis is the Public Use Microdata Area (PUMA)/year,
including 2,044 PUMA from 1997 to 2012. Marriage outcomes are only observed in 2000, and 2005-2011. The impact on marital and
non-marital birth rates is not statistically different. All monetary values are inflation-adjusted to 2010 dollars, using the Personal
Consumption Expenditure (PCE) index. A regression of actual new production on simulated new production suggests that an
additional one thousand dollars of simulate production per capita is associated with approximately 5,400 dollars of actual production
per capita, suggesting that the impacts of actual production are approximately half the size. All regression models include controls for
the natural log average house price, the male/female sex ratio age 18-34, gender by race shares for 18-34 year olds, gender by
education shares for 18-34 year olds, and stateXyear and PUMA fixed effects. Estimates are weighted by the total number of births to
18-34 year olds in 2000. Standard errors are adjusted for clustering at the PUMA level. *** p<.01, ** p<.05, * p<.1. ***

50

Data Appendix
Fracking Production Data
To construct measures of fracking production, we overlay the latest shale play boundary
shapefiles available at the time from 2015 (provided by the Energy Information Administration
(EIA)) onto county boundary shapefiles (provided by the U.S. Census Bureau). ArcGIS software
is used to determine if a shale play and county intersect.14 Although there are 48 unique shale
plays in the US, some of these plays are small and cover only a few counties. We combine small
shale plays that cover less than nine counties into an “other” category so that total play level
production is not driven by any one county. We first generate simulated production at the county
level, as there are many counties in each play. We then aggregate both actual new production and
simulated new production up from the county level to the PUMA level. For the most part, a
county will be completely contained within a PUMA. Some densely populated counties, are
divided into multiple PUMA, in which case we use the share of the county population in 2000 in
each PUMA to assign production values. Only 35 counties with production are partitioned into
two or more PUMA.
These geographic measures are then combined with quarterly well level production data
provided through a restricted access agreement with DrillingInfo, a private firm that collects
lease, permit, and production data on wells drilled in the United States. These data are
proprietary, and obtained through an academic use agreement with DrillingInfo, available
through their academic outreach initiative. Oil and gas production are reported in barrels and
thousands of cubic feet respectively. We use annual national prices provided by the Energy
Information Administration (EIA) to convert output metrics into dollar amounts, and we then use
the Personal Consumption Expenditure (PCE) price index calculated by the United States Bureau
of Economic Analysis to adjust all dollar amounts to year 2010 dollars. DrillingInfo does not
indicate if a well is a fracking well, as fracking is a means of stimulating production, but it does
report whether a well is horizontally or vertically drilled. We assign non-vertical wells drilled in
counties that intersect with shale plays as fracking wells and then aggregate this production to
the PUMA level.
Jobs and Earnings Data
We use the Quarterly Workforce Indicators (QWI) as our primary source of wage data.
The QWI is aggregated from the Longitudinal Employer-Household Dynamics (LEHD) microlevel data collected from unemployment insurance earnings data from participating states and
several other sources (U.S. Census, 2014). The QWI is aggregated to the county level, and can
be tabulated by firm characteristics (industry, size) or worker characteristics (gender, age,
education). When tabulating by worker characteristics, only two levels of tabulation are feasible
(gender by age or gender by education). For this reason, we consider gender by education level
14

A special thanks to Lisa Boland and Michael Bender for their help with ArcGIS.

51

measures for all workers over the age of 25. The QWI data is constructed through a state sharing
process, and as such, only states that have made agreements with the Census have reported data.
Many of the states began participating in 2000 with most participating by 2003.
The main measure we use is the beginning of quarter earnings for all jobs. This measures
the quarterly earnings for all jobs that existed at the beginning of the quarter. Other options (not
used) include stable jobs (spanning multiple quarters) or total jobs (employed at any time during
quarter). We take the implied average annual earnings across all four quarters, accounting for
differences in employment levels by weighting by the reported quarter specific job count. To do
this we aggregate up the total number of jobs as well as the total earnings from the county level
to the PUMA level, and then calculate the earnings per worker. We also construct a jobs to
population ratio by taking the total job count, averaged across quarters, and dividing it by the
estimated population 18 and older from the SEER population estimates.
Because the QWI is constructed from firm employment, all measures are constructed for
the job count. This means that average quarterly earnings are the average earnings of all jobs in a
given quarter. Individuals who are unemployed are not considered, and individuals who hold two
jobs will be treated as two separate individuals. In general, average earnings levels in the QWI
are higher than those calculated elsewhere, as it records average earnings conditional on
working. Also, because some workers might hold jobs for less than the full year, the average
annual earnings constructed from the QWI will be higher, because the construction implicitly
assumes the job lasts the entire year. This measure of earnings is relevant as it captures the
“potential earning” opportunity available to a man.
Alternative labor market measures could be constructed from the Quarterly Census of
Employment and Wages (QCEW) or the 2000 Census and ACS microdata. The QCEW provides
county level employment and wage measures, but it does not separately identify jobs by the
gender or education of workers. Because we are particularly interested in looking at non-college
educated workers, we rely on the QWI. The ACS microdata would allow us to construct PUMA
level measures based on the individual, rather than the job, and more closely corresponds to
realized earnings rather than potential earnings. The ACS also presents several data constraints.
Consistent PUMA geo-codes are only available in 2000 and 2005-2011, and the ACS is a one
percent survey of households, which likely would yield less precise estimates than the QWI
which draws from the near universe of jobs.
Birth Outcomes
We use restricted access Vital Statistics data provided by the National Center of Health
Statistics to construct county level measures of birth outcomes, which are then aggregated to the
PUMA level. The restricted files provide the universe of births between 1998 and 2013 with
county identifiers. We focus our analysis on mothers between 18 and 34. In theory, we are
interested in fertility decisions of less educated women. However, a limitation of the Vital
Statistics data is its measurement of mother’s educational attainment. Starting in 2009, the Vital
Statistics required states to updated measures of maternal education to the new 2003
classification. States that did not comply did not have maternal education recorded. As a result,

52

in 2009, 20 states are missing measures of mother’s education. Starting in 2010, some of these
states’ education measures were included again. As educational attainment is potentially
endogenous, and to maintain all states in our analysis we focus on births to women 18 to 34, in
2000, 76 percent of births to women 18 to 34 were to women with less than a four year college
degree.
We convert births to conceptions leading to a live birth by subtracting the length of
gestation from the fifteenth of the month of birth. This shifts the timing to the time of
conception. We do this to consider the time the pregnancy decision was made. Our analysis
sample thus consists of live births that were conceived between 1997 and 2012. To construct age
specific birth rates, we divide the number of births by the number of women 18-34 in each
PUMA, constructed from the SEER gender by age population estimates, which are derived from
the intercensal population estimates. We then multiply this by 1000 to be interpreted as birth per
1000 women in the age group of interest.
Marriage Outcomes
PUMA level marriage outcomes are constructed from the 2000 Census and 2005-2011
ACS microdata (Flood, 2015). Over these years consistent PUMA geo-codes are available,
allowing us to estimate the share of 18 to 34 year old women who are never married, married,
divorced, cohabitating, and married within the past year (share newly married). We use the
population weights provided to do this. Never married, married, and divorced are created using
the marital status variable. To construct the share cohabitating, we assign all women who are (1)
the head of household with an unmarried partner present in the household, or (2) listed as
unmarried partners in the household roster. The variable indicating if an individual was married
in the past year is not available in the 2000 Census, so the share married within the past year is
only available from 2005-2011.

