                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




         THE DISTRIBUTIONAL CONSEQUENCES OF LARGE DEVALUATIONS

                                       Javier Cravino
                                     Andrei A. Levchenko

                                      Working Paper 23409
                              http://www.nber.org/papers/w23409


                    NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                             1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                               Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    May 2017




We are grateful to Mark Aguiar, David Atkin, Ariel Burstein, Yu Chin Chen, Michael Devereux,
Natalia Ramondo, Daniele Siena, and seminar and workshop participants at several institutions
for helpful suggestions, and to Laurien Gilbert and Nitya Pandalai-Nayar for excellent research
assistance. We would especially like to thank Christian Ahlin and Mototsugu Shintani for sharing
the digitized pre-April 1995 Mexican consumer price data. Financial support from Michigan
Institute for Teaching and Research in Economics (MITRE) and from the National Science
Foundation under grant SES-1628879 is gratefully acknowledged. Levchenko would also like to
thank the University of Zurich, the UBS Center for Economics in Society, and the Excellence
Foundation Zurich for their hospitality during the 2014-15 academic year and financial support
for this project. Email: jcravino@umich.edu, alev@umich.edu. The views expressed herein are
those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic
Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2017 by Javier Cravino and Andrei A. Levchenko. All rights reserved. Short sections of text,
not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
The Distributional Consequences of Large Devaluations
Javier Cravino and Andrei A. Levchenko
NBER Working Paper No. 23409
May 2017
JEL No. F31,F61

                                         ABSTRACT

We study the impact of large exchange rate devaluations on the cost of living at different points
on the income distribution. Poor households spend relatively more on tradeable product
categories, and consume lower-priced varieties within categories. Changes in the relative price of
tradeables and of lower-priced varieties affect the cost of living of low-income relative to high-
income households. We quantify these effects following the 1994 Mexican devaluation and show
that they can have large distributional consequences. Two years post-devaluation, the cost of
living for the bottom income decile rose 1.48 to 1.62 times more than for the top income decile.


Javier Cravino
Department of Economics
University of Michigan
611 Tappan Street, Lorch Hall 365B
Ann Arbor, MI 48109
and NBER
jcravino@umich.edu

Andrei A. Levchenko
Department of Economics
University of Michigan
611 Tappan Street
Ann Arbor, MI 48109
and NBER
alev@umich.edu




A online appendix is available at http://www.nber.org/data-appendix/w23409
Large exchange rate devaluations are associated with dramatic changes in relative prices.
In the aftermath of a devaluation, the price of tradeable goods “at the dock” moves one-
for-one with the exchange rate, the retail price of tradeable goods increases, though less
than the exchange rate, while non-tradeable goods’ prices are relatively stable.1 A clear
illustration of such relative price movements is presented in Figure 1, which plots the
evolution of these prices following the 1994 Mexican devaluation. The retail price of
tradeables is much closer to the price of non-tradeables than to prices of tradeables at the
dock, consistent with the importance of local distribution costs in retail prices.

                Figure 1: Price changes during the 1994 Mexican devaluation
                            2.50
                            2.00
                            1.50
                            1.00




                              Nov−94        Jan−95                  Apr−95     Jul−95                Oct−95

                                       Trade weighted exchange rate          Price of Non Tradeables
                                       Retail price of Tradeables            Price of Tradeables at the dock (IPI)




Notes: This figure plots the trade-weighted nominal exchange rate, the import price index, and the con-
sumption price indices of tradeables and non-tradeables following the November 1994 peso devaluation,
each rebased to November 1994.

     This paper studies the distributional consequences of such relative price movements.
It is well known that households at different income levels consume very different baskets
of goods.2 We distinguish two types of differences, which we label Across and Within.
Across product categories, low-income households spend relatively more on tradeables
(such as food), while high-income households spend relatively more on non-tradeables
(such as personal services). Within product categories, low-income households spend
relatively more on lower-end goods purchased from lower-end retail outlets. Changes in
the relative price of tradeables and of low-priced varieties following a large devaluation
will thus affect households differentially, generating a distributional welfare impact.
   1 These patterns were first documented by Burstein et al. (2005) for 5 large devaluations.
                                                                                          In summarizing
the literature, Burstein and Gopinath (2015) extend these findings to include more devaluation episodes.
   2 This was documented as early as the 19th century by Engel (1857, 1895, "Engel’s Law"). For recent

evidence using household surveys from multiple countries, see Almås (2012).


                                                                       1
   We measure the magnitude of these two effects during the 1994 Mexican devaluation.
For this episode, we combine two sources of detailed microdata that are key for studying
these mechanisms. The first is household-level expenditures on detailed product cate-
gories from the Mexican household surveys both immediately before and after the crisis.
The second is monthly data on unique product-outlet level prices that the Bank of Mexico
uses to construct the consumer price index. In what follows, we refer to a unique product-
outlet combination as a variety. Crucially, the consumption categories in the household
survey can be matched to the product categories for which the Bank of Mexico collects
price data. Indeed, these datasets are the two principal inputs underlying the official
Mexican CPI.
   We first calculate an income-specific price index that captures the Across effect by
weighting price indices for disaggregated consumption categories with income-specific
expenditure shares from the 1994 household expenditure survey. According to this in-
dex, in the 2 years following the devaluation the consumers in the bottom decile of the
Mexican income distribution experienced cost of living increases about 1.25 times larger
than the consumers in the top income decile. The increase in the price index was 95% for
households in the poorest decile, compared to 76% for households in the richest decile.
The effect is monotonic across all income deciles.
   We then compute an income-specific price index that captures the Within effect using
the unique product-outlet level price data and household expenditure data. First, we use
the household survey data to show that high-income households tend to pay higher unit
values within detailed product categories (i.e. both the high- and low-income households
buy bread, but the high-income households pay more per kilo). This evidence supports
the notion that households at the top of the income distribution purchase higher-priced
varieties. We then compute a Within price index by assuming that all consumers have
the same expenditure shares across product categories, but that within each category, the
high-income households consume the more expensive varieties, and the low-income the
less expensive ones. In our benchmark index, the Within effect implies that inflation for
the lower-income consumers was between 14 and 22 percentage points higher than for
the higher-income consumers. We supplement the Within effect results for Mexico using
the Economist Intelligence Unit CityData on store prices in a sample of several emerging
market devaluations.
    The Across and Within effects are roughly additive, reinforcing each other. Our pre-
ferred estimate of the price index that combines these two effects implies that the house-
holds in the bottom decile of the Mexican income distribution experienced increases in
the cost of living between 1.48 and 1.62 times higher than the households in the top decile


                                            2
in the two years that follow the devaluation. Absent any changes in nominal income,
our combined price index implies a decline in real income of about 50% for households
in the bottom decile compared to about 40% for households in the top decile. The main
finding is thus that both the Across and the Within distributional effects were large and
economically significant in the 1994 Mexican devaluation.
   Understanding why the observed price changes are anti-poor requires an account of
the mechanisms behind the relative price changes that follow a large devaluation. We
show that the poor spend a higher fraction of their income on tradeable product cate-
gories, and among tradeables, on categories with a systematically lower non-tradeable
component. This is primarily driven by differences in distribution margins rather than
by differences in the prevalence of local goods across categories. As the relative price of
tradeables to non-tradeables increases following the devaluation, the prices paid by the
low-income households rise by proportionally more than those paid by the high-income
households. This mechanism provides an account of the Across effect.
    We then evaluate whether the leading explanations for incomplete exchange rate pass-
through into retail prices are consistent with the observed relative price changes within
product categories.3 First, if cheaper varieties have lower distribution margins, their rela-
tive price will increase following a devaluation. We show in a simple flexible price frame-
work that differences in distribution margins account well for the observed differences in
price changes across varieties. Second, if some varieties are not traded internationally but
only produced and sold locally, the price of these varieties may fall relative to imported
ones. If this is the case and imported varieties are more expensive than local ones, then
the price of the expensive varieties should actually increase by more than cheap varieties
following the devaluation. This is at odds with the relative price movements we docu-
ment. Third, if markups of higher-quality varieties fall by more following a devaluation,
we should expect the relative prices of expensive varieties to decrease.4 This type of effect
is consistent with the relative price changes observed in our data.
    Our analysis is expressly about the differences in consumption price levels for house-
holds of different incomes, and is silent on how nominal income changed across the in-
come distribution. As such, our results can be interpreted as differences in the compen-
sating variation of changes in the consumption price level across the income distribution.
That is, we answer the question, by how much should the nominal income of differ-
ent households have changed to leave everyone relatively as well off as before? Our
   3 See
       e.g. Burstein et al. (2005); Burstein and Gopinath (2015).
   4 This
        assumes that prices are increasing in product quality. See Auer et al. (2014) and Antoniades and
Zaniboni (2015) for empirical evidence that exchange rate pass-through is lower for high-quality products.



                                                    3
results can be benchmarked to existing studies of how incomes changed during the Mex-
ican devaluation. According to Mexico’s National Statistical Institute (INEGI) there was
not much differential impact in the decline in income per capita across deciles over this
period, with incomes falling by 29% in inflation-adjusted terms for the highest income
decile, and by 27% for the lowest decile.5 Lopez-Acevedo and Salinas (2000) report a
modest decrease in income inequality over this period using the same household survey
that we use in this paper, which is a repeated cross-section. Using a panel survey of wages
(ENEU), Maloney et al. (2004) report that median real wages fell by 30%, but that there
was not much differential impact across education groups (which can serve as a rough
proxy for income). Using the ENEU, Verhoogen (2008) shows that inequality, measured
by the 90-10 income ratio or the white-blue collar wage gap actually increased over the
1994-1996 period, and more broadly did not experience any change in its (upward) trend.
All in all, available evidence suggests that it is unlikely that a large pro-poor change in
nominal incomes could have erased the anti-poor price changes that we document.6
  Our paper belongs to the literature on large devaluations, surveyed by Burstein and
Gopinath (2015). This literature has highlighted that pass-through into retail prices is in-
complete in part because consumer prices include a large non-traded component – the
distribution margin. Goldberg and Campa (2010) document the heterogeneity in distri-
bution margins across sectors. We study a pattern that has until now been ignored in
the exchange rate literature: the importance of the non-traded component in the total
consumption basket varies systematically across the income distribution, both across and
within detailed product categories. Some evidence on what we label the Across effect is
provided by Friedman and Levinsohn (2002) and Levinsohn et al. (2003) for Indonesia’s
1998 depreciation, Kraay (2008) for the Egyptian 2000-05 depreciation, and de Carvalho
Filho and Chamon (2008) for Brazil and Mexico over the period 1980-2006. Our paper
examines the Across effect more systematically and relates it to the interaction between
distribution margin heterogeneity and differences in consumption baskets.
    Our paper is also related to a large and growing literature in international trade that
models demand non-homotheticities and examines the distributional impact of economic
integration across consumers (see, e.g. Fajgelbaum et al., 2011; Fajgelbaum and Khandel-
wal, 2016; Atkin et al., 2016). The closest to ours are papers by Porto (2006) and Faber
   5 SeeEncuesta Nacional de Ingresos y Gastos de los Hogares (ENIGH), Síntesis histórica, 1992-2008.
   6 Changes  in asset values/incomes are more difficult to ascertain, but available evidence suggests that
assets of the poor suffered larger losses than those of the rich. Halac and Schmukler (2004) document that
in a sample of Latin American crises that includes Mexico in 1994, larger depositors and larger borrowers
suffered less than small ones. Lopez-Acevedo and Salinas (2000) document that changes in capital and
financial income during the Mexican crisis favored the top income decile households.



                                                    4
(2014). Porto (2006) uses household consumer expenditure data in Argentina following
Mercosur to trace the distributional impact of this regional trade agreement on different
consumers. The analysis incorporates the Across effect but not the Within effect. Faber
(2014) shows that following NAFTA, intermediate inputs used in production of higher-
quality varieties became cheaper in Mexico, and richer consumers benefited more – a type
of Within effect that is differential across product categories according to their intensity of
imported input use. Relative to these papers, that focus on long-run changes, we examine
the relatively short-run effects following large devaluations. Our paper is the first, to our
knowledge, to combine the analysis of Across and Within effects.
    The rest of the paper is organized as follows. Section 2 illustrates the distributional ef-
fects of relative price changes when consumption baskets differ across consumers. Section
3 describes the data and the main results. Section 4 discusses the possible mechanisms
for the main findings, with an emphasis on variation in distribution margins, and Section
5 concludes.


2    Conceptual framework
Let the indirect utility of a household h be denoted by Vth , and let xbt ⌘ xt /xt0 1 denote
the cumulative growth rate of variable xt between some base period t0 and time t. The
proportional change in welfare following a change in income and the vector of prices is
to a first approximation given by

                                      bt h = W
                                      V      b th       Â wgh Pbg,t ,                        (1)
                                                        g2 G


where Wth is nominal income, g indexes goods, w gh are household-specific expenditure
shares, and Pbg,t are good-specific price changes. To illustrate the distributional effects of a
change in prices across households, it helps to write (1) as:

                         bth = W
                         V     b th      Â wg Pbg,t        Â     Pbg,t (w gh      w g ),     (2)
                                        g2 G              g2 G
                               |         {z         }     |             {z              }
                                                  b
                               homothetic-utility V            Cov( Pbg,t ,w gh w g )


where w g is the economy-wide share of spending on good g. The first term of this expres-
sion is the change in welfare that we would obtain if utility were homothetic and every
h had the same consumption basket. The second term captures the distributional im-
pact across households. The term is reminiscent of a (negative) covariance between price


                                                    5
changes and household-level relative spending shares. If the pattern of price changes
across g is positively correlated with h’s relative spending shares, then h suffers more
from this vector of price changes than the average household, because prices go up on
average more in goods that the household consumes more of.
   Consider an example in which there are two households, rich and poor, h = r, p, and
two goods, tradeables and non-tradeables: g = T, NT. Suppose further that the poor have
                                          p
higher expenditure shares in tradeables: wT > wT > wTr . If an exchange rate depreciation
leads to a higher increase in the price of tradeables than in the price of non-tradeables –
PbT,t > PbNT,t – then the last term in (2) will be negative for the poor and positive for the
rich. This is the simplest version of what in the empirical analysis below we refer to as
the Across effect.
    To illustrate the Within effect, suppose instead that the two goods were an expensive
variety and a cheap variety: g = E, C, and the poor consumed a higher share of the cheap
                         p
variety than the rich, wC > wC > wCr . If the price of the cheap variety increased by more
after a devaluation, PbC,t > PbE,t , we would once again have an anti-poor distributional
effect.
   The discussion above underscores the point that there is no fundamental difference
in how the Across and Within effects work. Both are driven by the covariance of price
changes and relative spending shares across the income distribution. Because they have
different data requirements, it is still convenient to separate them in the empirical analy-
sis. Note also that the expression (1) has a natural compensating variation interpretation:
in response to a given vector of price changes Pbg,t , a compensating variation for house-
hold h is a change in income W b h that leaves welfare unchanged (V b h = 0). Thus, while we
                                 t                                   t
state the empirical results in terms of changes in household-level costs of living indices
Pbth , they can equivalently be stated in terms of the heterogeneity in the compensating
variation across households.


2.1   Within and Across effects: definitions and measurement
This section defines the Across, Within, and Combined price indices. Let there be G goods
categories indexed by g, and let each g contain varieties indexed by v g . Households spend
different shares of their income both across goods categories g, and across varieties v g
within each g. The change in the aggregate price index is defined by:

                                     Pbt ⌘   Â wg Pbg,t ,                                 (3)
                                             g2 G




                                             6
                      h qh
                  Âh Pg,t 0 g,t0
where w g ⌘            h qh                is the economy-wide expenditure share on good g at some base
               Âh Â g Pg,t g,t 0       0
period t0 , and

                                                              1
                                                   Pbg,t ⌘
                                                              Vg       Â      Pbvg ,t               (4)
                                                                      vg 2g


is the change in the price index for good category g that has Vg varieties. Pbt is the change
in the CPI as it would be constructed by national statistical agencies.
    The change in the household-specific price index is given by:

                                                    Pbth ⌘    Â wgh Pbg,t
                                                                      h
                                                                          ,                         (5)
                                                              g2 G

                    h qh
                   Pg,t
where w gh ⌘
                        g,t
                       0
                     h qh
                               0
                                       is now the share of household h’s expenditures that go towards
                Â g Pg,t g,t
                           0       0
good category g, and Pbhg,t is the change in the price sub-index of good g. It varies across
households because they consume different varieties:

                                                   Pbhg,t ⌘      Â svhg Pbvg ,t ,                   (6)
                                                                 vg


where svhg is household h’s share of expenditures in variety v g within the good category g,
and Pbvg ,t is the (non-household-specific) change in the price of variety v g of good g. Pbh        g,t
can vary across households if households of different incomes consume different goods
within each good category g. This would happen, for instance, if the richer households
consume systematically higher-priced varieties within each g.
   We define the Across change in the price index for household h as:

                                                 PbhAcross,t ⌘        Â wgh Pbg,t ,                 (7)
                                                                     g2 G


and the Within change in the price index for household h as:

                                                   h
                                                 PbWithin,t ⌘         Â wg Pbhg,t .                 (8)
                                                                      g2 G


In words, PbhAcross,t is the change in the cost of living for a hypothetical household that has
h’s expenditure shares across g, and faces the unweighted average price change across all
                                          h
varieties within each g. By contrast, PbWithin,t  is the change in the cost of living for a hypo-
thetical household that has aggregate consumption shares across goods g, but consumes

                                                                 7
household h’s varieties within each good g.
    Using these expressions, the change in the price index of household h is:
                                                                   ⇣               ⌘⇣                    ⌘
       Pbth =   Â      w gh Pbg,t +    Â     w g Pbhg,t +   Â          w gh   wg        Pbhg,t   Pbg,t       Â wg Pbg,t .
                g2 G                  g2 G                  g2 G                                             g2 G
                |      {z         }   |      {z        }    |                  {z                        }   |      {z    }
                    PbhAcross,t             h
                                          PbWithin,t                            h
                                                                              PbCov,t                               Pbt


                          h
The third term, labeled PbCov,t , is a “covariance” across goods between how different price
changes are for h relative to the average and how different h’s expenditure share relative
to the average. It is not formally a covariance because Pbg,t is not the mean across goods,
but rather the mean across varieties within g, and w g is not the mean across goods but
an expenditure-weighted average across households. The “covariance” will be positive
when h experiences large deviations from the mean in its household-specific price in its
relatively large expenditure categories.
    The difference in the change of the price indices of two households h and h0 at different
points in the income distribution is given by

                                  D Pbt = D PbAcross,t + D PbWithin,t + D PbCov,t ,

                            0
where D x̂t ⌘ x̂th x̂th denotes a cross-sectional rather than a time difference. The differ-
ence in Pbt h is the sum of the differences in the Across and Within indices and the covari-
ance term. Section 3 calculates D Pbt , D PbAcross,t and D PbWithin,t following the 1994 Mexican
devaluation and shows that the covariance term is quantitatively small.


3     Price changes during the 1994 Mexican devaluation
This section quantifies the distributional consequences of the 1994 Mexican devaluation.
After describing the data sources, we report the Across, Within, and Combined effects.
We conclude the section by recalculating price indices under alternative assumptions to
show the robustness of the results.


3.1   Data description
The analysis uses two main data sources. The first is monthly data on unique product-
outlet level prices that the Bank of Mexico uses to construct the consumer price index.
The second is household-level expenditure data on detailed product categories from the



                                                                8
Mexican household surveys both immediately before and after the crisis. Our baseline
indices incorporate price and expenditure data from all regions in Mexico.7


3.1.1   Mexican data on consumer prices

The Mexican micro data on consumer prices are collected by the Bank of Mexico with
the purpose of computing the Consumer Price Index. Since January 1994, the prices that
underlie the construction of the CPI are published monthly in the Diario Oficial de la
Federacion (DOF), the official bulletin of the Mexican government. Each price quote in
the DOF corresponds to a ’specific’ variety, which is a unique product-city-outlet combi-
nation that can be traced through time. An exact product description – e.g. Kellogg’s,
Corn Flakes, 500gr box – for each variety was published in the April 1995 DOF. Unfortu-
nately, outlet identifiers are not available in the data for this time period. The varieties
are grouped into 313 ’generic’ categories – e.g. Cereal in Flakes – representing the goods
and services consumed in Mexico. For most generic product categories, the price quotes
for the specific varieties are expressed in common units. For example, the prices of vari-
eties within the category Cereal in Flakes are quoted per kilo of cereal. These micro price
data from the DOF have been used previously by Ahlin and Shintani (2007) and Gagnon
(2009).
   We focus on a sample of 28,675 specific varieties grouped into 284 generic categories
that can be observed continuously in 35 municipalities throughout Mexico from January
1994 to December 1996.8 For each specific variety, we observe its monthly price, its generic
category, the city in which it is sold and the units in which prices are quoted. The DOF
also publishes the specific varieties that are added because of product substitutions, or
changes in the outlets that are being sampled by the price inspectors. We focus on the
specific varieties that can be observed continuously through our sample. Appendix Table
A4 reports the 284 generic categories.


3.1.2   Mexican household surveys

We use the Mexican household surveys, Encuesta Nacional de Ingresos y Gastos de los
Hogares (ENIGH) for 1994 and 1996 to obtain consumption expenditures across con-
sumption categories by household. The key variables that come from this dataset are
the household’s city, income, and total expenditures in 597 detailed product categories.
Crucially, the product categories in the ENIGH can be mapped to the 331 generic good
  7 Appendix    B reports results restricting attention to relative price changes within Mexico City only.
  8 There   was a revision in April 1995, in which some of the generic categories were changed.


                                                       9
categories used to calculate the CPI – in fact, the weights used to compute the official
CPI are derived from the ENIGH. In addition, for some product categories the ENIGH
reports the total quantity of the good consumed by each household. We combine the total
quantities with the expenditure data to compute the unit value paid by each household
in each product category.
    The top panel of Appendix Table A5 reports the average quarterly income in Mexico
in each income decile, in pesos. The income of the average household in the top income
decile was more than six times higher than the average household in the median decile,
and 23 times higher than the average household in the bottom decile. The bottom panel
of Appendix Table A5 reports the consumption expenditure shares in the 8 1-digit CPI
categories by income decile.


3.2    The Across effect
We calculate the Across price index in equation (7), reproduced here to facilitate exposi-
tion:

                                      PbhAcross,t =     Â wgh Pbg,t .
                                                        g2 G


The category-level price indices Pbg,t aggregate the micro prices from the DOF according
to equation (4). We define the product categories G for two alternative levels of disaggre-
gation for which the Bank of Mexico computes consumer price indices: at the 1-digit level
(8 good categories listed in Appendix Table A5), and at the 9-digit level (284 categories
listed in Appendix Table A4). The expenditure shares w gh for the product categories come
from the 1994 household expenditure survey. In particular, we sort households into in-
come deciles and compute the expenditure shares of each decile in each of the G product
categories. The price indices are normalized to 1 in October 1994, the month before the
devaluation.
    Tables 1a and 1b report the resulting price indices for different deciles of the income
distribution when the product categories are defined at the 1- and 9-digit levels of disag-
gregation. Our aggregate price index closely follows the official inflation rate computed
by the Bank of Mexico.9 Changes in PbhAcross,t differ dramatically across the income dis-
tribution in the two years following the devaluation. The Across price index computed
at the 1-digit level of disaggregation increased by 87 percent for the households in the
   9 Differencesin the two indices arise in part because the official Mexican CPI used expenditure weights
from the 1977 survey prior to the 1995 revision.


                                                   10
bottom decile, compared to only 79 percent for households in the top decile. The rela-
tion between the change in the indices and household income decile is monotonic, with
households of lower income experiencing higher inflation in this period.
    The difference in the price indices is more dramatic when PbhAcross,t is computed at the 9-
digit level of disaggregation. The change in the 9-digit Across price index was 95 percent
for households in the bottom decile, compared to 76 percent for the top decile. Two years
after the devaluation, inflation for the bottom decile was 1.25 times higher than infla-
tion for the top decile due to differences in household expenditure shares across product
categories.

                Table 1: The Across price index by income decile, 1994 weights
                                                   (a) 1-Digit
                                       Income Decile
               1      2      3       4    5    6     7             8      9     10       Aggregate      Official

  Oct. 94    1.00   1.00    1.00   1.00   1.00    1.00     1.00   1.00   1.00   1.00         1.00        1.00
  Oct. 95    1.48   1.47    1.47   1.47   1.47    1.46     1.46   1.46   1.45   1.44         1.45        1.49
  Oct. 96    1.87   1.86    1.85   1.85   1.84    1.83     1.83   1.82   1.81   1.79         1.82        1.88

                                             (b) 9-Digit
                                       Income Decile
               1      2      3       4    5    6     7             8      9     10       Aggregate

  Oct. 94    1.00   1.00    1.00   1.00   1.00    1.00     1.00   1.00   1.00   1.00         1.00
  Oct. 95    1.51   1.50    1.49   1.49   1.48    1.47     1.47   1.46   1.45   1.42         1.45
  Oct. 96    1.95   1.91    1.89   1.88   1.86    1.84     1.83   1.82   1.81   1.76         1.82

Note: These tables report the Across price indices defined in equation (7) for different income deciles. Table
1a computes the price index using 8 1-Digit product categories for G, while Table 1b computes the price
index using 284 9-Digit product categories for G. The expenditure weights come from the 1994 household
survey.


    We next compute the Across price indices at the household level. Appendix Figure
A1 plots the quadratic and the local polynomial fit of PbhAcross,t for October 1996 computed
at the 9-digit level of disaggregation, for households of different income levels. The fig-
ure confirms that the relation shown in Tables 1a and 1b between inflation and income
is monotonic. The price difference between the richest and poorest household exceeds
25 percentage points. The confidence intervals show that the difference in price indices
between the top and the bottom of the income distribution is strongly statistically signifi-
cant.


                                                     11
3.3    The Within effect
The Within price index is defined by equation (8), reproduced here for convenience:

                                         h
                                       PbWithin,t =       Â wg Pbhg,t .
                                                          g2 G


We weight the generic product categories g with aggregate expenditure weights w g com-
puted from the household expenditure survey, and allow for differences in the price in-
dices that households face for each generic category: Pbhg,t ⌘ Âvg 2 g svhg Pbvg ,t . Differences
in the price indices Pbhg,t stem from differences in the expenditure shares svhg across the
different varieties v g within each product category g.
    While we can observe the price change Pbvg ,t of every specific variety in the DOF, it
is important to emphasize that the expenditure shares of each household svhg are not ob-
servable. Appendix A uses data from the 1994 and 1996 household expenditure surveys
to document that within narrow product categories, richer households tend to purchase
more expensive varieties. We link expenditure shares svhg to household income following
this evidence, and assume that high-income households consume high-priced varieties
while low-income households consume low-priced varieties. Section 3.5.1 below per-
forms two additional exercises that employ information on spending patterns to construct
alternative versions of the Within price index.10
    We classify varieties as high- or low-priced using two alternative criteria. First, we
split varieties according to whether their average price between January 1994 and Octo-
ber 1994 – the 10 months prior to the devaluation for which we have data – was above or
below the average price of the median good in the generic category. Second, we split the
January 1994-October 1994 average prices into quartiles in each generic category, and fo-
cus on products that are in the highest vs. the lowest quartiles. Focusing on the 10-month
average (January 1994-October 1994) as the base period in which we classify varieties into
high- or low- price bins, as opposed to the price in one particular month, has the advan-
tage that temporary sales are less likely to be identified as low prices. Appendix 3.5 shows
that using January 1994 as our base period does not significantly affect our results.
   One potential concern with this procedure is that high and low pre-devaluation prices
  10 Note  that the distinction between the Across and Within effects is driven purely by data availability
considerations. An alternative approach would be to carry out the entire analysis at a higher level of aggre-
gation, such that we can always observe expenditure shares. In a sense, Tables 1a and 1b already do that by
comparing the price indices obtained under the coarsest product classification (8 categories) and the finest
product classification (about 300 product categories) for which expenditure shares are observable. Moving
to a more disaggregated level increases the disparity in the cost of living changes between the high- and
low-income households, suggesting that the anti-poor pattern in price changes manifests itself at multiple
levels of product disaggregation.


                                                     12
may not reflect differences in product attributes (such as the type of retail outlet), but may
come simply from price dispersion due to staggered price adjustment. If some prices are
low at the beginning of the sample because they have not been adjusted in a long time,
a large increase in these prices may simply reflect that the price is finally being adjusted.
To avoid this concern, we limit our analysis to specific varieties for which we see a price
change between January 1994, our base month, and October 1994, the month prior to the
devaluation. For this sample of products, we can be more confident that changes in prices
that occur after October 1994 are not due to the firms resetting old prices.
    Finally, the Within price index from equation (8) can only be computed for those prod-
uct categories in which identical goods can be observed continuously through time. Un-
fortunately, this is not feasible for every category, since some categories were discontin-
ued in the April 1995 revision of the consumer price index. As a consequence, only 284
of the 331 generic categories can be traced before March 1995. The continuing categories
account for 82 percent of the expenditures. In addition, there are some generic categories,
most prominently apparel, for which the micro price quotes are based on ’samples’ of
products, as opposed to unique individual products. After excluding these product cate-
gories, there are 231 categories in which identical products can be observed continuously
through time, accounting for 55 percent of total consumption expenditures.11 To compute
a price index that reflects the importance of the Within effect for the entire economy we
need to take a stand on how the relative price of cheap vs. expensive varieties changed
for the missing categories.
    With this in mind, we compute the Within price index under two limiting assump-
tions. First, we take a conservative approach and assume that the relative price of cheap
vs. expensive varieties remained constant for the missing generic categories. In this case,
the Within price index is given by:

                                h
                              PbWithin,t =     Â      w g Pbhg,t +    Â      w g Pbg,t ,                (9)
                                              g2 GM                  g2 GU


where G M is the set of categories for which identical varieties are measured continuously
through time, GU is the set of categories for which identical goods cannot be measured
continuously through time, and Pbg,t is the change in the aggregate price index for the
goods in category g. Second, we make the opposite assumption that the change in the
relative price of cheap vs. the expensive varieties for the unmeasured categories was
equal to the (weighted) average change of the price of cheap and expensive varieties that
  11 For
      the median category, we can trace 69 different price quotes through time, and the initial ratio of the
maximum to the minimum price within the median category is 4.7.


                                                      13
we do observe. In particular, we assume that for each category g 2 GU , the price index is
                                    Â g2G M w g Pbhg,t
Pbhg,t = Pbg,t ⇥                                       .                    In this case, the Within price index is given by:
                                    Â g2G w g Pbg,t M



                                                        h
                                                                                                                                                                Â g2GM w g Pbhg,t
                                                      PbWithin,t =                                Â                w g Pbhg,t +     Â      w g Pbg,t                              .                                                                         (10)
                                                                                                 g2 GM                            g2 GU                         Â g2G w g Pbg,t   M


    Figure 2 plots the evolution of the Within price indices computed when we sort goods
relative to the median price within each product category. The price indices for high vs.
low prices are very close to each other before the October 1994 devaluation. Following
the devaluation, the price indices start to diverge.

                                                                                      Figure 2: The Within price indices

                                               Conservative                                                                                                                                 Liberal
   2




                                                                                                                                     2
                                                                                                                                     1.5
   1.5




                                                                                                                                     1
   1
         1994m1

                  1994m4

                           1994m7

                                    1994m10

                                                 1995m1

                                                          1995m4

                                                                   1995m7

                                                                            1995m10

                                                                                        1996m1

                                                                                                 1996m4

                                                                                                          1996m7

                                                                                                                     1996m10




                                                                                                                                           1994m1

                                                                                                                                                    1994m4

                                                                                                                                                             1994m7

                                                                                                                                                                      1994m10

                                                                                                                                                                                   1995m1

                                                                                                                                                                                             1995m4

                                                                                                                                                                                                      1995m7

                                                                                                                                                                                                               1995m10

                                                                                                                                                                                                                           1996m1

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    1996m4

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             1996m7

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      1996m10
                                              P Low Income                            P High Income                                                                             P Low Income                             P High Income



Notes: This figure plots the Within price indices for consumers that buy the varieties priced above (“P High
Income”) and below (“P Low Income”) the median price within each product category. The Conservative
price indices are defined in (9), and the Liberal indices in (10).


    The values for the resulting price indices are reported in Table 2. Columns 1-2 and
4-5 report the price indices when we sort varieties based on whether their average price
prior to the devaluation was below and above the median. Even according to our most
conservative price index, inflation was substantially higher for the varieties that were
initially below the median: by October 1996, the price index composed of these varieties
increased by 14 percentage points more than the price index of varieties initially above the
median. According to the ’Liberal’ index, the difference in inflation between these price
indices was 22 percent. Columns 3-4 and 7-8 show the price indices based on varieties that
were in the top and bottom quartiles of the price distribution as of the January-October
1994 period. By October 1996, inflation was between 21 and 35 points higher, depending
on the choice of the price index, for varieties in the cheapest quartile relative to the most

                                                                                                                               14
expensive quartile. This shows that the welfare losses from exchange rate depreciations
for poor households can be significantly higher due to the Within effect.

                                    Table 2: The Within price index

                           Conservative                                                      Liberal
               Below      Above       Quart. Quart.                   Below               Above      Quart. Quart.
               Median     Median        1     4                       Median              Median      1      4

 Oct. 94         1.00        1.00          1.00       1.00                 1.00            1.00       1.00   1.00
 Oct. 95         1.50        1.41          1.52       1.39                 1.53            1.38       1.57   1.34
 Oct. 96         1.88        1.74          1.92       1.71                 1.91            1.69       1.99   1.64
Note: These tables report the Within price indices defined in equation (8). The left panel reports the Con-
servative price indices (equation 9), while the right panel reports the Liberal price indices (equation 10).
Columns labeled Below/Above Median report the price indices for consumers that buy the varieties priced
above/below the median price in each product category. Columns labeled Quart. 1/4 report the price
indices for consumers that buy varieties with prices in the 1/4th quartiles of the price distribution within
each product category.




3.4    The Combined effect
This section computes the Combined price index, defined in equation (5) and reproduced
here for convenience:

                                          Pbth =       Â wgh Pbhg,t .
                                                      g2 G


This index combines the two mechanisms captured by the Across and Within price indices
computed above. Since we do not observe the varieties consumed by each household,
we report the comparison of a hypothetical low-income and a hypothetical high-income
household. The low-income household is defined as one that has across-goods expendi-
ture shares w gh of a household in the bottom income decile, and on top of that consumes
the cheaper varieties within each g. The high-income household has w gh ’s of the top in-
come decile, and within each g consumes the more expensive varieties.
   As discussed in Section 3.3, the indices Pbhg,t cannot be computed for all product cat-
egories. We proceed as above, and compute the Combined price index under the two
limiting assumptions from the previous section. In particular, in the conservative version
there is no Within effect in categories where it cannot be directly measured:

                                 Pbth =     Â      w gh Pbhg,t +    Â      w gh Pbg,t ,                       (11)
                                           g2 GM                   g2 GU


                                                      15
while in the liberal version the Within effect is equally strong in the unmeasured cate-
gories as it is in measured ones:

                                                                                                                                                          Â g2GM w gh Pbhg,t
                                                            Pbth =                        Â              w gh Pbhg,t +         Â      w gh Pbg,t                             .                                                                               (12)
                                                                                      g2 GM                                   g2 GU                       Â g2G w gh Pbg,t
                                                                                                                                                                       M


   Figure 3 plots the month-to-month evolution of the Combined price index under the
two alternative assumptions, computed when the high-income household consumes va-
rieties priced above the median, and the poor household below the median within each
product category. Note that the price indices for the two households are very close to
each other before the October 1994 devaluation, after which they start to diverge.

                                                                           Figure 3: The Combined price indices

                                              Conservative                                                                                                                                   Liberal
  2




                                                                                                                                      2
  1.5




                                                                                                                                      1.5
  1




                                                                                                                                      1
        1994m1

                 1994m4

                          1994m7

                                   1994m10

                                                1995m1

                                                         1995m4

                                                                  1995m7

                                                                           1995m10

                                                                                       1996m1

                                                                                                1996m4

                                                                                                           1996m7

                                                                                                                    1996m10




                                                                                                                                            1994m1

                                                                                                                                                     1994m4

                                                                                                                                                              1994m7

                                                                                                                                                                       1994m10

                                                                                                                                                                                    1995m1

                                                                                                                                                                                              1995m4

                                                                                                                                                                                                       1995m7

                                                                                                                                                                                                                1995m10

                                                                                                                                                                                                                            1996m1

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     1996m4

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              1996m7

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       1996m10
                                             P Low Income                            P High Income                                                                               P Low Income                             P High Income



Notes: This figure plots the Combined price indices. The Conservative price indices are defined in (11), and
the Liberal indices in (12). The Combined indices are depicted for consumers that buy the varieties priced
above and below the median price within each product category.


   The corresponding price indices are reported in Table 3. The difference in inflation
faced by high- and low-income households is startling. According to the most conser-
vative index, if we split varieties according to median prices, the change in price two
years after the devaluation was 34 percentage points higher for the poorest households
compared to the richest ones. Under the liberal index, inflation for the poorest house-
holds was 41 percentage points higher than for the richest households. The following
subsection shows that the magnitude of these results is robust to a number of alternative
assumptions used to build the price indices.




                                                                                                                              16
                                 Table 3: The Combined price index

                            Conservative                                       Liberal
               Below       Above       Quart. Quart.            Below       Above      Quart. Quart.
               Median      Median        1     4                Median      Median      1      4

 Oct. 94         1.00        1.00          1.00     1.00          1.00         1.00          1.00     1.00
 Oct. 95         1.58        1.39          1.60     1.38          1.60         1.36          1.64     1.34
 Oct. 96         2.04        1.70          2.08     1.68          2.07         1.66          2.13     1.62
Note: These tables report the Combined price indices defined in equation (5). The left panel reports the
price indices under the Conservative assumptions (equation 11), while right panel reports the Liberal price
indices (equation 12). Columns labeled Below/Above Median report the price indices for consumers that
buy the varieties priced above/below the median price in each product category. Columns labeled Quart.
1/4 report the price indices for consumers that buy varieties with prices in the 1/4th quartiles of the price
distribution within each product category.


3.5     Robustness
This section presents two sets of robustness checks. First, we provide two alternative
measurements of the Within effect, in which differences in expenditure patterns across
households are benchmarked to different data sources. Second, we evaluate whether dif-
ferences in substitution possibilities across high- and low-income households exacerbate
or dampen the welfare implications of our findings. Appendix B collects additional ro-
bustness checks, including: (i) alternative assumptions for calculating the baseline Within
effect; (ii) restricting attention to consumers and prices in Mexico City; and (iii) ’placebo’
experiments to show that the Within effect is not present in non-devaluation periods. Ad-
ditionally, Appendix C discusses evidence based on an entirely different data source, the
Economist Intelligence Unit CityData.


3.5.1   Additional measurement of expenditure shares

The main limitation of the Within price index is that variety-level expenditures by Mexi-
can households are not directly observed. As a result, the baseline Within effect is based
on hypothetical households consuming varieties above and below median in each prod-
uct category. Unfortunately, there are no available data sources for variety-level expendi-
ture over this period in Mexico. This subsection contains two exercises that adopt alterna-
tive approaches to model the within-category expenditure shares to construct the Within
price indices.




                                                     17
Matching estimated differences in prices paid by high- and low-income households
This exercise uses data from the Mexican household expenditure surveys to match vari-
eties to households in the top vs. the bottom income decile. We proceed in three steps.
First, for each household in the survey, we compute the unit values in each product cate-
gory as the ratio of expenditures in the category divided by quantity consumed. Second,
for each product category with available unit value data, we obtain the log difference in
unit values paid by households in the highest and the lowest income deciles. Third, we
combine these estimates with the DOF data and, starting from the variety that has the
median price in each category find the two prices that are closest to being at a log differ-
ence corresponding to the unit value observed in the survey. Further details of unit value
differences estimation are described in Appendix A.
    This procedure has the advantage of being based on the actual differences in unit
values paid by high- vs. low-income households in each g. As such, it captures the
heterogeneity in the consumption patterns across the income distribution for different
goods: there may be some g in which the high- and the low-income households consume
similar unit values on average, while in other g the unit values of different households
are vastly different. There are two caveats, however. First, while there are infinitely many
bundles of goods that would give the same unit values, this procedure uses only two
varieties per product category. Second, the expenditure survey only contains unit value
data for a limited set of products, an thus we can only compute the indices for a bundle of
goods that accounts for 20 percent of consumption expenditures (as opposed to 55 percent
in our baseline procedure).
    Appendix Table A6 reports the resulting Within price indices. The magnitude of the
liberal Within effect is slightly larger than our baseline when using the above/below the
median prices of the varieties. Note that the conservative Within effect is mechanically
lower than in the baseline (0.05 two years after the devaluation vs. 0.13 in Table 2), since
the categories for which we can compute the Within effect with this alternative method-
ology comprise a lower share of consumption expenditures (0.20 vs. 0.55), and the con-
servative calculation attributes zero Within effect to unmeasured categories.


Matching expenditure shares from US scanner data This exercise uses scanner data for
the United States to compute expenditure weights in high- and low-priced varieties for
households across the income distribution. In particular, we use the Nielsen HomeScan
database described by Broda and Weinstein (2010) and the large literature that followed.
This database contains barcode-level purchases by about 50,000 US households in 23 cities
in grocery stores, drug stores, and general merchandise stores. The barcode items are


                                            18
divided into about 1,200 product modules, which are fairly specific.12 We use data for
2006 (earliest year of HomeScan available to us). Within each product module, we express
all prices in common units (per ounce or per item), and rank barcode-store combinations
according to price.13 We then compute the expenditure shares of high- and low-income
households in the survey on expensive and cheap varieties, and use those expenditure
shares to construct alternative Within price indices.
    This exercise comes with a number of caveats. First, the scanner data are for a different
country and time period. Second, these data only cover grocery and household merchan-
dise, expenditure on which accounts for on average less than 7% of pre-tax household
income in these data. Third, the range and reliability of household income data in Home-
Scan is limited. The income variable is household income 2 years prior to the year the
scanner data were collected. The income information comes in ranges, with the highest
income category being $200,000 or above. We compare the expenditures of households
in this high-income category to the households with reported household income below
$20,000. Note that the income disparity between the high- and low-income households in
HomeScan is smaller than the one between the top and bottom deciles in Mexico, which
was about 23-fold in 1994 (Appendix Table A5). We found that while the high-income
category is reasonably homogeneous, the low-income category is highly heterogeneous
and includes households that are not low-income in permanent-income terms, such as
younger households and students. For these households, the fact that income is reported
with a 2-year lag potentially injects substantial noise. To partly address this issue, we
focus on married households with heads between 30 and 65 in our analysis.
   Appendix Figure A3 plots the shares of expenditure by high- and low-income house-
holds on items that belong in each price decile within their product module. It is in-
deed the case that lower-income households spend disproportionately on lower-priced
items, and high-income households on higher-priced items within modules. The shares
are monotonic: the highest expenditure share for the high-income consumers is in the
10th price decile, and shares decline moving down deciles. On the flip side, the high-
est expenditure share for the low-income consumers is in the bottom decile, and shares
decline moving up deciles. All in all, 78% of expenditure by high-income households
is on items above the median price, and 61% of expenditure of the low-income house-
holds is on items below the median price. Given the considerations mentioned above, it
  12 For example, there are 18 different product modules of cheese, such as “Cheese, Grated,” or “Cheese,
Processed, Snack.”
  13 This requires restricting attention to product modules in which we are confident that the items are

comparable. For example, we can rank prices per ounce in product module “Tomato Puree,” but not in
“Frozen Novelties,” and thus we use the former but not the latter product module.


                                                   19
is not surprising that the expenditure shares in the scanner data are less stark than our
assumption that the high-income households consume only items above the median and
low-income households below the median. Product categories that we normally think of
as more differentiated by quality exhibit expenditure patterns very much in line with our
assumption. For instance, in Men’s Toiletries, Photographic Supplies (that includes cam-
eras), and Wine, nearly all the expenditures by the low-income households is on items
below the median price, and 100% of expenditure by the high-income households is on
items above the median price.
   We use the expenditure shares observed in the US scanner data to construct the Within
effect for the Mexican devaluation. Instead of assuming that the high-income households
have equal expenditure shares on all items above the median price as in the baseline, we
assign to the high-income households the expenditure shares in each decile reported in
Appendix Figure A3. Then, we compute the Within price index of that household by
tracking prices in each price decile following the devaluation. Formally, the household-
specific price change in product category g for household h is:

                                            10
                               Pbhg,t ⌘    Â       shpdec Pbg,pdec,t ,                  (13)
                                          pdec=1


where shpdec is the expenditure share by household h on items whose price is in price decile
pdec, that comes from the HomeScan data and reported in Appendix Figure A3. Pbg,pdec,t
is the average price change of items in product category g that belong to the decile pdec of
prices in that product category. Then, the Within effect aggregates these household- and
product category-specific prices as in the baseline, equation (8).
    The results are presented in the bottom panel of Appendix Table A6. The basic finding
in confirmed. The cost of living inflation for the low-income households was 7 percent-
age points higher according to the Conservative Within price index, and 12 percentage
points higher according to the Liberal one. While the magnitudes are smaller than in the
baseline, this is not surprising: for the reasons outlined above the differences in expen-
diture patterns between high-income and low-income households in the HomeScan data
are likely to be attenuated relative to what is likely the case in Mexico. Nonetheless, even
when we apply these relatively modest expenditure differences to the Mexican devalua-
tion experience, the Within effect continues to be noticeably anti-poor.




                                             20
3.5.2   Differences in substitution possibilities across households

Substitution bias and the Across effect One well-known limitation of Laspeyres price
indices is that they overstate how price changes affect welfare due to the substitution bias
(see, e.g. Hausman, 2003). In particular, differences in the measured price index changes
for high- and low-income households may not necessarily translate into differences in
welfare if poor households are better able to substitute consumption across categories
in response to price changes. With this in mind, we recalculate the Across price indices
using expenditure weights from the 1996 household survey. The price index based on
end-of-period weights is likely to understate the true welfare effects of the price changes.
   The price indices under 1996 weights are reported in Appendix Tables A7a and A7b.
The magnitude of the observed inflation differences between income deciles is similar
to that obtained under the 1994 weights: inflation for the poorest decile is 18 percentage
points higher than inflation for the richest decile. We conclude that the ability to substitute
towards cheaper categories did not substantially mitigate the disparity in the welfare
losses between rich and poor households arising from differences in expenditure shares
across product categories.


Substitution bias and the Within effect The Within effect measured in the previous sec-
tion was also computed using Laspeyres price indices, and hence subject to the substitu-
tion bias. If low-income households are better able to substitute away from high-inflation
varieties than high-income households, our Within indices will overstate the distribu-
tional impact of the devaluation. Unfortunately, we cannot conduct a robustness exercise
analogous to the one above for the Within effect, as we do not observe expenditure shares
for the different varieties within product categories either before or after the devaluation.
    To evaluate whether differences in substitution possibilities for high- vs low- income
households can overturn the Within effect, we simulate changes in expenditures assum-
ing a CES demand structure across varieties within each good and using our price data.
In particular, let the share of expenditures by household h on variety v g of good g be given
by the CES functional form:

                                                           1 sg
                                                    avhg pvg ,t
                                   svhg ,t =                      1 sg
                                                                         ,                (14)
                                               Âv0g 2 g avh0g pv0g ,t

where avhg is a taste shifter for variety v g in household h’s preferences, and sg is the elas-
ticity of substitution between varieties of product category g. The preference shifters avhg
capture, in reduced form, the notion that different households prefer different varieties,

                                                   21
perhaps in a systematic way – such as the high-income households preferring higher-
quality varieties. They are treated as free parameters in this exercise, the only assumption
being that they are non-time-varying.
   We are interested in computing a Paasche price index that is consistent with our as-
sumptions on the expenditure shares svhg ,94 before the devaluation and with the observed
changes in prices. We proceed in three steps. First, we use observed pre-devaluation
prices pvg ,94 to infer the taste shifters avhg for each variety v g of each product category g
that are consistent with the assumption that before the devaluation high- (low-) income
households put equal weight on varieties priced above (below) the median. These taste
shifters are given by:
                                           "              #sg    1 h              "              #sg          1
                         avhg                  pvg ,94            svg ,94             pvg ,94
                                  =                                          =                                    ,   (15)
                         avh0                  pv0g ,94           svh0 ,94            pv0g ,94
                            g                                        g


where the second equality comes from our baseline assumption that the high- (low-) in-
come households consume all varieties v g above (below) the median price with equal
shares in 1994.
    Second, we plug in the implied taste shifters and the observed prices in 1996 in equa-
tion (14) to obtain the relative shares in 1996:
                                                    "                #sg   1"              #1
                                svhg ,96                  pvg ,94               pvg ,96
                                                                                                     sg
                                               =                                                          .
                                svh0 ,96                  pv0g ,94              pv0g ,96
                                   g



Using the equation above and noting that shares must add up to one, Â svhg ,96 = 1, we
obtain the expenditure share of each variety in 1996 as a function of the price changes and
the elasticity if substitution.
                                                          h                      i1    sg
                                                       pvg ,96 /pvg ,94
                                       svhg ,96   =     h                i1                 sg
                                                                                                 .                    (16)
                                                    Âvg pvg ,96 /pvg ,94

    Third, we use the imputed shares (16) to measure the Within price index using Paasche
price indices, which capture substitution away from varieties for which inflation was high
following the devaluation. Such substitution is clear in equation (16): when sg > 1, vari-
eties increasing in price in relative terms will see their shares fall. Given the considerable
uncertainty regarding the appropriate value of sg , we treat it as a free parameter ranging



                                                                 22
between 0 and 30, and assess the the sensitivity of our results to it.14
    Appendix Figure A4 presents the results of computing the Within effect with Paasche
instead of Laspeyres price indices.15 It depicts the resulting PbWithin,t
                                                                   h       for the high- and
low-income households as a function of sg . Using end-of-period weights unsurprisingly
         h
lowers PbWithin,t at high levels of substitution elasticity. This is intuitive: there is sub-
stantial dispersion in price changes at the variety level. Allowing agents to substitute
towards varieties with the smallest price changes following the devaluation and assum-
ing those varieties are very close substitutes mitigates the welfare impact of the increase
                                                            h
in prices. We highlight, however, that the gap between PbWithin,t  between high- and low-
income households is evident at different values of sg . Indeed, the percentage point gap
     h
in PbWithin,t between the rich and the poor is about the same under sg = 30 as it is under
sg = 0. Note that what is important for the Within effect is not whether agents substi-
tuted per se, but rather whether the high- and low-income households had differential
substitution possibilities. These possibilities depend on whether the price increases were
concentrated in a few varieties or broad-based across all the varieties consumed by each
type of household. It turns out that while allowing for substitution between varieties af-
                     h
fects the level of PbWithin,t                                        h
                              , is does not erase the disparity in PbWithin,t between high- and
low-income households.16


4      Mechanisms
This section evaluates different mechanisms that may be responsible for the relative price
changes underlying the indices computed in the previous section. Our analysis follows
that in Burstein et al. (2005), who argue that the primary force behind the large drop
in real exchange rates after large devaluations is the slow adjustment in the price of
non-tradeable goods and services. Our contribution in this section is to provide new
    14 Brodaand Weinstein (2010) report elasticities of substitution between product varieties in the range of
7 to 11 in barcode-level data. A potential concern is that the sg ’s may be different for high- and low-income
households. There are now several sets of income-specific estimates of sg from scanner data that find no
difference between high- and low-income households in the average level of sg (Handbury, 2013; Argente
and Lee, 2015; Faber and Fally, 2016), so we assume that it is the same for all households.
   15 Formally, these Within indices are obtained by using the shares in equation (16) to compute the

household-specific price indices Pbhg,t defined in equation (6), and using the resulting Pbhg,t ’s for the com-
putation of the Within price indices in equations (9) and (10).
   16 Burstein et al. (2005) and Burstein et al. (2010) show that large devaluations lead to “flight from quality:”

substitution from expensive towards cheaper varieties. To the extent that high-income households are
better able to substitute towards cheaper varieties following a devaluation (as they start out consuming
relatively more of the high-priced varieties), this type of substitution pattern within product categories
should if anything amplify the anti-poor welfare effects of a devaluation.



                                                        23
evidence that cross-sectional heterogeneity in these dimensions can also account for dif-
ferential price changes across goods and varieties, and therefore carries distributional
consequences across consumers.
   We first show that low-income households spend a higher fraction of their income on
tradeable product categories, and among tradeables, on categories with systematically
lower non-tradeable component. This together with the changes in the relative price of
tradeables to non-tradeables following the devaluation provides an account of the Across
effect. We then evaluate whether the leading explanations for incomplete exchange rate
pass-through into retail prices are consistent with the relative price changes underlying
the Within effect. We discuss the role of local distribution costs, tradeable goods that
are locally produced, and variable markups in generating relative price changes within
product categories.


4.1   A simple framework for understanding relative price changes
Competitive retailers combine physical goods with distribution services in fixed propor-
tions to sell the goods to consumers. The retail price of variety v g is given by:

                                   Pvg ,t = PvTg ,t + nvg PtD ,                           (17)

where PvTg ,t , PtD and nvg denote the price of the physical good, the price of distribution
services, and the amount of distribution services required to provide one unit of the retail
variety v g . The proportional price change for retail variety v g is given by
                                                   h          i
                                            T
                              b            b
                              Pvg ,t = hvg Pvg ,t + 1      hvg PbtD ,                     (18)

where 1       hvg ⌘ nvg P D /Pvg is the distribution margin for variety v g . We are interested
in understanding how differences pass-through into retail prices affect consumers differ-
entially across the income distribution. In what follows, we assume that distribution ser-
vices are purely non-tradeable, so that PbtD = PbtN , where PtN is the price of non-tradeable
goods. We also assume that the price of the tradeable goods at the dock or at the factory
gate relative to the price of non-tradeables moves in proportion to the exchange rate –
PbvTg ,t PbtN = avg E
                    bt , where avg     0. The parameter avg captures in a reduced form the
fact that pass-through into prices at the dock can be incomplete and can differ across va-
rieties. We discuss different sources of incomplete pass-through into border prices below.
Combining these assumptions, equation (18) becomes:



                                               24
                                   Pbvg ,t = PbtN + hvg ,t          b
                                                             1 av g Et .                 (19)

Aggregating up to the good category, the change in the price index for category g, Pbg,t ⌘
1           b
Vg Âv g 2 g Pv g ,t , is given by:

                                                          ⇣         ⌘
                           Pbg,t = PbtN + hg a g E
                                                 bt + covv hvg , avg Ebt ;               (20)
                      1
where 1    hg ⌘ 1     Vg  Âvg 2 g hvg is the average share of distribution services among va-
                                                                              ⇣       ⌘
rieties of g, a g captures the average pass-though in category g, and covv hvg , avg is the
covariance between the distribution margins and pass-through into border prices within
product category g. In what follows, we ignore this covariance and focus on the first order
terms.
   Equations (19) and (20) relate changes in retail prices following a devaluation to local
distribution margins and pass-through into border prices. They state that varieties and
product categories for which distribution margins are high and pass-through into border
prices is low will experience smaller proportional price changes. To the extent that expen-
diture patterns across the income distribution are systematically related to these product
characteristics, large devaluations will have distributional consequences.
    Differences in pass-through into border prices, captured by the parameter avg , can be
driven by multiple factors, including differences in markup changes across varieties. In
what follows, we focus on one dimension of heterogeneity in avg across goods: the distinc-
tion between goods produced purely for local consumption and goods that are actually
traded internationally. We focus on this dimension because it has played a prominent
role in the literature on large devaluations and because it is one dimension that we can
measure in the data (see, e.g. Burstein et al., 2005). Appendix D lays out a complete
accounting framework in which price changes are also affected by changes in markups
following Burstein and Gopinath (2015), to illustrate where variable markups can poten-
tially enter, and reviews the available literature on their role. Importantly, the exercises
below are still valid in the presence of variable markups.


4.2   Understanding the Across effect
Our explanation for the Across effect relies on two premises: (i) the differences in the non-
tradeable component of different product categories explain the good-level price changes
following the devaluation; and (ii) there is a systematic relationship between the non-
tradeable component and expenditure shares of high- and low-income households: the


                                                  25
poor have higher effective expenditure shares in tradeables. We now provide empirical
evidence on each of these in turn.


4.2.1   Distribution margins, local goods, and price changes

This section shows how the observed price changes following the devaluation are related
to differences in distribution costs and the share of local goods across product categories.
With that in mind, we assume that there are two types of tradeable goods: those that are
produced purely for local consumption and those that are actually traded internationally.
Under these assumptions, equation (20) can be written as:

                           Pbg,t = PbtN + hg aloc E
                                                  bt + hg q g (aint          bt ,
                                                                      aloc ) E                      (21)

where aint and aloc control the pass-through into border prices for internationally traded
and local goods respectively, and q g is the share of internationally traded goods in prod-
uct category g. Note that to the extent that aint > aloc , pass-through will be higher for
internationally traded goods.17


Distribution margins and price changes Figure 1 has already documented that the rel-
ative price of tradeables to non-tradeables increased following the devaluation. We now
show that among the categories classified as tradeables, the prices of goods with higher
distribution margins increased by less. To take equation (20) to the data, however, we
need to know the distribution margins for disaggregated product categories. Unfortu-
nately, these data are not available for Mexico for a period close to the 1994 devaluation.
Thus, we focus on retail margins from the 2004 Mexican Retail Census. The underlying
assumption behind the exercise is that the variation in distribution margins across prod-
uct categories is at least partly technologically determined, and thus the 2004 data are
informative of the cross-category variation in distribution margins in 1994. To the extent
this measure provides a noisy indicator of Mexican distribution margins in 1994, the noise
will likely bias us towards finding no patterns in the data.
    We define the retail margin as the ratio of the retail price to the cost of the merchandise
that is purchased in order to sell at the retail establishment. The Retail Census reports this
information by store types. We match these store categories by hand to the product cat-
egories in the Mexican consumer price data. The store types and the resulting matches
  17 Bursteinet al. (2005) show that a model in which the prices of local goods move like non-tradeable
prices following a large devaluation (aloc ⇡ 0), while pass-through into traded prices is almost complete
(aint ⇡ 1) can successfully account for the aggregate pass-through after large devaluations in a panel of
countries.


                                                    26
are reported in Appendix Table A12. According to these data, the distribution margins
range from about 0.15 to about 0.82 across products, with the mean of 0.45 and the me-
dian of 0.44. Appendix Table A13 reports the 5 categories with the lowest and highest
distribution margins in our data.
    Figure 4 reports the scatterplot of the good-level price changes Pbg,t following the de-
valuation (the change from October 1994 to October 1996) against the one minus the dis-
tribution margin hg as in (20). Each dot represents a tradeable product category. There

                        Figure 4: Price changes and distribution margins
                                         1.6




                                                             Coeff = .801
                                                             Std.Err.
                                                              2
                                                                      = .366
                                                             R = .228
                                                  1.4
                            Pg,Oct96/Pg,Oct94 − 1
                                     1.2




                                                                                                                   Cars
                                         1
                                         .8




                                                        .3                .4        .5             .6         .7    .8
                                                                               1 − Distribution margin (ηg)


Note: This figure presents the scatterplot of the price change in each good against one minus the distribution
margin (hg ) together with an OLS fit following the 1994 Mexican devaluation. The box in the top left corner
reports the coefficient, robust standard error, and the R2 in that bivariate regression.


is a positive and statistically significant relationship between these variables: the product
categories with lower distribution margins experienced larger price increases, exactly as
implied by (20). In spite of the fact that our data on distribution margins come from the
2004 Census, the relationship is strongly significant, and the R2 in this bivariate regression
is 0.23.
    To establish more firmly that this pattern is due to the devaluation, Appendix Figure
A5 plots the same relationship in two placebo periods: one immediately pre-devaluation
and one in the mid-2000s. The picture is very different, with the point estimates for the
slope of the relation negative for the pre-devaluation period, and close to zero and in-
significant in the mid-2000s.


Local goods and price changes We now evaluate whether among tradeables, prices of
product categories with a higher share of local goods increased by less. It is difficult to
quantify the share of local goods in each category g. We use two alternative proxies for

                                                                                       27
the importance of local goods. First, we calculate the import content of absorption in each
                                      ⇥               ⇤
category g, that is we set q g = Mg / Yg + Mg Xg , where Yg , Mg , and Xg denote pro-
duction, imports, and exports in category g respectively. This measure is a lower bound
on the share of pure tradeable goods, as it does not count goods produced and consumed
in Mexico but that are also exportable. Hence, the second measure is openness at the
                                                                ⇥      ⇤ ⇥         ⇤
sector level relative to production and imports, that is: q g = Mg + Xg / Yg + Mg .
Imports, exports, and production data for sufficiently disaggregated sectors that can be
mapped intro the DOF categories are not available in input-output matrices. For this
reason, we compute proxies for q g from the UN Food and Agricultural Organization’s
FAOSTAT database, that reports imports, exports, and production quantities and values
for 60 agricultural products in 1994 in Mexico. Appendix Table A14 reports the matches
between Mexican CPI categories and items in FAOSTAT, the two measures of q g , and
the differences in consumption shares in each category between the top and the bottom
income deciles. These categories combined represent nearly 15% of total consumption
expenditure in Mexico in 1994.
   Figure 5 reports the scatterplot of the product-level price changes Pbg,t following the
devaluation (the change from October 1994 to October 1996) against the one minus the
share of purely traded goods, q g as in (21). Each dot represents a tradeable product cate-
gory. There is a positive relation between the share of pure traded goods and the observed
price changes during the devaluation. The relationship is strongly significant under our
two alternative measures for the share of pure traded goods. Appendix Figure A6 reports
the scatterplots for two placebo periods, and shows that the positive relationship does
not hold absent a large devaluation.


4.2.2   Distribution margins, local goods and consumption patterns

We now evaluate how expenditure shares across product categories are related to ob-
served distribution margins and the share of local goods in each category. Combining (7)
and (21), the Across price index for household h following a devaluation can be written
as:
                                  "                                            #
            Pbh
             Across,t= PbtN + wTh aloc Â we gh hg + [a Int aloc ] Â w
                                                                    e gh hg q g Ebt . (22)
                                             g2 G                   g2 G


Here, wTh ⌘ Â g2T w gh denotes the share of tradeable goods consumed by household h,
                        w gh
    e gh ⌘ Â g2T
and w                           denotes h’s share of spending on tradeable category g in total
                   Â g2T w gh
tradeables expenditure.

                                                    28
                                                       Figure 5: Price changes and share of local goods

                                      Imports to absorption ratio                                                                   Openness
                              4




                                                                                                          4
                                      Coeff = .624                                                                Coeff = .336
                                      Std.Err.
                                       2
                                               = .12                                                              Std.Err.
                                                                                                                   2
                                                                                                                           = .124
                                      R = .144                                                                    R = .051
          Pg,Oct96/Pg,Oct94




                                                                                      Pg,Oct96/Pg,Oct94
                              3




                                                                                                          3
                              2




                                                                                                          2
                              1




                                                                                                          1
                                  0            .2        .4        .6   .8   1                                0               .2      .4        .6   .8   1
                                                              θg                                                                           θg

Note: This figure presents the scatterplots of the price change in each good against one minus the share of
local goods in each product category (q g ) together with an OLS fit following the 1994 Mexican devaluation.
The box in the top left corner reports the coefficient, robust standard error, and the R2 in that bivariate
                                                                                ⇥             ⇤
regression. ’Imports to absorption ratio’ refers to q g proxied by q g = Mg / Yg + Mg Xg . ’Openness’
                              ⇥        ⇤ ⇥           ⇤
refers to q g proxied by q g = Mg + Xg / Yg + Mg .


     According to equation (22), differences in the changes in the Across price index across
households are driven by: i) the share of expenditure on tradeable product categories,
wTh , and ii) expenditure shares across tradeable product categories with different distri-
bution margins and local goods shares Â g2G w             e gh hg and Â g2T w   e gh hg q g . To the extent that
                                                                                      poor
the poor consume relatively more of the tradeable categories, wT                             > wTrich , the across
price index will rise more for the poor. In addition, if the poor consume tradeables
                                                   poor
with low distribution margins Â g2G w            e g h g > Â g2 G w e grich hg and low local goods shares,
          poor
Â g2 T w                     e grich hg q g , the Across price index will rise more for the poor.18 In
        e g h g q g > Â g2 T w
what follows, we combine the expenditure data from the 1994 Mexican household survey
with the sectoral values for hg and q g computed in the previous subsection to study this
relation.
     First, we show that the poor do indeed have higher expenditure shares on tradeable
                poor
categories: wT > wTrich . We sort households into income deciles and compute the ex-
penditure shares of each decile in tradeable and non-tradeable goods.19 The results are
depicted in Figure 6a. Expenditure shares on tradeable goods decrease monotonically
as we move up the income distribution. The difference is quantitatively large: the bot-
tom decile’s tradeable expenditure share is 0.58, compared to 0.4 for the top decile. Ap-
pendix Table A5 reports income-specific expenditure shares across broad consumption
  18 Tosee this, note that aloc 0 and a Int aloc in equation (22).
  19 Appendix   Table A4 classifies the consumption categories in the Mexican CPI the into tradeables and
non-tradeables (source: Bank of Mexico).


                                                                                 29
categories. The largest differences are in the Food, Beverages, and Tobacco and Educa-
tion categories (the expenditure shares of 42% for households at the bottom income decile
vs. 11% for households at the top in Food, and of 3% for the bottom decile vs. 15% for
the top decile in Education). Higher-income households also have larger expenditure
shares in housing, which is partly accounted for by the fact that the imputed expenditure
shares in ’owner-occupied housing’ are larger for the richer households. Note however
that this does not account for the bulk of the expenditure differences across the income
distribution.
                                         Figure 6: Expenditures by income decile
                      (a) Tradeable share of expenditures                                                     (b) Distribution shares
               0.60




                                                                                          .6
               0.55




                                                                                g
                                                                                          .4
                                                                            h
                                                                            ∑Tω gηg/∑Tω
               0.50
           T




                                                                                                   Cars        Others
       h
        ω




                                                                            h

                                                                                          .2
               0.45
               0.40




                                                                                          0




                      1   2   3   4     5      6      7   8   9   10                           1          2      3      4     5      6      7   8   9   10
                                      Income Decile                                                                         Income Decile




Note: Figure 6a plots the expenditure share of tradeables by income decile in the 1994 ENIGH household
                                                                                                  e gh hg , by
survey. Figure 6b plots one minus the distribution margin expenditure share for tradeables, Â g2T w
income decile in the 1994 ENIGH household survey.


   Second, we establish whether among tradeables, the poor exhibit higher expenditure
shares in categories with low distribution margins and a low share of local goods. Be-
cause the distribution margins and local goods shares come from different data sources,
we cannot compute distribution margins and local goods shares at the same level of dis-
aggregation. To evaluate these two margins in isolation, we proceed in two steps. First,
we assume that there are no differences in local goods across product categories (q g = q̄),
and evaluate how Â g2G w e gh hg varies across households. Second, we assume instead that
there are no differences in distribution margins across product categories (hg = h̄), and
evaluate how Â g2G w e gh q g varies across households.

Distribution margins and consumption patterns Figure 6b reports one minus the local
                                                     e gh hg , by income decile. In categories
distribution margin for tradeable expenditure, Â g2T w
other than cars, the pattern is clear. Expenditure-weighted tradeable content falls as in-
come increases. Even restricting attention to tradeables, high-income households have

                                                                       30
higher effective non-tradeable shares, as they consume more in categories with higher
distribution margins. The difference is substantial, falling from about 0.55 to 0.42 between
the bottom and top deciles.
   Cars is an expenditure category that does not fit this pattern. According to the Retail
Census data, cars have a lower than average distribution margin, but are consumed dis-
proportionately more by those at the top of the income distribution. Interestingly, how-
ever, Figure 4 shows that for cars the increase in the price was low relative to what would
be predicted by their low retail margins. Thus, even though cars are a low-distribution
margin good consumed disproportionately more by high-income households, they do
not eliminate the substantial Across effect found in the data.


Local goods and consumption patterns We now evaluate how expenditure shares across
product categories are related to observed local goods shares. The categories for which
q g can be computed in FAOSTAT is only a subset of the T tradeable categories. Thus we
report results for the weighted share of local goods in the FAOSTAT categories, that is,
                                                 w gh
                 e gh q g we compute Â g2 F
instead of Â g2T w                                          q g , where F is the set of tradeable goods
                                              Â g2 F w gh
for which the FAO data are available.
    The results are depicted in Figure 7. Expenditure shares on local goods decrease mod-
estly as we move up the income distribution. The bottom decile’s expenditure share in
pure traded goods is between one and two percentage points higher in the bottom decile
than in the top decile. Appendix Table A5 reports the differences in income-specific ex-
penditure shares across broad consumption categories between the top and the bottom
income deciles. The largest differences are in the Meat and Milk categories, where the
expenditure shares of the top decile are 14 and 7.5 percentage points higher than of the
bottom decile, and in Maize and Beans, for which the bottom decile expenditure shares
are 11-13 percentage points higher than the top decile shares.
   All in all, there is more support in the data for the role of distribution margins than
local goods in generating the Across effect. While both the distribution margin and local
good differences predict correctly the cross-section of price changes following the deval-
uation, we find at best weak evidence that consumption baskets of lower-income house-
holds are significantly skewed towards categories with more pure traded goods.




                                                  31
                                                Figure 7: Tradeable share of expenditures by income decile

                                          Imports to absorption ratio                                                                                      Openness
                              .115




                                                                                                                                  .19
                              .11




                                                                                                                                  .18
                  g




                                                                                                                      g
            h




                                                                                                                h
            ∑FAOω gθg/∑FAOω




                                                                                                                ∑FAOω gθg/∑FAOω
                              .105




                                                                                                                                  .17
            h




                                                                                                                h
                              .1




                                                                                                                                  .16
                              .095




                                                                                                                                  .15
                                     1      2       3      4        5      6      7   8    9       10                                    1     2       3   4     5      6      7   8   9   10
                                                                  Income Decile                                                                                Income Decile



Note: This figure plots the expenditure the share of local goods in each product category (q g ) by income
decile in the 1994 ENIGH household survey. ’Imports to absorption ratio’ refers to q g proxied by q g =
     ⇥              ⇤                                         ⇥         ⇤ ⇥         ⇤
Mg / Yg + Mg Xg . ’Openness’ refers to q g proxied by q g = Mg + Xg / Yg + Mg .


4.3         Understanding the Within effect
4.3.1       Distribution margins and the Within effect

Differences in distribution margins within product categories can lead to a Within effect
if (i) the relative price of varieties with low distribution margins increased following the
devaluation; and (ii) the poor tend to consume varieties with lower distribution margins.
     We first assess whether differences in distribution margins can rationalize the ob-
served variation in price changes across varieties within product categories post-devaluation.
Equation (19) implies that the difference between the price change of any variety v g and
the change in the average price in category g is given by:
                                                                                      0                  av g                                      1
                                                                                          hvg ,t        1 ag                            hg,t   1
                                                        Pbvg ,t        Pbg,t = @                                                                   A ⇥ hg,t              b
                                                                                                                                                                 1 a g Et .                        (23)
                                                                                                        hg,t              1


Equation (23) is the theoretical prediction for variety-level price changes following the
devaluation. It states that prices will increase proportionately more for varieties that have
low distribution margins (high hvg ,t 1 ), and that have higher pass-through into border
prices, avg > a g . Note that we observe the left-hand side of (23) directly. If we could
find proxies for the
                 ! variation in distribution margins and pass-through into border prices
             av g
  hv g ,t   1 ag                         hg,t   1
                                                        and average exchange rate pass-through into retail prices hg,t                                                                               b
                                                                                                                                                                                                1 a g Et ,
            h̄g,t                    1

we could evaluate this theoretical prediction empirically.
   An important challenge in taking (23) to the data is that differences in distribution

                                                                                                         32
margins and tradeability across varieties of the same g are not directly observed. We
circumvent this challenge by focusing on subsets of products g that are composed of
identical physical goods sold in different retail outlets. Restricting attention to identical
physical goods implies that their pass-through into border prices is identical: avg = a g .
As a result, we can then infer differences in distribution margins from differences in their
observed prices. To implement this approach, we manually parse verbal product descrip-
tions, and classify goods as being “the same product” if they have an identical verbal
description and weight. To ensure that we are grouping identical products, we impose
two additional constraints. First, the product description must contain a brand name, and
thus we exclude products whose descriptions only contain product characteristics – for
instance a type of cut of meat – but do not contain brand names. Second, we limit the
sample to goods that have prices quoted in kilos or liters. The resulting sample consists
of 1297 products that have identical product descriptions (e.g. “Corn Flour, Maseca, Bag
of 1 KG”), spread over 79 product categories (e.g. “Corn Flour”).
    For this subset of products, (23) simplifies to:
                                              ✓                                  ◆
                                   b̄ g,t =       hvg ,t    1       h̄ g,t   1
                         Pbvg ,t   P                                                 ⇥ h̄ g,t         b
                                                                                                1 ā g Et ,   (24)
                                                           h̄ g,t   1


and we can use equation (17) to infer differences in distribution margins from observed
price differences:
                          hvg ,t 1 h̄g,t 1    P̄g,t 1 Pvg ,t 1
                                           =                   .                    (25)
                                h̄g,t 1             Pvg ,t 1
In these expressions, the bars denote the averages among only the identical products
within each g.20
    We then assume that distribution costs and changes in exchange rates do account for
                                                                                     bt to match
observed changes in average prices (Burstein et al., 2005), and calibrate hg,t 1 a g E
the observed changes in average prices in each category. That is, using equation (18) we
                      b̄ g,t PbN .
                 bt = P
match hg,t 1 a g E             t
    Based on these two proxies, we compute predicted price changes in the two years
following the devaluation for individual varieties using equation (23). The first column
of Table 4 reports the results of a linear regression of actual price changes on the predicted
price changes. The estimated coefficient is close to 1 and strongly significant. The R2 is
  20 Appendix D.1 derives the model prediction in the presence of multiplicative retail markups, and shows

that our approach of proxying distribution margin differences with proportional price differences is valid
when retail markups are the same across varieties, or more generally as long as the differences in retail
markups are not too negatively correlated with differences in distribution margins across stores (so that the
most expensive stores are not the ones that have lower distribution margins).


                                                           33
equal to 0.135, which means that relying on inferred distribution margins alone we can
account for almost one-sixth of the variation in the observed price changes. Appendix
Figure A7 plots the observed vs. the predicted price changes across identical products
sold in different outlets in the two years following the devaluation. A strong positive
relation between the predicted and the observed price changes is evident. We conclude
that differences in distribution margins across retailers can indeed explain a significant
fraction of the observed variance in price changes following the devaluation.
    Finally, the relation between observed price changes and differences in distribution
margins is nonexistent in non-devaluation periods. We recompute predicted price changes
for two alternative periods in which the nominal exchange rate is roughly constant: i) The
January 1994 – October 1994 period, which is the longest time period before the devalu-
ation for which we have variety-level price data, and ii) the January 2004 – January 2006
period. We compare the observed vs. predicted price changes in Appendix Figure A8,
and report the estimated coefficients in the last two columns of Table 4. It is clear from
the figures that differences in distribution margins do not have explanatory power for
differences in price changes in the absence of large exchange rate movements.

                          Table 4: Predicted vs. observed price changes

                                 Devaluation:              Placebo I:           Placebo II:
                                 Oct94 – Oct96           Jan94 – Oct94        Jan04 – Jan06

           Slope                     1.426***                0.161               -0.0865*
                                      (0.282)               (0.110)              (0.0519)

           Observations               5,079                  5,084                5,742
           R2                         0.135                  0.002                0.003
Notes: ***: significant at the 1% level; *: significant at the 10% level. This table reports the results of
estimating equation (23) for the devaluation period (first column) and two placebo periods. The prices are
for identical goods sold in different stores.



Distribution margins and consumption patterns It remains to link consumption of va-
rieties with different distribution margins to income. Appendix A provides robust em-
pirical evidence that poorer households consume lower-priced varieties. We show above
that at least for varieties of identical physical goods, distribution margins are low for
the cheaper varieties (see equation 25). Appendix C.2 provides some direct evidence to
support this claim based on an alternative data source, the Economist Intelligence Unit




                                                    34
CityData.21
   A recent paper by Atkin et al. (2016) uses a rich collection of barcode, store, and
household-level data in Mexico over 2011-2014 to show that (i) products with identi-
cal barcodes are 12% cheaper in foreign-owned stores compared to domestically-owned
stores; and (ii) higher-income households spend a higher fraction of their retail expendi-
ture in foreign stores. How are these observations reconciled with the evidence in Table
A1 that the poor pay lower prices within product categories? First, Atkin et al. (2016)
also show that similar but not identical products are actually more expensive in foreign-
owned stores, presumably because they are of higher quality. Since richer households
tend to buy higher-quality varieties, this is consistent with the observation that higher-
priced varieties are consumed by the high-income households. Second, even for identical
(barcode-level) products the analysis in Atkin et al. (2016) does not establish that the poor
actually pay more than the rich. Their estimated coefficient reflects the average price
difference between all foreign- and non-foreign-owned stores. It does not rule out the
possibility that both sets of stores are highly heterogeneous and that the poor shop in
particularly cheap domestically-owned stores, and/or that they buy from foreign-owned
stores the goods that are cheaper in those stores.


4.3.2    Local goods and other explanations

In contrast to our findings across food categories in FAO data, a common conjecture is that
within categories low-income households consume local goods, whereas the high-income
households consume imported goods. If the local goods increase in price by less than
imported goods following the devaluation, the resulting Within effect will be pro-poor.
Note that our Within effect exercise assumes only that the poor consume the lower-priced
varieties in each product category. If those lower-priced varieties are also – plausibly –
local goods, our Within effect would capture this difference in consumption baskets across
the income distribution. The fact that our Within effect is still anti-poor suggests that the
imported vs. local goods distinction is not the main driver of the Within effect.
   The Within effect establishes that the more expensive varieties within the same prod-
uct categories experienced smaller price increases following the devaluation. If the more
  21 A recent paper by Jaimovich et al. (2015) shows that in the US low-end retail establishments – where
lower-income households are more likely to shop – are less labor-intensive, and thus likely to exhibit rela-
tively lower retail value added. We acknowledge that this US-based evidence is at best suggestive for our
purposes. As documented by Lagakos (2016), the retail sector looks very different in Mexico compared
to the US. In addition, distribution margins include services of other factors such as capital and materials
inputs, and it is not clear how different types of retail outlets differ in their intensity of the use of those
other factors.



                                                      35
expensive varieties represent higher quality, an explanation for this fact could be that
higher-quality products have lower exchange rate pass-through at the border avg . Several
recent papers document this type of effect. Auer et al. (2014) propose a model of variable
markups in which low exchange rate pass-through into high quality goods arises endoge-
nously as a result of vertical differentiation, and demonstrate that higher-quality products
have lower pass-through using detailed data on car sales in several European countries.
Antoniades and Zaniboni (2015) use barcode-level data from several retailers in the UAE
to show empirically that pass-through into retail prices is indeed lower for high qual-
ity goods. Chen and Juvenal (2016) use bottle-level data for Argentina’s wine exports to
show that pass-through is lower for higher-quality wine. In our own data, exchange rate
pass-through following the Mexican devaluation was indeed lower for higher-priced than
for lower-priced varieties of the same product (results not reported in order to conserve
space, but available upon request). Appendix C.3 provides additional evidence of this
finding using price data for several devaluation episodes from the Economist Intelligence
Unit.


5    Conclusion
Large exchange rate devaluations affect the prices faced by high- and low-income house-
holds differentially. Using the 1994 Mexican peso devaluation, we show that the distri-
butional consequences can be large. In the two years following the devaluation, inflation
of the consumption basket of those in the bottom decile of the income distribution was
between 32 and 39 percentage points higher than for the basket of those in the top decile.
Differences in price changes within narrow product categories account for about half of
this difference.
    We explore in detail one possible explanation for this result: the poor consume fewer
non-tradeable goods. This manifests itself at all levels of product aggregation. Poorer
households tend to spend a larger overall share of their income on tradeables. Across
tradeable categories, the poor have higher expenditure shares in products with system-
atically lower distribution margins. Finally, within detailed product categories, the poor
consume lower-priced varieties that contain relatively less domestic value added. Corre-
spondingly, prices of goods with a smaller non-tradeable component rise more following
a devaluation, leading to anti-poor distributional consequences. Another plausible mech-
anism that can drive the Within effect is differences in markup elasticities with respect to
exchange rate changes between higher- and lower-quality goods. The systematic con-
sumption basket differences we identify are likely to occur in other countries and time

                                            36
periods, and thus the results for Mexico may be informative of the effects of other deval-
uations.


References
Ahlin, Christian and Mototsugu Shintani, “Menu costs and Markov inflation: A theo-
  retical revision with new evidence,” Journal of Monetary Economics, April 2007, 54 (3),
  753–784.

Almås, Ingvild, “International Income Inequality: Measuring PPP Bias by Estimating
  Engel Curves for Food,” American Economic Review, 2012, 102 (2), 1093–1117.

Antoniades, Alexis and Nicola Zaniboni, “Exchange Rate Pass-Through into Retail
 Prices,” June 2015. forthcoming, International Economic Review.

Argente, David and Munseob Lee, “Cost of Living Inequality during the Great Reces-
  sion,” June 2015. Kilts Booth Marketing Series Paper 1-032.

Atkin, David, Benjamin Faber, and Marco Gonzalez-Navarro, “Retail Globalization and
  Household Welfare: Evidence from Mexico,” May 2016. forthcoming, Journal of Political
  Economy.

Auer, Raphael, Thomas Chaney, and Philip Sauré, “Quality Pricing-to-Market,” May
 2014. Mimeo, Swiss National Bank and Toulouse School of Economics.

Berger, David, Jon Faust, John H. Rogers, and Kai Steverson, “Border prices and retail
  prices,” Journal of International Economics, 2012, 88 (1), 62–73.

Broda, Christian and David E. Weinstein, “Product Creation and Destruction: Evidence
  and Price Implications,” American Economic Review, June 2010, 100 (3), 691–723.

Burstein, Ariel T. and Gita Gopinath, “International Prices and Exchange Rates,” in Ken-
  neth Rogoff Elhanan Helpman and Gita Gopinath, eds., Handbook of International Eco-
  nomics, Vol. 4, Elsevier, 2015, chapter 7, pp. 391 – 451.

  , Martin Eichenbaum, and Sergio Rebelo, “Large Devaluations and the Real Exchange
  Rate,” Journal of Political Economy, August 2005, 113 (4), 742–784.

  , Nir Jaimovich, and Pablo Andrés Neumeyer, “Consumer behavior during the 2002
  Argentine crisis: a macroeconomic analysis with microeconomic data,” September
  2010. Mimeo, UCLA, Stanford, and Universidad Torcuato Di Tella.

                                           37
Chen, Natalie and Luciana Juvenal, “Quality, Trade, and Exchange Rate Pass-Through,”
  Journal of International Economics, May 2016, 100, 61–80.

de Carvalho Filho, Irineu and Marcos Chamon, “A Micro-Empirical Foundation for the
  Political Economy of Exchange Rate Populism,” IMF Staff Papers, 2008, 55 (3), 481–510.

Engel, Ernst, “Die Produktions- und Ernteerträge und der Getreidehandel im preussis-
  chen Staate,” Zeitschrift des Königlichen preussischen statischen Bureaus, 1857, 2, 249–89.

  , “Das Lebenskosten belgischer Arbeiterfamilien früher und jetzt,” Bulletin de Institut
  International de Statistique, 1895, 9, 1–124.

Faber, Benjamin, “Trade Liberalization, the Price of Quality, and Inequality: Evidence
  from Mexican Store Prices,” July 2014. mimeo, UC Berkeley.

  and Thibault Fally, “Firm Heterogeneity in Consumption Baskets: Evidence from
  Home and Store Scanner Data,” September 2016. mimeo, UC Berkeley.

Fajgelbaum, Pablo D. and Amit K. Khandelwal, “Measuring the Unequal Gains from
  Trade,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, August 2016, 131 (3), 1113–1180.

Fajgelbaum, Pablo, Gene M. Grossman, and Elhanan Helpman, “Income Distribution,
  Product Quality, and International Trade,” Journal of Political Economy, August 2011, 119
  (4), 721–765.

Friedman, Jed and James Levinsohn, “The Distributional Impacts of Indonesia’s Finan-
  cial Crisis on Household Welfare: A ’Rapid Response’ Methodology,” World Bank Eco-
  nomic Review, December 2002, 16 (3), 397–423.

Gagnon, Etienne, “Price Setting During Low and High Inflation: Evidence from Mexico,”
 The Quarterly Journal of Economics, August 2009, 124 (3), 1221–1263.

Goldberg, Linda S. and José Manuel Campa, “The Sensitivity of the CPI to Exchange
 Rates: Distribution Margins, Imported Inputs, and Trade Exposure,” Review of Eco-
 nomics and Statistics, May 2010, 92 (2), 392–407.

Halac, Marina and Sergio L. Schmukler, “Distributional Effects of Crises: The Financial
 Channel,” Economia, Fall 2004, 5 (1), 1–67.

Handbury, Jessie, “Are Poor Cities Cheap for Everyone? Non-Homotheticity and the
 Cost of Living Across U.S. Cities,” July 2013. mimeo, Wharton.


                                                  38
Hausman, Jerry, “Sources of Bias and Solutions to Bias in the CPI,” Journal of Economic
  Perspectives, 2003, 17 (1), 23–44.

Jaimovich, Nir, Sergio Rebelo, and Arlene Wong, “Trading Down and the Business Cy-
  cle,” September 2015. NBER Working Paper No. 21539.

Kraay, Aart, “The welfare effects of a large depreciation: the case of Egypt, 2000-05,” in
  Hanaa Kheir-El-Din, ed., The Egyptian Economy: Current Challenges and Future Prospects,
  Cairo: The American University in Cairo Press, April 2008.

Lagakos, David, “Explaining Cross-Country Productivity Differences in Retail Trade,”
  Journal of Political Economy, April 2016, 124 (2), 579–620.

Levinsohn, James A., Steven T. Berry, and Jed Friedman, “Impacts of the Indonesian
  Economic Crisis. Price Changes and the Poor,” in Michael P. Dooley and Jeffrey A.
  Frankel, eds., Managing Currency Crises in Emerging Markets, NBER Chapters, National
  Bureau of Economic Research, June 2003, pp. 393–428.

Lopez-Acevedo, Gladys and Angel Salinas, “How Mexico’s Financial Crisis Affected
  Income Distribution,” 2000. mimeo, The World Bank.

Maloney, William F., Wendy V. Cunningham, and Mariano Bosch, “The Distribution of
  Income Shocks during Crises: An Application of Quantile Analysis to Mexico, 1992–
  95,” World Bank Economic Review, 2004, 18 (2), 155–174.

Porto, Guido G., “Using survey data to assess the distributional effects of trade policy,”
  Journal of International Economics, September 2006, 70 (1), 140–160.

Ravallion, Martin, Shaohua Chen, and Prem Sangraula, “New Evidence on the Urban-
  ization of Global Poverty,” Population and Development Review, December 2007, 33 (4),
  667–701.

Schneider, Friedrich and Dominik Enste, “Shadow Economies: Size, Causes, and Con-
  sequences,” Journal of Economic Literature, March 2000, 38, 77–114.

Verhoogen, Eric, “Trade, Quality Upgrading and Wage Inequality in the Mexican Manu-
  facturing Sector,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, May 2008, 123 (2), 489–530.




                                             39
