NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

INTEREST-ONLY/PRINCIPAL-ONLY
MORTGAGE-BACKED STRIPS:
A VALUATION AND RISK ANALYSIS

Alan J. Marcus
Arnold Kling

Working Paper No. 2340

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
August 1987

We thank Bob Taggart for helpful comments. The views expressed in this
paper are not necessarily those of the Federal Home Loan Mortgage Corporation
of the Federal Home Loan Bank Board. The research reported here is part
of the NBER's research program in Financial Markets and Monetary Economics.
Any opinions expressed are those of the authors and not those of the National
Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER Working Paper #2340
August 1987

Interest-Only/Principal-Only Mortgage-Backed Strips:

A Valuation and Risk Analysis

ABSTRACT

We examine the risk characteristics of each portion of 10/PO mortgage
strips, present results of a valuation model of these securities, and examine
market prices of both the interest—only and principal—only portions of

mortgage pools. We show that 10/PC securities are highly sensitive to the
prepayment behavior of the underlying mortgage pool. Because that behavior
varies systematically with the interest rate, and because prepayments affect
the values of 10 and P0 components in opposite ways, the interest—rate risk of
strip securities can differ substantially from that of the underlying mortgage

pool. The P0 component has much longer duration than the underlying mortgage
pool. In contrast, the 10 component typically will have a negative duration,
at least In ranges for which interest—rate movements induce meaningful changes

in mortgage prepayment behavior. We also show how market prices of
partially—stripped MBSs that are actively traded on secondary markets can be

used to infer market values of pure 10/PC strips. Recent market data is fully
consistent with the theoretical insights offered by our valuation model. When
interest rates spiked last April, P0 values fell far more dramatically than
those of the underlying mortgage pooi while 10 values actually rose.

Arnold Kling
Federal Home Loan Bank Board
1776 G Street, NW
Washington, DC 20013

Alan J. Marcus
School of Management
Boston University
704 Commonwealth Avenue

Boston, MA 02215

The huge trading losses of Merrill Lynch and other investment bankers
recently focused considerable attention on interest—only/principal—only

(lO/PO) mortgage—backed securities. These securities are formed by separating
interest payments on mortgage pools from principal repayments and selling

claims to each income stream separately. The 10 security receives all the
interest payments made on the mortgages in the pool. These payments cease

when mortgages are prepaid. PC securityholders, in contrast, benefit from
early payment of principal. Neither the risk characteristics nor the
appropriate pricing of these new securities are yet well understood. Equally
important, it is not widely recognized that in some cases market data is

available that can be used by issuers to price these securities precisely. In
this paper, we examine the risk characteristics of each portion of lO/PO
strips, present results of a valuation model of these securities, and show how
market prices of traded securities can be used to infer the values of both the
interest—only and principal—only portions of mortgage poois.

1. Interest—Rate Risk in lO/PO Securities

The major difficulty in analyzing all mortgage—backed securities lies in

the analysis of prepayments. A 30—year 10% conventional mortgage selling at
par would have a duration of about 8.4 years if prepayments were

disallowed.1 In practice, of course, prepayments shorten durations of
mortgage pools considerably. For example, a prepayment rate of 5 percent of

outstanding mortgages per year would reduce duration to 6.2 years. The
peculiarity of IC/PC securities is that the risk of interest—rate increases is

borne overwhelmingly by the owner of the principal—only security. The

duration of the P0 portion greatly exceeds that of the underlying mortgage

pool, while the duration of the 10 portion is correspondingly smaller. In
fact the IC portion is likely to have negative duration, and thus potentially

may

serve

as a hedging asset for fixed—income portfolios.

This disparity in interest—rate exposure derives primarily from the

interaction of prepayment behavior with interest—rate movements. When

interest

rates increase, the value of the P0 security falls for two reasons.

First, future repayments of principal are worth less as the discount factor
for the time value of money increases. Second, mortgage prepayment rates fall
when interest rates rise, thereby increasing the average time until repayment
of principal. The increase in the time until receipt of principal payments in
conjunction with the increase in the discount rate results in a substantial

decrease in the present value of those payments. These factors lend the P0
security a duration substantially longer than that of the underlying pool of
mortgages.

In

-

contrast, the 10 portion of the mortgage is affected in offsetting ways

by interest rate movements. A decline in interest rates increases the present
value of scheduled interest payments, but simultaneously increases the

incidence of prepayments of principal. Since these prepayments terminate the
stream of interest payments made on the mortgage pooi, they lower the value of

the 10 security. The net effect on the value of the 10 security may be either
positive or negative. However, for interest rates near the coupon rate of the
mortgage pool, prepayments tend to increase enough in response to a fall in

the interest rate that the 10 security loses value. In this empirically
relevant region, the termination of interest payments dominates the effect of
lower discount rates, resulting in a negative duration for the IC security.

—2—

To illustrate these points, consider a 30—year l00,0O0 mortgage with a
10% coupon rate. If prepayments were disallowed, then 84.2% of the present
value of the total cash flows on the loan would derive from the interest
component of payments while only 15.8% would derive from principal

repayments. At the other extreme, if the mortgage were prepaid immediately,
an Interest—only claim would become worthless while the value of the principal

claim would jump from 15,80O to the principal balance of l00,00O.
The effect of prepayment behavior is examined in Table 1 where prepayment

per year is assumed to be a constant fraction of outstanding mortgages. The
effect of prepayment experience is evident. An unanticipated increase in the
prepayment rate from 5% to 7.5% would, even without coincident interest—rate

movements, reduce the value of interest payments from 6l to 53.2 per 100
principal balance, inducing a capital loss to an 10 security holder of 12.8%.

The corresponding gain on the P0 security would be from 39 to 46.8, for a
capital gain of 20%. These calculations are incomplete, of course, because
they ignore the interaction between prepayment behavior and changes in
interest rates, but they do illustrate the wide swings in the relative shares
of the mortgage value that accrue to interest versus principal claimants when

prepayment rates change. Market values in practice should be even more
volatile than suggested by Table 1 since prepayment rates in fact vary in
response to interest—rate swings.

The weighted average of the durations of the 10 and P0 securities must

equal the duration of the underlying pooi of mortgages. Thus, the great
disparity in durations of the component securities are necessary

counterparts: the short or negative duration of the 10 security must be
matched by correspondingly long durations of the P0 security.

—3—

Table 1: Components of Mortgage Values

Percent of Value Due
to Principal Repayments

Prepayment Rate
(per year)

Percent of Value Due
to Interest Payments

0.0%

84.2%

15.8%

2.5

71.0

29.0

5.0

61.0

39.0

75

532

46.8

10.0

47.1

52.9

15.0

38.1

61.9

20.0

31.9

68.1

25.0

27.4

72.6

—4—

2.

Contingent—Claims Analysis
The right to prepay a mortgage is in essence a call option that gives the

homeowner the right to call back the loan from the lender at a price equal to

the scheduled balance remaining on the loan. Thus, mortgage—backed securities
may be valued using the same techniques that have been developed for other

option—valuation problems. In fact, option—pricing techniques have been
applied to GNMA mortgage—backed security valuation by Dunn and McConnell

(1981a, 198lb), Brennan and Schwartz (1985), and others. Here, we apply
similar techniques to the valuation of the IC and P0 components of a

mortgage—backed pool. Following their lead, we assume that there are two
types of mortgage prepayments: economically—motivated prepayments (and
refinancings) that exploit interest rate declines, and "autonomous"

prepayments that arise when homeowners change their residences. We will
assume that 5% of all outstanding mortgages prepay for autonomous reasons in

each year. Such a simplistic specification is arbitrary, but does little harm
to the analysis of the interest—rate dependence of these securities, which

2
depends primarily on economically—motivated prepayment.
Economically—motivated prepayment will occur when the interest rate
reaches a critical point at which refinancing is optimal for the homeowner.
This critical point will be determined by the process under which interest

rates evolve over time. We will assume that the interest rate is expected
to increase when it is below 10% and to fall when above 10%. Hence, 10% is
the natural or long—run equilibrium value of the interest rate. The épeed
with which rates are impelled toward that long—run value is assumed to be
proportional to the difference between the interest rate and its long run
equilibrium value.

3

—5—

In addition to the expected drift in the interest rate, there are

continuous shocks to rates due to unanticipated economic events. We model
interest rate uncertainty as increasing with the level of rates, specifically
that the variance of the interest rate is proportional to the level of the

rate.4 In our numerical simulations, we set the proportionality constant
equal to .25. At a 10 percent interest rate, this results in a standard
deviation of the interest rate of 1.6 percent annually.

Using this particular set of assumptions, we can use a valuation model to
examine the response of 10, P0, and mortgage—pool values to interest rate

changes. Our mathematical approach is modelled after Brennan and Schwartz
(1977), which provides a full discussion of the techniques used to value
interest—rate—dependent option—like securities.
In brief, the valuation methodology uses the dynamics for interest rate
movements given in footnotes 2 and 3 to derive the corresponding dynamics for

the value-of interest—rate dependent securities. These, together with
'boundary conditions" for the values of the security at extreme values of the

interest rate orat optimal prepayment dates, uniquely determine both the

value of the security at all points and the optimal prepayment schedule. In
our model, we employ a version of the liquidity preference theory, and assume
that the expected risk premium earned by each security is proportional to the
instantaneous standard deviation of that security's rate of return, with a
proportionality constant of 0.1.

Such a specification generates a liquidity

premium of about 1.5% for an 8—year duration asset.

Figure 1 is a graph of the value of the 3 securities (10, P0, and the
mortgage pool itself) backed by a mortgage pool with a coupon rate equal to
the long—run equilibrium interest rate, 10%, as a function of the current

—6—

market interest rate. The mortgage pool is assumed to have been issued 10
years ago with an original life of 30 years. The current principal value is

90.78 per l00 original principal. Notice that, as anticipated, the value of
the PC security falls most dramatically with interest rate increases,
especially at interest rates near the optimal prepayment point of about 8

percent. As economically—motivated prepayment becomes more likely at lower
interest rates, the value of the P0 security rises dramatically. In contrast,
the 10 security falls in value with interest rate decreases, even at rates as

high as 14%. Like the PC, the value of the IC security is most sensitive to
the interest rate near the optimal economic—prepayment point.
These interest—rate sensitivities are even more evident in Figure 2,
which depicts the durations of the securities as functions of the interest

rate. The duration of the mortgage pool is nearly 3 years at high interest

rates. Without prepayment, it would be about 6 years. The seemingly—large
difference in duration is due both to the incidence of autonomous prepayments
and to the threat of economic prepayment. Even at an interest rate of 147.,
such a threat is not trivial since the interest rate at that point is drifting

downward to its long—run equilibrium value of 10%. The duration of the
mortgage is even shorter at lower interest rates since economic prepayment is
that much more imminent.

The duration of the P0 security is far larger. For larger values of the
interest rate, it is roughly double that of the mortgage pool. At an interest
rate of 10%, the duration of the PC is 13 years, roughly 5 times that of the

mortgage. From there, duration rises dramatically to 60 years at an interest
rate just above the prepayment point.

—7—

The duration of the IC security is, in contrast, negative and of quite

large magnitude at interest rates below 1OZ. At an interest rate of 11
percent, duration Is 52 years; at 10 percent it is 58 years. From there
duration spikes downward even more dramatically. At the optimal economic
prepayment point duration is essentially infinitely negative.5

These values are more extreme than one would expect to observe in reality
since the valuation model assumes that all outstanding mortgages are prepaid
at the optimal moment, when in practice some homeowners will defer prepayment

for reasons not captured by the model. While the model allows for suboptimal
(autonomous) prepayment, It does not allow for suboptimal non—prepayment.

Nevertheless, the qualitative pattern of strip values Illustrated In Figures 1
and 2 will be observed in practice, and 10/PC strips do empirically exhibit

large durations. Indeed, Figure 5, which traces out estimates of actual 10
and P0 strip values during a period of rising interest rates is remarkably
similar to Figure 1.

Other (nonreported) simulations replicate the analysis of Figures 1 and 2

for mortgage coupon rates of 8 and 12 percent, thus bracketing the long—run

equilibrium interest rate. While the optimal economic—prepayment points
differed from the analysis of Figures 1 and 2, the qualitative patterns that
emerged were otherwise identical.

3.

Investment Implications

The peculiar interest rate exposures of the 10/PC securIties create both

opportunities and risks for their investors. The interest—rate exposure of
the P0 security is apparent. Nevertheless, such securities may be useful

—8—

portfolio tools for investors seeking very—high—duration assets. For example,
pension funds with long—duration liabilities might find PC securities useful
for immunization purposes.
10 securities offer hedging opportunities for investors holding more

conventional fixed—income securities. For example, a thrift institution with
holdings of conventional mortgages could offset some of its interest rate
exposure by holding part of its portfolio in mortgage—backed 10 securities
with negative duration.

4.

Empirical Evidence

While the valuation model presented above is useful for analyzing the
properties of 10/PC securities, the particular values derived are dependent on
assumed autonomous prepayment rates and on the posited process for the

evolution of interest rates. One would like a valuation procedure that is
consistent with market information as reflected in prices of other traded

assets. Fortunately, such data do exist, and market assessments of the values
of the lO/PO components of some mortgage poois can be computed directly from

these data. Hence, the "proper" market prices for the lO/PO components of at
least some mortgage poois can be inferred.
Completely stripped mortgage—backed securities tend to be privately
placed, and to date have been traded only erratically on the secondary

market. Consequently, investment bankers cannot easily rely on market values
of outstanding strips to price newly issued securities. However, FNNA has
issued partially stripped securities that are actively traded that can be used

to infer the market values of IC/PO securities. This inference is made

—9—

possible because the partial strips allocate principal and interest in
different proportions to different—class securites.

To illustrate, consider the issues of "B" and "C" series securities by
FtThIA in the letter half of 1986, in which two 9 percent coupon mortgage—backed

securities (MBSs) were divided up so that the premium classes received 2/3 of
the interest and 1/2 of the principal payments, while the discount classes

received 1/3 of the interest and 1/2 of the principal. The premium class,
therefore effectively became a 12% security (

9% x 2/3

discount class was effectively a 6% security C = 9% x 1/3

1/2) while the

1/2). (However,

these synthetic securities would not behave precisely like original—issue 12
or 6 percent coupon mortgage pools since the prepayment behavior of the
"synthetic" securities would be tied to the 9% coupon rate of the underlying
mortgage pools.

If one were to take a long position in the premium—class security and a
short position -in the discount—class security, the principal payments would

net out to zero, and one would be left with a three percent 10 strip on the

underlying 9% coupon mortgage pools. Therefore, three times the value of the
price difference between the premium and discount securities equals the value

of a pure 9% 10 strip. Substracting the value of that 10 strip from the sum
of the values of the discount and premium securities then gives the value of a

"synthetic" P0 position on the 9% mortgage pooi. The key to this procedure is
that the premium and discount securities are written on the same underlying

MBS and so have identical prepayment exposure. Long and short positions on
different—coupon passthroughs would create Interest and principal—only
securities only until the prepayment behavior of the two passthroughs diverged.
Goldman Sachs supplied us with price data f or 3 types of partial strips:

—10—

the B" and "C" series just discussed In which 9% pools were split into 6 and
12 percent securities, the "D" series, in which an 8.5% coupon MBS was split
into 11% and 6% securities, and the "F", "G", "H", and "I" series, in which 9%

coupon MBSs were split into 11.5% and 6.5% securities. Using these data we
created three synthetic 10 strips and three synthetic P0 strips. The inferred
prices of the 10 and P0 strips over time are presented in Figures 3 and 4.
The three 10 and P0 prices all tended to move together over time, which is

gratifying, given that the underlying mortgage coupons are similar and thus
should have similar prepayment behavior.

The most dramatic price movements took place in April 1987, when the bond

market fell sharply. Prices of mortgage passthroughs (obtained by adding
together the prices of the premium and discount securities) fell as well.

Figure 5 shows that the value of the P0 component fell far more dramatically
than the value of the overall MBS, confirming the extremely long duration of

this asset predicted by the previous sections. In contrast, the value of the
10 security actually rose, also confirming the theoretical prediction of a
negative duration, and indicating that prepayment activity was expected to

decline sufficiently to more than offset the increase In the discount factor
applied to 10 payments.

5. Summary

We have shown that lO/PO securities are highly sensitive to the

prepayment behavior of the underlying mortgage pooi. Because that behavior
varies systematically with the interest rate, and because prepayments affect
the values of 10 and P0 components in opposite ways, the Interest—rate riàk of

—11—

strip securities can differ substantially from that of the underlying mortgage

pooi. The P0 component has much longer duratlonthan the underlying mortgage
pool. In contrast, the 10 component typically will have a negative duration,
at least in ranges for which interest—rate movements induce meaningful changes

in mortgage prepayment behavior. The distinct durations of these securities
make them interesting candidates for immunization of long—term obligations or
for hedging the value of fixed income portfolios.

We've shown how market prices of partially—stripped MBSs that are actively
traded on secondary markets can be used to infer market values of pure lO/PO

strips. This inference method is potentially of value to issuers and
purchasers of such strips. Recent market data is fully consistent with the
theoretical insights offered by our valuation model. When interest rates
spiked last April, P0 values fell far more dramatically than those of the
underlying mortgage pooi while 10 values actually rose.

—12—

Footnotes

1. Duration is, strictly speaking, the weighted average of the times until
receipt of each payment from a security, with weights proportional to the

present value of each payment. For mortgages with possible prepayments,
such a definition is problematic since the cash flow stream will vary with

prepayment experience. Throughout this paper, I will use duration in a
looser, but more common, context as the interest—rate elasticity of a
security's value, that is, as the proportional change in the security's
price due to a 1 percent change in its yield to maturity.

2. This simple rule is probably reasonably realistic. Although prepayment
rates generally are lower in early years of mortgage lives, before they
ultimately level off, mortgage defaults are generally higher in the early

years. Because these mortgages are insured, a default is essentially
equivalent to an autonomous prepayment from the perspective of the lender,
and the sum of the two sources of autonomous prepayments might be
relatively stable.

3. This specification can be written formally as,
E(dr/dt) =

k(.lO—r),

where dr/dt is the time derivative of the interest rate, E is the
expectation operator, and k is the proportionality constant, which we set
equal to .2 in our illustrative examples below.

—13—

>-

>

-J

(1)
LjJ

I

0.02

I

0.04

0.08

0.10

I

INTEREST RATE

0.06

I

1

/

/

-

0.12

I

10

0.14

I

strip

strip

Th2rge

0.00

0-

20-

40-

60-

o

100-

FIGURE 1
SECURITY VALUES

I

0.16

P0 STRIP

10 STRIP

—

MORTGAGE POOL

Legend

(I-)

z

100

75

50
25

0
F0

—25

a
>F-

0
Ui
(I)
—50

—75

—100

0.00

0.02

0.06

'S

5'

/
/
/

'S

0.08

/
0.10

/

0.12

—

FIGURE 2
SECURITY DURATIONS

0.04

INTEREST RATE

—

TO

strip

DC'

0.14

strip

0.16

MORTGAGE POOL

Legend

JO STRIP

P0 STRIP

L

N:

I

3 Ij

.3 1

.i .1

.34

..i ':'

—

.3a

41

42

r /r

4.3

44

4-5

46

4-7

0

(B,c::)

.3,' 2
+

Synthetic.

3

4.

1

(F1c-H,I)

4/

Strip Prices

r1cT
([:t)

10

Figure

4/22

(1

•7#

71

7fl

j

j69
i_i

b
kD

5.3
s:jl

59
58
'-'p-r

56

54
5.3

51
51j
#-,

,r
0

.3/2

Synthetic

(E4.C:)

+

Figure
4

P0

>

(F,i31H,i)

4/1

Strip Prices

1987
ID)

4/22

L.
U-

75
7fl

65
E;fl

55
50

45
40
35
3 Ij

"'I

10

/'

Figure 5

0)

97

(B

1

P0

+

10

4/1

P0 Strip Prices

3/2
0

4/22

4. Formally, we specify that,
Variance(dr/dt) =

and set s =
0

5.

sr,

.5.

The value of the 10 srip is zero if the pool is repaid. Hence, a small
increase in the interest rate from the prepayment point to a value just
above it, Increases the value of the 10 strip from zero to a positive
value, which is an infinite percentage increase.

—14—

References

Michael Brennan and Eduardo Schwartz. "Savings Bonds, Retractable Bonds, and
Callable Bonds," Journal of Financial Economics, 5 (1977), 67—88.

Kenneth B. Dunn and John J. McConnell. "A Comparison of Alternative Models for
Pricing GNMA Mortgage—Backed Securities, Journal of Finance, 36 (May
1981), 471—484.

_____________________________

"Valuation of GNNA Mortgage—Backed Securities,"

Journal of Finance, 36 (June 1981), 599—616.

—15—

