                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




            ARE RECESSIONS GOOD FOR STAFFING IN NURSING HOMES?

                                      R. Tamara Konetzka
                                       Karen B. Lasater
                                       Edward C. Norton
                                       Rachel M. Werner

                                      Working Paper 23402
                              http://www.nber.org/papers/w23402


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     May 2017




Karen B. Lasater received support from the National Institute of Nursing Research (T32-
NR0714). Rachel M. Werner received support from the National Institute on Aging (K24-
AG047908). The funders played no role in the study design, analysis, writing, or the decision to
submit the paper for publication. The authors thank participants at the International Long-term
Care Policy Network conference in London for comments. The authors declare that they have no
relevant or material financial interests that relate to the research described in this paper. The
views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the
National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2017 by R. Tamara Konetzka, Karen B. Lasater, Edward C. Norton, and Rachel M. Werner.
All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without
explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Are Recessions Good for Staffing in Nursing Homes?
R. Tamara Konetzka, Karen B. Lasater, Edward C. Norton, and Rachel M. Werner
NBER Working Paper No. 23402
May 2017
JEL No. E32,I11,J44,L84

                                          ABSTRACT

The quality and cost of care in nursing homes depend critically on the number and types of
nurses. Recent research suggests that the nursing supply adjusts to macroeconomic conditions.
However, prior work has failed to consider the effect of macroeconomic conditions on demand
for nurses through the effect on revenues. We test how county-level unemployment rates affect
direct-care staffing rates in nursing homes using California data. We exploit the wide variation in
the unemployment rates across counties and over time in 2005–2012. We also test whether there
are heterogeneous effects of unemployment rates by facility size, staffing level, and profit status.
We find that as unemployment rates increase, staffing by registered nurses (RNs) decreases but
staffing by licensed practical nurses (LPNs) increases. The increase in LPNs is larger in large
nursing homes, nursing homes with higher staffing levels, and in for-profit nursing homes. We
also find that as unemployment rates increase, nursing home revenue decreases. While the effect
of macroeconomic conditions on nursing supply may be important for cost and quality of care,
the mechanism is not simple, direct, or homogeneous for all types of nurses and nursing homes.


R. Tamara Konetzka                               Edward C. Norton
University of Chicago                            Department of Health Management and Policy
5841 S. Maryland Ave.,                           Department of Economics
MC 2007, Rm. W-255                               University of Michigan
Chicago, IL 60637-1447                           School of Public Health
tkonetzk@health.bsd.uchicago.edu                 1415 Washington Heights, M3108 SPHII
                                                 Ann Arbor, MI 48109-2029
Karen B. Lasater                                 and NBER
Center for Health Outcomes and                   ecnorton@umich.edu
 Policy Research
University of Pennsylvania                       Rachel M. Werner
School of Nursing                                University of Pennsylvania
418 Curie Blvd.                                  and Philadelphia VAMC
Philadelphia, PA 19104                           Blockley Hall, room 1204
karenbl@nursing.upenn.edu                        423 Guardian Drive
                                                 Philadelphia, PA 19104
                                                 rwerner@upenn.edu
I. INTRODUCTION

       The quality and cost of care in nursing homes depend critically on the number and types

of nurses (Castle, 2008; Backhaus et al., 2014; Dellefield et al., 2015; Spilsbury et al., 2011;

Zhang, Xinzhi, & Grabowski, 2004). Therefore, an important question for policy is what

determines both the demand for nurses and the supply of nurses. Health care providers are

increasingly being held accountable for the quality and cost of care, and nurses will play an

important role in how providers are judged and rewarded under value-based payments (Das et

al., 2016). Public and private sector efforts have attempted to grow the nursing supply (Johnson

& Johnson, 2017; Institute of Medicine, 2011), including policies that have focused on minimum

staffing levels (Assembly Bill 394) and whether to accredit new schools of nursing (Buerhaus,

Auerbach, & Staiger, 2014).

       Recent research has proposed new ideas about how the number of employed nurses

adjusts to macroeconomic conditions in ways unrelated to minimum staffing levels or the

number of nursing school graduates. This line of research is motivated by Ruhm’s observation

that population health improves during recessions. Over a series of papers Ruhm has documented

that total mortality across the population is inversely correlated with unemployment rates (Ruhm

2000, 2003), although this relationship has changed over time, becoming less procyclical

recently (Ruhm, 2015). This procyclic varation in mortality is concentrated among those at prime

working age but also exists in older age groups (Ruhm 2000, 2003) and infants (Dehejia and

Lleras-Muney 2004). The mechanisms behind procyclic mortality are not well understood, but

given that the effects are seen for segments of the population not typically in the labor force and

that the magnitude is too large to derive only from working-age adults, it is hypothesized that

mortality changes stem from other mechanisms that fluctuate with unemployment.



                                                                                                      1
       To address this question of the mechanism of procyclic mortality, Stevens and colleagues

(2015) use state-year panel data models and find that own-group labor market indicators are not

positivity correlated with mortality within group. They also find that nursing home deaths among

those age 65 years and older account for the total cyclic variation in mortality. They posit that

nursing homes’ contribution to cyclic variation in mortality is driven by countercyclical staffing

in nursing homes. That is, nursing home staffing improves when the economy falters, driving

reductions in nursing home deaths. Using nursing home staffing data from the Online Survey

Certification and Reporting (OSCAR) from 1990 to 2006, Stevens and colleagues find that as the

state unemployment rates rise, the number of nurses working in a nursing home in that state rises

as well. They estimate that a 1 percentage-point increase in the unemployment rate raises full-

time employment of nurses and aides by about 3 percent. Based on this, they suggest that when

the unemployment rate rises, the number of nurses in nursing homes improves to such a degree

to explain the decline in mortality rates observed among the elderly.

       There is evidence to support the idea that changes in nurse labor supply are driven by

recessions. Using the Current Population Survey, Buerhaus and colleagues (2009) show that

trends in nurse employment increased during two recent recessions. The authors speculate that

this is motivated by anticipated declines in spousal income during recessions, an observation that

is supported by some empirical research. A 2003 review of the nurse labor supply literature found

that a number of recent studies documented that a spouse’s wage and household income is negatively

associated with labor force participation (Antonazzo and colleagues 2003). Additionally, Baughman

and Smith (2012) show that direct-care workers in nursing homes have longer duration of

employment when the unemployment rate is high. Thus, macroeconomic conditions may indeed

greatly influence the number and types of nurses who are working, which in turn could affect

population health enough to be measurable.

                                                                                                     2
       Our research extends this literature, taking into account both supply and demand of all

direct-care staff including nurses and nurses’ aides, whereas prior work has ignored the fact that

macroeconomic conditions also affect demand for nurses. We provide a theoretical framework

for how changes in the macro economy could affect both the supply and the demand of nursing

care. In particular, our framework adds theory for why the macro economy affects demand,

which in turn affects revenues, and builds on the discussion of supply in the prior literature.

When unemployment rises and wages fall or stagnate, nursing homes will shift staffing to

respond to both lower wages and lower demand (lower revenues) for nursing home care.

       We argue that the effect of macroeconomic conditions on nursing demand is not simple,

direct, or homogeneous for all types of providers and direct-care staff  the macro economy

affects the different types of staff within nursing homes differently. The change in the supply of

direct-care staff may also differ by the unemployment rate. We expect heterogeneity in the

response to the unemployment rate  both by types of nurses and by types of providers.

Heterogeneity is an important and interesting part of this story.

       The main empirical research question is: how does the unemployment rate affect the net

direct-care staffing rates in nursing homes, considering that the effect may vary across types of

nurses and types of facilities? We exploit the wide variation in the unemployment rate across

counties and over time during 2005–2012 and use data on direct-care staffing in nursing homes.

       Our paper has several innovations. It lays out a conceptual framework of how

unemployment affects direct-care staffing levels through both changes in supply and demand,

and how that effect may be heterogeneous across types of staff in nursing homes and across

nursing homes. The conceptual framework motivates the empirical work, which tests how

staffing changed in nursing homes as a function of the local unemployment rate. We analyze the


                                                                                                     3
best available data on staffing in California, combined with data on county-level unemployment

rates.

         Our results are largely consistent with our conceptual framework, although different than

results found by Stevens and colleagues (2015). In general we find that during economic

downturns, nursing homes do not change total employment of nurses, but shift from more

expensive registered nurses (RNs) to less expensive licensed practical nurses (LPNs). At the

same time, they experience a decline in net revenues.



II. CONCEPTUAL FRAMEWORK

         The conceptual framework considers both the supply of nursing by individuals and the

demand for staffing by nursing homes, and how supply and demand will change during a

recession. We start with labor supply, then discuss labor demand, which derives in part from

patient demand for health care services. The result is a set of testable predictions with more

nuance than in the prior literature.

         Starting with labor supply, as in the prior literature (Stevens et al., 2015) we assume that

the supply of nurses and nurse aides will increase during a recession. During an economic boom,

work in a nursing home in particular may be seen as less desirable than work in other settings or

than leaving the labor force, due to stress and shift work or to better alternative opportunities

(Hanel, Kalb, and Scott, 2014). In a recession, as other types of jobs disappear or cut back on

hours, those with a nursing degree will be more likely to rejoin the labor force as a nurse

(Buerhaus, Auerbach, and Staiger, 2009), although the response will differ by type of nurse.

         For example, someone with a nursing degree who loses her non-nursing job would be

more likely to take a job as a nurse. The same could happen if the spouse loses (or fears losing)



                                                                                                        4
a job, or is forced to cut back on hours. In short, as other jobs disappear, the labor supply of

nurses can increase as people come out of retirement, are willing to increase their hours, or in the

longer run, get more education and training. This effect has been posited to be stronger for nurses

than for other types of professions, in part because health care jobs are seen as less vulnerable to

recessions and in part because the majority of RNs are married women who might move in and

out of the labor force in response to the spouse’s employment status (Staiger, Auerbach, and

Buerhaus, 2012).

        Studies of the labor supply of nurse aides are scarcer, but evidence also suggests that

local economic conditions have a significant effect on nurse aide turnover and retention in

nursing homes similar in direction to that for nurses (Stone and Wiener, 2001). The supply of

nurse aides may increase as workers shift from non-health sectors more affected by a recession

(such as child care or retail) to health care. For all categories of staff, these effects may be

mitigated by the availability of unemployment insurance; however, the broader literature on

unemployment benefits has generally found these effects to be small – neglible for

unemployment status and effectively zero for labor force participation (Figura and Barnichon,

2014). Thus, during a recession nursing homes will face a labor supply curve that shifts outward,

lowering labor costs. Ceteris paribus, during a recession nursing homes would be expected to

hire more direct-care staff, pay lower wages, or both.

        Despite consistency of direction, the supply curves may be shaped differently for

different types of nurse staffing. RNs are more highly trained and command higher wages than

LPNs (and than nurse aides, who are generally minimum-wage workers without post-secondary

education or formal nurse training). RNs, having invested more time in training, would be

expected to have less elastic supply than LPNs and aides. Hanel and colleagues (2014) found



                                                                                                       5
that the nursing supply elastiticy varies by education  specifically that nurses with higher

education have more inelastic supply. Therefore, the supply curve for RNs is steeper than for

LPNs and nurse aids, and shifted inwards.

       On the demand side, however, health care providers face additional consequences of a

recession due to shifts in the demand for services. Nursing home care is typically paid by one of

three main sources: Medicaid, covering 63 percent of residents on average; Medicare, covering

only post-acute care for 14 percent of residents on average; and private resources, covering 23

percent of residents on average, all based on 2014 statistics (Kaiser Family Foundation, 2015). In

a recession, demand by nursing home residents will likely decline, especially for those who pay

out of pocket. The decline in demand among private-pay residents derives from two

mechanisms. First, although the elderly are less affected than working-age adults by shocks to

employment, they are potentially more affected than other groups by shocks to wealth. Surveys

of the elderly found that during the Great Recession, spending by the elderly on health care

declined on the order of 10% (National Research Council, 2011) and that the elderly felt

substantially worse about their asset position than other segments of the population (Petev and

Pistaferri, 2012). Second, older adults may benefit from an increased supply of informal care as

their adult children leave the formal labor market. For example, a recent study finds evidence of

both increased informal care and decreased purchase of formal care among older European

adults during the Great Recession (Font, Karlsson, and Oien, 2015).

       The change in demand from Medicaid residents during a recession is slightly more

ambiguous than in the private-pay case. The fraction of Medicaid residents may increase because

more people will qualify for Medicaid as declining wealth makes it easier to meet Medicaid’s

asset tests. However, demand by Medicaid residents could also decrease due to greater


                                                                                                    6
availability of informal care, similar to the private-pay case. The direction of the net effect is

uncertain.

       Figure 1 depicts the shift in demand for nursing home care that might be expected in a

recession, using a traditional Scanlon (1980) and Nyman (1985) two-payer framework (see also

Norton 2000). A nursing home faces a downward-sloping demand curve from private-pay

residents but a flat demand curve from Medicaid residents due to administratively set prices by

Medicaid. The Medicaid price is lower than the private-pay price. The private-pay price is set to

maximize private-pay revenues, and private-pay residents are accepted up to the point where

marginal private-pay revenues equal the Medicaid rate. After that, Medicaid residents are

accepted. In a recession, for the reasons outlined above, demand from private-pay residents shifts

left, resulting in fewer private-pay residents and a lower private-pay price. If demand among

Medicaid recipients increases or even stays the same, the number of Medicaid residents may

increase due to greater availability of beds when private-pay demand declines. Although the

ultimate effect on payer mix and the total number of residents is ambiguous, we unambiguously

expect lower nursing home revenues during a recession, whether through lower price, more

disadvantageous payer mix, or both.

       We intentionally ignore Medicare-funded nursing home care in this simple framework,

but the addition of Medicare would not affect our predictions. Eligibility for Medicare is

universal after age 65, so that eligibility is unrelated to the economy. Medicare pays for limited

post-acute care for those who have a hospital stay of at least three days, and this demand is fairly

unresponsive to the macro economy (Levine and Buntin, 2013).

       Nursing homes employ a mix of the three direct-care staff types, with some

substitutability between RN and LPN tasks. RNs observe, assess, and record resident symptoms



                                                                                                     7
and progress, overseeing the work of nurse aides and LPNs. RNs also collaborate with

physicians in treatment, administration of medications, and development of care plans. LPN

responsibilities often include medication administration, charting in the medical record, taking

vital signs, and wound care(Assisted Living Today, 2017). While scope of practice regulations

vary somewhat from state to state, LPNs are generally more limited in what they are allowed to

do and must practice under supervision of an RN. At the same time, there is some overlap in

potential duties and thus the potential for substitution, and duties often look similar for RNs and

LPNs in nursing homes (Burger et al., 2009). Finally, nurse aides provide the majority of direct

care to residents. This care is nontechnical and consists primarily of helping residents with

activities of daily living (ADLs) such as eating, dressing, bathing, toileting, and walking

(Cawley, Grabowski, and Hirth, 2006).

       Nursing homes face regulatory requirements to have a minimum RN presence in the

facility regardless of nursing home size and must employ sufficient staff overall to meet care

needs, but have some flexibility as to staff mix. Nursing homes face federal regulatory

requirements to have an RN for at least 8 consecutive hours per day and California regulatory

requirements to have an RN or LPN in the facility 24 hours per day. (Note that the California

regulations were implemented before our study period begins.) Figure 2 presents stylized

pictures of labor supply and demand in nursing homes for each type of direct-care worker, with

the expected outward shift in labor supply during a recession.

       Although there is some substitutability among types of staff in nursing homes, the mix of

staff is likely to affect quality. Specifically, a substantial literature associates more RN hours, or

more RN hours as a proportion of total staff hours, with better patient outcomes as measured by

various process and outcome indicators. Examples include improved survival and better



                                                                                                         8
functional status (Cohen and Spector 1996), fewer pressure sores (Cohen and Spector 1996;

Konetzka Stearns and Park 2008; Horn and colleagues 2005), fewer urinary tract infections

(Konetzka Stearns and Park 2008; Horn and colleagues 2005), and fewer hospitalizations (Horn

and colleagues 2005). Consumers appear to recognize the importance of staffing as a determinant

of quality when choosing a nursing home (Konetzka and Coca Perraillon, 2016).

       When the supply curve for nurses and nurse aides shifts out during a recession, nursing

homes may be able to hire more staff at lower wages. While theoretically wages should fall

during a recession as the supply of unemployed nurses increases, empirical evidence supporting

this theory is mixed. Studies testing this theory have been limited by empirical difficulties in

identifying the relationship between economic cycles and wages (Antonazzo, Skatun, and Elliott,

2003). Additionally, wage rates may be “sticky”, or slow to respond to changes in the economic

cycle. The wages of workers who remain employed may stay the same or even grow during a

recession rather than falling with the general decrease in demand for labor. While the issue of

sticky wages is important and creates some uncertainty about whether wages will fall for nurses

employed in nursing homes, it does not affect the prediction that the supply of nurses available to

nursing homes should increase during a recession. Unfortunately, without data on wage rates, we

cannot directly observe whether changes in wage rates is a specific mechanism for changes in the

demand for nurses. Nonetheless, we can still comment on the outcomes of interest—that is, net

nurse staffing levels.

       We would not expect an increase in all types of staff or in all types of nursing homes

when we also consider the source of the shocks to revenues. Because the private-pay demand is

likely to decrease, lowering the fraction of residents in a typical nursing home who can be

charged a market price, the fraction of residents whose demand is sensitive to changes in quality



                                                                                                   9
decreases and the overall elasticity of demand for quality could change (Nyman, 1985;

Grabowksi 2001). This means that nursing homes can shift resources from RNs to LPNs and

aides. LPNs in particular have authority to perform many tasks that are also performed by RNs,

such as administration of medications, although they have less formal and fewer years of training

and arguably provide a lower level of nursing expertise. This overall expected shift in staffing

composition does not apply to small nursing homes that face binding regulatory constraints on

the minimum number of RNs. Small nursing homes will typically be at the minimum threshold

with no ability to substitute away from RNs to LPNs and aides. Therefore we expect a

difference in response between large and small nursing homes.

       Our conceptual framework has four testable hypotheses. First, as unemployment rises,

nursing home revenues will decrease. Second, nursing homes will hire more nurses overall.

Third, nursing homes will shift away from RNs to LPNs and aides. Fourth, this shift will be

larger in the largest nursing homes (those with more than 60 beds) and potentially zero in small

nursing homes that are constrained by staffing regulations.



III. EMPIRICAL STRATEGY

       We use a longitudinal nursing home fixed-effects strategy to examine how the local

unemployment rate affects direct-care staffing levels and net revenue in nursing homes, using

variation in the local unemployment rate across counties and over time to identify the effect. To

analyze the effect of the unemployment rate on direct-care staffing we estimate the following

reduced-form ordinary least squares regression:



                                                                            (1)



                                                                                                   10
where our outcome of interest is the number of staff hours per resident day (               ) for nursing

hone j, located in county m, in year t. We also control for time fixed effects      , and nursing

home fixed effects    . In some models we stratify by nursing home characteristics. The error

term is . We consider staffing hours for RNs, LPNs, and aides separately and also a facility’s

total staff hours across all three staff types. We also consider the ratio of RN hours to total staff

hours as an outcome, for a total of five staffing-related outcomes and regressions. Finally, to test

a potential mechanism of any observed changes in staffing during a recession, we re-estimate

equation (1) replacing net revenues for staffing levels as the dependent variable. In all

specifications, standard errors are clustered at the facility level.

        The Stevens and colleagues (2015) paper finds that an increase in unemployment leads to

an increase in nursing home staffing, meaning that           . Following from our conceptual

model, we hypothesize a more nuanced view that  will be positive for some, but not all, types of

direct-care nursing home staff. We also explore whether there are heterogeneous effects of

unemployment rates by facility characteristics. We test whether there are different effects by

facility size (number of beds), staffing level, and profit status.

        Specifically, our testable hypotheses from the conceptual framework are:

            1. In a model to predict nursing home net revenues,            .

            2. In a model to predict overall nurse staffing in nursing homes,           .

            3. In a model to predict RN staffing in nursing homes,             , but in models to

                predict LPN and nurse aide staffing,          .

            4. When stratified by nursing home size,              for large nursing homes and

                for small nursing homes.


                                                                                                       11
       The facility fixed effects account for any facility time-invariant unobservable factors (and

observable factors) that affect the outcomes of interest. They also subsume county fixed effects.

The inclusion of year fixed effects in the above specifications allows us to control for any

systematic trends in staffing or revenue that affect all nursing homes. This is a conservative

approach, as it controls for secular trends affecting the nursing supply or health care demand but,

in doing so, does not allow us to exploit the large increase in unemployment during the 2008/9

recession. Thus, identification relies on the extent to which trends over time in unemployment

vary from county to county, and the corresponding within-facility variation in our outcomes. We

test the robustness of this specification by replacing year fixed effects with county-specific

trends and, in the national sample, state-specific trends and state-time dummies.

       Finally, we weight each regression by the bed size of each nursing home to assess

whether underweighting large facilities in facility-level regression affects the results.



IV. DATA

       This study uses secondary data sets from two sources. We obtain data on staffing and

organizational characteristics in California nursing homes from the annual data files from

California’s Office of Statewide Health Planning and Development (OSHPD). We collect

county-level unemployment rates from the Area Health Resources File.

       We restrict our analysis to California nursing homes due to concerns of biased over-

reporting among nursing homes nationally in the Centers for Medicare & Medicaid Services’

(CMS) Online Survery, Certification and Reporting (OSCAR) database. OSHPD data is

rigorously audited by the state of California. In our comparisons with OSCAR, nursing home-



                                                                                                 12
year level staffing estimates are substantially lower in OSHPD (tables of comparisons available

upon request) and our estimates of staffing levels from OSHPD are consistent with prior work

(Kim et al, 2009).



IV.A. Study Sample

       Our sample of nursing homes comprises non-governmental skilled or intermediate care

nursing homes in California from 2005-2012. The initial sample includes 9,081 unique

observations from 1,172 nursing homes. We exclude nursing homes that are neither skilled

nursing nor intermediate care (n = 113). We also exclude nursing homes that are less likely to

make staffing decisions independent of the entity that owned them: hospital-owned (n = 8) and

government-owned nursing homes (n = 2). To eliminate outliers that are most likely due to data

errors, we also exclude nursing homes with more than 12 total nurse hours per patient day (n =

3), and those with no reported RNs in nursing homes greater than 60 beds (n = 2) (Park and

Stearns, 2009). The final sample of California nursing homes includes 8,086 unique observations

from 1,044 nursing homes from 20052012.



IV.B. Dependent Variables

       We examine two sets of outcome measures — facilities’ direct-care staffing levels and

revenues (see Table 1). Facility direct-care staffing is measured in minutes per resident day

(PRD), and categorized by the types of staff: RNs, LPNs, aides, total direct-care staff  which

represented the sum of RN, LPN, and aide hours. We also include a measure of nursing skill mix

defined by the ratio of RN hours to total direct-care staff hours. Our measure of net revenues is a




                                                                                                  13
facility’s total net health care revenue (the sum of the net routine services revenue, net ancillary

services revenue, and other operating revenue from providing health care services to residents).



IV.C. Unemployment Variable

       Our predictor of interest is the county-level unemployment rate. Unemployment rates are

measured annually using data obtained from the Area Health Resources File. In each study year,

the unemployment rate is reported among individuals 16 years and older. This definition has

been widely used in the health services literature (Maeda et al., 2014). The average county-level

unemployment rate in California during the study period was 8.9%, and ranged from 2.2% to

29.9% over the study period (see Figure 3). The average national county-level unemployment

rate was 7.0%, and ranged from 1.7% to 29.7%. The typical within-county fluctuation across the

eight years was 19.8% in California and 16.1% nationally. We rely on this variation within

county over time to identify the effect of economic booms and busts on the outcomes. The

unemployment rate thus serves as a proxy for the effects of these macroeconomic trends, where

the mechanism of effect may be unemployment itself or wealth shocks to the elderly that affect

spending on nursing home care. We note that nursing homes in each county in California employ

at most about 2% of employed individuals, so there is no concern of monopsony behavior

biasing our estimates.



IV.D. Other Variables

       Facility characteristics used to stratify the regression models included: size, total nurse

staffing level, and profit status (see Table 1). We classified facilities into two groups according

to their size defined by approximately the 25th percentile of the number of beds: small (<=60



                                                                                                      14
beds) and large (>60 beds). Similarly, we classified direct-care staffing levels into two groups

defined as: low (≤ mean total staffing in all nursing homes) and high (> mean total staffing in all

nursing homes). Profit status was either for profit or nonprofit. The stratification by nursing

home size was to test the fourth hypothesis.



V. RESULTS

        For California nursing homes, an increase in unemployment led to an increase in the

staffing level of LPNs, a decrease in RNs, and no change in aides or total direct-care staffing

levels (see the first column of Table 2 for unstratified results). A one-percentage point increase

in the unemployment rate was associated with a decrease in RN minutes PRD of 0.57 and an

increase in LPN minutes PRD of 0.77. In relative terms, this translates into a 2.8% decline in RN

staffing and a 1.7% increase in LPN staffing. There was no statistically significant effect of the

unemployment rate on the ratio of RN to total hours.

        When stratifying by nursing home characteristics, we also find a statistically significant

decrease in RN staffing and an increase in LPN staffing among large nursing homes, nursing

homes with high average staffing levels, and for-profit nursing homes. In the case of nursing

homes with high staffing, we also found a decline in the ratio of RN-to-total-staff levels,

suggesting that either through demand or supply, during recessions there is a shift away from

RNs towards LPNs. The results for small nursing homes, and non-profit nursing homes were

similar in magnitude to the non-stratified results but not statistically significant.

        We also estimate declines in net revenue among California nursing homes during

recessions (see Table 3). We find that a one-percentage point increase in unemployment was

associated with a decrease in net revenue of over $114,000, a relative decline of 1.7%. Similar to



                                                                                                     15
the results of recession on staffing, we also find that an increase in unemployment is associated

with a larger decline in revenue for large nursing homes, nursing homes with low staffing, and

for-profit nursing homes.

       We perform a number of tests of the robustness of our results. First, we re-estimate the

relationship between unemployment in all nursing homes nationally, using data from The

Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services’ (CMS) Online Survey, Certification and Reporting

(OSCAR) database (see Table 4). We find similar results to our California results among the

total sample, large nursing homes, nursing homes with low staffing levels, and for-profit nursing

homes, though the magnitude and statistical significance differ somewhat. This gives us more

confidence that our results from California generalize to the entire country. Second, we re-

estimate the main regressions using alterative controls for time (see Table 5). We find similar

results for California nursing homes, with estimates in the same direction and most not

statistically significant. In the national sample of nursing homes, the effect of unemployment on

RN staffing becomes negative and marginally significant with state-specific time trends, a

consistent result with the California sample. Third, we weight each regression by the bed size of

each California nursing home to assess whether underweighting large facilities in facility-level

regression affects the results (see Table 6). Results from this specification are qualitatively

similar to the main results.

       Finally, because prior estimates of the effect of changes in unemployment rates on nurse

and aide staffing levels in nursing homes have been positive (Stevens et al. 2015), we estimate a

number of alternative specifications on the national sample of nursing homes to try to recreate

these prior results (see Table 7). To do so, we focus on the two types of nurse staffing examined

by Stevens (nurses, or the combination of RNs and LPNs, and aides). In various specifications



                                                                                                   16
we add a set of control variables (population demographics and number of nursing home beds)

plus alternative controls for time (state-specific time trends, state-year dummies, and county-

specific time trends) with and without taking the log of the dependent variable. In these

specifications our estimates remain close to zero and insignificant.



VI. CONCLUSIONS

       The macro economy has a strong influence on the number and types of nurses hired in

nursing homes. However, we find a different, more complex pattern than the one reported by

Stevens and colleagues (2015). Unlike them, we find no significant increase in total employment

in nursing homes when the unemployment rate rises. A key difference might explain why our

results are not the same—we measure staffing as a ratio of nursing time (e.g., minutes) per

resident-day whereas Stevens measures staffing as the number of nurses. Stevens’ approach

could overstate true employment levels particularly if there is an increase in the use of part-time

workers during a recession. However, we do find changes in the types of nurses employed, with

large for-profit nursing homes shifting away from RNs towards less expensive LPNs.

       One mechanism for these shifts may be the change in revenue that we document. During

recessions, nursing home revenue declines. To cover costs, nursing homes would then need to

reduce the number of staff or shift to less expensive nurses.

       Our findings should be viewed with respect to several limitations. First, in order to

control for secular trends that may be collinear with recession, our primary specification does not

capitalize fully on the increase in unemployment during the recession starting in 2008, the most

dramatic change during our study period. Rather, our identification depends on variation in

county-specific changes in unemployment, as some counties were affected more than others.



                                                                                                  17
However, alternative specifcations that do not include time fixed effects are consistent with our

main specification. Second, our data on staffing allows us only to examine staffing type and

staffing ratios, not the quality or tenure of staff within type. Thus, if facilities shift from highly

experienced RNs to less experienced RNs at lower wages, our analysis will not be able to detect

it. Third, although we would ideally control for nurses’ marital status, the data do not have this

information. If RNs are more likely to have highly educated spouses than nurses aides, the

different types of nurses would face different economic pressures during recessions.

Furthermore, Auerbach, Buerhaus, and Staiger (2015) found that RNs with an associate degree

are increasingly employed in long-term care, while RNs with a bachelors degree are increasingly

employed in hospitals. Because we do not observe private-pay prices, we focus on total

revenues and are unable to parse out the exact mechanisms behind declining revenues in a

recession.

        Nonetheless, our findings have several important implications. First, they show that it is

important to consider changes in demand for health care services when assessing the effect of

macroeconomic cycles on health care staffing. In the presence of changes in patient demand, the

net effect of a shift in nursing supply becomes theoretically ambiguous, and we show that

revenues do appear to be affected by economic booms and busts. Second, nursing homes do

appear to operate on a margin where economic conditions affect their ability to hire nursing staff.

Regulations and administratively set payment rates for nursing home care should potentially

consider the state of the economy and the nurse labor market if minimum RN staffing is to be

required. At the same time, policymakers may want to take a closer look at the scope of practice

between RNs and LPNs in nursing homes to assess the extent of substitutability desired or

allowed in order for nursing homes to meet minimum quality standards. Finally, we show



                                                                                                         18
evidence that the market for nurses in nursing homes is somewhat sensitive to the macro

economy. Whether or not these changes in staffing affect morbidity and mortality is a question

that should be pursued further.




                                                                                             19
REFERENCES

Akosa Antwi, Yaa and John R. Bowblis. 2016. “The Impact of Nurse Turnover on Quality of

       Care and Mortality in Nursing Homes: Evidence from the Great Depression.” Upjohn

       Institute Working Paper 16-249. Kalamazoo, MI: W.E. Upjohn Institute for Employment

       Research. http://dx.doi.org/10.17848/wp15-249.

Antonazzo, Emanuela, Anthony Scott, Diane Skatun, and Robert F. Elliott. 2003. “The labour

       market for nursing: A review of the labour supply literature.” Health Economics 12(6):

       465-478.

Assembly Bill 394. 1999. Cal Bus Prof Code §2725.3; Health Safety Code §1276.4

Assisted Living Today. 2017. “The Role of Nurses in a Nursing Home” (blog).

       http://assistedlivingtoday.com/blog/the-role-of-nurses-in-a-nursing-home/

Auerbach, David I., Peter I. Buerhaus, Douglas O. Staiger. 2015. “Do Associate Degree

       Registered Nurses Fare Differently in the Nurse Labor Market Compared to

       Baccalaureate-Prepared RNs?” Nursing Economics 33 (1): 8–13.

Backhaus, Ramona, Hilde Verbeek, Erik van Rossum, Elizabeth Capezuti, and Jan PH Hamers.

       2014. “Nurse staffing impact on quality of care in nursing homes: a systematic review of

       longitudinal studies.” Journal of the American Medical Directors Association 15 (6):

       383-393.

Baughman, R.A. and K.E. Smith. 2012. “Labor mobility of the direct care workforce:

       Implications for the provision of long-term care.” Health Economics 21(12): 1402-1415.

Buerhaus, Peter I., David I. Auerbach, & Douglas O. Staiger. 2014. “The rapid growth of

       graduates from associate, baccalaureate, and graduate programs in nursing.” Nursing

       Economic 32(6), 290-295, 311.



                                                                                                20
Buerhaus, Peter I., David I. Auerbach, & Douglas O. Staiger. 2009. “The Recent Surge in Nurse

       Employment: Causes and Implications.” Health Affairs 28 (4): 657–668.

Burger, Sarah Green, Bonnie Cantor, Mathy Mezey, Ethel Mitty, Malvina Kluger, Donna

       Algase, Kathryn Anderson, Cornelia Beck, Christine Mueller, and Joanne Rader. 2009.

       “Nurses Involvement in Nursing Home Culture Change: Overcoming Barriers,

       Advancing Opportunities.” Issue Paper. Hartford Institute for Geriatric Nursing, New

       York University College of Nursing.

       http://www.socialworkers.org/practice/aging/documents/issuePaper0609.pdf

Castle, Nicholas G. 2008. "Nursing home caregiver staffing levels and quality of care a literature

       review." Journal of Applied Gerontology 27(4): 375-405.

Cawley, John, David C. Grabowski, and Richard A. Hirth. 2006. “Factor substitution in nursing

       homes.” Journal of Health Economics 25(2): 234-247.

Cohen, Joel W., and William D. Spector. 1996. “The effect of Medicaid reimbursement on

       quality of care in nursing homes.” Journal of Health Economics 15(1): 2348.

Das, Anup, Edward C. Norton, David C. Miller, Andrew M. Ryan, John D. Birkmeyer, Lena M.

       Chen. 2016. “Adding a spending metric to Medicare's value-based purchasing program

       rewarded low-quality hospitals.” Health Affairs 35(5):898906.

Dehejia, Rajeev, Adriana Lleras-Muney. 2004. “Booms, busts, and babies’ health.” Quarterly

       Journal of Economics 119(3):10911130.

Dellefield, Mary Ellen, Nickolas G. Castle, Katherine S. McGilton, and Karen Spilsbury. 2015.

       "The relationship between registered nurses and nursing home quality: An integrative

       review (2008-2014)." Nursing Economics 33(2): 95.




                                                                                                21
Figura, Andrew and Regis Barnichon. 2014. “The effects of unemployment benefits on

       unemployment and labor force participation: Evidence from 35 years of benefits

       extensions.” https://www.federalreserve.gov/pubs/feds/2014/201465/201465pap.pdf

Font, Joan Costa, Martin Karlsson, and Henning Oien. 2015. “Informal Care and the Great

       Recession.” CEP Discussion Paper No. 1360. Centre for Economic Performance, London

       School of Economics and Political Science

       http://cep.lse.ac.uk/pubs/download/dp1360.pdf

Grabowski, David C. 2001. “Medicaid reimbursement and the quality of nursing home care.”

       Journal of Health Economics 20 (4):549569.

Hanel, Barbara, Guyonne Kalb, and Anthony Scott. 2014. “Nurses’ labour supply elasticities:

       The importance of accounting for extensive margins.” Journal of Health Economics 33:

       94–112.

Horn, Susan D., Peter Buerhaus, Nancy Bergstrom, and Randall J. Smout. 2005. “RN staffing

       time and outcomes of long-stay nursing home residents - Pressure ulcers and other

       adverse outcomes are less likely as RNs spend more time on direct patient care.”

       American Journal of Nursing 105(11): 5870.

Institute of Medicine. 2011 The Future of Nursing: Leading Change, Advancing Health.

       Washington, DC: The National Academies Press.

Johnson & Johnson. 2017. The Campaign for Nursing’s Future. Accessed March 6, 2017.

       https://www.discovernursing.com/


Kaiser Family Foundation. 2015. Nursing Facilities, Staffing, Residents and Facility

       Deficiencies, 2009 Through 2014. http://kff.org/medicaid/report/nursing-facilities-

       staffing-residents-and-facility-deficiencies-2009-through-2014/

                                                                                              22
Kim, Hongsoo, Christine Kovner, Charlene Harrington, William Greene, and Mathy Mezey.

       2009. “A panel data analysis of the relationships of nursing home staffing levels and

       standards to regulatory deficiencies.” The Journals of Gerontology Series B:

       Psychological Sciences and Social Sciences, 64B (2): 269-278.

Konetzka, R.Tamara, Sally C. Stearns, and Jeongyoung Park. 2008. “The staffing-outcomes

       relationship in nursing homes.” Health Services Research 43(3): 10251042.

Konetzka, R.Tamara, and Marcelo Coca Perraillon. 2016. “Use Of Nursing Home Compare

       Website Appears Limited By Lack Of Awareness And Initial Mistrust Of The Data.”

       Health Affairs 35(4):706-713.

Levine, Michael and Melinda Buntin. 2013. “Why Has Growth in Spending for Fee-For-Service

       Medicare Slowed?” Congressional Budget Office Working Paper 2013-06. Washington,

       D.C. https://www.cbo.gov/sites/default/files/44513_MedicareSpendingGrowth-8-22.pdf

Maeda, Jared Lane K., Rachel Mosher Henke, William D. Marder, Zeynal Karaca, Bernard S.

       Friedman, and Herbert S. Wong. 2014. “Association between the unemployment rate and

       inpatient cost per discharge by payer in the United States, 20052010.” BMC Health

       Services Research 14: 378.

National Research Council. 2011. “Consumption, Savings, Pensions, and Wealth” in Assessing

       the Impact of Severe Economic Recession on the Elderly:Summary of a Workshop. M.

       Majmundar, Rapporteur. Steering Committee on the Challenges of Assessing the Impact

       of Severe Economic Recession on the Elderly. Committee on Population, Division of

       Behavioral and Social Sciences and Education. Washington, DC. The National

       Academies Press.




                                                                                               23
Norton, Edward C. 2000. “Long-term Care.” In Handbook of Health Economics, Volume IB,

       A.J. Culyer and J.P. Newhouse, eds, pp. 956994. New York, NY: Elsevier Science

       B.V.

Nyman, John A. 1985. “Prospective and Cost-Plus Medicaid Reimbursement, Excess Medicaid

       Demand, and the Quality of Nursing Home Care.” Journal of Health Economics

       4(3):237259.

Park, Jeongyoung, and Sally C. Stearns. 2009. “Effects of State Minimum Staffing Standards on

       Nursing Home Staffing and Quality of Care.” Health Services Research. 44 (1): 5678.

Petev, Ivaylo D., and Luigi Pistaferri. 2012. “Consumption in the Great Recession.” A Great

       Recession Brief. Standford, CA: Stanford Center on Poverty and Inequality.

       https://web.stanford.edu/group/recessiontrends/cgibin/web/sites/all/themes/barron/pdf/Co

       nsumption_fact_sheet.pdf

Ruhm, Christopher J. 2000. “Are recessions good for your health?” Quarterly Journal of

       Economics 115 (2): 617650.

Ruhm, Christopher J. 2003. “Good times make you sick.” Journal of Health Economics 22 (4):

       637658.

Ruhm, Christopher J. 2015. “Recessions, healthy no more?” Journal of Health Economics

       42:1728.

Scanlon, W.J. 1980. “A Theory of the Nursing Home Market.” Inquiry 17:25-41.

Sochalski, Julie, R. Tamara Konetzka, Jingsan Zhu, and Kevin Volpp. 2008. “Will mandated

       minimum nurse staffing ratios lead to better patient outcomes?” Medical Care 46 (6):

       606613.




                                                                                              24
Spilsbury, Karen, Catherine Hewitt, Lisa Stirk, and Clive Bowman. 2011. "The relationship

       between nurse staffing and quality of care in nursing homes: a systematic

       review." International journal of nursing studies 48, (6): 732-750.

Staiger, Douglas O., David I. Auerbach, and Peter I. Buerhaus. 2012 “Registered nurse labor

       supply and the recession—Are we in a bubble?” New England Journal of Medicine 366:

       1463-1465.

Stevens, Ann H., Douglas L. Miller, Marianne E. Page, and Mateusz Filipski. 2015. “The best of

       times, the worst of times: Understanding pro-cyclical mortality.” American Economic

       Journal: Economic Policy 7 (4): 279311.

Stone, Robyn I., and Joshua M. Wiener. 2001. “Who will care for us? Addressing the Long-

       Term Care Workforce Crisis.” The Urban Institute and the American Association of

       Homes and Services for the Aging. https://aspe.hhs.gov/system/files/pdf/73111/ltcwf.pdf


Zhang, Xinzhi, and David C. Grabowski. 2004. "Nursing home staffing and quality under the

       nursing home reform act." The Gerontologist 44, (1): 13-23.




                                                                                              25
Figure 1: Demand for Nursing Home Care with Shift During a Recession


                           Private-pay demand
   Price




     Pprivate pay




     PMedicaid
                                                                        Medicaid demand




                                                               Nmax    Number of Residents



                    Nprivate pay                NMedicaid




                                                                                 26
Figure 2: Supply and Demand of Direct-Care Staff in Nursing Homes, with Supply Shift During
a Recession




    Wage                                                                    Supply of RNs
                     Demand by Nursing Homes




                                                                             Supply of LPNs




                                                         Demand by Nursing Homes

                                                                                     Supply of aides




                                                                             Demand by Nursing Homes


                                                                                 Number of Staff




                                                                                            27
Figure 3. Percent Unemployment Over Time in California and Nationally




Note. Mean and standard deviation of county-level percent unemployment in California and nationally.




                                                                                                       28
Table 1. Characteristics of California Nursing Homes, 2005-2012
                                                       California
              Characteristics                        Nursing Homes,
                                                       (N = 1,044)
                        Dependent variables
                                                         214.1
Mean Total Nurse Minutes PRD, (SD)
                                                         (28.7)
                                                          20.0
Mean RN Minutes PRD, (SD)
                                                         (11.7)
                                                          45.6
Mean LPN Minutes PRD, (SD)
                                                         (12.9)
                                                         148.5
Mean Aides Minutes PRD, (SD)
                                                         (19.9)
                                                          0.09
Mean RN/Total Minutes PRD, (SD)
                                                         (0.05)
                    Other facility characteristics
                                                          95.02
Mean Number of Beds, (SD)
                                                         (47.56)
                                                          30.08
Percentage Small Size, (n)
                                                          (314)
                                                          69.92
Percentage Large Size, (n)
                                                          (730)
                                                          66.19
Percentage Low Staffing, (n)
                                                          (691)
                                                          33.81
Percentage High Staffing, (n)
                                                          (353)
                                                          86.59
Percentage For-Profit, (n)
                                                          (904)
                                                          13.41
Percentage Non-Profit, (n)
                                                          (140)
                                                        6,898.48
Mean Net Revenue (SD)
                                                       (3,789.17)
PRD (per resident day)
Small size is defined by nursing homes with <=60 beds
Large size is defined by nursing homes with >60 beds
Low staffing is defined by a mean total nurse staffing less than or equal to the mean of total nurse staffing
across all nursing homes; Mean total staffing within low staffing nursing homes is 200.4.
High staffing is defined by a mean total nurse staffing greater than the mean of total nurse staffing across
all nursing homes; Mean total staffing within high staffing nursing homes is 240.7..
Mean net revenue reported in thousands of dollars.




                                                                                                          29
Table 2. Effect of a 1%-point Change in Unemployment on Nurse Staffing Minutes per Resident
Day in California Nursing Homes, 2005-2012
                                Stratified by Number of                                       Stratified by Profit
                 California                                     Stratified by Staffing
                                          Beds                                                       Status
                  nursing
                  homes                                          Low           High
                                 Small           Large                                     For-Profit    Non-Profit
                                                               staffing       staffing
                  -0.5659*      -0.2895       -0.7278**        0.07123      -1.2353**       -0.4600          -0.4314
RNs
                  (0.2923)      (0.4974)       (0.3620)       (0.2698)       (0.6006)       (0.2897)         (0.6639)
                 0.7702***       0.7847       0.8135***       0.4496**      1.5079***      0.9046***          0.7580
LPNs
                  (0.2657)      (0.5497)       (0.2853)       (0.2503)       (0.5335)       (0.2630)         (0.8968)
                   -0.5226      -0.8464        -0.2034         -0.2651        -0.5044       -0.2781          -0.6822
Aides
                  (0.4960)      (1.2016)       (0.4282)       (0.3137)       (1.1471)       (0.3888)         (2.1177)
                   -0.3184      -0.3512        -0.1177          0.2557        -0.2318        0.1665          -0.3556
Total
                  (0.6775)      (1.4665)       (0.6896)       (0.3499)       (1.5863)       (0.5432)         (2.6515)
                   -0.0011       0.0003        -0.0020          0.0008       -0.0035*       -0.0013           0.0002
RN/Total
                  (0.0011)      (0.0021)       (0.0013)       (0.0013)       (0.0021)       (0.0012)         (0.0025)
No. nursing
                    1,044          314           730             691           353             904             140
homes
No.
                    8,086         2,388         5,698           5,379         2,707           7,047           1,039
observations
All of the models include year and nursing home fixed effects. Robust standard errors in parentheses.
*p<0.10 **p<0.05 ***p<0.01




                                                                                                        30
Table 3. Effect of a 1%-point Change in Unemployment on Total Net Revenue in California
Nursing Homes, 2005-2012
                            Stratified by Number of
             California                                  Stratified by Staffing    Stratified by Profit Status
                                      Beds
              nursing
              homes                                        Low          High
                             Small          Large                                  For-Profit       Non-Profit
                                                         staffing      staffing
Nursing      -114.96***       32.89      -235.18***    -195.41***       42.28      -169.46***         41.41
Homes          (39.85)       (41.80)       (50.37)       (50.78)       (62.25)        (45.44)        (74.21)
Total net revenue reported in thousands of dollars.
All of the models include year and facility fixed effects. Robust standard errors in parentheses.
*p<0.10 **p<0.05 ***p<0.01




                                                                                                           31
Table 4. Effect of a 1%-point Change in Unemployment on Nurse Staffing Minutes per Resident
Day in National Nursing Homes, 2005-2012
                National        Stratified by Number of
                                                                Stratified by Staffing      Stratified by Profit Status
                nursing                   Beds
                 homes          Small           Large       Low staffing    High staffing   For-Profit       Non-Profit
                 0.0777         0.0215          0.0868         0.0772          0.1498        0.1238*          -0.1529
RNs
                (0.0571)       (0.1305)        (0.0633)       (0.0485)        (0.1299)       (0.0673)         (0.1049)
                 0.0637         0.0145          0.0521       0.1642**         -0.0378       0.1492**         -0.2700**
LPNs
                (0.0628)       (0.1618)        (0.0672)       (0.0671)        (0.1272)       (0.0742)         (0.1215)
                -0.1608        -0.2050         -0.1300      -0.3523***         0.0748        -0.1900          -0.0065
Aides
                (0.1170)       (0.3015)        (0.1255)       (0.1263)        (0.2383)       (0.1325)         (0.2617)
                -0.0194        -0.1690          0.0089        -0.1110          0.1868         0.0860          -0.4292
Total
                (0.1545)       (0.3934)        (0.1656)       (0.1513)        (0.3373)       (0.1751)         (0.3456)
                 0.0003         0.0005          0.0002        0.0004*          0.0005         0.0003          -0.0003
RN/Total
                (0.0002)       (0.0005)        (0.0002)       (0.0002)        (0.0003)       (0.0002)         (0.0004)
No. nursing
                   7,637         1,633         6,004             4,707          2,930           5,701          1,936
homes
No.
                  95,068        18,254        76,814            62,323         32,745          71,365         23,703
observations
All of the models include year and nursing home fixed effects. Robust standard errors in parentheses.
*p<0.10 **p<0.05 ***p<0.01




                                                                                                        32
Table 5. Effect of a 1%-point Change in Unemployment on Nurse Staffing Minutes per Resident
Day, using alternative specifications to control for time, 2005-2012
                                               State-      State-time
                 County-specific trends       specific     dummies
                                               trends
                California     National      National       National
                 Nursing       Nursing        Nursing       Nursing
                 Homes          Homes         Homes          Homes
                 -0.2837       -0.0768       -0.1291*       -0.1253
RNs
                (0.3125)       (0.0639)      (0.0688)       (0.0852)
                 -0.2694       -0.0143         0.0656        0.0752
LPNs
                (0.3769)       (0.0773)      (0.0807)       (0.1044)
                 -1.0429        0.0207        -0.0789       -0.2703
Aides
                (0.6610)       (0.1445)      (0.1510)       (0.1943)
                -1.5961*       -0.0705        -0.1424       -0.3204
Total
                (0.8149)       (0.1888)      (0.2000)       (0.2591)
                  0.0003       -0.0003        -0.0004       <0.0001
RN/Total
                (0.0013)       (0.0002)      (0.0002)       (0.0003)
No. nursing
                   1,044         7,637         7,637          7,637
homes
No.
                   8,086        95,068        95,068         95,068
observations
All of the models include nursing home fixed effects. Robust standard errors in parentheses.
*p<0.10 **p<0.05 ***p<0.01




                                                                                               33
Table 6. Effect of a 1%-point Change in Unemployment on Nurse Staffing Minutes per Resident
Day in California Nursing Homes, Weighted by Bedsize, 2005-2012
                California      Stratified by Number of
                                                                Stratified by Staffing      Stratified by Profit Status
                 nursing                  Beds
                 homes          Small            Large      Low staffing    High staffing   For-Profit       Non-Profit
                -0.5207*       -0.4282         -0.5401*        0.1426        -1.5753***      -0.3528          -0.6873
RNs
                (0.2715)       (0.5143)        (0.3107)      (0.2531)          (0.5892)      (0.2645)         (0.7463)
               0.6920***        0.6495          0.7137*        0.2817         1.5996***     0.7158***          1.1229
LPNs
                (0.2518)       (0.5827)        (0.2782)      (0.2500)          (0.5255)      (0.2610)         (0.9392)
                 -0.3263       -1.0610          -0.1213       -0.3753          -0.0327       -0.1472          -1.2885
Aides
                (0.4140)       (1.2291)        (0.4302)      (0.3090)          (1.0437)      (0.3982)         (1.9251)
                 -0.1550       -0.8397          -0.0523        0.0490          -0.0084       -0.2158          -0.8529
Total
                (0.6129)       (1.5411)        (0.6664)      (0.3800)          (1.5941)      (0.5875)         (2.5054)
                 -0.0012       -0.0005          -0.0014        0.0012        -0.0053***      -0.0009          -0.0019
RN/Total
                (0.0010)       (0.0022)        (0.0012)      (0.0012)          (0.0019)      (0.0011)         (0.0028)
No. nursing
                   1,044          314           730              691             353             904            140
homes
No.
                   8,086         2,388         5,698            5,379           2,707           7,047          1,039
observations
All of the models include year and nursing home fixed effects. Robust standard errors in parentheses.
*p<0.10 **p<0.05 ***p<0.01




                                                                                                        34
Table 7. Alternative Specifications of the Effect of a 1%-point Change in Unemployment on
Nurse Staffing Minutes per Resident Day in National Nursing Homes, 2005-2012
                                   Alternative specifications for national nursing homes
                        -0.0818        -0.0003       -0.2663     -0.0009      0.0257       -0.0003
Aides
                        (0.1541)       (0.0013)      (0.1994)    (0.0016)    (0.1481)      (0.0012)
                        -0.0331        -0.0001        0.0258      0.0008     -0.0691       -0.0012
RNs + LPNs
                        (0.1094)       (0.0011)      (0.1393)    (0.0015)    (0.1046)      (0.0011)
Demographic
                           X              X             X           X            X            X
controls
Total number of
                           X              X             X           X            X            X
beds
Logged dependent
                                          X                         X                         X
variable
State-specific trends      X              X

State-year dummies                                      X           X
County-specific
                                                                                 X            X
trends
Demographic controls include fraction of the population who are less than 5 years old, 5 to 17 years old,
20 to 29 years old, greater than 65 years old, high school dropouts, with some college, college graduates,
black, and Hispanic.
All of the models include nursing home fixed effects.
Models that do not control for time trends include year fixed effects.
Robust standard errors in parentheses.
*p<0.10 **p<0.05 ***p<0.01




                                                                                                        35
