                             NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




        LESSONS UNLEARNED? CORPORATE DEBT IN EMERGING MARKETS

                                        Laura Alfaro
                                        Gonzalo Asis
                                        Anusha Chari
                                        Ugo Panizza

                                     Working Paper 23407
                             http://www.nber.org/papers/w23407


                    NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                             1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                               Cambridge, MA 02138
                          May 2017, Revised November 2017




We thank participants at NBER conference Capital Flows and Debt in Emerging Markets, Luis
Serven for an insightful discussion, Carmen Reinhart and Sebnem Kalemli-Ozcan for comments
and suggestions. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily
reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2017 by Laura Alfaro, Gonzalo Asis, Anusha Chari, and Ugo Panizza. All rights reserved.
Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission
provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Lessons Unlearned? Corporate Debt in Emerging Markets
Laura Alfaro, Gonzalo Asis, Anusha Chari, and Ugo Panizza
NBER Working Paper No. 23407
May 2017, Revised November 2017
JEL No. F34,G01,G15,G32

                                         ABSTRACT

This paper documents a set of new stylized facts about leverage and financial fragility for
emerging market firms following the Global Financial Crisis (GFC). Corporate debt vulnerability
indicators during the Asian Financial Crisis (AFC) attributed to corporate financial roots provide
a benchmark for comparison. Firm-level data show that post-GFC, emerging market corporate
balance sheet indicators have not deteriorated to AFC crisis-country levels. However, more
countries are close to or in the “vulnerable” range of Altman’s Z-score, and average leverage for
the entire emerging market sample is higher in the post-GFC period than during the AFC.
Regression estimates suggest that the relationship between leverage, exchange rate depreciations,
and corporate financial distress is time varying. Also, a central finding is that firm size is
correlated with corporate distress and, further, that currency depreciations amplify the impact of
leverage on financial vulnerability for large firms during a crisis. Consistent with Gabaix (2011)
the paper finds a granularity effect in that large firms are systemically important—idiosyncratic
shocks to the sales growth of large firms significantly correlate with GDP growth in our emerging
markets sample. Relatedly, the sales growth of large firms with higher leverage is more adversely
impacted by exchange rate shocks. While this result holds for the average country in our sample,
there is substantial cross-country heterogeneity.

Laura Alfaro                                         Anusha Chari
Harvard Business School                              301 Gardner Hall
Morgan Hall 263                                      CB#3305, Department of Economics
Soldiers Field                                       University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill
Boston, MA 02163                                     Chapel Hill, NC 27599
and NBER                                             and NBER
lalfaro@hbs.edu                                      achari@unc.edu

Gonzalo Asis                                         Ugo Panizza
University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill          The Graduate Institute, Geneva
gasis@live.unc.edu                                   Department of International Economics
                                                     PO Box 36, 1211 Geneva 21
                                                     Switzerland
                                                     ugo.panizza@graduateinstitute.ch
                           1. Introduction


                                                      There was a rapid credit expansion in emerging-market countries in the aftermath of the
Global Financial Crisis (GFC). A surge in foreign borrowing and deterioration in net external
debt positions accompanied the increase in domestic credit (BIS, 2014; IMF, 2015). The non-
financial corporate sector accounts for the lion’s share of this surge in leverage, which also
accounts for large increases in international bond issuance (BIS, 2016). The total domestic and
international debt of emerging market-based non-financial firms rose from $2.4 trillion to $3.7
trillion, and outstanding international bonds grew from $360 billion to $1.1 trillion between 2007
and 2015 (BIS, 2016).
                                                      The impact of monetary policy reversals in advanced economies on emerging-market
sovereign debt premia, in conjunction with low corporate profitability and market valuations,
have the potential to cause severe liquidity problems for emerging market firms.1 Nearly $1
trillion flowed out of emerging markets in the first three-quarters of 2015, eclipsing the outflows
during the GFC.2 Understanding potential vulnerabilities require knowing more about the state
of emerging market corporate balance sheets and their potential impact on the macroeconomy.
Our paper fills this gap.
                                                      In this paper, we show that the relationships between leverage, exchange rate
depreciations, and corporate financial distress are time varying—this result is new. In particular,
controlling for firm characteristics, the relationship between (i) leverage and distress scores and
(ii) leverage, currency depreciation and distress scores varies across the crisis and tranquil
periods in our sample. A key finding is that firm size plays a critical role in the relationship
between these three variables. Specifically, there is an inverse correlation between firm size and
corporate distress scores and, further, currency depreciations amplify the impact of leverage on
financial vulnerability for large firms during a crisis. Therefore we go on to investigate the role


	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  
1
  The growth in corporate profits has slowed considerably and the return on invested capital in emerging-market
firms has significantly declined since the financial crisis. As evidence, emerging markets usually trade at a lower
valuation than their advanced-economy counterparts, and while these relative valuations increased in the aftermath
of the GFC, emerging markets are trading at a discount again.
2
  A number of direct and indirect channels can transmit shocks to highly leveraged non-financial corporates to the
domestic economy. For example, a deterioration of credit quality of corporate borrowers or a sudden withdrawal of
funds from the domestic financial system by firms that are unable to roll-over their international obligations can
impair the domestic banking system (Acharya et. al., 2015).


	                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 2
of large firms and the amplification of macroeconomic vulnerabilities in emerging markets. To
the best of our knowledge, this is the first paper to document these facts and implications.
         The analysis proceeds in the following steps. First, we examine differences in leverage
and other indicators of corporate vulnerability immediately prior and during the Asian Financial
Crisis (AFC), the intervening tranquil period and the post-GFC period. Then, we present a
formal regression analysis that highlights the importance of the interaction between leverage and
exchange rate movements on corporate distress scores in the different sub-periods. This
interaction provides indirect evidence for the relative importance of foreign currency debt in
different periods, a variable that is not observable in balance sheet data. The regression analysis
also brings to light the importance of firm size as it shows that, all else equal, it is the larger
firms that are more vulnerable.
         Next, we explore the role of large firms and their importance for the overall economic
performance in emerging markets. We believe that this is the first paper to formally test the role
of Gabaix (2011) and others’ granularity idea using emerging market data. We find that while
large firms are less leveraged than small firms, they may have a more risky type of leverage as
large firms corporate distress scores deteriorate more significantly in response to exchange rate
depreciations. In conjunction with the contributions that large firms make to the overall
economic performance in emerging markets, the leverage vulnerabilities of these firms may,
therefore, warrant particular attention from policy makers.
         Note again that there is considerable concern about the recent increase in dollar
borrowing by emerging market firms (BIS, 2015, Avdjiev et al., 2014, and Acharya et al., 2015).
Our paper is the first to provide evidence of the macroeconomic consequences of the links
between leverage, currency movements, and firm size. Given that disaggregate data on the
liability composition (currency, maturity, type of lender) of non-financial firms are not available,
our tests are a valuable and novel contribution to the literature. The details of the analysis follow
below.
         To reiterate, the first objective of this paper is to document a set of stylized facts about
leverage and financial fragility in the non-financial corporate sector in emerging markets. We use
detailed firm-level data to document stylized facts about the evolution of corporate leverage and
its relationship to financial fragility in emerging markets over the last twenty years. With this
data in hand, we compare corporate debt immediately before and during the Asian Financial



	                                                3
Crisis (AFC) with corporate debt in emerging markets in the aftermath of the GFC. The AFC
serves as the benchmark that allows us to answer the following question: How do corporate debt
vulnerability indicators in emerging markets today compare with these indicators on the eve of
the AFC? 3 In particular, how is corporate financial fragility related to leverage and other
pertinent firm characteristics? While research on the state of corporate balance sheets in
emerging markets shows that leverage and foreign currency exposure of emerging-market-based
corporates have increased, a lack of relevant benchmarks prevents prior studies from assessing
the magnitude of the risks brought about by these trends (IMF 2015).
                                                      The second objective of our paper is to provide such a benchmark by comparing the
current situation with the evolution of corporate balance sheets during the AFC. Why the AFC?
Historically, emerging market crises arose from sovereign debt problems, and twin banking and
currency crises (Reinhart and Rogoff, 2009). However, the underlying microeconomic roots
attributed to the AFC include corporate debt vulnerabilities (Pomerleano,1998; Corsetti et al.
1999) as well as implicit guarantees and moral hazard (Krugman 1998, Craig, et al. 2003). The
crisis was accompanied by widespread corporate failures due to adverse balance sheet effects via
currency and maturity mismatches at the firm level. Corporate debt levels associated with the
AFC, therefore, serve as a natural benchmark to assess corporate sector vulnerabilities in
emerging markets today.
                                                      Third, we ask whether leverage poses a risk to the health of emerging market firms. To
test this, we regress corporate fragility on leverage and other firm characteristics and
macroeconomic control variables, focusing on different periods, sectors, and exchange rate
regimes.
                                                      Fourth, as noted by Gabaix (2011), the largest firms dominate economic activity across
many countries and shocks to the largest firms can affect total output as these shocks do not get
diversified in the aggregate data.4,5 The role of large firms is particularly critical in many
emerging markets.


	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  
3
  Chari and Henry (2015) use this methodological approach to compare and contrast the fiscal policy response and
its impact on the recovery of GDP growth in the aftermath of the AFC to examine Europe’s pivot from stimulus to
austerity and it’s impact on European growth in the aftermath of its crisis.
4
  See also Acemoglu et al. (2016) and Acemoglu et al. (2017).
5
  Note that weak bank balance sheets and non-performing loans leading up to the AFC were arguably associated
with corporate sector weaknesses (see Corsetti et al., 1999).


	                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 4
                                                      The final objective of the paper is to carefully examine whether the most levered and
financially fragile firms are also the most systemically important. In particular, implicitly the
vulnerabilities of systemically large firms are intimately linked to bailout guarantees and moral
hazard issues in emerging market lending where widespread corporate debt vulnerabilities can
turn into full-blown financial crises.
                                                      We compile extensive firm-level data between 1992 and 2014 from Worldscope and
Osiris for 26 countries classified as emerging markets by the Bank of International Settlements
(Argentina, Brazil, Chile, China, Colombia, Czech Republic, Hungary, India, Indonesia, Jordan,
Malaysia, Mexico, Morocco, Pakistan, Peru, Philippines, Poland, Russia, Slovakia, Slovenia,
South Africa, South Korea, Taiwan, Thailand, Turkey, and Vietnam). We exclude financial firms
from our analysis. The firm-level data provide different indicators from the balance sheets and
income statements to analyze cash flows, leverage, liquidity, solvency, and profitability ratios—
the returns on equity and invested capital.
                                                      To document the stylized facts, we split the sample into two subperiods: AFC (1996-
1998) and post-GFC (2008-2014). We compare the post-GFC indicators to two benchmarks: (i) a
within-country comparison relative to 1996-1998 values for a given indicator; and (ii) a crisis-
country comparison to the 1996-1998 average of the five Asian countries involved in the AFC
(Asian Crisis Five).6,7 We find that the within-country cross-time benchmark and the Asian
Crisis Five benchmark yield varying cross-country patterns of results.
                                                      In particular, the data reveal the following stylized facts. First, over half of the emerging
markets in our sample display increased leverage in the post-GFC period. However, no emerging
market country has leverage ratios that exceed the average of the Asian Crisis Five on the eve
and during the Asian Financial crisis. Second, half our sample countries have higher short-term
liquidity needs measured by current to total liabilities compared to the Asian Crisis Five. Third,
about 91% of countries in the sample have stronger solvency positions, measured by coverage
ratios, in the post-GFC period than the Asian Crisis Five during the AFC.8 Fourth, a measure of
corporate financial fragility (Altman’s (2005) emerging-market Z-score) shows that post-GFC, a

	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  
6
  Indonesia, Malaysia, Philippines, South Korea and Thailand.
7
  In robustness analyses, we also exclude, obtaining similar results, the period 1999-2002 to avoid contaminating our
tests with emerging market crises which were associated with sovereign debt episodes as the Russian, Brazilian, and
Argentine crises of the late 1990s early 2000s were not clearly attributable to corporate leverage, (see Reinhart and
Rogoff, 2009). 	  
8
  This could be a result of higher liabilities, lower profitability or a combination of the two.


	                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 5
larger number of countries are in or close to the grey or “vulnerable zone” than in the AFC
period. However, while South Korea was in the distress zone during the AFC, there are no
countries in the distress zone in the post-GFC period. In summary, our data show that post-GFC,
emerging market corporate balance sheet indicators have not deteriorated to AFC crisis-country
levels. However, more countries are close to or in the “vulnerable” range of Altman’s Z-score
(in the “grey zone” or barely above the threshold) and average leverage for the entire emerging
market sample is higher in the post-GFC sub period than during the AFC.
       Next, we formally analyze the relationship between leverage and corporate financial
fragility at the firm level controlling for a variety of firm, sector, and country-level
(macroeconomic) factors. Regression estimates confirm that during the AFC and in the aftermath
of the GFC, there is a negative and statistically significant correlation between leverage and firm
financial fragility. In other words, firms with higher leverage have Z-scores that are closer to the
financial distress range. The data also show that currency depreciation amplifies the negative
impact of leverage Z-scores during the Asian Financial Crisis.
       To examine whether the leverage and corporate financial fragility patterns can portend
adverse macroeconomic consequences, we examine the role of large firms in the macroeconomy.
Consistent with Gabaix (2011) we find that large firms are systemically important—idiosyncratic
shocks to large firms significantly correlate with GDP growth in our sample of emerging markets.
We also find that while large firms are, on average, less leveraged than smaller firms, the more-
levered large firms are more vulnerable to exchange rate shocks than smaller firms with
comparable levels of leverage. While this result holds for the average country in our sample, we
also find that there is substantial cross-country heterogeneity.
       Our paper is related to several strands of literature. First, the paper contributes to the
literature on the recent evolution of corporate debt in the aftermath of the GFC. IMF (2015)
documents the main trends and shows that global factors drive the increase in corporate leverage
following the GFC. This finding is in line with Shin’s (2013) view that the response to the crisis
led to a sudden increase in global liquidity. Acharya et al. (2015) present several case studies and
evaluate vulnerabilities and potential policy responses.
       The paper is also related to the literature on the origins of the AFC. Several papers
suggest that weak fundamentals and excessive risk-taking by corporates caused the crisis. The
“crony capitalism” view suggests that the increase in corporate leverage was due to moral hazard



	                                                6
attributed to weak banking supervision and implicit guarantees for well-connected borrowers
(Corsetti et al., 1998, Claessens and Glaessner, 1997, Krugman, 1998, Johnson et al., 2000;
Burnside et al., 2001, 2003).9 Pomerleano (1998) uses firm-level data and finds that excessive
leverage and poor financial performance in the corporate sector caused the AFC. 10 More
generally, this paper relates to the literature documenting the association between rapid credit
growth and the building of corporate leverage and financial crises (Mendoza and Terrones 2008,
and Schularick and Taylor, 2012).
                                                      The paper proceeds as follows. Section 2 presents trends in broad macro-indicators to
motivate the analysis. Section 3 describes the firm-level data. Section 4 uses the AFC as a
benchmark to detail stylized facts about leverage and corporate financial fragility, and Section 5
presents formal firm-level regression results. Section 6 analyzes the interplay between emerging-
market corporate fragility and the macroeconomy. Section 7 concludes.




2. The Post-GFC Rise in Emerging Market Borrowing


                                                      In the aftermath of the GFC, advanced economies were characterized by increases in
government borrowing and household and corporate deleveraging.11 Emerging markets stand in
stark contrast. Over 2001-2007 average credit to the non-financial sector in emerging market
countries remained close to 120% of GDP. The GFC caused a sudden reduction in credit, which
went from 122% of GDP in 2007 to 109% in 2008. Credit started expanding rapidly in 2009 and
reached 175% of GDP in 2015, a 67-percentage point increase with respect to the 2008 trough




	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  
9
  An alternative view as in Furman and Stiglitz (1998), Radelet and Sachs (1998), and Stiglitz and Bhattacharya
(2000) maintains that there was nothing particularly wrong with the pre-crisis fundamentals of most East Asian
economies.
10
   Ghosh et al. (2002) also show that in 1995–96 several East Asian countries had debt ratios and share of short-term
debt which were significantly higher than debt ratios and short-term debt shares in OECD countries. Claessens et al.
(2000) suggest that corporate financial risk factors may have been an amplifying factor in the crisis.
11
   Low global interest rates notwithstanding, the higher leverage led to a rapid increase in the debt service ratios of
emerging market borrowers. In a period when the average debt service ratio of Advanced Economies decreased from
21 to 18 percent, the average debt service ratio of emerging markets increased from 10 to 12.5 percent. In a subset of
emerging economies characterized by rapid credit expansion, debt service ratios surpassed the advanced economy
average (BIS credit statistics).	  


	                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 7
(Figure 1). Borrowing by non-financial corporations was a key driver of this surge in leverage—
corporate debt went from 57% to 101% of GDP over 2008-15.12
                                                      There is, however, substantial heterogeneity across emerging market countries (Figure 2).
By the end of 2015 total domestic credit to the non-financial sector was above 200 percent of
GDP in China and South Korea and below 100 percent of GDP in Argentina, Indonesia, Mexico,
and Russia. Borrowing by non-financial corporations is important in China, Korea, Hungary,
Czech Republic, and Turkey.13 According to BIS data, in the case of China the total credit-to-
GDP ratio for the non-financial sector went from 150% in 2008 to nearly 250% in 2015, with
borrowing by non-financial corporations increasing from 100% to 166% of GDP. If we exclude
China from our sample of emerging market countries we find a more moderate credit expansion
(solid line in Figure 1).
                                                      Non-financial corporations also played a key role in international bond issuances.14 Over
2008-2015, outstanding international bonds issued by non-financial corporations grew from $360
billion (approximately 30% of total outstanding bonds) to $1.1 trillion (more than 40% of total
outstanding bonds). Issuances by non-financial corporations were particularly important in Asia
and Latin America, where they now represent nearly 50% of total outstanding bonds. In addition,
by 2015, total claims of BIS reporting banks on emerging markets and outstanding international
securities issued by emerging market nationals surpassed $5.8 trillion, representing an 80%
increase over emerging-market liabilities in 2007. The largest increases, both in percentage and
absolute terms, were in Emerging Asia and Latin America (148% and 93%, respectively).15 The
increase in leverage was particularly important in non-tradable cyclical sectors such as
construction.
                                                      The figures for Asia and, to some extent, Latin America are however driven by two
important outliers. As mentioned, liabilities by Chinese nationals increased by 500 percent and,
if we remove China from the Asian total, we find a more modest increase in foreign liabilities (a
58% increase compared to 148%). In the case of Latin America, instead, removing Brazil from

	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  
12
     Over the same period, household debt increased by 12 percentage points and government debt increased by 9
percentage points.
13
     While borrowing by households is important in Malaysia and Thailand, public sector borrowing is relatively more
important in Brazil, India, Indonesia, South Africa, Mexico, and Argentina. See Alfaro and Kanczuk (2013).
14
     In 2015, borrowing by non-financial corporation accounted for about 25 percent of EM cross-border borrowing
from BIS reporting banks.
15	  Alfaro, Chari, and Kanczuk (2017) analyze the effects of Brazilian capital control policies regarding capital

inflows. 	  


	                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 8
the total brings down the increase in foreign liabilities from 93% to 76%. Brazil and China
account for 48% of the increase in total claims of BIS reporting banks on EMs and outstanding
international securities issued by EM nationals, and excluding Brazil and China from the EM
total reduces the percentage increase of these liabilities from 80% to 45%.
                                                      As the introduction mentions, domestic credit expansion in emerging markets was
accompanied by a surge in foreign borrowing.16 In 2007 foreign currency bonds represented 16
percent of international debt by emerging market-based non-financial corporations and by 2014
the foreign currency share had grown to 22 percent (IMF, 2015).17 However, the increase in
leverage and foreign currency debt documented above took place in an environment of ample
global liquidity and record low policy rates in advanced economies. Emerging market-based
corporates have therefore borrowed at longer maturities and lower yields.18 Recent fears are that,
as monetary policy conditions in the US normalize, they could trigger a wave of corporate
failures in a number of emerging economies.




3. Data


                                                      Firm-level data are from Worldscope (gathered through Datastream) and Osiris.19 Both
sources provide detailed historical information for listed and unlisted firms for a wide sample of
countries. We compared Worldscope and Osiris’ coverage for emerging markets and chose the
data source with the most data availability for each country. Osiris had better coverage for China
and India, while Worldscope dominated for all other countries. Column 1 in Table A1 shows
total sales of firms in our database by country as a percentage of the country’s total market
capitalization, as computed by the World Bank. We find this a better measure of sample

	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  
16
   Total cross-border claims on EMs by BIS reporting banks increased from $2.4 trillion in 2008 to a peak of $3.7
trillion on 2014. Data for 2015 indicates a $200 billion retreat, with total cross-border claims standing just below
$3.5 trillion (Table 1).
17
   The share of dollar-denominated bonds issued by non-financial corporations is higher than the overall share of
dollar-denominated bonds.
18
   Maturity went from the pre-crisis average of 5 years to more than six years and average yields decreased from 8 to
6 percent (IMF, 2015).
19
    The Worldscope database provides detailed historical financial statement information for the world’s leading
public and private companies. Osiris, published by Bureau van Dijk, has information as well on listed, and major
unlisted/delisted, companies around the world. All data for Tangible fixed assets is also from Osiris. When
extracting data from Osiris, we restricted the sample to include sales information.


	                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 9
coverage than Sales/GDP because the large majority of the firms in our database are publicly
listed, and the size of the listed market relative to GDP varies significantly by country, as
Column 2 shows.
                                                       The sample consists of data on non-financial firms from 1992–2014 for the main
countries classified as emerging markets by the Bank of International Settlements. These are
Argentina, Brazil, Chile, China, Colombia, Czech Republic, Hungary, India, Indonesia, Jordan,
Malaysia, Mexico, Morocco, Pakistan, Peru, Philippines, Poland, Russia, Slovakia, Slovenia,
South Africa, South Korea, Taiwan, Thailand, Turkey, and Vietnam. Since coverage of Eastern
European countries is extremely sparse, we group together firms from Czech Republic, Hungary,
Poland, Slovakia, and Slovenia into ‘Eastern Europe’.
                                                       Overall, the dataset covers primarily larger firms. While a lack of smaller firm coverage
tends to pose problems in other settings, a focus on large corporations is to our advantage in this
paper. As mentioned in the introduction, large firms have the propensity to contribute more to
systemic risk, and thus they are precisely the firms whose financial health is of greatest concern
to policy-makers.
                                                       Our final sample includes all companies that have data for each indicator of firm
performance described below. 20 We exclude outliers and all noticeable errors in the data. The
sample varies from a maximum of 8,286 firms with data on return on invested capital totaling
(41,888 firm-year observations) to a minimum of 2,986 firms (14,393 observations) with enough
data to compute Altman’s Emerging Market Z-score. The countries with most firms in the
database are China, India, and South Korea, and with the least Eastern Europe.
                                                       We use several indicators of corporate financial vulnerabilities and firm performance. For
leverage, we use as a main indicator the debt to equity ratio (a firm’s total debt divided by its
common equity), which indicates how much debt a company is using to finance its assets relative
to its common equity. As a proxy for liquidity, we use the current ratio (current to total
liabilities). For solvency, we compute the coverage ratio, the ratio of earnings before interest,
taxes, depreciation, and amortization (EBITDA) over total liabilities to measure a company’s
ability to use their cash flow to pay back its outstanding liabilities.

	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  
20
  The number of companies with data for every variable and year of interest is too small to create a balanced sample.
Nonetheless, we have performed the analysis maintaining a balanced sample during different periods, obtaining
similar results (e.g. to analyze yearly debt/assets ratio for the 2008-2014 period, we select for our sample all
companies that have data for each indicator of Total Debt, Total Assets, and Sales for each year in 2008-2014). 	  


	                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 10
                                                      For firm performance, we analyze as well the increase in tangible fixed assets as a proxy
for investment. Profitability is captured by the return on equity (ROE) and return on invested
capital (ROIC). ROE is defined as the amount of net income returned as a percentage of
shareholders’ equity, and ROIC is the ratio of operating profit (earnings before interest and tax)
to invested capital (sum of shareholders' equity and debt liabilities).
                                                      As a summary measure of corporate fragility, we calculate the Altman (2005) Emerging
Market Z-score. The measure weighs four ratios constructed using the firms’ financial statements
(working capital to total assets, retained earnings to total assets, operating income to total assets,
and book value of equity to total liabilities).21 The measure is an enhanced version of the
standard Z-score model, adjusted to incorporate the characteristics of emerging market firms and
best suited to assess the relative vulnerability of the sample of countries we consider in this paper.
Lower Z-scores are associated with greater vulnerability and likelihood of bankruptcy.
Companies with EM Z-scores greater than 5.85 are considered to be in the “safe zone”, scores
between 5.85 and 3.75 indicate vulnerability, and scores below 3.75 indicate that the firm is in
state of distress. The following table from Altman (2005) compares Z-scores with bond ratings.


                                                                                                                                                                                                                 Table A. Altman’s EM Z-Score and Bond Rating
                                                                                                                                                                                      Z' Score                                            Rating        Z' Score          Rating   Grey Zone
                                                                                                                                                                                             >                                     8.15   AAA           5.65 -     5.85   BBB-
                                                                                                                                                                                      7.60 -                                       8.15   AA+           5.25 -     5.65   BB+
                                                                                                                                                                                      7.30 -                                       7.60   AA            4.95 -     5.25   BB
                                                                                                                                                                                      7.00 -                                       7.30   AA_           4.75 -     4.95   BB-
                                                                                                                                                                                      6.85 -                                       7.00   A+            4.50 -     4.75   B+
                                                                                                                                                                                      6.65 -                                       6.85   A             4.15 -     4.50   B
                                                                                                                                                                 Safe Zone




                                                                                                                                                                                      6.40 -                                       6.65   A-            3.75 -     4.15   B-
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   Distress Zone




                                                                                                                                                                                      6.25 -                                       6.40   BBB+
                                                                                                                                                                                      5.85 -                                       6.25   BBB           3.20   -   3.75   CCC+
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        2.50   -   3.20   CCC
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        1.75   -   2.50   CCC-
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               <   1.75   D
	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  
21
  EM score =6.56 (X1) + 3.26 (X2) + 6.72(X3) + 1.05(X4) + 3.25, where X1= working capital/ total assets,
X2=retained earnings /total assets, X3=operating income /total assets, X4=book value of equity /total liabilities. The
constant term (derived from the median Z`` score for bankrupt US entities) standardizes the analysis so “that a
default equivalent (D) is consistent with a score below zero.” The use of book value of equity, not market value, was
motivated by a concern that equity markets may be less liquid than in developed markets. Altman (2005) adjusts the
measure to consider currency devaluation vulnerability, industry adjustments (relative to U.S.): competitiveness
position adjustment (dominant firms in the industry due to size, political influence, etc.); special debt issue figure
(collateral or bona fide, high-quality guarantor); sovereign spread (comparison to US corporate bond of the same
rating).


	                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 11
                                                      To further validate our use of Altman’s EM Z-score as a proxy for (the inverse of)
corporate financial fragility, we test its ability to predict exit from the sample. We find that firms
with low Z-scores are more likely to exit the sample the next period. Specifically, a one standard
deviation (corresponding to a 4.7%) decrease in the Z-score is associated with a 2% increase in
the probability that the firm will not be in the sample in the following year. This outcome allows
us to think of the Z-score as a rough proxy for distance to default.22




4. Corporate Fragility in Emerging Markets: Stylized Facts


                                                      We begin by comparing corporate financial fragility indicators during the AFC – which
was deemed to have corporate financial roots – with the same indicators following the GFC, a
period characterized by the rapid build-up in emerging market corporate debt. To do so, we
divide the data into two periods: AFC (1996-1998) and post-GFC (2008-2014).23 We use the
indicators described in Section 3 to analyze corporate fragility and profitability using data from
the balance sheet, income statements, and cash flows. For different indicators of corporate
financial vulnerabilities and firm performance, Table 2 and Figures 3-6 present several stylized
facts via weighted mean values using sales (as a proxy for size) as the weights. The weighted
means are calculated for all firms in a country by year. The yearly weighted means are then
averaged for each of the two sub-periods, also by country. We also analyze simple means and
simple and weighted medians. The Asian Crisis Five include Indonesia, Malaysia, Philippines,
South Korea and Thailand.
                                                      Leverage: Panel A of Table 2 presents the findings for changes in leverage levels
(weighted means), measured as the debt to equity ratio for the firms in the sample.24 It is

	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  
22
   Specifically, we run a regression where the dependent variable is an “exit” dummy, which takes a value of one if a
firm that was in the sample in year t-1and year t-2 is not in the sample in year t and takes a value of zero if a firm
that was in the sample in year t-1 and year t-2 is still in the sample in year t. The explanatory variables are the t-1
value of the Z-score and a set of firm fixed effects. We find that the coefficient is -0.005 with a standard error of
0.0019. We would like to thank an anonymous referee for suggesting to check whether the Z score predicts survival.
23
   We also compared results against an average of the period 1992-1997. The main results and implications are
similar.
24
   The debt to equity is a leverage ratio that compares a company's total liabilities to its total shareholder’s equity.
The measure provides information about the magnitude of the commitments from lenders and creditors to a firm
compared to the magnitude of shareholder commitments. The debt to equity ratio therefore provides an alternative
lens from which to view a firm's leverage position by comparing total liabilities to shareholders' equity rather than to


	                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 12
important to note that the debt to equity ratio provides a more striking perspective on a firm's
leverage position than the debt to assets ratio. For example, South Korea’s AFC average debt to
asset ratio of 68% for the firms in our sample seems less burdensome than its debt to equity ratio
of more than 280%, which implies that debt obligations are more than twice as high as
shareholder commitments.
                                                      We also documented the patterns for the simple means and medians, as well as the
weighted median. Here a point about the relevance of the summary statistic used is worth noting.
In general, the weighted median measure attenuates the distributional consequences of
observations in the tails of a distribution. In many circumstances, this adjustment is warranted to
ensure that outliers do not drive the results. In other words, if a few observations skew the
weighted mean, the weighted median that adjusts for non-uniform statistical weights and gives
the 50% weighted percentile measure is the more appropriate statistic. However, in the case of
leverage and measuring the overall riskiness of corporate debt for the financial system in a
country, we would like to assess the upper bound of the risk. If a few large firms are also the
ones with the highest leverage, it is desirable to give a larger weight to these observations since
arguably these firms have the greatest potential to generate systemic risk—we focus on these
large firms in Section 6. We therefore present the main results using the (sales) weighted mean
rather than the weighted median while recognizing that the weighted median provides a useful
alternative benchmark.
                                                      Columns 1 and 2 present the firm level weighted mean leverage by country for our two
periods: one year before and during the AFC (1996-98) and post-GFC (2008-14). Column 1
shows that the average debt to equity ratio in the Asian Crisis Five was close to 145% while the
average for the full emerging market sample was 80%. Column 3 counts the number of countries
with higher average leverage during the post-GFC than during the AFC, revealing that 56% of
countries25 (10 out of 18) have higher average leverage ratios in the post-GFC period. Column 4
tabulates how many countries have higher average leverage during the post-GFC years than the
average of the Asian Crisis Five during the AFC. It shows that all countries have lower leverage
post-GFC than the Asian Crisis Five did on the eve and in the midst of the crisis. Figure 3
confirms these patterns visually.
	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  
assets. Similar to the debt to assets ratio, a lower percentage means that a company is using less leverage and has a
stronger equity position.
25
   Data for Jordan following the Global Financial crises was patchy for leverage.


	                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      13
                 For purposes of illustration it is interesting to note the patterns we obtain when we use the
(sales) weighted median instead of the weighted mean. First, in the AFC period the weighted
median leverage ratios for the Asian Crisis Five and full emerging market sample are much
lower than the weighted mean, close to 93% and 67%, respectively. Second, 14 out of 19
countries have a higher post-GFC weighted median. Third, three countries have a higher
weighted median compared to the Asian Crisis Five.
                 Liquidity: Panel B of Table 2 provides the (sales) weighted mean of the current to total
liabilities ratio by country to analyze the liquidity needs of the firms in our sample.26 Column 3
suggests that six countries demonstrate a higher current to total liability ratio in the post-GFC
sub-period. Column 4 shows that 11 out of the 22 countries have higher short-term liquidity
needs compared to the Asian Crisis Five. Figure 4 presents a graphical representation of these
patterns.
                 Solvency: The coverage ratio is a measure of a firm's ability to meet its obligations to
lenders. Generally, the higher the coverage ratio, the better the ability of the firm to fulfill its
debt obligations. Common coverage ratios include the interest coverage ratio, debt service
coverage ratio and the asset coverage ratio. The interest payment and debt service ratio data are
very sparse in our sample of emerging market firms. We therefore use a modified version of the
coverage ratio – the ratio of EBITDA to total liabilities. By definition, this modified ratio will be
biased downward as total liabilities exceed interest expenses or other debt obligations used to
calculate more standard versions of the coverage ratio. Nevertheless it provides a useful snapshot
of a firm’s solvency position.
                 In Panel C of Table 2, we see that the pre-crisis coverage ratio average of the Asian Crisis
Five has increased. The average for the full emerging markets sample on the other hand has
remained unchanged. Column 3 shows that half of the countries have coverage ratios that are
lower than their AFC levels, but 20 countries have coverage ratios that exceed that of the Asian
Crisis Five. Figure 5 visually confirms these patterns.
                 Profitability: Next we examine the profitability of the firms in our sample (Panel D,
Table 2). We use two measures: the return on invested capital (ROIC) and the return on equity
	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  
26
  Current liabilities measure a firm's debts and other obligations that are due within one year and include short-term
debt, accounts payable, accrued liabilities and other debts. Note that current liabilities provide a more
comprehensive measure of a firm’s short-term liquidity needs compared to short-term debt since it includes accounts
payable and accrued liabilities.
	  


	                                                                                                           14
(ROE). A concern with increased leverage is that if it is accompanied by a slowdown in
profitability, firms will find it more difficult to service their debt obligations. Unlike equity, debt
is a non-contingent claim that needs to be met regardless of the state of firm profits. Firm-level
liquidity and solvency ratios therefore feature some measure of earnings relative to debt service
obligations to provide a measure of a firm’s flexibility with respect to these obligations.
       Panel D shows that while the ROIC for the Asian Crisis Five during the AFC was close
to 7% the number for the overall emerging markets sample was approximately 10%. In the post-
GFC period, the average ROIC across all emerging markets in our sample was similar to the
AFC sample period. However, 77% of countries (17 out of 22) had higher profitability post-GFC
than the Asian Crisis Five during the AFC. The fact that the Asian crisis five countries had
significantly worse profitability during the Asian crisis and the emerging market averages for
profitability are the same in the AFC and GFC periods suggests that profitability has fallen
between the two periods for the countries not involved in the AFC. This pattern indicates that a
broader sample of emerging markets have subpar profitability in the post-GFC period.
       Interestingly, consistent with an increase in leverage, the return on equity (ROE) shows a
much different pattern (not reported in Table D). Note that increased leverage (debt) increases
the expected rate of return on the equity simply because leveraged investments are riskier than
unlevered ones. The average ROE went from negative to 13% for the Asian Crisis Five across
the two sample periods while the overall emerging market average increased from 9% to 14%.
More than half the sample of countries has higher ROE values in the post-GFC period compared
to the AFC period. Strikingly, post-GFC, most of the countries have higher ROE values
compared to the Asian Crisis Five during the AFC.
       Corporate Fragility: As mentioned in section 3, Altman’s Emerging Market Z-score can
be used as a composite summary statistic for corporate fragility. The measure is composed of
various income statement and balance sheet items: the ratios of working capital, retained
earnings, and operating income to total assets, as well as the book value of assets to total
liabilities. By combining various aspects of firm operations, it paints an overall picture of
corporate health. The advantage of the approach, as the data section shows, is that the different
ranges of “safe”, “grey” and “distress” can be correlated with corporate ratings letter grades used
by credit rating agencies. Altman modifies the summary statistics to account for different
structural characteristics of emerging market firms; e.g. he replaces the market value of assets to



	                                                15
the book value to adjust for the relative trading illiquidity in emerging markets compared to
advanced economies. The Z-score statistics correspond to AAA to BBB for the safe zone, BBB-
to B- for the grey zone and CCC+ and below for the distress zone.
         Panel E of Table 2 and Figure 6 present the results. Companies with EM Z-scores greater
than 5.85 are considered to be in the “safe zone”, scores between 5.85 and 3.75 indicate
vulnerability, and scores below 3.75 indicate that the firm is in state of distress. Figure 6 shows
that among the Asian Crisis Five, South Korea was in the distress zone during the AFC period.
Malaysia, Philippines and Thailand were in the grey area, as were China, India, and Pakistan.
The only Asian country in the safe zone was Taiwan. In Latin America, while Argentina and
Brazil were in the grey zone, Chile, Colombia, Mexico and Peru were in the safe zone. Note also
that both Turkey and South Africa were in the safe zone. The average Z-score for the Asian
Crisis Five was 5.2 (in the grey zone) and the AFC emerging market average was 6.1 (in the safe
zone).
         The picture changes in the post-GFC period. Countries with higher Z-scores in the post-
GFC period are Colombia, Eastern Europe, Malaysia and Indonesia. South Korea moved from
the distress zone into the safe zone. China, India and Turkey are in the grey zone as is Mexico.
The picture suggests that the issues of corporate vulnerability apply to a broader set of emerging
markets in the post-GFC period given the number of countries in or barely above the grey zone.
It is worth pointing out that there are no countries in the distress zone post-GFC. Also, note that
some of the countries in the safe zone show a fall in their Z-scores compared to their AFC scores
and are now barely over the grey zone threshold. If the Altman Z-score provides a leading
indicator of the potential for distress, the data suggest that corporate financial vulnerabilities are
more widespread now than during the AFC period.
         Summary: Thus far, we have contrasted a range of firm-level indicators related to
corporate fragility and profitability prior to and during the AFC of 1998 and the aftermath of the
GFC of 2008–2009. We compare the indicators using two benchmarks: (i) a within-country
cross-time comparison to the 1996-1998 values for a given indicator; and (ii) a comparison
relative to the 1996-1998 average of the Asian Crisis Five.
         In the 1996-1998 period, East Asian corporates had greater leverage and financial
vulnerabilities than corporates in other emerging markets. While there is substantial cross-
country heterogeneity in the post-GFC period, our data suggest that more countries have higher



	                                               16
leverage and are in or close to the “grey zone” post-GFC than in the AFC period, implying a
higher risk of financial distress. It is important to note that the analysis of the East Asian crisis is
“ex-post” in that we examine the leverage of the Asian countries that were eventually hit by a
crisis. The leverage levels in these countries therefore provide a useful “worst case scenario”
benchmark against which to assess leverage-related vulnerabilities in the post-GFC period. Note
also that while warning lights are flashing regarding these vulnerabilities, thus far no emerging
market country is actually in crisis. Therefore, we do not have a single country with leverage
akin to the Asian Crisis Five in the red “distress” zone.
                        The appendix includes a table that helps visualize some of our findings through heat
maps for leverage and Altman’s Z-score. The maps confirm our prior observations that East
Asian corporates had greater leverage and financial fragility than corporates in other emerging
markets during the AFC, that the AFC period displays the greatest heterogeneity across countries
(both in leverage and Z-score), and that leverage and financial fragility have surged for several
countries in the post-GFC period.




5. Corporate Fragility in Emerging Markets: Firm Level Evidence


                        In the previous section we found that in the post-GFC period more countries are in
Altman's grey zone for corporate fragility or barely above the threshold. In this section we delve
further into the firm-level data and run regressions to examine the link between corporate
financial fragility and leverage as well as the role of firm-characteristics—in particular firm size.
We also examine the impact of macroeconomic and institutional factors such as exchange rates,
economic growth, and financial globalization interacted with leverage on the corporate distress
scores.
                        As a first step, we examine whether the relationship between leverage and Z-score is
different across time periods by estimating the following model:27


                                                                                             𝑍!,!,! = 𝛼! + 𝛿!,! + 𝛽! 𝐷1 + 𝛽! 𝐷2 + 𝛽! 𝐷3 𝐿!,!,! + 𝜀!,!,!                                                                            (1)
	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  
27
  In the regressions, the variables are Winsorized at 5%. The results are robust to using 1% Winsorization as well as
no Winsorization.
	  


	                                                                                                                                                       17
where 𝑍!,!,! is the Z-score for firm i, country c, year t; 𝐿!,!,! is leverage for firm i, country c, year
t; 𝛼! are firm fixed effects; 𝛿!,!   are country-year fixed effects; D1 is a dummy that takes a value
of 1 for years 1996-98 (the AFC period and its run-up); D2 is a dummy for years 2003-2007
(tranquil period); and D3 is a dummy for years 2008-14 (post-GFC period). In the baseline
regression, we exclude 1992-1995 from the regressions because we have a small number of firms
for this period. We also exclude 1999-2002 to avoid contaminating our tests with emerging
market crises associated with sovereign – not corporate – debt episodes (i.e. Russian, Brazilian,
and Argentinean crises). However, as a robustness check we include these years and more
generally, find that the results remain robust to alternate specifications of the subsamples.
        We begin by examining the unconditional correlation between leverage and the Altman’s
Z-score across the three sub-periods, i.e., with a specification that does not include compositional
controls. In other words, we start by estimating specification (1), but without firm and country-
year fixed effects. Column 1 of Table 3 examines the impact of leverage on the Altman’s Z-score
across three sub-periods.   𝛽1, 𝛽2,    and 𝛽3  measure the correlation between leverage ant the Z-
score in the Asian Financial Crisis (AFC) period, the tranquil period (Tranquil), and the post-
Global Financial Crisis (GFC) periods.
        Column 1 shows that leverage is negatively correlated with the Z score, i.e., scores for
firms with high leverage are closer to the distress range. The effect is statistically significant at
the 1% level in all three periods. A potential concern with the econometric specification in
Column 1, however, is that the ratio of Book-Value-of-Equity to Total Liabilities, a component
of the Altman’s Z-score, is by construction negatively correlated with our measure of leverage.
Therefore, one might argue that the relationship between leverage and the Z-score is hard-wired
and endogenous. This subtle point is worth emphasizing. On the one hand, at first pass it may
appear that “leverage is regressed on leverage.” However, note that this holds because leverage
is part of the Z score, but not an entirely correct interpretation because the specification in
Column 1 examines whether the relationship between leverage and the Z-score varies over time
and hence is not limited to the automatic correlation between leverage and the Z-score. Although,
in Column 1, we find that the coefficients are not statistically significantly different from each
other, this pattern changes as we include controls for firm observables such as firm size and
compositional controls in later specifications.


	                                                 18
       Nevertheless, to circumvent this concern, we construct a modified Z-score that does not
include the leverage term and only includes the ratios of working capital, retained earnings and
operating income to total assets. Higher values of these components drive up the Z-score and are
a sign of improving corporate health. Column 2 examines the unconditional correlation between
leverage and the modified Altman’s Z-score across the three sub-periods. The coefficients on
𝛽1, 𝛽2,    and 𝛽3  , are negative and highly statistically significant. The pattern suggests that there
is an inverse unconditional correlation between leverage and the modified Altman’s Z-score as
well. This suggests that firms with higher leverage also have a lower index of working capital,
retained earnings and operating income relative to total assets.
       In Column 3 we introduce firm observables such as investment and firm size. Size is
inversely correlated with the modified Z-score, suggesting that, for a given level of leverage,
larger firms are more financially fragile. Real investment is positively correlated with firm
financial health. Note that the coefficient on 1 , which measures the impact of leverage on the
modified Altman’s Z-score during the AFC, loses significance, but the other two coefficients,
𝛽2,    and 𝛽3  , remain significantly negative. The bottom panel of the table shows that the three
coefficients are not significantly different from each other.
       The inverse relationship between firm-size and financial health is of interest as the
financial vulnerability of large firms is of particular concern to regulators. For example, Chapter
3 of the IMF’s World Economic Outlook (October 2015) report explicitly states that it is
“important to closely monitor sectors and systemically important firms most exposed to risks and
the sectors and large firms closely connected to them, including across the financial system, and
to prepare for contingencies.”
       Since the results in Columns 2 and 3 do not control for time-invariant unobservable
heterogeneity at the firm level and time variant unobservable heterogeneity at the country level,
we go on to include firm fixed effects, as well as country-year fixed effects to control for
compositional effects at the country and year levels. The results, presented in Column 4, suggest
that the correlation between leverage and other dimensions of firm resilience captured by the
modified Z-score is positive and statistically significant during the tranquil period (𝛽! > 0) and
remain negative (albeit not statistically significant) in the other two sub-periods. In other words,
once compositional controls are introduced, better firms, i.e., firms with higher working capital,
retained earnings and operating income, borrow more during the tranquil sub-period. An


	                                                19
important pattern to also note in this regard is that the coefficients on leverage (𝛽1, 𝛽2,    and
𝛽3  ),  are time-varying and significantly lower during the AFC and post-GFC periods compared
to the tranquil period ( 𝛽! − 𝛽! < 0 and 𝛽! − 𝛽! < 0 ), suggesting that firms with high leverage
experienced worsening liquidity, solvency and profitability during the AFC and post-GFC
periods.
                                                       Column 4 also includes a control for firm size. We find that firm size continues to be
negatively correlated with the modified Z score. This implies that, controlling for leverage, larger
firms have significantly lower modified Z-scores, i.e., overall lower values of working capital,
retained earnings and operating income as fractions of total assets.28
                                                       Turning to the sector-specific dimension, we use a linear regression with dummy
variables to test whether the relationship between leverage and the Z-score differs across sectors.
For instance, industries such as energy and mining are traded but exposed to commodity prices.
Industries such as construction and utilities tend to be non-traded and therefore particularly
exposed to currency risk when they access international capital markets. Currency mismatches
associated with excessive foreign currency leverage were one of the root causes of the AFC.
However, such mismatches may be less damaging for firms that, by operating in the tradable
sector, may have natural hedges through foreign currency revenues.29
                                                       We observe two patterns. First, in the AFC period the negative correlation between
leverage and the modified Z-score is not statistically significant in the tradable sector (Column 5,
Table 3), positively correlated with the modified Z-score in the tranquil period and inversely
correlated in the post-GFC period, mirroring the patterns observed in Column 4. Second, for the
non-tradable sector none of the interacted leverage coefficients are statistically significantly
related to the Z-score in any sub-period. Post-GFC, it appears that, conditional on leverage, the
tradable sector is more financially vulnerable. Firm size continues to be inversely correlated with
the Z-score for both tradable and non-tradable sectors.
	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  
28
   We also estimated a specification with a control for the return on assets. The coefficient on firm size remains
inversely correlated with the modified Z-score while the return on assets, a measure of profitability, is positively
correlated with the modified Z-score.
29
   We start by classifying as non-tradable all firms that have a SIC2 code above 39, but then we also classify as non-
tradable firms with SIC2 codes 7 (Agricultural Services), 9 (Fishing, Hunting and Trapping), 15 (Construction -
General Contractors & Operative Builders), 16 (Heavy Construction, Except Building Construction, Contractor), 17
(Construction - Special Trade Contractors), 25 (Furniture and Fixtures), 27 (Printing, Publishing and Allied
Industries), and 32 (Stone, Clay, Glass, and Concrete Products). This classification yields 5,888 observations in the
tradable sector and 4,000 in the non-tradable sector. Our results are robust to using the simpler above 39 and below
split.


	                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 20
           Next, we examine the impact of the interaction of leverage and three macroeconomic
variables - exchange rates, interest rates and GDP growth - on financial fragility. We begin with
the exchange rate. This variable stands to play an important role because, in the presence of
foreign currency denominated debt, the relationship between leverage and the Z-scores may vary
with currency movements. While we do not have data on the currency composition of firm-level
debt, the finding that currency movements amplify the correlation between leverage and
corporate financial fragility measured by the modified Z-score would be consistent with the
presence of currency mismatches. We test this hypothesis by estimating the following equation:


                                            𝑍!,!,! = 𝛼! + 𝛿!,! + 𝛽! 𝐷1 + 𝛽! 𝐷2 + 𝛽! 𝐷3 𝐿!,!,! +
                                                          + 𝛾! 𝐷1 + 𝛾! 𝐷2 + 𝛾! 𝐷3 𝐿!,!,! ∆𝐸𝑋!,!!! + 𝜀!,!,!                                                                               (2)


           Here, ∆𝐸𝑋!,!!! is the percentage change in the nominal exchange rate, where ∆𝐸𝑋 > 0
represents a currency depreciation. Table 4 presents the results. Again, we start by estimating the
model without including firms and country-year fixed effects. The first column’s negative,
statistically significant coefficient on 𝛾! (AFC×ΔEX×Leverage) suggests that, in the AFC period and
conditional on a depreciating currency, leverage has a statistically adverse impact on the firm-
fragility score. 𝛽! the unconditional effect of leverage on the modified Z-score during the AFC
period is no longer statistically significant once we include the interaction of leverage and
exchange rate changes.
           At the same time,  𝛽! and 𝛽! , the unconditional effects of leverage on the modified Z-
score remain negative and statistically significant and 𝛾! , the effect of leverage conditional on
currency changes in the post-GFC period is not statistically significant. This result is consistent
with the fact that in the AFC period firms with high leverage also had currency mismatches.
However, currency mismatches do not seem to be important in the post-GFC period, possibly
due to the lack of severe currency depreciations. Also, note that while Asian currencies
experienced significant depreciations during the AFC, the post-GFC period was generally
marked by an appreciation of emerging market currencies with the exception of the period after
2013.
           Column 2 of Table 4 shows that the interaction effect between leverage and exchange
rate change (𝛾! ) holds when we introduce firm-specific factors like investment in fixed assets


	                                                                                             21
(investment) and firm size (log of total assets). Specifically, the modified Z-score continues to be
inversely correlated with firm size, and the effect is statistically significant at the 1% level.
Column 3 introduces firm and country-year fixed effects. It is interesting to note that once we
include compositional controls, the only two coefficients that are statistically significant (and at
the 1% level) are the interaction effect between leverage and exchange rate change (𝛾! ) and the
negative coefficient on firm size.
                                                      Finally, we split the sample between firms in the tradable and non-tradable sectors. As
before, we do not run separate regressions but interact the coefficients with tradable and non-
tradable dummies. Column 4 shows that in the AFC period the differences between firms in the
tradable and non-tradable sectors are not apparent. The point estimates on 𝛾! , i.e., the interaction
effect of leverage during the AFC period conditional on changes in exchange rates are virtually
identical across the two sectors, albeit the coefficient is more precisely estimated for the non-
tradable sectors.30 Taken together, the findings are consistent with the idea that in the AFC
period (and immediately before it) the link between leverage and corporate financial fragility
indicates the presence of currency mismatches. Further, while, 𝛾! , the interaction effect between
leverage and exchange rate changes in the post-GFC period, is not statistically significant for
either the tradable or the non-tradable sector, 𝛽! , the unconditional relationship between leverage
and the modified Z-score continues to be negative and significant in the post-GFC period only
for the tradable section. This pattern is similar to that observed in Table 3. Post-GFC leverage
vulnerabilities appear significant for the tradable sector independent of exchange rate changes as
well. Also note that firm size is inversely related to the modified Z-score at the 1% level of
statistical significance in all specifications.
                                                      One may argue that our results are driven by the fact that exchange rate movements were
different in the two periods. In the period following the immediate aftermath of the post-GFC
period when international capital flows began their surge towards emerging markets, many
emerging markets experienced appreciating currencies (2010-2012) and/or relatively modest
depreciations (2012-2014) in comparison to the massive currency depreciations in the AFC
period. To examine whether this may be the case, we distinguish between periods of currency
appreciation and depreciation. Specifically, we estimate the following model:

	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  
30
  As in Table 3, Columns 4a and 4b are estimated jointly. In robustness analysis (not shown) the results are robust
to including the periods excluded from the table (the excluded periods are 1992-95 and 1999-2002).


	                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 22
                            𝑍!,!,! = 𝛼! + 𝛿!,! + 𝛽! 𝐷1 + 𝛽! 𝐷2 + 𝛽! 𝐷3 𝐿!,!,! +
                                + 𝛾! 𝐷1 + 𝛾! 𝐷2 + 𝛽𝛾! 𝐷3 𝐿!,!,! ∆𝐸𝑋!,!!! +
                             +𝐴!,!!! 𝜃! 𝐷1 + 𝜃! 𝐷2 + 𝛽𝜃! 𝐷3 𝐿!,!,! ∆𝐸𝑋!,!!! + 𝜀!,!,!               (3)


       where 𝐴!,!!! is a dummy that takes a value of 1 if ∆𝐸𝑋!,!!! < 0 (i.e., if we observe a currency
appreciation). The specification captures the differential effects of depreciations and
appreciations interacted with leverage on corporate financial fragility. In this set up 𝛾! measures
the joint effect of leverage and change in the exchange rate on Z-scores conditional on a currency
depreciation, and 𝛾! + 𝜃! measures the effects conditional on an appreciation. We find 𝛾! to be
negative and statistically significant whereas 𝛾! + 𝜃! yields positive but statistically insignificant
values (results unreported but available from the authors). This pattern corroborates the
hypothesis that leverage interacted with currency depreciation has a statistically significant
adverse impact on Z-scores, our measure of corporate financial fragility in emerging markets.
             An important concern is whether survivorship bias drives the observed pattern of results.
To address this, in Table 5 we re-estimate the specification in Column 3 of Table 4 with firms
that survive or are present in the data for different lengths of time. We limit the sample to firms
that are present for at least five years (column 2), for at least ten years (column 3) and for at least
fifteen years (column 4). The finding that exchange rate depreciations amplify the negative
correlation between leverage and the modified Z-score during the AFC period is robust to
restricting the analysis to these subsamples. Interestingly, the correlation rises in magnitude as
we proceed from a sample with a fewer number of years in Column 2 to a sample with firms
with data for fifteen years in Column 4.
             In emerging markets, currency depreciations are often accompanied by economic
recessions and tighter financial conditions. The previous results could thus be driven by the fact
that highly leveraged firms suffer more during recessions or, in the presence of maturity
mismatches, are particularly affected by sudden increases in the interest rate. In Table 6, we take
these underlying macro fundamentals into account by further interacting our three period
dummies (AFC, tranquil, and GFC) with lagged GDP growth and the deposit rate (we would
have preferred a lending rate but faced data constraints).




	                                                  23
       The main results from the tables 4 and 5 on the adverse impact of leverage conditional on
currency depreciations (𝛾! ) on Z-scores during the AFC period remain unchanged. Column 1
includes lagged real GDP growth as a control and suggests that during the post-GFC period
leverage conditional on higher real GDP growth rates is positively but not significantly
correlated with Z-scores. It is interesting to point out that in specifications that use the regular Z-
score as a dependent variable there is a positive and statistically significant correlation between
leverage conditional on real GDP growth in the post-GFC period, suggesting that leverage in
growing countries is correlated with less corporate financial vulnerability. Column 2 controls for
leverage interacted with lagged values of the interest rate. The coefficient estimates on interest
rates interacted with leverage are not statistically significant. Column 3 includes both interaction
effects (lagged real GDP growth and lagged interest rates). The interaction effect on lagged real
GDP growth continues as positive and that on lagged interest rates remains statistically
insignificant. The findings that size is inversely correlated with the modified Z-score while real
investment is positively correlated remain robust to the inclusion of these additional macro
controls. Note that 𝛽! , the unconditional effect of leverage on the modified Z-score during the
AFC period, is positively and significant (Columns 1 and 3) suggesting that controlling for real
GDP growth, firms with better prospects were able to borrow more during this period.
       Many emerging market countries reacted to the crises of the late 1990s with reforms
aimed at improving their institutional and macroeconomic framework. Fourteen of the twenty-
five countries included in our sample moved to an inflation-targeting framework between 1997
and 2009. Many countries and also implemented reforms aimed at improving their domestic
capital markets (the Asian Bond market Initiative was a specific outcome of the Asian Financial
crisis) and promoting financial deepening. In our sample of countries average financial depth
went from 50% in 1995 to 72% in 2014. The period we study was also characterized by different
phases of financial globalization with an increase of cross-border capital flows over 2002-2007, a
collapse over 2007-2009 and a rapid increase in flows to emerging markets after 2010 (Lane and
Milesi-Ferretti, 2017).
       In Table 7 we test whether our results are driven by these factors by examining the effects
of leverage conditional on changes in the exchange rate are robust to the inclusion of an index of
financial development, inflation targeting regimes, and the updated Lane and Milesi-Ferretti
(2007) index of financial globalization. The adverse impact of leverage conditional on currency



	                                                24
depreciations (𝛾! ) on Z-scores during the AFC period remains unchanged to the inclusion of
these additional controls. It is important to note that the inverse correlation between firm size and
the modified Z-score is salient across all specifications.




6. Corporate Fragility in Emerging Markets and the Macroeconomy


                                                       A key question is whether the increase in corporate leverage documented above can have
large negative macroeconomic consequences when central banks in advanced economies start
raising their interest rates (a process already begun by the Federal Reserve). Acharya et al.
(2015) suggest this could lead to capital outflows from emerging markets and potential problems
associated with the presence of currency mismatches in firm balance sheets.
                                                       Note that in all the specifications in Tables 3-7 that included firm size, size was a
significant predictor of financial vulnerability. Moreover the coefficient was highly statistically
significant. The inverse correlation between firm size and the Altman’s Z-score (both the
standard and modified versions), suggest that in emerging markets firm size or the extent of
granularity in the firm-level data may be a novel and powerful indicator of financial
vulnerabilities.
                                                       We address this question by studying the behavior of large firms. Specifically, we
proceed in two steps. First, we follow Gabaix (2011)31 and show that idiosyncratic shocks to
large firms are significantly correlated with GDP growth in our sample of emerging markets.32
Second, we test whether large firms are particularly vulnerable to exchange rate movements. We
find that large firms are, on average, less leveraged than smaller firms. However, we also find
that the more-leveraged large firms are more vulnerable to exchange rate shocks compared to
equally-leveraged smaller firms. This evidence is consistent with the idea that large firms make a

	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  
31	  Gabaix
           (2011) shows that idiosyncratic shocks to firms can generate aggregate fluctuations. An intuitive reason is
that some firms are very large, and further that initial shocks can be intensified by a variety of generic amplification
mechanisms. In the context of exchange rate or other shocks that can adversely impact highly levered firms, an
additional concern is that shocks to systemically important firms in emerging markets could have feedback effects
for the financial systems in these countries. The financial vulnerability of large firms is inextricably linked to the
banking system in particular. 	  
32
   Gabaix (2011) uses data for US listed firms. To the best of our knowledge, we are the first to apply his
methodology to emerging market countries and show that the result also holds in this sample of countries.
	  


	                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 25
greater use of foreign currency borrowing and that they are not fully hedged against exchange
rate movements. While this result holds for the average country in our sample, we also find that
there is substantial cross-country heterogeneity.


6.1    Granularity in emerging market countries


       Gabaix (2011) shows that if the distribution of firm size can be approximated with a fat-
tailed power law (formally 𝑃 𝑆 > 𝑥 = 𝑎𝑥 !! where S is firm size and 𝜉 ≥ 1) idiosyncratic firm-
level shocks can play a key role in explaining aggregate fluctuations. He builds a “granularity”
index that captures idiosyncratic shocks for the largest 100 US firms and shows that this index is
closely correlated with overall US GDP growth.
       According to Gabaix, granularity effects are likely to be even more important in countries
that are less diversified than the United States. He mentions several emerging market countries
and suggests that “It would be interesting to transpose the present analysis to those countries”
(Gabaix, 2011 p. 737). We take this suggestion seriously and build a granularity index for our
sample of 26 emerging market countries.
       Gabaix (2011) measures granularity with the following index:


                                                    ! !!,!!!
                                           Γ! =     !!! !       𝑔!,! − 𝑔!                       (4)
                                                        !,!!!




where 𝑆!,!!! measures sales of firm 𝑖, 𝑌!,!!! is GDP, 𝑔!,! is the growth rate of firm 𝑖 (defined as
the growth rate of the sales to employees ratio) and 𝑔! is the simple average of the growth rate of
the largest 𝑄 firms in the economy (with 𝑄 ≥ 𝐾, and where firm size is measured by sales).
Gabaix sets K=100 and experiments with Q=100 and Q=1000. When Q=100, the index is equal
to the weighted growth rate of the 100 largest firms minus the (simple) average growth rate of
these same firms. When Q=1000, the index is equal to the weighted growth rate of the 100
largest firms minus the (simple) average growth rate of the largest 1000 firms. It should be noted
                  !
that the weights (!!,!!! ) do not add up to one because the weights are computed for a subset of
                      !,!!!

firms and the numerator is sales and the denominator is GDP.




	                                                26
                                                      In order to build a granularity index for our sample of emerging markets we need to
address two issues. The first issue relates to data limitations. As mentioned above, Gabaix
measures firm growth as the growth rate of the sales-to-employees ratio. Unfortunately, we do
not have a good coverage of firms with data on total employment. Therefore, we measure firm
growth by focusing on the growth rate of total sales. Our measure is a good approximation of the
sales to employees growth rate as long as most of the variance in the ratio used by Gabaix arises
from variations in sales rather than in variations of employment.
                                                      The second issue relates to the definition of “large” firms in an emerging market context.
While it is reasonable to assume that, in a large and diversified economy like the United States,
the largest 100 firms are indeed very large, this assumption is problematic in smaller and less
diversified emerging market countries.
                                                      One possible way to address this issue is to simply use a smaller number of firms for all
countries in our sample. In choosing this number however the number of firms needs to be large
enough to capture some variability in idiosyncratic shocks and cover a meaningful share of
overall GDP. Among the various possible thresholds, the largest number that allows us to include
all the countries in our sample is 25.33
                                                      An alternative strategy is to use a criterion based on the share of total sales over GDP.
For instance, we can rank firms in descending order of size and impose a cumulative sales-to-
GDP ratio threshold.34 Formally, let 𝑓!,!,! be total sales of the largest firm (by sales) in country c,
year, t, 𝑓!,!,! , the sales of the second largest and 𝑓!,!,! the sales of the nth largest firm. Let x be a
threshold in terms of cumulated sales of over GDP. Then firm are defined as large up to the point
where:
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        !    !!,!,!
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        !!! !"#        <𝑥   (5)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 !,!




                                                      We experimented, with different thresholds and found that most country-years in our
sample reach the level of 20% of the cumulative sales-to-GDP ratio. One issue is that in

	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  
33
   Note that country heterogeneity poses a challenge. 25 firms are likely to capture a large share of the economy in a
relatively small country like Peru, but twill capture a much smaller share of the economy in a larger country like
Brazil or China.
34
   As before there are tradeoffs in the choice of the threshold, x. If the threshold is too low there will be too few
“large” firms and if the threshold is too high there will be many countries in our sample with few listed firms that do
not reach a higher threshold.


	                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 27
countries with high degrees of concentration, a very small number of firms are sufficient to
breach the threshold.
                                                      In the end, we adopt an intermediate strategy: we define as large, the largest firms for
whom cumulative sales are below 20 percent of GDP. However, if less than 25 firms are
sufficient to reach this threshold, our definition of large is the largest 25 firms. As we do not
want to include more firms than what Gabaix includes for the US, we limit the number of large
firms to 100. Summing up, we rank firms by sales and we define as large a firm 𝑓!,!,! if 𝑖 ≤ 25 or
            !    !!,!,!
            !!! !"#                                                              < 0.2, and 𝑖 ≤ 100.35 Table 8 replicates Gabaix’s results and shows that granularity
                                                              !,!

is positively correlated to GDP growth in our sample of emerging market countries.


6.2                                                   Large Firms and Exchange Rate Vulnerabilities


                                                      Having established that idiosyncratic shocks to large firms are correlated with GDP
growth, we now examine whether leveraged large firms are more vulnerable to currency
depreciations. As a first step, we check if there are differences in leverage and other potential
measures of fragility between large and smaller firms.                                                                                                                                                                                  Column 1 of Table 9 shows that
compared to smaller firms, lower levels of leverage characterize the large firms in the sample.
Columns 2-4 show that there are no statistically significant differences in other measures of
corporate financial vulnerabilities such as solvency, liquidity, and the Z-score.
                                                      While large firms have lower leverage with respect to smaller firms, it is possible that
they have an “unhealthier” type of leverage. Specifically, in the presence of fixed costs it is
easier for large firms to borrow abroad and foreign borrowing tends to be in foreign currency.
There is evidence that large firms issue international bonds not only to finance investment
projects but also to engage into carry trade activities (Bruno and Shin, 2016, Caballero, Panizza,
and Powell, 2015). Lack of data on the currency composition of firm liabilities prevents us from
directly testing if this is the case for our full sample of countries, but there is some evidence that
(i) large Brazilian firms are more likely to have foreign currency debt compared to smaller firms
(Bonomo et al.2003); (ii) large firms in US use more foreign currency derivatives (Allayannis
and Weston, 2001); (iii) large firms in Finland are more likely to borrow in foreign currencies
	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  
35
  The results are robust to defining as large the largest 25 firms without taking into consideration the cumulative
sales-to-GDP ratio.


	                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 28
than small firms (Keloharju and Niskanen, 2001); and larger firms hold a higher fraction of
dollar debt in a set of firms from Argentina, Brazil, Chile, Colombia, and Mexico (Bleakley and
Cowan, 2005).
       Given that we cannot test directly whether currency mismatches are potentially more
problematic for larger firms, we test whether sales growth (associated with GDP growth in the
granularity regressions of Table 8) responds more to exchange rate movements in large and
leveraged firms than in equally leveraged smaller firms. As a first step we estimate the following
model for our full sample of firms:


       𝐺𝑅!,!,! = 𝐿𝐸𝑉!,!,! 𝛽 + 𝛾𝐷𝑋𝑅!" + 𝛿𝐿𝐴𝑅𝐺𝐸!,!,! + 𝜃𝐷𝑋𝑅!" + 𝛼! + 𝜀!,!",!                    (6)


where 𝐺𝑅!,!,! is sales growth in firm 𝑖, country 𝑐, year 𝑡, 𝐿𝐸𝑉!,!,! is leverage, 𝐷𝑋𝑅!" is the
percentage change in the exchange rate in country 𝑐, year 𝑡 (positive values are depreciations),
𝐿𝐴𝑅𝐺𝐸!,!,! is a dummy variable that takes a value of one for large firms (defined as above), and
𝛼! are firm fixed effects.
       Column 1 of Table 10 shows that currency depreciations and leverage are negatively
correlated with sales growth, but that the interaction between leverage and sales growth is not
statistically significant. The lack of a significant effect on the interaction between leverage and
currency depreciations may be due to the fact that for the average firm in our sample the negative
effect of depreciation is not linked to the presence of negative balance sheet effects brought
about by the presence of foreign currency debt. Alternatively, the lack of statistical significance
may be due to the fact that firms that have currency mismatches are less leveraged on average.
As we saw earlier, large firms are less leveraged and may have larger shares of foreign currency
debt. When we augment the model with country-year fixed effects (a specification that does not
allow us to separately estimate the effect of the exchange rate change, DXR), we find results that
are essentially identical to those of the model without country-year fixed effects (compare the
first two columns of Table 10).
       Next, we estimate our model with country-year fixed effects separately for large and
small firms. Columns 3 and 4 of Table 10 show that leverage and the interaction between
leverage and exchange rate movements are statistically significant for large firms and are not
statistically significant for smaller firms. There are also large differences in the coefficients. The


	                                               29
leverage coefficient is three times larger in the large firms subsample and the interaction between
leverage and DXR is ten times larger in the large firms subsample. The point estimates imply
that in large firms, a 30% depreciation of the exchange rate (DXR=0.3) yields correlations
between leverage and sales growth ranging from -0.045 to -0.195.
          In column 3 of Table 10, we find that the interactive coefficient takes a value of -0.5.
This means that, all else equal, a 30% depreciation (the average in our sample) reduces sales for
the large firm with average leverage (the average for large firms is 65% in our sample) by
approximately (10% 65*0.3*0.5=9.75%). Assume that these large firms have sales that amount
to 50% of GDP. The granularity regressions of Table 8 (column 1) say that if there is a 1% shock
to sales of the largest firms with total sales accounting for 50% of GDP, GDP growth will
decrease by 0.35 percentage points (0.698/2). These back-of-the-envelope calculations imply that
the GDP growth effects of a 30% depreciation will be a decrease in growth of 3.5 percentage
points.
          In column 4, we pool all our observations but allow for the differential effect of firm size
by estimating the following model:


              𝐺𝑅!,!,! = 𝐿𝐸𝑉!,!,! 𝛽 + 𝛾𝐷𝑋𝑅!" + 𝜙𝐿𝐴𝑅𝐺𝐸!,!,! + 𝜓𝐿𝐴𝑅𝐺𝐸!,!,! ×𝐷𝑋𝑅!" +
                      +𝛿𝐿𝐴𝑅𝐺𝐸!,!,! 𝛿 + 𝜆𝐷𝑋𝑅!" + 𝛼! + 𝜒!,! + 𝜀!,!",!                                (7)


Where 𝜒!,! is a country-year fixed effect and all other variables are defined as above. In this case
our parameter of interest is 𝜓, which captures how firm size affects the impact on sales of the
interaction between depreciation and leverage. The results are in Column 5 of Table 10. We find
that 𝜓 is negative, large in absolute value, and statistically significant. This confirms that the
interaction between leverage and currency depreciations in absolute value is significantly larger
for large firms. We also find that 𝜆   is negative and statistically significant, suggesting that large
firms are negatively impacted by currency depreciations even in the absence of leverage.
          Given that our panel is highly unbalanced with some countries in the sample with more
than 400 listed firms while others with only 20 listed firms, we re-estimate our model by keeping
a maximum of 150 firms per country-year. The results remain near identical to what we obtain
for the full sample of firms (compare columns 5 and 6 of Table 10).




	                                                30
                                                       Our findings are consistent with the hypothesis that many large firms may have unhedged
foreign currency liabilities and are thus vulnerable to sudden currency depreciations. Given our
previous evidence that idiosyncratic shocks to large firms affect overall economic activity, one is
tempted to conclude that a sudden capital flows reversal could lead to very adverse effects on
real output in emerging markets.36
                                                       Such a pessimistic conclusion is however mitigated by the fact that, while the results of
Table 10 are valid for the average emerging market country, there is substantial heterogeneity
among the countries included in our sample. Figure 7 reports the point estimates of the parameter
𝜓 obtained by estimating Equation 7 (without the country-year fixed effects) separately for 16
countries in our sample. 37 The point estimates range between -1 (Pakistan) and 2.5 (Russia).
They are negative for 10 countries (statistically significant for 5 countries) and positive for 6
countries (statistically significant for one country). Thus, there is substantial cross-country
heterogeneity and one challenge for future research will be to identify the drivers of this
heterogeneity.




7. Conclusion


                                                       This paper addresses widespread concerns about and potential macroeconomic
repercussions of the rapid increase in corporate leverage in emerging markets following the GFC.
Stylized facts using firm-level data show that post-GFC, emerging market corporate balance
sheet indicators have not deteriorated to AFC crisis-country levels. However, more countries are
close to or in the “vulnerable” range of Altman’s Z-score (in the “grey zone” or barely above the
threshold) and average leverage for the entire emerging market sample is higher in the post-GFC
sub period than during the AFC. Significantly, we find that the relationships between leverage,
exchange rate depreciations, and corporate financial distress scores are time varying. Also, a
central finding is that firm size is inversely correlated with corporate distress scores and, further,



	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  
36
   Please note that all the results are robust to interacting leverage and firm size with financial debt and a measure of
financial globalization.
37
   For the remaining countries in our sample, there was not enough information in the data to estimate country-
specific coefficients.


	                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 31
that currency depreciations amplify the impact of leverage on financial vulnerability for large
firms during a crisis.
       Therefore the question arises whether the corporate financial health of large firms is more
important for the macroeconomy than others. Following Gabaix (2011), we find that at a
granular level, the sales growth of large firms is a systemically important driver of economic
growth. Large firms, therefore, have the potential to transmit corporate distress to other firms in
emerging markets via network effects and other spillovers, warranting special attention from
policymakers. Although large firms in our sample consistently have less leverage, the sales
growth of these firms is more adversely impacted by exchange rate depreciations compared to
similarly levered smaller firms, albeit with substantial cross-country heterogeneity in the
observed impacts.
       The AFC had corporate financial roots. In particular, increased leverage on firm balance
sheets in conjunction with foreign exchange denominated debt made firms vulnerable to the
currency devaluations that accompanied the crisis. Currency and maturity mismatches led to
widespread firm failures, while implicit bailout guarantees created moral hazard issues related to
the increased leverage. Credit to emerging market firms has witnessed an unprecedented and
rapid growth since the GFC. Given the systemic importance of large and highly levered firms,
our results suggest that policymakers closely monitor this subset of emerging market firms.


References


Acemoglu Daron, Asuman Ozdaglar, Alireza Tahbaz-Salehi (2017) “Microeconomic Origins of
Macroeconomic Tail Risks” American Economic Review, 107(1), pp. 54–108.

Acemoglu, Daron, Asuman Ozdaglar, Alireza Tahbaz-Salehi, (2016) “Networks, Shocks, and
Systemic Risk” in Handbook of Network Economics. Edited by Yann Bramoullé, Andrea
Galeotti, and Brian Rogers, Oxford University Press, New York, NY, 2016.

Acharya, Viral, Stephen Cecchetti, Jose De Gregorio, Şebnem Kalemli-Özcan, Philip Lane, and
Ugo Panizza (2015) “Corporate Debt in Emerging Economies: A Threat to Financial Stability,”
Committee on International Policy Reform, Brookings Institutions and CIGI.

Avdjiev, Stefan,,Stefan, Michael Chui and Hyun Song Shin (2014) “Nonfinancial Corporations
from Emerging Market Economies and Capital Flows,” BIS Quarterly Review (December): 67-
77.



	                                              32
Alfaro, Laura, Anusha Chari and Fabio Kanczuk (2017) “The Real Effects of Capital Controls:
Firm-Level Evidence from a Policy Experiment.” Journal of International Economics 108: 191–
210.

Alfaro, Laura, and Fabio Kanczuk. (2013) “Debt Redemption and Reserve Accumulation.”
NBER Working Paper Series, No. 19098.

Allayannis, George and James Weston (2001) “The use of foreign currency derivatives and firm
market value”, Review of Financial Studies 14, 243-76.

Altman, Edward (2005) “An Emerging Market Credit Scoring System for Corporate Bonds,”
Emerging Market Review 6: 3011-323.

Altman, Edward (1993) Corporate Financial Distress and Bankruptcy. 2nd edition. John Wiley
& Sons, New York.

Bank of International Settlement (2014), “Buoyant Yet Fragile?” BIS Quarterly Review,
December 2014.

Bank of International Settlement (2016), Debt Securities Data Base.
http://www.bis.org/statistics/secstats.htm

Bank for International Settlements (2012) “Developments in Domestic Government Bond
Markets in EMEs and their Implications,” BIS Papers, no. 67.

Bleakley, Hoyt and Kevin Cowan (2008) “Corporate Dollar Debt and Depreciations: Much Ado
about Nothing?”, Review of Economics and Statistics 90 (4), 612-626.

Burnside, Craig, Martin Eichenbaum and Sergio Rebelo (2001) “Prospective Deficits And The
Asian Currency Crisis,” Journal of Political Economy 109: 1155-1197

Burnside, Craig, Martin S. Eichenbaum, and Sergio Rebelo (2003) “On the Fiscal Implications
of Twin Crises”, in Managing Currency Crises in Emerging Markets, Michael P. Dooley and
Jeffrey A. Frankel, editors, Chicago University Press.

Bruno, Valentina and Hyun Song Shin, (2015) “Global Dollar Credit and Carry Trades: A Firm-
Level Analysis”, BIS Working Paper, No 510, August.

Caballero, Julian, Ugo Panizza and Andrew Powell (2015), “The Second Wave of Global
Liquidity: Why are Firms acting like Financial intermediaries?” CEPR Working Paper, 10926.

Chari, Anusha and Peter Blair Henry (2015) “Two Tales of Adjustment: East Asian Lessons for
European Growth” IMF Economic Review Vol. 63(1) pp. 164-196.

Claessens, Stijn, Simeon Djankov, and Lixin Colin Xu (2000) “Corporate Performance in the
East Asian Financial Crisis,” The World Bank Research Observer, vol. 15, no. 1: 23-46.



	                                            33
Claessens, Stijn and Thomas Glaessner (1997) “Are Financial Sector Weaknesses Undermining
the East Asian Miracle?” IFC Technical Paper No. 3.

Corsetti, Giancarlo, Paolo Pesenti and Nouriel Roubini (1999) “What Caused the Asian Currency
and Financial Crisis?” Japan and the World Economy, Vol. 11: 305-373.

Furman, Jason, and Joseph Stiglitz (1998) “Economic Crises: Evidence and Insights from East
Asia.” Brookings Papers on Economic Activity 2:1–135.

Gabaix, Xavier (2011) “The Granular Origins of Aggregate Fluctuations.” Econometrica 79,
733–72.

Galindo, Arturo, Ugo Panizza, and Fabio Schiantarelli (2003) “Debt Composition and Balance
Sheet Effects of Currency Depreciation: A Summary of the Micro Evidence,” Emerging Markets
Review, Elsevier, vol. 4(4): 330-339.

Ghosh, Atish, Timothy Lane, Marianne Schultze-Ghattas, Ales Bulir, Javier Hamann, and Alex
Mourmuras (2002) IMF-Supported Programs in Capital Account Crises. Occasional Paper 210.
Washington: International Monetary Fund.

IMF (2015) “Corporate Leverage in Emerging Markets—A Concern?” in Vulnerabilities,
Legacies, and Policy Challenges Risks Rotating to Emerging Markets, Global Financial Stability
Report, October. Washington D.C.

Johnson, Simon, Peter Boone, Alasdair Breach, and Eric Friedman (2000) “Corporate
Governance in the Asian Financial Crisis, 1997–8,” Journal of Financial Economics 58, 141-186.

Keloharju, Matti and Mervi Niskanen (2001) “Why do firms raise foreign currency denominated
debt? Evidence from Finland”, European Financial Management 7, 481-496.

Krugman, Paul (1998) “What Happened to Asia?” unpublished, MIT.

Martínez-Solano, Pedro (2000) “Foreign exchange exposure in the Spanish stock market:
Sources of risk and hedging”, Working Paper, University of Murcia, Spain.

McCauley, Robert, Patrick McGuire, and Vladyslav Sushko (2015) “Dollar Credit in Emerging
Market Economies,” BIS Quarterly Review, December.

Mendoza, Enrique and Marco E. Terrones, E. 2008 “An Anatomy of Credit Booms: Evidence
from Macro Aggregates and Micro Data,” NBER WP 14049.

Pomerlano, Michael (1998) “The East Asian Crisis and Corporate Finances: The Untold
Microeconomic Story,” Emerging Markets Quarterly, Winter: 14-27.




	                                           34
Powell, Andrew (2014) “Global Recovery and Monetary Normalization: Escaping a Chronicle
Foretold?” Latin American and Caribbean Macroeconomic Report, Inter-American Development
Bank.

Radelet, Steven, and Jeffrey Sachs (1998) “The East Asian Financial Crisis: Diagnosis,
Remedies, Prospects.” Brookings Papers on Economic Activity 1:1–90.

Reinhart, Carmen and Kenneth Rogoff (2009) This Time is Different: Eight Centuries of
Financial Follies. Princeton, New Jersey: Princeton University Press.

Schularick, Moritz and Alan M. Taylor (2012) “Credit Books Gone Bust: Monetary Policy,
Leverage Cycles, and Financial Crises: 1870-2008.” American Economic Review 102 (2): 1029-
61.

Stiglitz, Joseph E., and Amar Bhattacharya. 2000. “Underpinnings for a Stable and Equitable
Global Financial System: From Old Debates to a New Paradigm.” Proceedings of the World
Bank Annual Conference on Development Economics 1999. Washington, D.C.: World Bank.

Truman, Edward (2013) “Asian and European Financial Crises Compared” Peterson Institute for
International Economics WP 13-9.

Shin, Hyun Song (2013) “The Second Phase of Global Liquidity and Its Impact on Emerging
Economies” Proceedings of the Asia Economic Policy Conference, Federal Reserve Bank of San
Francisco.




	                                            35
                          Figure 1: Total Credit to the Non-Financial Sector in Emerging Markets (% of GDP)

       200
       180
       160
       140
                                                                                                                                                                                     NFC
       120
                                                                                                                                                                                     HHs
       100
                                                                                                                                                                                     Govt
          80
                                                                                                                                                                                     Total
          60
          40                                                                                                                                                                         Total	  e x-­‐China

          20
                      0
                                    2002
                                           2003
                                                  2004


                                                                           2006
                                                                                  2007
                                                                                         2008


                                                                                                       2010
                                                                                                              2011
                                                                                                                               2012


                                                                                                                                              2014
                                                                                                                                                     2015
                             2001




                                                         2005




                                                                                                2009




                                                                                                                                       2013
Source: authors calculations based on BIS total credit statistics. (Decomposition across sectors is only available after
2006)




                          Figure 2: Total Credit to the Non-Financial Sector in Emerging Markets (% of GDP)

                                    ARG                                                  BRA                                                  CHN                                               CZE
       0 90 180 270




                                                           0 90 180 270




                                                                                                               0 90 180 270




                                                                                                                                                                   0 90 180 270




                      1995   2000   2005   2010   2015                    1995    2000   2005   2010   2015                   1995    2000    2005   2010   2015                  1995   2000   2005   2010   2015


                                    HKG                                                  HUN                                                  IDN                                               IND
                                                           90 180 270




                                                                                                               90 180 270




                                                                                                                                                                   90 180 270
       0 90 180 270




                                                             0




                                                                                                                 0




                                                                                                                                                                     0




                      1995   2000   2005   2010   2015                    1995    2000   2005   2010   2015                   1995    2000    2005   2010   2015                  1995   2000   2005   2010   2015


                                    KOR                                                  MEX                                                  MYS                                               POL
       0 90 180 270




                                                           0 90 180 270




                                                                                                               0 90 180 270




                                                                                                                                                                   0 90 180 270




                      1995   2000   2005   2010   2015                    1995    2000   2005   2010   2015                   1995    2000    2005   2010   2015                  1995   2000   2005   2010   2015


                                    RUS                                                  THA                                                  TUR                                               SAF
       90 180 270




                                                           90 180 270




                                                                                                               90 180 270




                                                                                                                                                                   90 180 270
         0




                                                             0




                                                                                                                 0




                                                                                                                                                                     0




                      1995   2000   2005   2010   2015                    1995    2000   2005   2010   2015                   1995    2000    2005   2010   2015                  1995   2000   2005   2010   2015




Source: authors calculations based on BIS total credit statistics

                                                                                                          36
	  
                                                                            Figure 3: Leverage – Debt to Equity (Weighted Mean)


                                                  300


                                                  250
           Total Debt/Common Equity (%)




                                                  200


                                                  150


                                                  100


                                                  50


                                                      0
                                                                      a



                                                                    ile

                                                                      a

                                                                      a

                                                                    pe

                                                                      a

                                                                   sia




                                                                   sia

                                                                      o

                                                           Pa o




                                                                                                                                       es




                                                                                                                                         a

                                                                                                                                       ea


                                                                                                                             Th n
                                                                                                                                       nd
                                                                    an




                                                                                                                                        ia




                                                                                                                             Vi y
                                                                      il




                                                                                                                             ili u
                                                                      n




                                                                                                                                       m
                                                                  tin




                                                                   in

                                                                   bi




                                                                   di




                                                                                                                                     ric
                                                                   ic

                                                                    c




                                                                                                                                       a



                                                                                                                                       e
                                                                                                                                       r
                                                                 sta
                                                                  az




                                                                                                                                     ss




                                                                                                                                   na
                                                                                                                                    in
                                                                                                                                   Pe




                                                                                                                                    or
                                                                 ro




                                                                 oc




                                                                                                                                  iw
                                                                 rd




                                                                                                                                   rk
                                                                Ch




                                                                                                                                    la
                                                                ne




                                                                ay
                                                               Ch

                                                    Ea olom




                                                                In




                                                                ex
                                                               Br
                                                               en




                                                                                                                                   f
                                                                                                                                 Ru
                                                                                                                                 pp
                                                               ki




                                                                                                                                 K




                                                                                                                                 ai



                                                                                                                                 et
                                                             Eu




                                                              Jo




                                                                                                                                Tu
                                                                                                                              hA
                                                              or




                                                                                                                                Ta
                                                             do




                                                              al

                                                             M
                                                            rg




                                                                                                                               h
                                                           M
                                                           M
                                                          In
                                                         rn




                                                                                                                            ut
                                                                                                                            ut
                                                  A




                                                          C




                                                                                                                          Ph
                                                      ste




                                                                                                                         So
                                                                                                                         So
                                                                                Pre-East Asia Crisis (1996-98)        Post-Global Finan. Crisis (2009-14)

                                                                                East Asia (Avg.)                      Emerg. Mkts (Avg.)




Source: authors calculations based on Worldscope data.



                                                                      Figure 4: Liquidity – Current to Total Liabilities (Weighted Mean)


                                                 90%
       Current Liabilities / Total Liabilities




                                                 80%

                                                 70%

                                                 60%

                                                 50%

                                                 40%

                                                 30%

                                                 20%

                                                 10%

                                                 0%
                                                             a



                                                                                ile


                                                                       Co na

                                                                                 ia

                                                                                pe


                                                                                          a

                                                                                                  sia

                                                                                                                 an

                                                                                                                sia


                                                                                                                  o

                                                                                                                 co

                                                                                                                  n

                                                                                                                           ru

                                                                                                                                   es

                                                                                                                                             ia

                                                                                                                                                                a

                                                                                                                                                               ea




                                                                                                                                                              ey

                                                                                                                                                               m
                                                                                                                                                              nd
                                                                                                                                                      Th n
                                                                                 il
                                                         tin




                                                                                        di




                                                                                                                                                   So fric
                                                                                                                ic




                                                                                                               sta




                                                                                                                                                              a
                                                                              az




                                                                    ste mb




                                                                                                                                         ss




                                                                                                                                                            na
                                                                                                                         Pe

                                                                                                                                in




                                                                                                                                                            or
                                                                               i



                                                                             ro




                                                                                                              rd




                                                                                                              oc




                                                                                                                                                           rk
                                                                                                                                                          iw
                                                                            Ch




                                                                                                                                                           la
                                                                                                ne




                                                                                                             ay
                                                                            Ch




                                                                                      In




                                                                                                            ex
                                                      en




                                                                                                                                        Ru
                                                                 Br




                                                                                                            ki




                                                                                                                                pp




                                                                                                                                                         K




                                                                                                                                                         et
                                                                                                                                                         ai
                                                                          Eu




                                                                                                        Jo




                                                                                                                                                        Tu
                                                                                                                                                  A
                                                                                                           or




                                                                                                                                                        Ta
                                                                           o




                                                                                            do




                                                                                                          al

                                                                                                          M




                                                                                                         Pa
                                                   rg




                                                                                                                                                      Vi
                                                                          l




                                                                                                                             ili




                                                                                                                                                       h
                                                                                                         M




                                                                                                                                               h
                                                                                                             M
                                                                                           In
                                                                       rn




                                                                                                                                                     ut
                                                                                                                                             ut
                                                  A




                                                                                                                           Ph



                                                                                                                                         So
                                                                  Ea




                                                                                Pre-East Asia Crisis (96-98)          Post-Global Finan. Crisis (2009-14)

                                                                                East Asia (Avg.)                      Emerg. Markts (Avg.)




Source: authors calculations based on Worldscope data.




                                                                                                                 37
	  
                                   Figure 5: Solvency – EBITDA to Total Liabilities (Weighted Mean)


                            100%
                            90%
                            80%
       EBIDTA/Liabilities




                            70%
                            60%
                            50%
                            40%
                            30%
                            20%
                            10%
                             0%
                                                a



                                              ile

                                                a

                                                a

                                              pe

                                                a

                                             sia

                                              an

                                             sia

                                                o

                                     Pa o

                                                n

                                                                                       ili u
                                                                                                es

                                                                                      ut sia

                                                                                                  a

                                                                                               ea




                                                                                        Vi y
                                                                                                m
                                                                                               nd
                                                                                       Th n
                                               il
                                            tin




                                             in

                                             bi




                                             di




                                                                                   So fric
                                             ic

                                              c

                                            sta


                                                                                                r




                                                                                               e
                                                                                               a
                                            az




                                                                                             na
                                                                                            Pe

                                                                                             in




                                                                                             or
                                           ro




                                           rd




                                           oc




                                                                                            rk
                                                                                           iw
                                          Ch




                                                                                            la
                                          ne




                                          ay




                                                                                             s
                                         Ch

                              Ea olom




                                          In




                                          ex
                                         en




                                                                                          Ru
                                         Br




                                         ki



                                                                                          pp




                                                                                          K




                                                                                          et
                                                                                          ai
                                       Eu




                                        Jo




                                                                                         Tu
                                                                                          A
                                        or




                                                                                         Ta
                                       do




                                        al

                                       M
                                      rg




                                                                                        h
                                     M




                                                                                        h
                                     M
                                    In
                                   rn




                                                                                      ut
                              A




                                    C




                                                                                    Ph
                                ste




                                                                                   So
                                            Pre-East Asia Crisis (96-98)        Post-Global Finan. Crisis (2009-14)

                                            East Asia (Avg.)                    Emerg. Markets (Avg.)




Source: authors calculations based on Worldscope data.




                                           Figure 6: Altman Z''-Score EM (Weighted Mean)




Source: authors calculations based on Worldscope data.




                                                                           38
	  
                                                               Figure 7: Coefficient of the Parameter 𝝍

       -2 -1.5 -1 -.5 0 .5 1 1.5 2 2.5 3




                                                       CHL




                                                                                                       CHN




                                                                                                                                     RUS
                                                                                                             PHL
                                                                   IDN




                                                                                           IND




                                                                                                                         PER

                                                                                                                               TUR
                                                 BRA
                                           PAK




                                                             THA



                                                                         MYS




                                                                                                 MEX




                                                                                                                   VNM
                                                                                     KOR
                                                                               ZAF


Notes: The figure plots the equation the coefficient (with a 95% Confidence Interval) of the Parameter 𝜓 of X4
(Without the country-year fixed effects) estimate one country at a time.




                                                                                     39
	  
        Table 1: Total Claims on Emerging Market Countries, BIS reporting Banks (billion USD)

Source: Own elaborations based on BIS Locational Statistics. The data are for total claims (all instruments and all
sectors) on residents of counterparty countries. Top five currencies are USD, euro, yen, British pound, and, Swiss
franc.

                        2007       2008      2009       2010       2011      2012       2013       2014    2015Q3
                                               Emerging Markets
Total                  2,419      2,408      2,396     2,807      3,032      3,157      3,640     3,699      3,471
% top 5 curr.           81%        83%        81%       79%        79%        77%        77%       71%        74%
% USD                   52%        53%        52%       53%        55%        53%        54%       55%        58%
                                          Emerging Markets Ex-China
Total                  2,231      2,254     2,219   2,476     2,555          2,634      2,740     2,663      2,594
% top 5 curr.           82%        84%       81%     80%       81%            79%        81%       81%        82%
% USD                   52%        53%        52%       53%        56%        55%        58%       61%        63%
                                                       Asia
Total                    830        738        783     1,064      1,258      1,349      1,801     1,945      1,752
% Total EM              34%        31%        33%       38%        41%        43%        49%       53%        50%
% top 5 curr.           78%        84%        80%       79%        79%        77%        74%       62%        65%
% USD                   56%        58%        59%       59%        59%        56%        56%       53%        56%
                                                 Asia Ex-China
Total                    641        584        606      733         782        826        901       908        874
% Total EM              26%        24%        25%      26%         26%        26%        25%       25%        25%
% top 5 curr.           81%        86%        84%       82%        85%        83%        84%       82%        83%
% USD                   57%        59%        60%       61%        66%        64%        67%       69%        71%
                                                 Latin America
Total                    403        410        413       533        602        626       647        633        627
% Total EM              17%        17%        17%       19%        20%        20%        18%       17%        18%
% top 5 curr.           83%        84%        76%       76%        78%        78%        79%       82%        85%
% USD                   70%        74%        67%       67%        70%        70%        71%       75%        79%
                                               Developing Europe
Total                    728        786        722       711        690        698       713        609        559
% Total EM              30%        33%        30%       25%        23%        22%        20%       16%        16%
% top 5 curr.           79%        81%        80%       76%        76%        73%        77%       77%        77%
% USD                   35%        33%        29%       28%        29%        27%        31%       32%        31%
                                             Africa and Middle East
Total                    459        474        478       499        481        484       479        513        533
% Total EM              19%        20%        20%       18%        16%        15%        13%       14%        15%
% top 5 curr.           87%        84%        85%       84%        86%        83%        84%       83%        84%
% USD                   58%        60%        62%       61%        63%        61%        61%       63%        65%




                                                        40
	  
                         Table 2: Asian Financial Crisis vs Post-Global Financial Crisis

Leverage is measured by the debt to equity ratio: a firm's total debt divided by its common equity. Liquidity is measured
by current-to-total liabilities. Solvency is measured by the coverage ratio: earnings before interest, taxes, and depreciation
divided by total liabilities. Profitability is measured by the return on invested capital (ROIC): the ratio of operating profit
(earnings before interest and tax) to invested capital (sum of shareholders' equity and debt liabilities). Altman's (2005)
Emerging Market Z-Score measures the inverse of firm fragility (computation described in the text). The first two
columns present the average measure for each group of countries during our two fragile periods: The Asian Financial
Crisis (1996-1998) and the post-Global Financial Crisis (2008-2014). The last three columns count the number of
countries in our sample that meet (“Yes”) and don’t meet (“No”) the conditions stated in the column headings. The data is
weighted by sales by year and then averaged per period per country. Asian Crisis Five countries include Indonesia,
Malaysia, Philippines, South Korea, and Thailand. Source: authors calculations based on Worldscope data.


                               (1)             (2)                                   (3)                 (4)           (5)

                              Asian      Post-Global
                                                                                 Post-GFC >      Post-GFC >       Post-GFC >
                            Financial     Financial
Countries                                                                           AFC          Asian Five        EM AFC
                           Crisis (1996-    Crisis
                                                                                 (By country)     AFC avg.           avg.
                              1998)       (2008-14)
                                                           Panel A: Leverage (Debt to Equity)
Asian Crisis Five            145.5%          73.9%                Yes                10                  0             12

Emerging Markets             80.8%           87.3%                 No                 8                  21             9

                                                     Panel B: Liquidity (Current to Total Liabilities)
Asian Crisis Five            57.6%           59.5%                Yes                 6                  11            11

Emerging Markets             58.7%           56.4%                 No                12                  11            11

                                           Panel C: Solvency (Coverage ratio: EBITDA to Total Liabilities)

Asian Crisis Five            23.7%            48.3%              Yes                 9                   20                9

Emerging Markets              34.9%           35.7%               No                 9                   2                 13

                                                  Panel D: Profitability (Return on Invested Capital)

Asian Crisis Five             7.3%           11.0%               Yes                  9                  17            9

Emerging Markets              10.9%          10.7%                No                  9                  5            13

                                               Panel E: Emerging-Markets Z-score (Distance to Default)
Asian Crisis Five             5.2              6.6               Yes                  9                   20               13

Emerging Markets              6.1              6.2                No                  9                      2              9




                                                           41
	  
       Table 3: The Relationship Between Leverage and Distance to Default in Different Time Periods

This table shows the results of a set of firm-level regressions where the dependent variable is distance to default (the
regular Z-score in column 1 and the modified Z-score in columns 2-5), and the explanatory variables are the
interactions between leverage and each of three dummy variables taking a value of one for the Asian Financial Crisis
(1996-1998), tranquil period (2003-2007), and post-Global Financial Crisis (2008-2014), respectively. In column 5
the variables are further interacted with a dummy taking a value of one for firms that operate in tradable sectors
(column 5a) and non-tradable sectors (column 5b). In columns 3-5, the model is augmented with a set of firm-
specific controls measuring investment and size proxied by the log of total assets. The last two rows display whether
a specification includes country-year and firm fixed effects. Robust standard errors clustered at the firm-level in
parenthesis.

                                   (1)               (2)          (3)        (4)                  (5)
                             Dep Var: Altman                     Dep Var: Modified Altman Z score
                                 Z-score
                                                                                              (5a)           (5b)
                                                                                          Tradable     Non-Tradable
𝛽! (AFC×Leverage)                -2.666***         -0.389**     -0.225         -0.252       -0.233         -0.270
                                   (0.229)          (0.179)     (0.201)       (0.259)      (0.332)        (0.338)
𝛽! (Tranquil×Leverage)           -3.024***        -0.711***     -0.512***     0.386*       0.495*           0.281
                                   (0.196)          (0.153)     (0.171)       (0.219)      (0.280)        (0.297)
𝛽! (GFC×Leverage)                -2.908***        -0.573***     -0.522***      -0.236     -0.526**          0.177
                                   (0.183)          (0.143)     (0.157)       (0.201)      (0.249)        (0.289)
Investment                                                      0.066         0.0432         0.769        0.0413
                                                                (0.041)      (0.0392)      (0.623)       (0.0393)
Firm Size                                                       -0.053***   -1.632***    -1.650***      -1.613***
                                                                (0.012)      (0.0731)     (0.0973)        (0.111)
Constant                         -2.666***        -0.389**      28.55***
                                   (0.229)         (0.179)      (0.203)
Observations                        9,257           9,257         8,015        6,495                 6,495
𝛽! − 𝛽!                             0.358           0.322         0.287      -0.638**
P value                              0.20            0.13           0.23        0.04
𝛽! − 𝛽!                             0.115           0.138          -0.01     -0.622**
P value                              0.62            0.44           0.96        0.02
𝛽! − 𝛽!                             0.242           0.185         0.297       -0.016
P value                              0.36            0.37           0.19        0.96
Firm fixed effects                    No              No             No         Yes                  Yes
Country-year fixed effects            No              No             No         Yes                  Yes




                                                           42
	  
                      Table 4: Distance to Default, Leverage, and the Exchange Rate

This table shows the results of a set of firm-level regressions where the dependent variable is distance to default (the
modified Z-score), and the explanatory variables are the interactions between leverage and each of three dummy
variables taking a value of one for the Asian Financial Crisis (1996-1998), tranquil period (2003-2007), and post-
Global Financial Crisis (2008-2014), respectively. These variables are then further interacted with the percentage
change in the nominal exchange rate (lagged one period). In columns 2, 3 and 5, the model is augmented with a set
of firm-specific controls measuring investment and size proxied by the log of total assets. The last two columns (5a
and 5b) estimate separate effects for firms in the tradable and non-tradable sectors. The last two rows display
whether a specification includes country-year and firm fixed effects. Robust standard errors clustered at the firm-
level in parenthesis.

                                     (1)          (2)         (3)          (4)                     (5)
                                                        Dep Var: Modified Altman Z score

                                                                                           (5a)          (5b)
                                                                                       Tradable     Non-Tradable
𝛽! (AFC×Leverage)                   -0.225       0.0239         0.245       -0.225        0.336         0.159
                                   (0.198)      (0.227)       (0.349)      (0.198)      (0.446)        (0.468)
𝛽! (Tranquil×Leverage)           -0.731***    -0.550***         0.340    -0.731***        0.425         0.267
                                   (0.154)      (0.173)       (0.262)      (0.154)      (0.319)        (0.373)
𝛽! (GFC×Leverage)                -0.596***    -0.522***        -0.234    -0.596***     -0.499*          0.134
                                   (0.146)      (0.160)       (0.237)      (0.146)      (0.296)        (0.348)
𝛾! (AFC×ΔEX×Leverage)             -1.747*      -2.333**     -4.800***     -1.747*     -4.881***      -4.822***
                                   (0.909)      (0.980)       (1.402)      (0.909)      (1.848)        (1.619)
𝛾! (Tranquil×ΔEX×Leverage)          -1.586      -2.699*        -3.131       -1.586       -2.440         0.263
                                   (1.529)      (1.632)       (1.907)      (1.529)      (2.031)        (2.509)
𝛾! (GFC×ΔEX×Leverage)                1.236        0.336         0.402        1.236       -0.523         1.880
                                   (1.468)      (1.604)       (2.683)      (1.468)      (3.099)        (3.907)
Investment                                        0.064         0.042                     0.789         0.043
                                                (0.041)       (0.027)                   (0.511)        (0.029)
Firm Size                                     -0.056***     -1.632***                 -1.649***      -1.611***
                                                (0.012)       (0.089)                   (0.120)        (0.134)
Constant                          27.64***     28.59***                  27.64***
                                  (0.0475)      (0.204)                  (0.0475)
Observations                        9,257         7,351        6,495       9,257                  6,495
Firm fixed effects                   No            No           Yes         Yes                    Yes
Country-year fixed effects           No            No           Yes         Yes                    Yes




                                                          43
	  
                                  Table 5: Firms that Remain in the Sample

This table shows the specification in Table 4, column 3 on samples that include firms present for different number of
years in the sample. Column 1 uses the entire sample, while columns 2-4 limit the sample to firms with at least 5, 10,
and 15 years of data, respectively. The dependent variable is distance to default (the modified Z-score), and the
explanatory variables are the interactions between leverage and each of three dummy variables taking a value of one
for the Asian Financial Crisis (1996-1998), tranquil period (2003-2007), and post-Global Financial Crisis (2008-
2014), respectively. These variables are then further interacted with the percentage change in the nominal exchange
rate (lagged one period). The model is augmented with a set of firm-specific controls measuring investment and size
proxied by the log of total assets. All specifications control for country-year and firm fixed effects. Robust standard
errors clustered at the firm-level in parenthesis.

                                      (1)                  (2)                     (3)                     (4)
                                                            Dep Var: Modified Altman Z score
𝛽! (AFC×Leverage)                     0.245               0.191                   0.519                    0.485
                                    (0.349)             (0.352)                 (0.406)                  (0.457)
𝛽! (Tranquil×Leverage )               0.340               0.377                   0.417                    0.393
                                    (0.262)             (0.263)                 (0.329)                  (0.477)
𝛽! (GFC×Leverage)                    -0.234              -0.164                  -0.286                    0.146
                                    (0.237)             (0.239)                 (0.296)                  (0.439)
𝛾! (AF×ΔEX×Leverage)              -4.800***          -4.803***                -5.751***                 -7.002**
                                    (1.402)             (1.395)                 (1.750)                  (2.696)
𝛾! (Tranquil×ΔEX×Leverage)           -3.131              -2.986                 -4.153*                   -4.870
                                    (1.907)             (1.925)                 (2.230)                  (3.596)
𝛾! (GF×ΔEX×Leverage)                  0.402               0.604                   0.830                   -0.358
                                    (2.683)             (2.690)                 (3.206)                  (4.190)
Investment                            0.042            0.0444*                  -0.317*                    0.431
                                    (0.027)            (0.0259)                 (0.192)                  (0.712)
Size                              -1.632***          -1.597***                -1.665***                -1.941***
                                    (0.089)             (0.091)                 (0.113)                  (0.172)
Observations                          6,495               6,473                   3,940                    1,929
Sample                                 All         At least 5 years        At least 10 years        At least 15 years
Firm fixed effects                     Yes                 Yes                     Yes                      Yes
Country-year fixed effects             Yes                 Yes                     Yes                      Yes




                                                          44
	  
                    Table 6: Leverage, Distance to Default, Interest Rate, and Growth

This table shows the results of a set of firm-level regressions where the dependent variable is distance to default (the
modified Z-score), and the explanatory variables are the interactions between leverage and each of three dummy
variables taking a value of one for the Asian Financial Crisis (1996-1998), tranquil period (2003-2007), and post-
Global Financial Crisis (2008-2014), respectively. These variables are then further interacted with the percentage
change in the nominal exchange rate (lagged one period), the local interest rate (IR is the deposit rate), and lagged
GDP growth (GR). The model is augmented with a set of firm-specific controls measuring investment and size
proxied by the log of total assets. All regressions control for country-year and firm fixed effects. Robust standard
errors clustered at the firm-level in parenthesis.

                                                           (1)                     (2)                     (3)
                                                                   Dep Var: Modified Altman Z score
𝛽! (AFC×Leverage)                                        1.566**                 0.736                   1.346**
                                                         (0.611)               (0.580)                    (0.590)
𝛽! (Tranquil×Leverage)                                     0.163                 0.288                      0.108
                                                         (0.499)               (0.382)                    (0.530)
𝛽! (GFC×Leverage)                                         -0.275                -0.260                     -0.308
                                                         (0.368)               (0.436)                    (0.440)
𝛾! (AFC*ΔEX)                                            -3.521**              -4.181**                  -4.472***
                                                         (1.634)               (1.731)                    (1.707)
𝛾! (Tranquil*ΔEX)                                         -3.407                -3.172                     -3.522
                                                         (3.002)               (3.070)                    (3.081)
𝛾! (GFC*ΔEX)                                             -0.0931                -0.317                     -0.145
                                                         (2.738)               (2.764)                    (2.797)
AFC*GR                                                     21.33                                            32.46
                                                        (19.887)                                          (28.34)
Tranquil*GR                                                4.287                                            3.779
                                                         (7.940)                                          (8.198)
GFC*GR                                                     2.144                                            1.999
                                                         (5.431)                                          (6.941)
AFC*IR                                                                            -3.933                    7.445
                                                                                 (4.144)                  (7.873)
Tranquil*IR                                                                        1.652                    1.194
                                                                                 (4.123)                  (4.210)
GFC*IR                                                                             1.877                    0.742
                                                                                 (7.208)                  (9.052)
Investment                                              0.0434*                 0.0443*                  0.0436*
                                                        (0.0260)                (0.0259)                 (0.0260)
Firm Size                                              -1.613***               -1.609***                -1.615***
                                                        (0.0892)                (0.0892)                 (0.0894)
Observations                                             6,334                     6,334                    6,334
Sample                                                     All                      All                      All
Country-year FE                                           Yes                       Yes                      Yes
Firm-FE                                                   Yes                       Yes                      Yes




                                                          45
	  
              Table 7: Leverage, Distance to Default, and Macro/Institutional Framework

This table shows the results of a set of firm-level regressions where the dependent variable is distance to default (the
modified Z-score), and the explanatory variables are the interactions between leverage and each of three dummy
variables taking a value of one for the Asian Financial Crisis (1996-1998), tranquil period (2003-2007), and post-
Global Financial Crisis (2008-2014), respectively. These variables are then further interacted with an index of
financial development, inflation targeting regimes, and the updated Lane and Milesi-Ferretti (2007) index of
financial globalization. The model is augmented with a set of firm-specific controls measuring investment and size
(proxied by the log of total assets). All regressions control for country-year and firm fixed effects. Robust standard
errors clustered at the firm-level in parenthesis.

                                            (1)                   (2)                 (3)                    (4)
                                                            Dep Var: Modified Altman Z score
𝛽! (AFC×Leverage)                            0.331               0.247               0.457                   0.549
                                           (0.622)             (0.349)             (0.781)                 (0.801)
𝛽! (Tranquil×Leverage)                       0.492               0.240              -0.239                  -0.331
                                           (0.528)             (0.455)             (0.826)                 (1.021)
𝛽! (GFC×Leverage)                           -0.505              -0.440            -1.517*                   -1.287
                                           (0.475)             (0.393)             (0.773)                 (0.788)
𝛾! (AFC*ΔEX)                             -4.865***           -4.804***           -4.842***               -5.077***
                                           (1.481)             (1.403)             (1.361)                 (1.473)
𝛾! (Tranquil*ΔEX)                           -1.422              -3.082              -1.517                  -2.083
                                           (1.994)             (1.902)             (2.064)                 (2.221)
𝛾! (GFC*ΔEX)                                 0.604               0.377              -3.626                  -3.486
                                           (2.679)             (2.689)             (2.917)                 (2.920)
AFC*FINDEV                                  -0.001                                                          -0.004
                                           (0.006)                                                         (0.009)
TRANQ*FINDEV                                -0.002                                                          -0.005
                                           (0.006)                                                         (0.007)
GFC*FINDEV                                   0.003                                                          -0.004
                                           (0.005)                                                         (0.008)
AFC*IT                                                             -                                           -
                                                                 0.158                                       0.255
TRANQ*IT                                                        (0.541)                                    (0.584)
                                                                 0.299                                      -0.338
GFC*IT                                                          (0.465)                                    (0.584)
                                                                                      -0.244               -0.0398
AFC*LMF                                                                              (0.769)               (0.963)
                                                                                       0.426                 0.677
TRANQ*LMF                                                                            (0.618)               (0.698)
                                                                                     0.889*                 1.109*
GFC*LMF                                                                               -0.489                -0.229
                                                                                     (0.712)               (0.920)
Investment                                 0.042                  0.042             0.082***              0.081***
                                           (0.02)                (0.027)             (0.011)                (0.01)
Firm Size                                -1.630***             -1.630***           -1.619***             -1.618***
                                          (0.0890)              (0.0889)             (0.108)               (0.108)
Observations                               6,473                  6,473                4,971                 4,971
Sample                                       All                   All                  All                   All
Country-year FE                             Yes                    Yes                  Yes                   Yes
Firm-FE                                     Yes                    Yes                  Yes                   Yes




                                                          46
	  
                                         Table 8: The Granularity Effect

This table reports a set of regression in which the dependent variable is per-capita GDP growth and the explanatory
variables are granularity (G) and its first two lag (L.G and L2.G). All the regressions control for country and year
fixed effects. Robust standard errors clustered at the country level in parenthesis.

                                          (1)                           (2)                          (3)
G                                      0.698**                      0.819***                      0.810**
                                       (0.262)                       (0.293)                      (0.310)
L.G                                                                  0.527**                       0.509*
                                                                     (0.236)                      (0.258)
L2.G                                                                                              -0.0739
                                                                                                  (0.365)
Observations                             486                          486                            486
Nr of countries                           26                           26                             26
Country fixed effects                    Yes                          Yes                           Yes
Year fixed effects                       Yes                          Yes                           Yes
Sample                                1994-2014                    1994-2014                     1994-2014




                                         Table 9: Fragility and Firm Size

This table reports a set of regression in which the dependent variables are various measures of potential or realized
fragility (leverage, solvency, liquidity, and distance to default) and the explanatory variable is a dummy variable
taking the value of 1 for large firms (Large). All the regressions control for country and year fixed effects. Robust
standard errors clustered at the country level in parenthesis.

                                 (1)                    (2)                     (3)                     (4)
                              Leverage               Solvency                Liquidity          Distance to default
Large                        -25.15***                 1.737                   0.392                  -68.66
                               (7.849)                (1.648)                 (0.944)                (42.46)
Observations                   45,104                 38,741                  39,271                  16,687
Sample                           All                    All                     All                     All
Country FE                       Yes                    Yes                     Yes                    Yes
Year FE                         Yes                    Yes                     Yes                     Yes




                                                         47
	  
                               Table 10: Leverage, Depreciation and Firm Size

This table reports a set of regression in which the dependent variable is sales growth and the explanatory variables
are leverage, change in in the exchange rate, firm size and the interactions among these variables. All the regressions
control for year fixed effects, and specifications 2-6 control also for country fixed effects. Robust standard errors
clustered at the country level in parenthesis.

                                  (1)             (2)           (3)              (4)             (5)            (6)
LEV                           -0.0115*        -0.0119*      -0.0350**         -0.0108        -0.00824        -0.0290
                             (0.00674)       (0.00709)       (0.0139)       (0.00865)       (0.00776)       (0.0404)
DXR _LEV                       -0.0553         -0.0593       -0.500**         -0.0448         -0.0474        -0.0520
                              (0.0495)        (0.0510)        (0.198)        (0.0571)        (0.0501)       (0.0533)
Large                        -209.0***       -284.5***                                      -285.0***      -316.5***
                               (19.20)         (24.70)                                        (24.70)        (27.94)
DXR                             0.543
                               (4.742)
DXR _LARGE                                                                                  -35.14**        -32.46*
                                                                                             (17.73)        (17.89)
LARGE_LEV                                                                                   -0.0316*        -0.0113
                                                                                            (0.0182)       (0.0466)
LARGE_LEV_DXR                                                                               -0.417**       -0.416**
                                                                                             (0.201)        (0.203)
Observations                   42,542          42,542         9,959           32,583         42,542          22,228
Number of firms                 7,441           7,441         2,956            6,046          7,441           4,990
Sample                           All             All       Large Firms        Other            All        Largest 150
Firm FE                         YES             YES           YES              YES            YES             YES
CY FE                            NO             YES           YES              YES            YES             YES




                                                          48
	  
                                                Appendix Tables

                       Table A1: Sample Sales and Country Market Cap and GDP

This table shows what percentage of a country’s economy is captured by firms in our sample. Column 1 reports – by
country – the total sales in firms in our sample divided by the country’s total market capitalization, as measured by
the World Bank. Column 2 shows the ratio of total market capitalization and GDP in each country.

                                                           (1)            (2)
                                                       Sales to       Market Cap
                                  Country
                                                      Market Cap       to GDP
                                  Argentina              52%            14%
                                  Brazil                 43%            49%
                                  Chile                  51%           111%
                                  China                  49%            51%
                                  Colombia               30%            45%
                                  Eastern Europe        100%            34%
                                  India                  36%            72%
                                  Indonesia              34%            39%
                                  Jordan*                27%
                                  Malaysia               46%           146%
                                  Mexico                 61%            35%
                                  Morocco*               12%
                                  Pakistan              107%            16%
                                  Peru                   33%            45%
                                  Philippines            32%            69%
                                  Russia                116%            26%
                                  South Africa           23%           225%
                                  South Korea           119%            78%
                                  Taiwan*                93%
                                  Thailand               59%            75%
                                  Turkey                 68%            31%
                                  Vietnam                79%            13%
                                  * No country-level market capitalization data.
                                  Value shows Sales / GDP instead.




                                                         49
	  
                       Table A2: Altman’s EM Z-score and Leverage Heat Maps

This table shows average Z-scores and leverage for each country over time. The color scale moves from red (for low
Z-scores and high leverage) to green (for high Z-scores and low leverage), going through several shades of orange
yellow.

                                   Altman's EM Z-score                           Leverage
        Country               1996-98   2003-07    2008-14          1996-98      2003-07      2008-14
        Argentina               5.64       7.38      5.62            59%           45%         74%
        Brazil                  5.52       6.13      5.88            50%           83%         94%
        Chile                   6.44       6.44      6.20            95%           82%         93%
        China                   5.39       5.58      5.28            95%           95%         103%
        Colombia                6.71       6.58      6.77            40%           47%         44%
        Eastern Europe          6.38       6.49      6.30            45%           48%         55%
        India                   5.14       5.62      5.55            92%           79%         118%
        Indonesia               5.43       6.36      7.13            105%          81%         72%
        Jordan                  5.39       5.97      5.14            32%           81%
        Malaysia                5.76       6.95      7.77            69%           69%         63%
        Mexico                  7.83       6.26      5.53            54%           59%         89%
        Morocco                 7.73       7.47      5.04            28%           42%         128%
        Pakistan                5.07       5.26      5.44            108%          56%         84%
        Peru                    6.88       7.23      6.99            53%           53%         68%
        Philippines             5.70       6.02      6.11            98%          103%         131%
        Russia                  6.69       8.76      7.60            22%           42%         56%
        South Africa            7.04       6.71      6.88            39%           50%         54%
        South Korea             3.63       5.58      6.11            284%         140%         110%
        Taiwan                  6.58       6.80      7.03            65%           66%         66%
        Thailand                5.51       6.21      6.32            172%          84%         83%
        Turkey                  7.57       6.30      5.80            95%          104%         124%
        Vietnam                            6.51      6.18                          95%         116%




                                                       50
	  
