                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




   CAN AT SCALE DRUG PROVISION IMPROVE THE HEALTH OF THE TARGETED
                       IN SUB-SAHARAN AFRICA?

                                      Adrienne M. Lucas
                                      Nicholas L. Wilson

                                      Working Paper 23403
                              http://www.nber.org/papers/w23403


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     May 2017




We would like to thank Herby Derenoncourt, Albert Mwango, Frank Sloan, Jeffrey Stringer,
Harsha Thirumurthy, Jenny Trinitapoli, two anonymous referees, and seminar participants at
Harvard University, the International Health Economics Association (iHEA) 11th Annual
Congress, Northeastern University, the Northwest Development Workshop, the Population
Association of America Annual Meeting, Swarthmore College, and the University of Washington
for many excellent comments. Madeleine Watson and Wentao Xiong provided superb research
assistance. The NBER Africa Project provided generous financial and institutional support. The
NBER Africa Project was not involved in study design, data collection/analysis, manuscript
writing, and the decision to submit the manuscript for publication. This research would not be
possible without the assistance of the Network of Zambian People Living with HIV/AIDS (NZP
+), the Zambia Central Statistical Office, and the Zambia Ministry of Health. All errors are our
own. The findings, interpretations, and conclusions expressed in this paper are those of the
authors and do not necessarily represent the views of the aforementioned individuals or agencies,
nor of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2017 by Adrienne M. Lucas and Nicholas L. Wilson. All rights reserved. Short sections of text,
not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Can at Scale Drug Provision Improve the Health of the Targeted in Sub-Saharan Africa?
Adrienne M. Lucas and Nicholas L. Wilson
NBER Working Paper No. 23403
May 2017
JEL No. H51,I12,I15,I18,O12,O15

                                          ABSTRACT

The single largest item in the United States foreign aid health budget is antiretroviral therapy
(ART) for the treatment of HIV/AIDS. Many supply- and demand-side factors in sub-Saharan
Africa could cause smaller than expected epidemiological effects of this at scale drug provision.
We provide what appears to be the first quasi-experimental evidence on the effect of at scale drug
provision in a poor country, using the phased roll-out of ART in Zambia, a setting where
approximately 1 in 6 adults are HIV positive. Combining anthropometric data from national
household surveys and a spatially-based triple difference specification, we find that local ART
introduction increased the weight of high HIV likelihood adult women. This finding from a
clinically difficult setting suggest that the generalized challenges of scalability of ART for adult
health in sub-Saharan Africa are surmountable.


Adrienne M. Lucas
Lerner College of Business and Economics
University of Delaware
419 Purnell Hall
Newark, DE 19716
and NBER
alucas@udel.edu

Nicholas L. Wilson
Department of Economics
Reed College
3203 SE Woodstock Blvd
Portland, OR 97202
nicholas.l.wilson@gmail.com
1        Introduction

The single largest item in the United States’ foreign aid health budget is antiretroviral therapy

(ART) for the treatment of HIV/AIDS (Moss 2008, Government Accountability Office 2010). The

United States President’s Emergency Plan for AIDS Relief (PEPFAR) has funded the rapid na-

tionwide scale-up of heavily subsidized ART distribution in much of sub-Saharan Africa (UNAIDS

2010), a region of the world where HIV/AIDS causes nearly one-third of mortality among those

aged 15-59 (WHO 2011). Despite the central focus of global health policy on drug provision in

sub-Saharan Africa, little quasi-experimental evidence exists about the total epidemiological e↵ects

of drug provision at scale on the targeted in this setting.1 In this study we focus on Zambia, a

country with one of the highest HIV/AIDS prevalence rates in the world, and estimate the e↵ect

of the at scale provision of ART on the health of likely HIV positive women.

        Even with large expenditures that have financed the rapid scale-up of heavily subsidized na-

tionwide ART distribution in much of sub-Saharan Africa, many challenges remain that could

lessen ART’s e↵ectiveness. Low overall health spending (WHO 2006a), inadequate infrastructure

(WHO 2006a), high patient-health worker caseloads (WHO 2006a), weak incentives (Basinga et al.

2011), health worker absenteeism (Goldstein et al. 2012), and counterfeit drugs (Bate et al. 2011,

Björkman-Nyqvist et al. 2012) have led to weak health systems (De Cock et al. 2011) that could

inhibit ART e↵ectiveness at scale. Further, demand side barriers such as incomplete adherence

could further impede success (Mills et al. 2014).

        We conduct our study in Zambia, a particularly interesting context for at least two reasons.

First, Zambia has one of the highest HIV prevalence rates in the world with roughly 1 in 6 adults

in the country being HIV positive (Central Statistical Office et al. 2009). Second, Zambia was one
    1
    To the best of our knowledge, Jayachandran et al. (2010), which examines the e↵ect of sulfa drugs on health in
the United States using a di↵erence-in-di↵erences regression approach, is the only other quasi-experimental evidence
on the e↵ects of drug provision at scale in any setting.



                                                         1
of the fifteen original PEPFAR focus countries and under PEPFAR I received substantial external

support for ART provision and little support for the broader health sector.

   In order to identify the e↵ects of at scale ART provision on health, we use a di↵erence-in-

di↵erence-in-di↵erences (i.e. triple di↵erence) strategy. We combine typical spatial and temporal

variation from the geographic location of all health facilities and the date when these facilities first

distributed ART with a third di↵erence, an individual’s likely HIV status. This triple di↵erence

specification allows us to identify the e↵ect of the availability of ART net of any time invariant or

time varying di↵erences across regions.

   Our data provide compelling evidence for a highly relevant question, but our HIV data are

unfortunately not ideal. National surveys at the height of the epidemic, our pre-ART availability

period, that include HIV testing are rare. Given the sensitivity of the question prior to the avail-

ability of ART and the desire to respect the confidentiality of respondents, the HIV test results

cannot be linked to individual respondents of the first round of our household survey that was com-

pleted in 2001. Instead individual test results were anonymized at the age group, gender, urban or

rural, province cell. Data anonymized using this method are the only data from this era that can

be spatially linked to ART proximity in a high HIV prevalence country. We create a binary HIV

approximation based on the cell level averages. Additional information on our HIV measure appear

in the Data Section. Our empirical strategy appears to be the best feasible strategy for estimating

the e↵ect of ART expansion on the health of the targeted during the height of the epidemic.

   In order to address concerns related to our measurement of HIV status, we conduct two checks

of our main estimates. One check relaxes the binary HIV specification of the main analysis to use

the full, continuous measure as a likelihood of being HIV positive. A second check calibrates our

estimates using results from efficacy studies of ART and body mass from other low-income settings.

   We use respondent weight as a proxy for overall health status and respondent height as a placebo



                                                   2
outcome. HIV positive women clinically eligible for ART experience substantial weight loss due to

the development of HIV into AIDS. Evidence from efficacy studies conducted in various developing

countries found weight gains of 2.6 to 10.3 kg after six to twelve months of treatment (Médecins

sans Frontiéres South Africa et al. 2003, Koenig et al. 2004, Severe et al. 2005, Saghayam et al.

2008, Koethe et al. 2010, Thirumurthy and Gra↵ Zivin 2012). Due to data availability, our analysis

is limited to women age 15-49.

   Our empirical framework allows us to compare the changes in anthropometrics associated with

the timing of local ART introduction for high HIV likelihood and low HIV likelihood individuals

residing near and far from health facilities where ART was introduced. Our overall e↵ect will

include both direct and indirect e↵ects of local ART introduction on high HIV likelihood women.

   Our results indicate that local ART introduction improved the health of the targeted. We find

that ART introduction within 10 kilometers (km) of the respondent increased the weight of high HIV

likelihood women by approximately 1.6 kilograms (kg), or approximately one-sixth of a standard

deviation. While this point estimate is smaller than some clinic-based studies that focused only on

HIV positive women, we approximate the e↵ect on directly treated women of over 10 kg. Consistent

with a causal interpretation of this main result, semi-parametric triple-di↵erence evidence indicates

that our findings are not the result of a di↵erential pre-introduction trend. We also find evidence

that the increase in weight was concentrated among women living within 10 km of health facilities

that distributed ART, and that local ART introduction did not a↵ect height, a health outcome

that should not be a↵ected by receiving ART, further reinforcing a causal interpretation of our

main result.

   The estimated weight gain suggests a highly successful ART scale-up despite the many logistical

and behavioral barriers that are often cited as limiting large public health campaigns in Africa

(WHO 2006, De Cock et al. 2011, Fauci and Marsten 2013).



                                                 3
   Our paper makes a number of important contributions. First, we provide the first quasi-

experimental evidence on the e↵ect of the at-scale provision of adult ART. Second, to the best

of our knowledge, this paper provides the first quasi-experimental evidence on the e↵ects of drug

provision at scale on adult morbidity in sub-Saharan Africa, complementing quasi-experimental

evidence on the e↵ects of sulfa drugs in the United States (Jayachandran et al. 2010). Third, we

have demonstrated that targeted health campaigns in sub-Saharan Africa can be successful despite

health sector barriers.

   More broadly, this paper contributes to the quasi-experimental literature in economics on the

health e↵ects of large, targeted government-run public health programs in poor countries (e.g.,

Miller et al. 2013, Gruber et al. 2014) and elsewhere (e.g., Finkelstein 2007, Card et al. 2008,

Almond et al. 2009, Hoynes and Schanzenbach 2009, Card et al. 2009, Hoynes et al. 2011,

Finkelstein et al. 2012). Further, this paper contributes to the quasi-experimental literature on the

health e↵ects of HIV/AIDS spending in Africa (e.g., Bendavid et al. 2012), the non-experimental

literature on the direct health e↵ects of ART provision at scale (e.g., Paella et al. 1998, Bor et

al. 2013), the quasi-experimental literature on the indirect health e↵ects of ART provision at

scale (Lucas and Wilson 2013, Baranov et al. 2015), and the quasi-experimental literature on the

behavioral e↵ects of ART (e.g., Thirumurthy et al. 2008, Gra↵ Zivin et al. 2009, McLaren 2010,

de Walque et al. 2012, Thirumurthy and Gra↵ Zivin 2012, Friedman 2013, Baranov et al. 2015,

and Lucas and Wilson 2015).

   Among existing quasi-experimental literature on HIV/AIDS spending, our paper is most closely

related to Bendavid et al. (2012), yet di↵ers in two key ways. First, we isolate the e↵ects of ART

availability on the health of the targeted instead of the e↵ect of PEPFAR funding on all-cause adult

mortality, the approach of Bendavid et al. (2012). While PEPFAR was not designed to strengthen

health sectors broadly, the increase in spending could have increased aggregate demand or had



                                                 4
other e↵ects across adults regardless of HIV status.       2   These e↵ects are, by design, included in their

estimates, while we focus only on the health of the targeted, those who were HIV positive. Second,

our triple-di↵erence specification controls for both time varying and time invariant di↵erences

between locations that did and did not receive ART. Bendavid et al. (2012) use a di↵erence-in-

di↵erences approach that relies on the standard parallel trends assumption and cannot control for

time varying di↵erences between PEPFAR and non-PEPFAR countries or regions within a country

with high or low PEPFAR take up. Therefore, we are answering a di↵erent question using a

methodology that can better control for potential time varying heterogeneity.

    The paper is organized as follows. Section 2 briefly describes antiretroviral therapy in sub-

Saharan Africa. Section 3 explains the empirical strategy we use to identify the epidemiological

e↵ects of ART scale-up on the targeted. Section 4 describes the household survey and health

facilities census data. Section 5 presents the results. Section 6 concludes.



2    Antiretroviral Therapy in Sub-Saharan Africa

The development of antiretroviral therapies has been called “one of the greatest...breakthroughs”

in the fight against HIV/AIDS (Barre-Sinoussi 2011). Antiretroviral drugs reduce the viral load

and increase the general health of individuals living in the advanced stages of HIV (WHO 2006b).

    Expanding access to antiretroviral therapy (ART) for HIV positive individuals throughout much

of sub-Saharan Africa has been a central component of U.S. foreign aid since the mid-2000s, shifting

the focus away from cash transfers, investment in economic infrastructure, training, technical ex-

pertise, and small grants toward commodities (Tarno↵ and Larson 2011). At the time of our study,

ART was the largest item in the United States foreign aid health budget and PEPFAR was the
   2
     In Zambia, the focus of our study, between 2000 and 2008, HIV development assistance increased from US$10
million to US$250 million (Ooman et al. 2007, Reisch et al. 2008), an increase from approximately US$1 per capita
to US$25 per capita. This represented a substantial fiscal stimulus for a country with GDP per capita in 2007 of
US$770 (World Bank 2009).



                                                       5
largest source of HIV/AIDS funding worldwide (Schneider and Garrett 2009). PEPFAR’s initial

funding targeted 15 focus countries, mostly in sub-Saharan Africa, to receive large-scale financial

support. More than one-half of PEPFAR I spending was allocated to ART and care for ART

patients (Moss 2008). While annual U.S. spending on HIV/AIDS in international health increased

from US$204 million in 2001 to US$3.3 billion in 2008, annual U.S. spending on non-HIV inter-

national health only increased from US$1.3 billion to US$1.7 billion (Government Accountability

Office 2010).

       Zambia, the location for the current study, is a PEPFAR focus country having received be-

tween US$1 billion and US$1.4 billion for HIV/AIDS through PEPFAR by 2013 (Fan et al.

2013a, PEPFAR 2013). The Global Fund to Fight AIDS, Tuberculosis and Malaria, the second

largest HIV/AIDS donor in Zambia, has disbursed between US$270 million and US$500 million for

HIV/AIDS (Fan et al. 2013b, Global Fund to Fight AIDS, Tuberculosis and Malaria 2012). Other

smaller donors are also operating in Zambia, combining to provide the final one-third to one-half

of HIV/AIDS donor funding in Zambia (Oomman et al. 2007, Resch et al. 2008).

       Prior to the authorization of PEPFAR in 2004, ART was virtually unavailable in Zambia. By

2007, the end of the period that we examine in this analysis, approximately one in five health

facilities provided ART and nearly one-half of the Zambian population lived within 10 km of an

ART site.3 In addition to providing ART, these clinics provided nutrition counseling to ART

patients (Koethe et al. 2010). Thus, our estimates of the e↵ect of local ART introduction on high

HIV likelihood adult female health will be the combined e↵ect of ART provided in conjunction

with nutrition counseling.4
   3
    In Section 4, we describe the data we use to make these calculations.
   4
    While this counseling likely enhanced the efficacy of ART, it was not substantial enough alone to account for
our estimates of weight gain due to local ART introduction but could contribute to our relatively large estimates.
Nutrition counseling frequently accompanies ART distribution.




                                                        6
3        Empirical Strategy

Our primary empirical strategy is a di↵erence-in-di↵erence-in-di↵erences (i.e. triple di↵erence)

specification. We exploit spatial and temporal variation in exposure to ART expansion between

two national household surveys (i.e. the 2001 and 2007 Demographic Health Surveys (DHS)), as

well as variation across individuals in the likelihood of being HIV positive.5

        Intuitively, our triple di↵erence strategy creates a treatment group of women with high HIV

likelihood who live near a health facility where ART was introduced by 2007 and who are surveyed

in 2007. Women who satisfy none or only some of these conditions (e.g., women with high HIV

likelihood who live hear a health facility where ART was introduced by 2007 but were surveyed in

2001) act as the control group. This method alleviates concerns about di↵erential trends between

HIV positive and negative women as well as about di↵erential trends for locations that did and did

not have clinics where ART was introduced prior to 2007. Empirically, this process is completed

in a single triple di↵erence specification:




             healthijt = ↵0 + ARTj ⇥ Y ear2007t ⇥ HIVijt

                           +↵1 ARTj + ↵2 Y ear2007t + ↵3 HIVijt

                           +↵4 ARTj ⇥ Y ear2007t + ↵5 ARTj ⇥ HIVijt + ↵6 Y ear2007t ⇥ HIVijt

                               0
                           +Zijt + ⌘district +     m   + "ijt                                       (1)



        where healthijt denotes the anthropometrics of female respondent i residing in Statistical Enu-

meration Area (SEA) j and interviewed in month-year combination t, ARTj is an indicator variable

equal to one if a health facility located near respondent i o↵ered ART twelve months prior to the
    5
        We describe how we measure the likelihood of being HIV positive in Section 4.



                                                            7
2007 survey (i.e. an “ever ART” measure), Y ear2007t is an indicator variable equal to one if the

respondent was surveyed in 2007, HIVijt is a binary measure that captures the respondent’s likeli-
                                   0
hood of being HIV positive, Zijt is a vector of individual and household level demographic controls

(i.e. indicator variables for five year age group, primary school completion, secondary school com-

pletion, urban residence, urban residence interacted with Y ear2007t , local PMTCT availability,

local VCT availability, and district fixed e↵ects interacted with the Y ear2007t indicator variable6 ),

 m   are fixed e↵ects for interview month, ⌘district are district fixed e↵ects, and ✏ijt is an idiosyncratic

error term, allowed to be correlated within a SEA, the level at which local ART availability varies

in our data.7 We estimate all specifications using ordinary least squares (OLS) regressions. As

our specifications control for time varying di↵erences between locations through the use of a set of

district dummy variables interacted with Y ear2007t as well as concurrent HIV programs and lower

level interactions of the triple di↵erence regressor of interest, we interpret            as the causal e↵ect of

local ART introduction on the anthropometrics of HIV positive adult females.8

         In the baseline specification, we consider respondents within 10 km of a health facility that

provided ART as having ART locally available. As a specification check we test for a spatial

gradient and find 10km to be a reasonable catchment approximation.



4         Data

To undertake our analysis, we use repeated cross-sectional geo-referenced national household sur-

veys and a unique geo-referenced HIV/AIDS services panel.
     6
     We include additional controls in the Robustness Section.
     7
     Because we have more than 300 SEAs in each of the two DHS surveys, standard asymptotic tests are appropriate
(Cameron et al. 2008).
   8
     Our triple-di↵erence strategy identifies the e↵ect of local ART on high HIV likelihood adult females net of any
local ART e↵ects shared by high HIV likelihood and low HIV likelihood adult females.




                                                         8
4.1      Individual-level data

Our individual survey data are the 2001 and 2007 Zambia Demographic Health Surveys (DHS),

cross-sectional national household surveys. These data contain adult female anthropometrics, basic

demographic and socioeconomic information, geographic location, and HIV testing results. We use

respondent weight as a proxy for overall health status and respondent height as a placebo outcome.

While in a middle- or high-income country context the weight concern is often obesity, the opposite

is true in Zambia. Women are more likely to be below healthy weight than overweight. Mean

BMI in our 2001 sample is just over 21, not far from the minimum of the normal range of the

BMI guidelines from US National Institutes of Health. Further, HIV positive individuals clinically

eligible for ART experience substantial weight loss due to the development of HIV into AIDS. As

documented in efficacy studies from various developing countries (Médecins sans Frontiéres South

Africa et al. 2003, Koenig et al. 2004, Severe et al. 2005, Saghayam et al. 2008, Koethe et al.

2010, Thirumurthy and Gra↵ Zivin 2012), individuals clinically eligible for ART typically experience

noticeable weight gain within six to twelve months of treatment, reversing much of the weight loss

due to the development of HIV into AIDS.

       Only women aged 15 to 49 at the time of the survey were both tested for HIV and weighed and

measured. Therefore, we limit our sample to these individuals. For each respondent we calculate

the approximate latitude and longitude of their dwelling from details on the location of the primary

sampling unit centroids.9

       Both the 2001 and 2007 Zambia DHS included HIV testing modules. Two issues guided the

construction of the HIV measure, the individual’s likely HIV status, that we use in the empirical
   9
    Some geographic imprecision is unavoidable with these data, potentially introducing attenuation bias. For the
2001 DHS, we use a digitized census map provided by the Zambia Central Statistical Office to locate the SEA
centroid. Unfortunately, approximately 7% of SEAs were missing from the maps used for the 2001 data, resulting in
the removal of respondents from these areas in our sample. The 2007 DHS provides approximate GPS locations for
each SEA centroid. The exact coordinates are o↵set by adding a random vector with length drawn from a uniform
distribution on 0 to 10 km to maintain respondent privacy.



                                                       9
specifications. First, due to privacy concerns, the 2001 HIV data were anonymized and cannot

be linked with individuals in the household rosters. Instead for each individual tested, the result

is accompanied by the individual’s gender, age, urban/rural status, and province of residence.

Second, the response rate for the HIV testing module was roughly 75% in each of the survey

rounds. Therefore, we assign each individual a likelihood of being HIV positive measured as the

HIV prevalence in the respondent’s demographic group defined as the interaction of survey round,

gender, five year age group, urban/rural status, and province of residence.10 Median HIV prevalence

in the 2001 and 2007 Zambia DHS using this measure is 0.14, the tenth percentile is 0.03, and the

ninetieth percentile is 0.35. Our primary regression specifications use an indicator variable to denote

likely HIV status, equal to one if the respondent is in a demographic group with HIV prevalence

at or above the median. This helps address concerns that HIV prevalence in a demographic group

in our sample rarely exceeds 0.5, for example, yet approximately 1 in 6 individuals in our sample

are HIV positive. As a robustness check, we also use a continuous measure of HIV prevalence in

the demographic group.


4.2    Health facilities data

Our health facilities data were originally collected for Wilson (2015). In 2006, the Japanese In-

ternational Cooperation Agency (JICA) Health Facility Census (HFC) recorded the latitude and

longitude of each health facility in Zambia. To augment these data, we surveyed these clinics

starting in 2008 to collect information on the month and year (if any) they began o↵ering each of

the three main HIV/AIDS services: ART, voluntary counseling and testing (VCT), and preventing

mother to child transmission (PMTCT). This augmented HFC contains comprehensive information

on the expansion of HIV/AIDS services in Zambia through the middle of 2008.
  10
    To maintain comparability across survey rounds, we apply this demographic group calculation to each survey
round using survey-round specific data.



                                                     10
4.3   Descriptive statistics

Table 1 reports descriptive statistics by DHS survey round, likely HIV status, and location relative

to a health facility that distributed ART. Six key facts emerge from this table. The first three are

apparent when comparing the full sample in 2001 (Column 1) to the full sample in 2007 (Column

6). First, although ART was virtually unavailable to the general public in Zambia in 2001, ART

availability was relatively widespread by 2007 with 43% of the 2007 sample within 10 km of an ART

clinic by 2007. Second, although adult female weight increased during this period, adult female

height remained virtually unchanged. Third, education levels and urbanization have increased

consistent with rapid development and growth in Zambia between 2001 and 2007.

   A fourth fact comes from the comparison of high versus low HIV likelihood women (i.e. Columns

2 and 3 in 2001 and Columns 7 and 8 in 2007). High HIV likelihood women are taller, heavier, more

educated, more urban, and more likely to have interacted with the health system as compared to low

HIV likelihood women, consistent with existing evidence on the HIV-education gradient (Fortson

2008) and that HIV prevalence is higher among women in the middle of the age distribution who

possess greater physical stature than younger or older women. Fifth, comparing Columns 4 and 5

in 2001 and Columns 9 and 10 in 2007 indicates that women who lived closer to locations where

ART was introduced were also more likely to have these characteristics, consistent with ART

being introduced disproportionately in high HIV prevalence locations. Sixth, higher likelihood of

being HIV positive and proximity to local ART introduction were associated with greater weight

gains between 2001 and 2007, whereas these characteristics were not associated with substantial

di↵erences in changes in height.

   To help illustrate variation in our data in the timing of local ART introduction relative to

respondent interview date, Figure 1 plots a histogram of this variable. While the distribution

is not uniform, for the majority of the twelve-month event windows, each one contains at least


                                                11
five percent of the DHS respondents. Therefore, sufficient variation exists to investigate the pre-

treatment parallel trends assumption underlying our triple-di↵erence approach, an assumption that

we examine in more detail in Section 5.4. Further, the distribution to the right of 0 suggests that

for many respondents ART was locally available long enough to generate epidemiological e↵ects.



5     Results

5.1   E↵ect of local ART on ART cascade

Before turning to the analysis of respondent health, we examine the e↵ects of local ART introduction

on the “ART cascade,” or the series of behavioral steps required to receive ART. The DHS data do

not contain data on whether an individual was receiving ART at the time of the survey. Instead,

Table 2 shows the estimated e↵ect of local ART on two steps required to receive ART. First, the DHS

asks whether the respondent visited a health clinic for themselves or their child in the 12 months

preceding the survey. Column 1 contains the triple di↵erence coefficient estimate from Equation

(1) with an indicator variable for whether the respondent visited a clinic in the last 12 months as

the dependent variable. As indicated by the coefficient estimate (and associated standard error)

on the triple interaction term, we do not find statistically significant evidence of an e↵ect of local

ART availability on whether the respondent visited a health clinic. The health clinic visit result

should be interpreted with caution for at least two reasons. First, as shown in Table 1, there was a

21 percentage point decline between 2001 and 2007 in the proportion of female respondents visiting

a health clinic, likely indicating an overall increase in maternal and/or child health that could

mask any direct change in visit behavior due to ART receipt. Second, a routine visit to a health

clinic for ART medication may not be considered a traditional clinic visit. Column 2 contains an

analogous specification with an indicator variable equal to one if the respondent reported having



                                                 12
ever been tested for HIV. The point estimate on the triple interaction term suggests that local

ART introduction increased the likelihood of the respondent having ever been tested for HIV by

approximately 7 percentage points (statistically significant at the 5% level).


5.2    E↵ect of local ART on adult female anthropometrics

Prior to the estimation of Equation (1) with anthropometrics as dependent variables, we present

prima facie evidence of e↵ect. Table 3 presents the average weight and average height within the

component cells of the triple di↵erence comparison, e↵ectively estimating Equation (1) without

covariates. The sample is divided by local ART availability, HIV status, and survey round, the

three sources of variation in the triple di↵erence.

    As explained in Section 4, respondents with an above median likelihood of being HIV positive

based on their demographic group (i.e. defined as the interaction of survey round, gender, five

year age group, urban/rural status, and province of residence) are considered “high likelihood

HIV+” in the table. In Table 3, Column 1 contains the sample means from 2001 (prior to the

availability of ART) and Column 2 contains the analogous means from 2007 (after some locations

had ART locally available).11 Column 3 contains the di↵erences between these two means, a

single di↵erence. Column 4 contains the double di↵erence between the single di↵erences in the

previous two rows of Column 3. Column 5 displays the triple di↵erence estimate, e↵ectively

from Equation (1) without controls. The triple di↵erence estimate for weight in Panel A suggests

local ART availability increased the weight of HIV positive women by approximately 1.2 kg or

2.3% of average female weight in 2001. The triple di↵erence estimate for height suggests local ART
  11
     Although the sample means in Column 1 indicate that individuals residing near locations where ART was sub-
sequently introduced were slightly heavier than individuals residing in other locations, our triple-di↵erence strategy
addresses this heterogeneity. In particular, our triple-di↵erence strategy identifies the causal e↵ect of local ART
introduction by further comparing high and low HIV likelihood individuals, addressing concerns about systematic
di↵erences in health by proximity to ART. In addition, as we demonstrate in Section 5.4, our semi-parametric triple-
di↵erence figure (i.e. Figure 2) reveals no di↵erential pre-treatment trend in our triple-di↵erence estimates.




                                                         13
availability increased height by 0.33 cm, or approximately a 0.2 percent change relative to 2001.

This substantial increase in weight without a corresponding change in height is consistent with the

physiological e↵ects of receiving ART.

    Table 4 presents regression estimates of our primary coefficient of interest, the triple di↵erence

parameter in Equation (1).12 Column 1 presents results with weight as the dependent variable and

Column 2 presents the analogous results with height as the dependent variable. The point estimate

on the triple interaction in Column 1 suggests that local ART introduction resulted in a weight gain

of approximately 1.6 kg for women with above median HIV likelihood (statistically significant at

the 5% level), or an increase of around 2.5% relative to mean weight in 2001. In contrast, Column

2 shows that local ART availability appears to be associated with a statistically insignificant and

small reduction in height of about 0.008 cm, or less than 0.1% of mean height in 2001.13 These

relationships are what one would expect given the timing of ART availability and our focus on

adults. Adults would have already reached their full stature prior to treatment, but improvements

in health could translate into increased weight.

    Columns 3 and 4 present results with body mass index (BMI) and BMI z-score, respectively, as

the dependent variables. The results confirm that local ART introduction was associated with an

increase in weight-for-height and not just weight. They also place the e↵ect size in context: local

ART introduction was associated with an approximately 0.17 standard deviation increase in the

body mass of high HIV likelihood women.

    In addition to our wealth of controls, the strong finding for weight without a corresponding

change in height bolsters our claim that ART availability has caused this change. First, generally
  12
     Even though lower level double and single di↵erence terms are included in all regressions, the inclusion of a host
of temporal and spatial controls (including their interactions) complicates their interpretation. Therefore, in order
to avoid confusion, we report only the triple di↵erence parameter in our main tables. In the Appendix, we present
results that display the lower level triple-di↵erence terms (e.g., the Y ear2007t times HIVijt ). We discuss these results
in the Appendix.
  13
     The point values in Table 4 di↵er from the simple triple-di↵erence calculations in Table 3 because the regression
used for Table 4 includes the covariates in Equation (1).



                                                           14
improving health or nutrition over time would likely appear in both height and weight. Second,

di↵erential migration by larger HIV positive individuals, while unlikely, does not appear to be

driving the weight results. We provide additional evidence on migration in Section 5.5. Third,

given the positive correlation between HIV infection and education found in Fortson (2008), one

could be concerned that ART has changed the sample selection, keeping people with a higher health

endowment alive. The lack of estimated change in height makes this unlikely. Therefore, local ART

at scale appears to have increased the health of the targeted.

       Our coefficient of interest must be scaled in order to compare it to other studies. To place our

estimates in context, studies in various developing countries found weight gains of 2.6 to 10.3 kg

after six to twelve months of treatment, with almost all reporting at least a 5 kg increase within

six months of treatment initiation (Koenig et al. 2004, Severe et al. 2005, Saghayam et al. 2008,

Koethe et al. 2010, Thirumurthy and Gra↵ Zivin 2012). Of particular interest to the current study,

Médecins sans Frontiéres South Africa et al. (2003) found in a clinic-based study in a previously

untreated area in South Africa that ART initiation led to weight gains averaging 10 kg. Our data

include some women whose disease had not progressed to the clinical stage. If 20% of HIV positive

women in our sample were clinically eligible for ART and one-half of these women accessed and

received ART, then local ART availability should directly a↵ect the health of approximately 10%

of the local adult HIV positive female population.14 Therefore, the expected e↵ect of local ART

due to treatment alone, averaged across all HIV positive adult women, those who were and were

not eligible for treatment, is a roughly 1 kg increase in body mass, approximately two-thirds of our

estimate. Recall that our estimate includes both the direct and indirect e↵ects of treatment. While

not all HIV positive women were clinically eligible for treatment, other studies have found that
  14
     During the period examined in the current analysis, the World Health Organization (WHO) recommended ini-
tiating ART for HIV patients in WHO clinical stages “III” or “IV” and for HIV patients with CD4 counts between
200 and 350 cells/mm (WHO 2006b). Clinical practice appears to have largely followed these guidelines (Stringer et
al. 2006).




                                                       15
the availability of ART increased household maize production by increasing mental health even

for those not under treatment, potentially accounting for the additional weight gain we observe

(Baranov et al. 2015). Although our estimated e↵ects of local ART introduction are relatively

large, they are consistent with a highly successful ART campaign.


5.3   Spatial heterogeneity

Initiating and adhering to ART requires a patient to make regular trips to a clinic for health

examinations and to receive medications. Our estimates thus far assumed that individuals more

than 10 km from a location where ART was introduced would have been unlikely to initiate and

adhere to ART. Table 5 examines spatial heterogeneity in the estimated e↵ect of local ART on

weight. We relax the restriction that the local introduction of ART a↵ected all individuals more

than 10 km from an ART health facility uniformly. To do this, we include an additional measure

of distance in Equation (1) that takes a value of 1 if a household resided within 20 km of a facility

with ART availability. We also include the appropriate double and triple interactions using this

new distance measure. This distance measure is not mutually exclusive with our existing measure:

a household that resides within 10 km of ART also resides within 20 km of ART. Therefore, the

estimated e↵ect for individuals within 10 km is the sum of the two triple interaction coefficients. For

those respondents residing between 10 km and 20 km, the estimated e↵ect is simply the coefficient

estimate on the new triple interaction term (i.e. “ART ever within 20 km X Year 2007 X HIV+”).

As expected, the results suggest that the statistically measurable e↵ect of local ART introduction

on female health was limited to those within 10 km as can be seen by the statistically insignificant

coefficient on the 20 km triple interaction term.




                                                    16
5.4     Parallel trends assumption and timing

One concern with our identification strategy is the presence of di↵erential pre-ART trends by HIV

status and clinic distance. While we have no reason to believe such trends existed, any such trends

would be evident in a semi-parametric triple di↵erence specification in which we allow a more

flexible timing of any e↵ect of ART availability.15 To do this, first we define 9 mutually exclusive

and completely exhaustive event windows based on when ART was locally available relative to DHS

respondent interview date: 6 windows prior to the introduction and 3 windows after introduction.

16   Then we estimate the following semi-parametric triple di↵erence regression specification:




                                9
                                X                              9
                                                               X
                  healthijt =         ↵k 1(⌧t = k) ⇥ ARTj +              k 1(⌧t   = k) ⇥ ARTj ⇥ HIVijt
                                k=1                            k=1

                                + 1 Y ear2007t +   2 HIVijt    +     3Y    ear2007t ⇥ HIVijt

                                      0
                                +Zijt + ⌘district +   t   + "ijt                                                    (2)



     where ⌧t denotes the nine event windows and other notation is the same as in Equation (1). In

the absence of di↵erential trending, the estimates for               k   for the six windows prior to introduction

(k =1 to 6) should show no pattern while the estimates for                        k   for the three windows after local

ART introduction (k =7 to 9) should demonstrate treatment e↵ects.

     The ordinary least squares regression estimates of the semi-parametric triple di↵erence param-

eters (i.e.   k   in Equation (2)) from a regression with respondent weight as the dependent variable
  15
     We are able to test for di↵erential pre-treatment trends despite only having two rounds of survey data (i.e. the
2001 DHS and 2007 DHS). In particular, we exploit variation in the timing of local ART introduction. For individuals
in a given survey round, substantial variation exists in the amount of time between the survey and when ART was
locally introduced.
  16
     The 6 windows prior to introduction are more than 60 months, 59 to 48 months, 47 to 36 months, 35 to 24
months, 23 to 12 months, and 11 to 0 months prior to introduction. The three windows after introduction are 1 to 11
months, 12 to 23 months, and more than 24 months. Because of the timing of our data collection we cannot extend
these windows further.




                                                          17
are plotted in Figure 2 and support a causal interpretation of the baseline anthropometric results.

In the figure, negative numbers on the horizontal axis indicate windows prior to local ART in-

troduction. As all coefficient estimates in this region of the figure are close to 0 and statistically

insignificant, we do not find a di↵erential pre-local ART introduction trend by HIV status. In

addition, the timing of the increase in adult female weight is closely associated with the timing of

local ART introduction, with the expected lag.

   We also estimate Equation (2) using height as the depending variable, yielding another dynamic

placebo test. Figure 3 plots the semi-parametric triple di↵erence parameters from this regression.

Again, these estimates fail to suggest any evidence of a di↵erential pre-introduction trend and fail

to suggest a di↵erential change in sample composition coincident with the timing of local ART

introduction.


5.5   Robustness checks

While all evidence indicates a causal interpretation of our findings, Table 6 presents estimates of the

parameter of interest in versions of Equation (1) that include additional covariates or an alternative

measure of HIV status. One concern could be that we are measuring other HIV/AIDS services, not

ART, but recall that our primary specification of interest included controls for both local PMTCT

and VCT availability, therefore our results are the e↵ect of ART, not the two other HIV services.

The first five columns of Table 6 contain additional control variables in order to demonstrate that

other health or demographic changes are not driving our results.

   In Columns 1 and 2 we control for two other public health improvements. Column 1 includes a

control for household access to piped water and Column 2 controls for household bed net ownership.

In both cases the results are quite similar to those that appear in Column 1 of Table 4. Column

3 controls for marital status of the respondent, again with only small changes to the coefficient



                                                  18
of interest. Other potential concerns are that our e↵ect is picking up a di↵erential likelihood in

pregnancy or in-migration of heavier individuals. Column 4 controls for whether the respondent was

pregnant at the time of the survey, and Column 5 controls for whether the individual had resided

in her household for less than one year. Again, these columns confirm the previous results. We do

not include these controls in our primary specification as ART could also a↵ect these outcomes.

We include them to demonstrate that their exclusions are not driving the results in Table 4.

    Finally, Column 6 uses a continuous measure of HIV likelihood, the age-group, gender, ur-

ban/rural, province cell level average, instead of the binary measure in the baseline specifications.

In this column the point estimate on the triple interaction term is larger than in our baseline esti-

mates. Because of the change in our HIV measure, this value is not immediately comparable to the

other columns. The point estimate on the triple interaction indicates a weight gain of roughly 5.4

kg for someone with a likely HIV status equal to 1. However, no observations have this value and

the 90th percentile of likely HIV status is 0.333. To scale this coefficient consider the estimated

e↵ect for a respondent in the 90th percentile of likely HIV status versus a respondent in the 10th

percentile of likely HIV status (i.e. 0.333 versus 0.034). This comparison suggests an expected

weight gain of approximately 1.60 kg, a large, but not unreasonable change in weight, and one

consistent with the other results in the table. Throughout, the estimates suggest that local ART

introduction increased adult female weight.



6    Conclusion

A fundamental debate in development and growth is whether foreign aid can be e↵ective at pro-

moting sustained improvements in quality of life (e.g., Boone 1996, Burnside and Dollar 2000,

Collier and Dollar 2002, Easterly 2003, Collier and Dollar 2004, Easterly et al. 2004, Easterly 2007,

Easterly 2009). We raise a related and more narrowly defined question: can targeted aid for drug


                                                 19
provision improve the health of the targeted at scale? We examine this topic in the context of

arguably the single largest foreign aid health program in the history of the world, the United States

President’s Emergency Plan for AIDS Relief (PEPFAR), a program directed toward addressing the

leading cause of death in the poorest region of the world. Our findings suggest that local ART

introduction in Zambia, a PEPFAR focus country, substantially increased the weight of high HIV

likelihood adult females, consistent with a reduction in HIV/AIDS morbidity due to local drug pro-

vision. These results suggest that despite limited local health sector capacity a very large foreign

health aid program focused on drug provision improved the health of the targeted.




                                                 20
7    References


Almond, Douglas, Hilary Hoynes, and Diane Whitmore Schanzenbach. 2011. Inside the war on
poverty: The impact of the food stamp program on birth outcomes. Review of Economics and
Statistics, 93(2): 387-403.

Baranov, Victoria, Daniel Bennett, and Hans-Peter Kohler. 2015. The indirect impact of an-
tiretroviral therapy: Mortality risk, mental health, and HIV-negative labor supply. Journal of
Health Economics, forthcoming.

Barre-Sinoussi, Francoise. 2011. Toward an H.I.V. cure. New York Times, June 3, 2011.

Basinga, Paulin, Paul Gertler, Agnes Binagwaho, Agnes Soucat, Jennifer Sturdy, Christel Ver-
meersch. 2011. E↵ect on maternal and child health services in Rwanda of payment to primary
health-care providers for performance: an impact evaluation. The Lancet, 377(9775): 1421-1428.

Bate, Roger, Ginger Zhe Jin, Aparna Mathur. 2011. Does price reveal poor-quality drugs? Evi-
dence from 17 countries. Journal of Health Economics, 30: 1150-1163.

Bendavid, Eran, Charles Holmes, Jay Bhattacharya, and Grant Miller. 2012. HIV development
assistance and adult mortality in Africa. Journal of the American Medical Association, 307(19):
2060-2067.

Björkman-Nyqvist, Martina, Jakob Svensson, David Yanagizawa-Drott. 2012. Can good products
drive out bad? Evidence from local markets for (fake?) antimalarial medicine in Uganda. Centre
for Economic Policy Research Working Paper No. 9114.

Boone, Peter. 1996. Politics and the e↵ectiveness of foreign aid. European Economic Review, 40:
289-329.

Bor, J, AJ Herbst, ML Newell, T. Barnighausen. 2013. Increases in adult life expectancy in rural
South Africa: valuing the scale-up of HIV treatment. Science. 339: 961-965.

Burnside, Craig, and David Dollar. 2000. Aid, policies, and growth. American Economic Review,
90(4): 847-868.

Cameron, A. Colin, Jonah Gelbach, and Douglas Miller. 2008. Bootstrap-based improvements for
inference with clustered errors. Review of Economics and Statistics, 90(3): 414-427.

Cantrell RA, Sinkala M, Megazinni K, et al. 2008. A pilot study of food supplementation to
improve adherence to antiretroviral therapy among food-insecure adults in Lusaka, Zambia. Journal
of Acquired Immune Deficiency Syndrome, 49: 190?195.

Card, David, Carlos Dobkin, and Nicole Maestas. 2008. The impact of nearly universal health
coverage on health care utilization: Evidence from Medicare. American Economic Review, 98(5):
2242-2258.

Card, David, Carlos Dobkin, and Nicole Maestas. 2009. Does Medicare save lives? Quarterly
Journal of Economics, 124(2): 597-636.

Central Statistical Office, Ministry of Health, Tropical Diseases Research Centre, University of Zam-


                                                 21
bia, and Macro International Inc. 2009. Zambia Demographic and Health Survey 2007. Calverton,
Maryland, USA: CSO and Macro International Inc.

Collier, Paul and David Dollar. 2002. Aid allocation and poverty reduction. European Economic
Review, 46(8): 1475-1500.

Collier, Paul and David Dollar. 2004. Development e↵ectiveness: What have we learnt? Economic
Journal, 114(496): F244-F271.

de Cock, Kevin, Wafaa El-Sadr, and Tedros Ghebreyesus. 2011. Game changers: Why did the scale-
up of HIV treatment work despite weak health systems? Journal of Acquired Immune Deficiency
Syndromes, 57(suppl 2): s61-s63.

de Walque, Damien, Haroun Kazianga, and Mead Over. 2012. Antiretroviral therapy, perceived
efficacy, and risky sexual behaviors: Evidence from Mozambique. Economic Development and
Cultural Change, 61(1): 97-126.

Easterly, William. 2003. Can foreign aid buy growth? Journal of Economic Perspectives, 17(3):
23-48.

Easterly, William. 2007. Was development assistance a mistake? American Economic Review
Papers and Proceedings, 97(2): 328-332.

Easterly, William. 2009. Can the West save Africa? Journal of Economic Literature, 47(2):373-447.

Easterly, William, Ross Levine, and David Roodman. 2004. New data, new doubts: A Comment
on Burnside and Dollars “Aid, Policies, and Growth”. American Economic Review, 94(3).

Fan, Victoria, Rachel Silverman, Denizhan Duran, and Amanda Glassman. 2013a. The financial
flows of PEPFAR: A profile. Center for Global Development Policy Paper 027, July 2013.

Fan, Victoria, Denizhan Duran, Rachel Silverman, and Amanda Glassman. 2013b. HIV/AIDS
intervention packages in five countries: A review of budget data. Center for Global Development
Policy Paper 033, October 2013.

Fauci, Anthony and Hilary Marsten. 2013. Achieving an AIDS-free world: Science and implemen-
tation. The Lancet, 382(9903): 1461-62.

Finkelstein, Amy. 2007. The aggregate e↵ects of health insurance: Evidence from the introduction
of Medicare. Quarterly Journal of Economics, 122 (1): 1-37.

Finkelstein, Amy, Sarah Taubman, Bill Wright, Mira Bernstein, Jonathan Gruber, Joseph P. New-
house, Heidi Allen, Katherine Baicker and Oregon Health Study Group. 2012. The Oregon health
insurance experiment: Evidence from the first year. Quarterly Journal of Economics, 127(3): 1057-
1106.

Fortson, Jane. 2008. The gradient in sub-Saharan Africa: Socioeconomic status and HIV/AIDS.
Demography, 45(2): 303-322.

Friedman, Willa. 2013. Antiretroviral drug access and behavior change. University of California,
Berkeley working paper.

Global Fund to Fight AIDS, Tuberculosis, and Malaria. 2012. The Global Fund to Fight AIDS,


                                               22
Tuberculosis and Malaria, Grants Portfolio.

Goldstein, Markus, Joshua Gra↵ Zivin, James Habyarimana, Cristian Pop-Eleches, Harsha Thiru-
murthy. 2012. The e↵ect of health worker absence and health clinic protocol on health outcomes:
The case of mother-to-child transmission of HIV in Kenya. American Economic Journal: Applied
Economics, 5(2): 58-85.

Government Accountability Office (GAO, United States). 2010. Trends in U.S. Spending for Global
HIV/AIDS and Other Health Assistance in Fiscal Years 2001-2008. GAO-11-64 Global Health.

Gra↵ Zivin Joshua, Markus Goldstein, Thirumurthy Harsha. 2009. AIDS treatment and intra-
household resource allocations: Childrens nutrition and schooling in Kenya. Journal of Public
Economics, 93: 1008-15.

Gruber, Jonathan, Nathaniel Hendren, and Robert Townsend. 2014. The great equalizer: Health
care access and infant mortality in Thailand. American Economic Journal: Applied Economics,
6(1): 91-107.

Hoynes, Hilary and Diane Whitmore Schanzenbach. 2009. Consumption responses to in-kind
transfers: Evidence from the introduction of the food stamp program. American Economic Journal:
Applied Economics Vol. 1, No. 4: 109-139.

Hoynes, Hilary, Marianne Page, and Ann Stevens. 2011. Can targeted transfers improve birth
outcomes? Evidence from the introduction of the WIC program. Journal of Public Economics,
95(7-8): 813?827.

Jayachandran, Seema, Adriana Lleras-Muney, and Kimberly V. Smith. 2010. Modern medicine
and the twentieth century decline in mortality: Evidence on the impact of sulfa drugs. American
Economic Journal: Applied Economics, 2(2): 118-46.

Kober, Katharina and Wim Van Damme. 2004. Scaling up access to antiretroviral treatment in
southern Africa: who will do the job? Lancet, 364: 10307.

Koenig, Serena, Fernet Le Andre, and Paul E. Farmer. 2004. Scaling-up HIV treatment pro-
grammes in resource limited settings: the rural Haiti experience. AIDS, 18(suppl 3):S21?S25

Koethe, Anna Lukusa, Mark J. Giganti, Benjamin H. Chi, Christopher K. Nyirenda, Mohammed
I. Limbada, Yolan Banda, and Je↵rey S. A. Stringer. 2010. Association between weight gain and
clinical outcomes among malnourished adults initiating antiretroviral therapy in Lusaka, Zambia.
Journal of Acquired Immune Deficiency Syndrome, 53(4): 507-513.

Lucas, Adrienne and Nicholas Wilson. 2013. Adult antiretroviral therapy and child health: Evi-
dence from scale-up in Zambia. American Economic Review Papers and Proceedings, 103(3).

Lucas, Adrienne and Nicholas Wilson. 2015. Adult health interventions at scale and children’s
schooling: Evidence from antiretroviral therapy in Zambia. University of Delaware working paper.

McLaren, Zoë. 2010. The e↵ect of access to AIDS treatment on employment outcomes in South
Africa. University of Michigan working paper.

Médecins sans Frontiéres South Africa, the Department of Public Health at the University of Cape
Town, and the Provincial Administration of the Western Cape, South Africa. 2003. Antiretroviral
therapy in primary health care: Experience of the Khayelitsha programme in South Africa. World


                                               23
Health Organization.

Miller, Grant, Diana Pinto, and Marcos Vera-Hernández. 2013. Risk protection, service use, and
health outcomes under Colombia’s health insurance program for the poor. American Economic
Journal: Applied Economics, 5(4): 61-91.

Mills, Edward, Richard Lester, Kristian Thorlund, Maria Lorenzi, Katherine Muldoon, Steve Kan-
ters, Sebastian Linnemayr, Robert Gross, Yvette Calderon, K Rivet Amico, Harsha Thirumurthy,
Cynthia Pearson, Robert H Remien, Lawrence Mbuagbaw, Lehana Thabane, Michael H Chung,
Ira B Wilson, Albert Liu, Olalekan A Uthman, Jane Simoni, David Bangsberg, Sanni Yaya, Till
B?rnighausen, Nathan Ford, Jean B Nachega. 2014. Interventions to promote adherence to an-
tiretroviral therapy in Africa: a network meta-analysis. The Lancet HIV, 1(3): e104-e111.

Moss, Kellie. 2008. International HIV/AIDS, Tuberculosis, and Malaria: Key Changes to U.S.
Programs and Funding. CRS Report for Congress. August 25, 2008.

Oomman, Nandini, Michael Bernstein, Steven Rosenzweig. 2007. Following the Funding for
HIV/AIDS: A Comparative Analysis of the Funding Practices of PEPFAR, the Global Fund and
World Bank MAP in Mozambique, Uganda and Zambia. Center for Global Development working
paper.

Palella FJ, Delaney KM, Moorman AC, et al. 1998. Declining morbidity and mortality among
patients with advanced human immunodeficiency virus infection. New England Journal of Medicine,
338: 853-860.

PEPFAR. 2013. The President’s Emergency Plan for AIDS Relief: Ambassdor’s Welcome.
http://zambia.usembassy.gov/pepfar.html

Resch, Stephen, Michelle Lee, Gilbert Kombe, Elijah Sinyinza. 2008. Sustainability Analysis of
HIV/AIDS Services in Zambia. Bethesda, MD: Health Systems 20/20 project, Abt Associates Inc.

Schneider, Kammerle, and Laurie Garrett. 2009. The evolution and future of donor assistance for
HIV/AIDS. Council on Foreign Relations Working Paper.

Severe, Patrice, Paul Leger, Macarthur Charles, Francine Noel, Gerry Bonhomme, Gyrlande Bois,
Erik George, Stefan Kenel-Pierre, Peter F. Wright, Roy Gulick, Warren D. Johnson, Jr, Jean
William Pape, and Daniel W. Fitzgerald. 2005. Antiretroviral therapy in a thousand patients with
AIDS in Haiti. New England Journal of Medicine, 353(22): 2325-2334.

Stringer, J., Zulu, I., Levy, J., Stringer, E., Mwango, A., Chi, B., Mtonga, V., Reid, S., Cantrell,
R., Bulterys, M., Saag, M., Marlink, R., Mwinga, A., Ellerbrock, T., Sinkala, M. 2006. Rapid
scale-up of antiretroviral therapy at primary care sites in Zambia: Feasibility and early outcomes.
Journal of the American Medical Association, 296(7), 782-793.

Saghayam, Suneeta, N. Kumarasamy, Anitha J. Cecelia, Suniti Solomon, Kenneth Mayer, and
Christine Wanke. 2007. Weight and body shape changes in a treatment naive population after 6
months of nevirapine based generic highly active antiretroviral therapy in South India. Clinical
Infectious Disease, 44: 295-300.

Tarno↵, Curt and Marian Leonardo Lawson. 2011. Foreign Aid: An Introduction to U.S. Programs
and Policy. Congressional Research Service, 7-5700, R40213.



                                                24
Thirumurthy, Harsha, Joshua Gra↵ Zivin, and Markus Goldstein. 2008. The economic impact of
AIDS treatment on labor supply in Western Kenya. Journal of Human Resources, 43: 511-552.

Thirumurthy, Harsha and Joshua Gra↵ Zivin. 2012. Health and labor supply in the context of
HIV/AIDS: The long-run economic impacts of antiretroviral therapy. Economic Development and
Cultural Change, 61(1): 73-96.

UNAIDS. 2006. Report on the Global AIDS Epidemic.

UNAIDS. 2010. Global Report: UNAIDS Report on the Global AIDS Epidemic.

United States Department of Health and Human Services. 2011. HIV study named 2011 Break-
through of the Year by Science: NIH-funded treatment-as-prevention study heralded as a major
advance. NIH News, National Institutes of Health, December 22, 2011.

WHO. 2006a. Working Together for Health. World Health Report 2006. World Health Organiza-
tion.

WHO. 2006b. Antiretroviral Therapy for HIV infection in Adults and Adolescents: Recommenda-
tions for a Public Health Approach. The World Health Organization.

WHO. 2011. Causes of Death Summary Tables. Health Statistics and Informatics Department,
World Health Organization. Geneva, Switzerland.

Wilson, Nicholas. 2015. Can disease specific funding harm health? Child mortality in the shadow
of HIV/AIDS service expansion. Demography, 52(5):1671-1700.

World Bank. 2013. World Development Indicators 2012. data.worldbank.org/data-catalog/world-
development-indicators




                                              25
Table 1: Descriptive Statistics for Adult Female Respondents in the 2001 and 2007 Demographic Health Surveys
Survey round:                                               2001                                                            2007
                                                                        ART                                                             ART
                                                High       Low           ever        ART                        High       Low           ever        ART
                                     Full    likehihood likehihood      within      further         Full     likehihood likehihood      within      further
Sub-sample:                        sample       HIV+       HIV+         10km      than 10km       sample        HIV+       HIV+         10km      than 10km
                                     (1)         (2)        (3)           (4)         (5)           (6)          (7)        (8)           (9)        (10)
ART within 10km                      0.00         0.00        0.00        0.00        0.00          0.43         0.57         0.29        1.00        0.00
                                   (0.00)       (0.00)      (0.00)       (0.00)     (0.00)         (0.50)       (0.50)      (0.45)       (0.00)     (0.00)
Weight, kilograms                  53.20        55.20       51.40        55.40      51.60          56.20        59.00       53.20        58.30      53.90
                                   (9.47)      (10.10)      (8.48)      (10.50)     (8.24)        (11.00)      (12.00)      (8.96)      (12.10)     (9.19)
Height, centimeters                157.50      158.50       156.50      158.30      156.90        157.60       158.70       156.40      158.40      156.80
                                   (6.38)       (6.24)      (6.38)       (6.27)     (6.40)         (6.82)       (6.62)      (6.83)       (6.77)     (6.79)
BMI                                21.40        21.90       20.90        22.10      20.90          22.60        23.40       21.70        23.20      21.90
                                   (3.32)       (3.63)      (2.90)       (3.73)     (2.87)         (3.98)       (4.41)      (3.25)       (4.36)     (3.40)
BMI z-score                         -0.16        -0.02       -0.29        0.02       -0.29          0.15         0.37        -0.08        0.32       -0.03
                                   (0.89)       (0.98)      (0.78)       (1.00)     (0.77)         (1.07)       (1.19)      (0.87)       (1.17)     (0.91)
Primary school completion            0.45         0.51        0.39        0.62        0.31          0.55         0.63         0.47        0.68        0.42
                                   (0.50)       (0.50)      (0.49)       (0.48)     (0.46)         (0.50)       (0.48)      (0.50)       (0.47)     (0.49)
Secondary school completion          0.06         0.09        0.04        0.11        0.02          0.11         0.18         0.04        0.17        0.04
                                   (0.24)       (0.28)      (0.19)       (0.32)     (0.14)         (0.31)       (0.38)      (0.20)       (0.38)     (0.21)
Urban                                0.31         0.39        0.23        0.62        0.07          0.45         0.65         0.23        0.74        0.13
                                   (0.46)       (0.49)      (0.42)       (0.49)     (0.25)         (0.50)       (0.48)      (0.42)       (0.44)     (0.34)
Visited clinic in past 12 months     0.66         0.73        0.59        0.69        0.64          0.45         0.51         0.38        0.48        0.42
                                   (0.47)       (0.44)      (0.49)       (0.50)     (0.48)         (0.50)       (0.50)      (0.49)       (0.50)     (0.49)
Ever took a HIV test                 0.09         0.11        0.07        0.13        0.05          0.41         0.52         0.29        0.50        0.31
                                   (0.28)       (0.31)      (0.26)       (0.34)     (0.23)         (0.49)       (0.50)      (0.45)       (0.50)     (0.46)
Age                                26.90        29.40       24.40        26.40      27.20          27.90        30.80       24.80        27.50      28.30
                                   (8.20)       (6.52)      (8.86)       (7.94)     (8.38)         (9.22)       (7.82)      (9.55)       (9.21)     (9.22)
Likely HIV positive                  0.17         0.27        0.07        0.19        0.15          0.17         0.26         0.07        0.21        0.12
                                   (0.14)       (0.13)      (0.04)       (0.15)     (0.13)         (0.12)       (0.10)      (0.04)       (0.14)     (0.09)
Observations                       6,645        3,240           3,405      2,881      3,764         7,039       3,608         3,441      3,635        3,404
Notes: Data come from the 2001 and 2007 Zambia Demographic Health Surveys. Entries are sample means. Standard deviations are in parentheses. ART
within 10 km is an indicator variable equal to one if a clinic located within 10 km of the respondent offered ART at least twelve months prior to the
respondent's survey date.
Table 2: Effect of Local ART on ART Cascade
                                                                    Visited                         Ever
Dependent variable:                                                 clinic                         tested
                                                                      (1)                            (2)

ART ever within 10km X Year 2007 X HIV +                             0.013                        0.073**
                                                                    (0.036)                       (0.033)
Observations                                             13,881                     13,797
Notes: Data come from the 2001 and 2007 Zambia Demographic Health Surveys. All dependent variables are
indicator variables. "ART ever within 10km" is an indicator variable equal to one if a health clinic with 10
kilometers of the respondent offered ART at least twelve months prior to the 2007 DHS. HIV + is an indicator
variable equal to one if respondent is in a demographic group with HIV prevalence above median. All
specifications include the full set of controls, including lower level triple difference terms, indicated in
Equation (1). Parameters estimated using ordinary least squares (OLS) regression. Standard errors are in
parentheses and are clustered by Standard Enumeration Area (SEA).
*** Significant at the 1 percent level, ** Significant at the 5 percent level, * Significant at the 10 percent level.
Table 3: Adult Female Anthropometrics in Zambia by Proximity to ART, HIV Prevalence, and
Survey Year
                                                               Survey round                                    Differences
                                                       2001                   2007            Single            Double               Triple
                                                        (1)                    (2)             (3)                 (4)                (5)
Panel A: Weight, kilograms
(1) ART ever within 10km, high likelihood HIV+         56.78                  60.65            3.87
(2) ART ever within 10km, low likelihood HIV+          52.90                  54.29            1.39
(3) Double difference                                                                                             2.48

(4) ART further than 10km, high likelihood HIV+        53.08                  56.28            3.20
(5) ART further than 10km, low likelihood HIV+         50.69                  52.61            1.92
(6) Double difference                                                                                             1.28

(7) Triple difference                                                                                                                 1.20

Panel B: Height, centimeters
(8) ART ever within 10km, high likelihood HIV+        158.34              159.20               0.86
(9) ART ever within 10km, low likelihood HIV+         157.08              157.14               0.06
(10) Double difference                                                                                            0.80

(11) ART further than 10km, high likelihood HIV+      158.30              158.19              -0.11
(12) ART further than 10km, low likelihood HIV+       156.58              156.00              -0.58
(13) Double difference                                                                                            0.47

(14) Triple difference                                                                                                          0.33
Notes: Anthropometric data come from the 2001 and 2007 Zambia Demographic Health Surveys. Entries are sample means. "ART ever within 10km"
and "ART further than 10km" refer to ART availability at least twelve months prior to the 2007 DHS. "High likelihood HIV+" and "low likelihood
HIV+" refer to whether HIV prevalence in the respondent's demographic group is above or below the median HIV prevalence demographic group,
respectively.
Table 4: Effect of Local ART on Adult Female Weight and Height

Dependent variable:                                        Weight (kg) Height (cm)           BMI       BMI z-score
                                                              (1)          (2)                (3)         (4)

ART ever within 10km X Year 2007 X HIV +                     1.619**          -0.008       0.624**       0.168**
                                                             (0.642)         (0.451)       (0.252)       (0.068)
Observations                                         13,684       13,668      13,662        13,662
Notes: Data come from the 2001 and 2007 Zambia Demographic Health Surveys. "ART ever within 10km" is
an indicator variable equal to one if a health clinic with 10 kilometers of the respondent offered ART at least
twelve months prior to the 2007 DHS. HIV + is an indicator variable equal to one if respondent is in a
demographic group with HIV prevalence above median. All specifications include the full set of controls,
including lower level triple difference terms, indicated in Equation (1). Parameters estimated using ordinary
least squares (OLS) regression. Standard errors are in parentheses and are clustered by Standard Enumeration
Area (SEA).
*** Significant at the 1 percent level, ** Significant at the 5 percent level, * Significant at the 10 percent level.
Table 5: Spatial Heterogeneity in Effect of Local ART on Adult Female Weight

Dependent variable:                                                                      Weight (kg)
                                                                                            (1)

ART ever within 10km X Year 2007 X HIV +                                                   1.883**
                                                                                           (0.843)
ART ever within 20km X Year 2007 X HIV +                                                    -0.415
                                                                                           (0.765)
Observations                                                                  13,684
Notes: Data come from the 2001 and 2007 Zambia Demographic Health Surveys. "ART ever within 10km" is an
indicator variable equal to one if a health clinic with 10 kilometers of the respondent offered ART at least twelve
months prior to the 2007 DHS. "ART ever within 20km" is defined analogously using a 20 kilometer cutoff.
HIV + is an indicator variable equal to one if respondent is in a demographic group with HIV prevalence above
median. All specifications include the full set of controls, including lower level triple difference terms, indicated
in Equation (1). Parameters estimated using ordinary least squares (OLS) regression. Standard errors are in
parentheses and are clustered by Standard Enumeration Area (SEA).
*** Significant at the 1 percent level, ** Significant at the 5 percent level, * Significant at the 10 percent level.
Table 6: Robustness Checks for Effect of Local ART on Adult Female Weight

Dependent variable:                                                          Weight (kg)
                                                      (1)         (2)       (3)      (4)           (5)          (6)

ART ever within 10km X Year 2007 X HIV +           1.560**     1.603** 1.609** 1.577**           1.617**     5.441*
                                                   (0.645)     (0.643) (0.634) (0.636)           (0.642)     (3.001)
Additional controls for                          piped water bed net      married pregnant       migrant

Alternative HIV measure                                                                                    continuous
                                                                                                           measure of
                                                                                                              HIV
                                                                                                           prevalence


Observations                                13,681    13,683 13,684 13,684         13,673     13,684
Notes: Data come from the 2001 and 2007 Zambia Demographic Health Surveys. "ART ever within 10km" is an
indicator variable equal to one if a health clinic with 10 kilometers of the respondent offered ART at least twelve
months prior to the 2007 DHS. In Columns (1) - (5), HIV + is an indicator variable equal to one if respondent is
in a demographic group with HIV prevalence above median. In Column (6), HIV+ is a continous measure of HIV
prevalence in the respondent's demographic group. All specifications include the full set of controls, including
lower level triple difference terms, indicated in Equation (1). Parameters estimated using ordinary least squares
(OLS) regression. Standard errors are in parentheses and are clustered by Standard Enumeration Area (SEA).
*** Significant at the 1 percent level, ** Significant at the 5 percent level, * Significant at the 10 percent level.
                                    Figure 1: Histogram of Timing of Local ART Introduction
                                                    Relative to Interview Date
                            0.25


                             0.2
   Portion of respondents




                            0.15


                             0.1


                            0.05


                              0
                                   -60 or -59 to -48 -47 to -36 -35 to -24 -23 to -12 -11 to 0   1 to 11   12 to 13 more than
                                   longer                                                                              24
                                                         Months before/after local ART introduction

Notes: Each bar represents the percentage of respondents. The months are the number of months between
the date of interview and ART availability within 10km. Negative numbers indicate that ART was not yet
available, while positive numbers indicate the number of months it was available prior to interview.
Calculations based on Zambia DHS 2001 and 2007 and the Zambia Health Facilities Census.
                     Figure 2: Semi-Parametric Difference-in-Difference-in-Differences Analysis of Effect of Local ART
                                          Introduction on Adult Female Weight in Kilograms
3
                                                                                                             Local ART introduction




2




1




0
                                                                                                 -11 to 0          1 to 11         12 to 23
     -60 or longer       -59 to -48       -47 to -36        -35 to -24        -23 to -12                                                      more than 24



-1




-2



     Notes: The solid line plot the estimtates of the βk's from Equation 2, using weight in kilograms as the dependent variable.
            The dashed lines are the 95% confidence interval associated with that point estimate.
-3
                     Figure 3: Semi-Parametric Difference-in-Difference-in-Differences Analysis of Effect of Local ART
                                          Introduction on Adult Female Height in Centimeters
3
                                                                                                               Local ART introduction




2




1




0
                                                                                                  -11 to 0           1 to 11         12 to 23
     -60 or longer       -59 to -48        -47 to -36        -35 to -24        -23 to -12                                                       more than 24



-1




-2




     Notes: The solid line plot the estimtates of the βk's from Equation 2, using height in centimeters as the dependent variable.
            The dashed lines are the 95% confidence interval associated with that point estimate.
-3
Appendix


In order to allow for interpretation of the lower level triple-difference terms (e.g. the Year 2007t

indicator variable and its interaction with likely HIV status), we estimate a restricted version of

Equation (1) in which controls are not interacted with Year 2007t. For example, we omit the

interactions of the district fixed effects and Year 2007t and and we omit the interaction between

urban residence and Year 2007t. Appendix Table A1 presents the results of these restricted

specifications. Across the various outcomes, the estimated effects of local ART introduction are

similarly to those estimated using the unrestricted specification (i.e. as stated in Equation (1) and

presented in Table 4). The lower level triple-difference terms suggest several systematic

differences in anthropometrics consistent with the facts of this setting. Namely, living near ART,

higher likelihood of being HIV positive, and Year 2007 are associated with higher body mass,

although the differences are typically statistically insignificant.
Table A1: Effect of Local ART on Adult Female Weight and Height, Restricted Specification

Dependent variable:                                         Weight (kg)     Height (cm)       BMI       BMI z-score
                                                               (5)              (6)            (7)         (8)

ART ever within 10km X Year 2007 X HIV +                      1.305**           -0.001      0.487*         0.131*
                                                              (0.655)          (0.437)      (0.254)        (0.068)

ART ever within 10km                                            0.213           0.110        0.060          0.016
                                                               (0.412)         (0.266)      (0.145)        (0.039)

Year 2007                                                       0.493           -0.449      0.367**       0.099**
                                                               (0.452)         (0.297)      (0.173)       (0.046)

HIV +                                                           0.242           -0.137       0.157          0.042
                                                               (0.306)         (0.211)      (0.117)        (0.031)

ART ever within 10km X Year 2007                                -0.602          0.273        -0.294         -0.079
                                                               (0.549)         (0.368)      (0.203)        (0.055)

ART ever within 10km X HIV +                                    -0.013          -0.368       0.070          0.019
                                                               (0.436)         (0.297)      (0.169)        (0.045)

Year 2007 X HIV+                                                0.419           0.218        0.082          0.022
                                                               (0.403)         (0.290)      (0.159)        (0.043)

Observations                                                   13,684          13,668        13,662        13,662


Notes: Data come from the 2001 and 2007 Zambia Demographic Health Surveys. "ART ever within 10km" is
an indicator variable equal to one if a health clinic with 10 kilometers of the respondent offered ART at least
twelve months prior to the 2007 DHS. HIV + is an indicator variable equal to one if respondent is in a
demographic group with HIV prevalence above median. All specifications include the full set of controls,
including lower level triple difference terms, indicated in Equation (1). Parameters estimated using ordinary
least squares (OLS) regression. Standard errors are in parentheses and are clustered by Standard Enumeration
Area (SEA).
*** Significant at the 1 percent level, ** Significant at the 5 percent level, * Significant at the 10 percent level.
