                         NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                   THE TERM STRUCTURE OF INTEREST RATES




                             Robert 3. Shiller

                            3. Huston McCulloch




                           Working Paper No. 2341




                   NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                         1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                            Cambridge, MA 02138
                                August 1987




For the Handbook of Monetary Economics. The research reported here is part
of the NBER's research program in Financial Markets and Monetary Economics.
Any opinions expressed are those of the authors and not those of the National
Bureau of Economic Research.
                                               NBER Working Paper #2341
                                               August 1987



                   The Term Structure of Interest Rates



                                 ABSTRACT




     This   paper consolidates and interprets the literature on the term

structure, as it stands today. Definitions of rates of return, forward

rates and holding returns for all time intervals are treated here in a

uniform manner and their interrelations, exact or approximate, delineated.

The concept of duration is used throughout to simplify mathematical expres-

sions. Continuous compounding is used where possible, to avoid arbitrary

distinctions based on compounding assumptions. Both the theoretical and the

empirical literature are treated.

     The attached tables by J. Huston McCulloch give term structure data for

U. S. government securities 1946-1987. The tables give discount bond yields,

forward rates and par bond yields as defined in the paper. The data relate

to the concepts in the paper more precisely than does any previously

published data series.



Robert J. Shiller                           J. Huston McCulloch
Cowles Foundation                           Department of Economics
Yale University                             Ohio State University
Box 2125 Yale Station                       410 Arps Hall
New Haven, CT 06520-2125                    1945 N. High St.
(203) 432-3798                              Columbus, OH 43210-1172
                                            (614) 292-0382
                   The Term Structure of Interest Rates1

                            Robert J. Shiller



     The term of a debt instrument with a fixed maturity date is the time

until the maturity date. The term structure of interest rates at any time

is the function relating interest rate to term. Figure 1. shows the U.S.

term structure of nominal interest rates according to one definition for

each year since 1948. Usually the term structure is upward sloping;

long-term interest rates are higher than short-term interest rates and

interest rate rises with term. Sometimes the term structure is downward

sloping. Sometimes it is hump shaped, with intermediate terms having

highest interest rates.

     The study of the term structure inquires what market forces are

responsible for the varying shapes of the term structure. In its purest

form, this study considers only bonds for which we can disregard default

risk (that interest or principal will not be paid by the issuer of the

bond), convertibility provisions (an option to convert the bond to another

financial instrument), call provisions (an option of the issuer to pay off

the debt before the maturity date), floating rate provisions (provisions

that change the interest payments according to some rule) or other special




     1
       The author is indebted to John Campbell, Benjamin Friedman, Jonathan
Ingersoll, Edward Kane, Stephen LeRoy, Jeffrey Miron, and J. Huston
McCulloch for helpful comments and discussions, and to Sejin Kim,
Plutarchos Sakellaris, and James Robinson for research assistance. Research
was supported by the National Science Foundation.


                                      I
                                                                   1980




         4
                                                                  time t
 years       3                                                     year
                                                           1960
                          6
             term: m          5
                                  4
                              mo nths       2
                                                    1950
                                                0
Figure 1. The Term Structure of Interest Rates. Data plotted are par bond
yields to maturity, r (t,t+in), against time t and term in, annual data. en
of June, 1948-85. Curses on surface parallel to in axis show the term
structure for various years. Curves on surface parallel to t axis show pa:
through time of interest rates of various maturities. Maturities shown are
0, 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, and 9 months and 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, and 10 years. Note t:
longer maturities are at the left, the reverse of the usual plot of term
structures, so an 'upward sloping' term structure slopes up to the left.
So'irce of data: See Appendix by J. Huston McCulloch
                                        2
 features.2 Thus, the study of the term structure may be regarded as the

study of the market price of time, over various intervals, itself.

       What follows is an effort to consolidate and interpret the literature

on the term structure, as it stands today. The notation adopted is a little

more complicated than usual, to allow diverse studies to be treated in a

uniform notation. Definitions of rates of return, forward rates and holding

returns for all time intervals are treated here in a uniform manner and

their interrelations, exact or approximate, delineated. The concept of

duration is used throughout to simplify mathematical expressions. Continu-

ous compounding is used where possible, to avoid arbitrary distinctions

based on compounding assumptions. The relations described here can be

applied approximately to conventionally defined interest rates or exactly to

the continuously compounded McCulloch data in the appendix.       The McCulloch

data, published here for the first time, are the cleanest interest rate data

available, in that they are based on a broad spectrum of government bond

prices, and are corrected for coupon and special tax   effects.
       Section II below is a brief introduction to some key concepts in the

simplest case, that of pure discount bonds. Section III sets forth the full

definitions and concepts and their interrelations. Section IV sets forth

theories of the term structure, and Section V the empirical work on the term

structure. Section VI is an overview and interpretation of the literature.




     2The U. S. government bonds used to produce Figure 1 are in some
dimensions good approximations to such bonds: default risk must be consi-
dered very low, the bonds are not convertible, and there are no floating
rate provisions. However, many long-term U. S. bonds are callable five years
before maturity, and some bonds are given special treatment in estate tax
law.

                                        3
          II. Simple Analytics of the Term Structure: Discount Bonds

     A discount bond is a promise by the issuer of the bond of a single

fixed payment (the "principal") to the holder of the bond at a given date

(the "maturity"). There are no intervening interest payments; thus the bond

sells for less than the principal before the maturity date, i. e., it is

expected to sell at a discount. The issuer of the bond has no other obliga-

tion than to pay the principal on the maturity date. An investment in a

discount bond is not illiquid because the holder can sell it at any time to

another investor. Let us denote by Pd(t,T) the market price at time t of a

discount bond whose principal is one dollar and whose maturity date is T,

t   T. The subscript d denotes discount bond, to contrast this price from

the par bond price to be defined below. The "term" of the bond (which will

be represented here by the letter in) is the time to maturity, in   — T-t.   Thus,

the term of any given bond steadily shrinks through time, a three-month bond

becoming a two-month bond after one month and a one-month bond after two

months.

      All discount bonds maturing at date T for which there is no risk of

default by the issuer ought to be perfectly interchangeable, and to sell at

time t for pd(t,T) times the principal. The price Pd(t,T) is thus determined

by the economy-wide supply and demand at time t for credit to be repaid at

time T. The determination of Pd(t.T) is thus macroeconomic in nature, and is

not at the discretion of any individual issuer or investor.

      The price Pd(t,T) of a discount bond may be generally expected to

increase gradually with time t until the maturity date T, when it reaches

its maximum, equal to one dollar. The increase in price for any holder of

the bond over the period of time that he or she holds it is the return to


                                       4
holding it. The actual increase in price, since it is determined by market

forces, may not be steady, and may vary from time to time. It is useful to

have some measure of the prospective increase in price that is implicit in

the price pd(t,T). The yield to maturity (or interest rate) rd(t,T) at time

t on the discount bond maturing at time T can be defined, given Pd(t,T), as

the steady rate at which the price should increase if the bond is to be

worth one dollar at time T. If the growth of price is to be steady, then the

price at time t', t   t'      T, should be given by pd(e,T)e(ttd(tT).
Setting this price equal to one dollar where t' —      T, and solving for
rd(t,T), we find that the yield to maturity is given by:



                   rd(t,T) —     log(p(t,T))/(Tt)

The term structure of interest rates, for discount bonds, is the function

relating rd(t,t+m) to m. We may also refer to r(t,t+m) as the "rn-period

rate," and if m is very small as the "short rate," if m is very large as the

"long rate."

     Note that the term structure at any given date is determined exclu-

sively by bond prices quoted on that day; there is a term structure in every

daily newspaper. Those making plans on any day night well consult the term

structure on that day. We can all lend (that is, invest) at the rates shown

in the paper, and while we cannot all borrow (that is, issue bonds) at these

rates, the rates shown     are likely to be   indicative of the rates at which we

can borrow. If the one-year interest rate is high, arid the two-year interest

rate is low (i. e., if there is a descending term structure in this range)

then individuals firms, or governments who plan to borrow for one year may


                                         5
be rather discouraged, and inclined to defer their borrowing plans for

another year. Those who plan to lend this year rather than next would be

encouraged. The reverse would happen if the term structure were ascending.

Most individuals, of course, do not pay close attention to the term struc-

ture, but many do, and firms and governments do as well. The term structure

on any day is determined by those who enter their preferences in the market

on that day. A descending term structure on that day means that if the term

structure had been flat there would be an excess supply of one-year bonds or

an excess demand for two-year bonds. The descending term structure arises,

of course, to choke off this excess demand.

     In making plans using the term structure, it is helpful to realize that

the term structure on any given date has in it implicit future interest

rates, called forward rates. In the above example, where the term structure

is descending between one and two years it is implicit in the term structure

that the one-year interest rate can be guaranteed to be lower next year than

it is this year. To guarantee the forward rate one must be able both to buy

and to issue bonds at quoted prices. One achieves this by trading in bonds

of different maturities available today. One buys a discount bond at time

t maturing at time T at price Pd(t,T) and issues an amount of discount

bonds maturing at t' at price Pd(t,t) ,        where t < t' < T. If the number

of bonds issued equals pd(t,T)/pd(t,t') ,     then one will have broken even,

at time t .   That is, one will not have acquired or lost any cash today in
the transaction. However, at time t' one must pay the principal on the

bonds issued, equal to pd(t,T)/pd(t,t') .     At time T one will receive the
principal on the (T-t)-period bond, equal to 1. Thus, the outcome of the

transaction is in effect that one is committing oneself at time t to buy a


                                      6
discount bond at time t' maturing at time T with price Pd(t,T)/Pd(t,t).

The forward rate fd(t,t' ,T) at time t applying to the time interval t' to T

is the yield to maturity on this contract:



       fa(t,t',T) —    log(p(t,T)/p(t,t'))/(Tt')         t < t' < T



This may also be called the t'-t period ahead forward rate of maturity T-

t'. One can as well guarantee that one can borrow at the forward rate

fd(t,t' ,T) by buying discount bonds maturing at t' and issuing bonds

maturing at T.

     One might thus consider, in deciding whether or not to defer borrowing

or lending plans, a comparison of the spot rate today rd(t,T) with the

forward rate of corresponding maturity k periods in the future,

                 There is also another margin to consider. One might hold

one's borrowing or lending plans fixed, deciding, let us say, to invest at

time t+k, but to consider whether to tie down the interest rate today at

                 or to wait and take one's chances with regard to the future

spot rate rd(t+k,T+k).

     The subject of the literature surveyed here is how people who are

making decisions at the various margins interact to determine the term

structure. Before embarking on this, it is important to broaden our

definitions and concepts.



                            III. Fundamental Concepts

111.1 Bonds: Their Definition

     The term "bond" will be used here for any debt instrument, whether


                                         7
technically bond, bill, note, commercial paper, etc., and whether or not

payments are defined in nominal (money) terms or in real terms (that is,

tied to a commodity price index).

       A bond represents a claim on a prespecified sequence of payments. A

bond which is issued at time I and matures at time T is defined by a

w-element vector of payment dates (t1, t2, ...,              t,,,1, T) where I < t           T

for all i, and by a w-element vector of corresponding positive payments

(s1, s2, s3, ..      . , s)   .   In   theoretical treatments of the term structure,

payments may be assumed to be made continually in time, so that the payment

stream is represented by a positive function of time s(t), I <                  t   T.

       Two   kinds   of payment sequences are common. For the discount bond

referred to above the vector of payment dates contains a single element T

and the vector of payments contains the single element called the principal.

A coupon bond, in contrast, promises a payment at regular intervals of an

amount c called the coupon and a payment of the last coupon and principal

(the latter normalized here at 1) at the maturity date. Thus, for example, a

coupon bond that will mature in an integer number of periods and whose

coupons are paid at integer intervals has vector of payment dates (1+1,

1+2,   .   .., I+w-l,   I+w) ,     and vector of payments (c, c,    .   .. c,   c+l) .   A

perpetuity or consol is a special case of a coupon bond for which T ,                    the

maturity date, is infinity.

       The purchaser at time t of a bond maturing at time T pays price

p(t,T) and is entitled to receive those payments corresponding to the t.

that are greater than t , so long as the purchaser continues to hold the




                                                  8
bond.
        3
            A coupon bond is said to be selling at par at tune t      if p(t,T)
is equal to the value of the principal, by our convention equal to 1.00.

        A coupon bond may be regarded as a portfolio of discount bonds. If

coupons are paid once per time period, for example, then the portfolio

consists of an amount c of discount bonds maturing at time 1+1 , an

amount c discount bonds maturing at time 1+2 ,        etc.   ,
                                                                 and an amount c+l

of discount bonds maturing at time T .       Should all such discount bonds be

traded, we would expect, by the law of one price, that (disregarding

discrepancies allowed by taxes, transactions costs and other market imper-

fections) the price of the portfolio of discount bonds should be the same as

the price of the coupon bond.4

        There is thus (abstracting from market imperfections) a redundancy in

bond prices, and if both discount and coupon bonds existed for all maturi-

ties, we could arbitrarily confine our attention to discount bonds only or

coupon bonds only. In practice, we do not generally have prices on both

kinds of bonds for the same maturities. In the United States, for example,

discount bonds were until recently available only for time to maturity of


     31n the United States coupon bonds are typically traded "and accrued
interest" (rather than "flat") which means that the price p(t,T) actually
paid for a coupon bond between coupon dates is equal to its quoted price
plus accrued interest which is a fraction of the next coupon. The fraction
is the time elapsed since the last coupon payment divided by the time
interval between coupons.


     4Conversely, a discount bond may be considered a portfolio of coupon
bonds, though in this case the portfolio involves negative quantities. For
example, a two-period discount bond may be regarded as a portfolio of one-
and two-period coupon bonds whose coupons are c1 and c2 respectively.
The portfolio would consist of -(c2)/[(c1+l)(c2+1)] of the one-period
coupon bonds and l/(c2+1) of the two-period coupon bonds.



                                         9
one year or less. There is also redundancy among coupon bonds, in that one

can find coupon bonds of differing coupon for the same maturity date.



111.2. Interest Rates: Their Definition

      The yield to maturity (or, loosely, interest rate) at time t of a bond

maturing at time T is defined implicitly as the rate r(t,T) that discounts

its vector of payments s to the price p(t,T)


                                   _(tit)r(t,T)
(1)        p(t,T) —        E s.e
                              1
                       1



The right-hand side of this expression is just the present value, discounted

at rate r(t,T) ,      of    the remaining payments accruing to bond holders. For

discount bonds, this expression reduces to the expression given in Section

II. above. The yield to maturity may also be given an interpretation as

above. Given the price p(t,T), r(t,T) is that steady rate of appreciation of

price between payment dates so that if the price falls by the amount s at

each t. before T, the price equals ST at time T. In theoretical treatments

of the term structure in which the payments are assumed made continually in

time, the summation in (1) is replaced by an integral.

       The expression (1) gives the continuously compounded yield to maturity

r(t,T) .   One can define a yield to maturity with any compounding interval

h: r(t,T,h) —   (etT)         -
                                   1)/h   .   In   the United States, where coupons are

traditionally paid semiannually, it is customary to express yields to




                                                   10
maturity at annual rates with semiannual compounding.5 Continuous compound-

ing will be assumed here for consistency, as we do not wish to allow such

things as the interval between coupon dates to dictate the compounding
            6
interval.

     For coupon bonds, it is customary to define the current yield as the

total coupons paid per year divided by the price. Current yield is not used

to represent the interest rate and should not be confused with the yield to

maturity.

     If coupon payments are made once per period, then equation (1) is a

(T-t)-order polynomial equation in e1tT) which therefore has T-t

roots. However, given that s 0 for all i, there is only one real

positive root, and this is taken for the purpose of computing the yield to

maturity r(t,T)

     Roots of polynomials of order n can be given an explicit formula in

terms of the coefficients of the polynomial only if n is less than five.

Thus, yields to maturity for T-t greater than or equal to five can be

determined from price only by iterative or other approximation procedures,

or with the use of bond tables.

     The term structure of interest rates at time t is the function


     5Thus, computing yield by solving (1) and converting to semiannual
compounding (using h — .5 ) gives us exactly the yields in bond value
tables, as in Financial Publishing Company, (1970), so long as the term In
is an integer multiple of h — .5  .  Whether or not m is an integer
multiple of h , this also gives exactly yields to maturity as presented in
Stigum (1981) page 111 if p(t,T) is represented as price plus accrued
interest.


     6Continuously compounded yield to maturity has also been referred to as
"instantaneous compound interest," "force of interest,' or "nominal rate
convertible instantaneously." See for example Skinner (1913).


                                      11
relating yield to maturity r(t,t+m) to term m. A plot of r(t,t+m)

against m is also known as a yield curve at time t .      There is a term

structure for discount bonds and a term structure for coupon bonds. If we

assume the law of one price as described in the preceding section, then,

given the coupons, there is a relation between the different term structur-

es.

111.3. Par Bonds

      Consider a bond that pays coupons continuously at rate c per period

until the maturity date T when a lump-sum payment of 1 is made. If we

disregard taxes and other market imperfections, the law of one price implies

that the price of this bond in terms of pd(t,T) is given by:



(2)       P(tT) — 1T                + pd(t,T)



The yield r(t,T) of a par bond is found from P(t1T) by setting the

left-hand-side of this expression to 1 and solving for c:7


                       1 -
(3)        r (t,T) — ___________
            P           rT
                        I
                       Jt
111.4 Instantaneous and Perpetuity Rates

       The interest rate of term zero is r(t,t), defined as the limit of

r(t,T) as T -    t   or as rd(t,t) defined as the limit of rd(t,T) as T

approaches t .   It is the instantaneous interest rate, which is of course
     7Note that for a par bond the yield to maturity equals the coupon. Note
also that in the presence of taxes the law of one price need not imply (2)
or (3). McCulloch's [1975b] formula for r (t,T) collapses to (3) if the
income tax rate is zero.                 p


                                        12
                                                                 we can adopt
not directly observed in any market. Since r(t.t) —
                                                       rd(t,t)
the simpler notation rt to refer to this instantaneous rate of interest. L:

the other extreme is, r(t1a) the limit of r(tT) as T approaches . This

is the consol or perpetuity yield, which is just the inverse of the integra.

of pd(t,5) from s—t to s—.8



111.4. Estimates of the Term Structure

     At any point of time t ,      there will be an array of outstanding bnth

differing by term, m —   T-t   ,
                                   and by payment streams. Of course, not all

possible times to maturity will be observed on available bonds at any givefl

time t , and for some terms there will be more than one bond available.

There has long been interest in estimates of rates of interest on stand.ard

bonds in terms of a standard list of times to maturity, interpolated from

the rates of interest on bonds of those maturities that are actively trade.

      The U. S. Treasury reports constant maturity yields for its own

securities,   that appear regularly in the Federal Reserve Bulletin. SaThmoL

Brothers (1983) provides yield curve data for government bonds of a wid-e

range of maturities. Durand (1942, and updated) provides yield curve d.ata




     8Corresponding to the consol yield, we may    also define the yield of a
discount bond of infinite term, r,(t,infinity),    defined as the limit of
rd(t,T) as T goes to infinity. Dbvig Ingersoll     and Ross (1986) have a
curious result concerning rd(t,infinity) in the    context of a state price
density model. They show that if r1(t,infinity)    exists for all t, then
r(t,infinity) r(sinfinity) with probability one when t < s. Otherse
arbitrage profits would obtain. Thus, the long term interest rate so defin
can never fall. Intuitively, this seemingly strange result follows froa the
fact that for large enough T the price p,(t,T) is virtually zero and hence
cannot decline, but will rise dramaticalTy if there is any decline in rd(t

                                         13
for corporate bonds. These data are interpolated judgznentally.9

     McCulloch used a spline interpolation method (1971),(1975b), that deals

statistically with the redundancy of bonds and deals systematically with

some differences among bonds, such as tax provisions pertaining to them.

His method produced an estimate of an after-tax discount function and from

that the price pd(t,T) of a taxable discount bond as a continuous function

of T .   Expression (1) was then used to convert this estimated function
into a function rd(t,T) .     Values of his estimated continuous function for

various values of t and T appear in Table A-l. His method allows for

the fact that, in the U. S. personal income tax law, capital gains are not

taxable until the bond is sold and that, until the 1986 tax act, capital

gains on bonds originally issued at par were taxed at a rate which was lower

than the income tax rate. He describes his function in the appendix. Other

functional forms for estimation of the term structure have been discussed by

Chambers, Carlton and Waldman (1984), Jordan (1984), Nelson and Siegel

(1985), Schaefer (1981), Shea (1984), (1985), and Vasicek and Fong (1982).

     McCulloch used his estimated Pd(t,T) to produce an estimate of the

term structure of par bond yields, using an equation differing from (3)

above only for tax effects.



111.5. Duration

     The term m —   T-t   of a bond is the time to the last payment, and is




     9Other important sources of historical data may be noted. Homer (1977)
and Macaulay (1938) provide long historical time series. Amsler (1984) has
provided a series of high quality preferred stock yields that might proxy
for a perpetuity yield in the United States, a series which is much longer
than that supplied by Salomon Brothers (1983).

                                       14
unrelated to the times or magnitudes of intervening payments s1, 2'

S1 .       Since bonds can be regarded as portfolios of discount bonds, it may

be more useful to describe bonds by a weighted average of the terms of the

constituent bonds rather than by the term of the longest bond in the

portfolio. The duration of a bond, as defined by Macaulay (1938), is such a

weighted average of the terms of the constituent discount bonds, where the

weights correspond to the amount of the payments times a corresponding

discount factor)0 The use of the discount factor in the definition implies

that terms of very long-term constituent discount bonds will tend to have

relatively little weight in the duration formula. Thus, 30-year coupon

bonds and 40-year coupon bonds have similar durations; indeed they are

similar instruments, as the payments beyond 30 years into the future are

heavily discounted and not important today relative to the coupons that come

much sooner.

      Macaulay actually gave two               different   definitions of duration that

differed in the specification of the discount factor. The first definition

of the duration of a bond of term m at time t ,                      uses the yield to
                         11
maturity of the bond:



                         E (t -      t)s.e
                                        1
                        t>t
             D(m,t) —
(4)
                                     -(t       -t)r(t,t+m)
                              Es.e
                                 1
                         ti>t


      10                                            .                  .       .   -
        Hicks (1946) independently defined Naverage period," which is equival-
ent to Macaulay's first definition of duration.


     11The second argument, t    of duratior. will be dropped below in
                                           ,


contexts where the interest rate r(t,t+m) is replaced by a constant.

                                                    15
       The second definition of duration of a bond of term m at time t

uses   prices of discount bonds as discount factors:




                             E (t. -
                         t   >t        t)sipd(tti)
(4')        D'(m,t) —
                                   E s.p (tt.)
                                            1
                                  1


        By either definition of duration, if the bond is a discount bond, then

the duration equals the term m, that is, we shall write

Otherwise, (since payments s are positive) the duration is less than the

time to maturity.

       If a bond is selling at par and coupons are paid continually,then

duration using (4) is:


                                  -mr (t,t+m)
                         1
(5)         D(mt) —           r(t,t+m)

Thus, the duration of a perpetuity whose term is infinite is l/r(t,).

       The duration using yields to maturity to discount D(m,t) is the

derivative of the log of p(t,T) ,               using (1), with respect to the yield to
                    12
maturity r(t,T)               Thus, duration may be used as an index of the "risk"

of a bond. The concept of duration has thus played a role in the literature

on 'immunization' from interest rate risk of portfolios of financial

intermediaries. A portfolio is fully immunized if there is complete cash-

flow matching, that is, if the payments received on assets exactly equal


     12This fact was used by. Hicks and was rediscovered by Samuelson (1945),
Fisher (1966), Hopewell and Kaufman (1973) and others.

                                                 16
payments paid on liabilities. When such cash-flow matching is infeasible,

portfolio managers may instead try to match the overall duration of their

assets with the duration of their liabilities. As long as the term struc-

ture makes only parallel shifts, the yields on bonds of all terms being

increased or decreased by the same amount, then duration matching will

perfectly immunize the portfolio and there is no uncertainty about net

worth. However, the term structure rarely makes a parallel shift, long- -

term interest rates being more stable than short-term interest rates, and so

duration tends to overstate the relative riskiness of long-term bonds.

Other methods of immunization have been proposed that take this into account

(see Ingersoll, Skelton and Weil (1978)).



                       13
111.6. Forward Rates

     The time t discount bond forward rate applying to the interval from

t' to T ,                   alluded to in Section II. above, is defined in
             fd(t,t',T),
terms yields to maturity and duration in Table 1, expression 1. Using (1)

one verifies that this expression is the same as the expression given in



     13The earliest use of the term 'forward rate,' and the first indication
that it can be thought of as a rate on a forward contract that can be
computed from the term structure appears to be in Hicks (1946) (first
published (1939). Kaldor [1939] speaks of forward rates and their inter-
pretation as rates in forward contracts, but attributes the idea to Hicks.
Macaulay (1938) speaks of computing "implicit interest rates" without making
an analogy to forward contracts (p. 30). Of course, the notion that long
rates are averages of future short rates has a longer history; the earlier
authors appear not to have written of computing forward rates from the long
rates, or of showing an analogy of such rates to rates in forward contracts.
     I wrote Sir John Hicks asking if he had coined the term forward rate in
the term structure. He replied that he only remembers being influenced by a
1930 paper in Swedish by Lindahl, later published in English (1939), which
which is couched, Hicks writes, "in terms of expected rates rather than
forward rates; it is likely that the change from one to the other is my own
contribution."
                                        17
section II. above. The forward rate compounded once per h periods is

fd(t,t',T,h) —   (exp(hfd(t,t',T))l)/h
      The limit of expression (1) of Table 1 as t'          approaches T

denoted fd(t,T,T) or just f(t,T) is the instantaneous forward rate:14


(6)       f(t,T)    rd(t,T) +      (T-t)drd(t,T)/dT
or:

(7)      f(t,t+m)    rd(t,t+m) + mdrd(t,t+m)/dxn


It follows that the instantaneous forward rate follows the same relation to

the spot rate as does marginal cost to average cost. To see this relation,

think of in   as output produced and rd(t,t+m) as price of a unit of

output. As with the familiar cost curves, the instantaneous forward rate

(marginal) equals the instantaneous spot rate (average) when in equals

zero, that is, f(t,t) —
                           r   .     The forward rate is less than the spot rate

where the slope of the term structure is negative and is greater than the

spot rate where the slope of the term structure is positive. An example




     '4McCulloch, who was concerned with the effects of taxation, writes
((1975b), page 823) what appears to be a different expression for the
instantaneous forward rate. If we adopt some of the notation of this paper
this is:

              f(t,T) —   -{88(t,T)/8T)/((1-z)6(t,Tfl
where 6(t,T) is the price at time t of an after-tax dollar at time T
and z is the marginal tax rate. However, since &(t,T) —
exp((lz)(Tt)rd(t,T))       ,
                               his   formula is identical to the one shown here,
i.e., the tax rate drops out of the formula expressed in terms of rd(t,T)
The tax rate should drop out because both the interest rate rd(t,T) and
the forward rate are taxable.


                                            18
showing a term structure and forward rate curve is shown in Figure 2.15

      Solving the differential equation (7) we can show:



(8)        fd(t,t',T) —   (T-t') -l            f(t,s)ds
                                      I
                                      J   ti

Thus, the forward rate fd(t,t',T) is a simple average of the instantaneous
forward rates between t' and T

      Par bond forward rates can also be computed. These are especially

useful if one wishes to make comparisons with spot interest rates as

commonly quoted, since longer-term bonds usually trade near par. At time t

one can guarantee for oneself a par bond issued at time t' and maturing at

time T (t      t'   T) by buying at time t one discount bond maturing at

time T ,   buying discount bonds maturing continually between t' and T
whose principal accrues at rate c ,               and selling a discount bond maturing

at date t' such that the proceeds of the sale exactly equal the total

purchases made. If one then chooses c such that the number of bonds

maturing at time t' sold is 1, one will have guaranteed for oneself, in

effect, the rate of interest on a par bond at time t' maturing at T . The

par forward rate F(t,t',T) equals c or:'6


     15lnstantaneous forward rates computed using McCulloch's data for large
T-t seem to be very erratic. Vasicek and Fong (1982) have suggested that
the problem would be eliminated if McCulloch had used exponential splines
instead of the ordinary splines of his procedure, however McCulloch (1984)
has disputed whether this would solve the problem.


     16This formula for the forward rate differs slightly from that in
McCulloch ((1975b) page 825). His formula replaces          with 8(x,y)
—
  P(xy)'      and divides by (1-z) where z is the marginal tax rate. His
formula is     quite identical to the one shown here if z > 0. However, the
Volterra-Taylor linearization (like that which follows immediately in the
text) of his expression in terms of instantaneous forward rates j identical
                                                 19
                           pd(t,t) -pd(tPT)
 (9)         F (t,t',T) — __________________
              P                       rT

                                    J t,   pd,ds
Note the similarity between this expression and expression (3) for the par

spot rate, above.

       The limit of expression (9) as t' approaches T is the same as the

values given by expressions (6) or (7) above for the instantaneous discount

forward rate, hence the omission in those expressions of the d or       p sub-
script.

       It can be shown that the par bond forward rate is a weighted average of

instantaneous forward rates, where the weights are proportional to the

prices of the discount bond maturing at the date to which the instantaneous

forward rate applies:17


                           rT

(9')        F (t,t',T) —
                           J   t' Pd(t,f(t,5)ds
             P                   rT

                                J      pd(t5

This expression may be compared with the corresponding expression for

discount bonds, expression (8) above. This expression gives more weight to

instantaneous forward rates in the near future, rather than equal weight to

all forward rates as in expression (8).


to equation (10) belowand the tax rate drops out of that.


       17See McCulloch (1977).




                                              20
       Using (8) for t —   t'    and substituting for pd(t,s) in the above

expression makes Fd(t,t' ,T) a functional of f(t,s) considered as a

function of $ .      Following   Campbell (1984), (1986), this functional can be

linearized around f(t,s) —       R     using a Volterra-Taylor expansion (Volterra,

(1959). We will refer to the linear approximation to the forward rate

F(t,t',T) as f(t,t',T) .             This       is:18




(10)
           f(ttT) et't)R                    -   eTt JTe(t)f(ts)ds
        Using expression (10) and that f(t,t,T)                    r(t,T) gives us again

expression 1 in Table 1, for this forward rate in terms of par interest
              19
rates only.        The expression for forward rates on par bonds is the same              as
that on discount bonds except that duration on par bonds D(s-t) replaces

the duration on discount bonds Dd(st) ,                 s-t,   s   t', T .   It might also
be noted that expression 1, Table 1 gives the true par forward rate

F(t,t' ,T) exactly if a slightly different, but less convenient, definition

of duration is used.2°


     '8The lower case f here denotes a linear approximation to the upper
case F above. In contrast, for discount bonds the linear approximation is
no different from the true forward rate, so lower case f is used for both.
A discrete time version of (10) appears in Shiller (1979).


       '9The quality of this approximation to F(t,t' ,T)                is discussed in
Shiller, Campbell and Schoenholtz (1983). The approximation is good except
when both t'-t and T-t' are large.



     20If we use Macaulay's definition of duration using prices of discount
bonds as discount factors, (4'), and compute duration at time t of a bond
whose continuous coupon is not constant through time but at time t+i
always equals f(t,t+i) , then one finds that duration is given by:

                                                   21
111.7. Holding Period Rates

     A holding period rate is a rate of return to buying a bond (or sequence

of bonds) and selling at a later date. The simple discount bond holding

period rate hd(t,t',T), where t                t'      T, is the rate of return from

buying at time t a discount bond maturing at date T and selling it at

date t'; see Table 1, expression (2). The rollover discount bond holding

period rate hd(t,t',T) where t < T < t' is the rate of return from

buying at time t a discount bond of term in —                   T-t   ,   reinvesting   ("rolling

over") the proceeds in another in-period discount bond at time t+m ,                       and

continuing until time t' when the last in-period discount bond is sold

(Table 1, expression (3)).

     The par bond holding period rate H(t,t',T) where t                         t'      T is the

yield to maturity on the stream of payments accruing to someone who buys at

time t a par bond maturing at T ,                   receives   the stream of coupons between

t' and T ,    and sells the bond at time T .                   This   holding period rate can

be defined as an implicit function of the coupon on the bond r(t,T) and

the selling price, which in turn is a function of r(t' ,T) as well as the

coupon r(tT) .         This implicit function may be linearized around
H(t,t',T) —   r(t,T)       —   r(t',T)   — R    to yield the approximate h(t,t',T)




                       t+m

         D'(m) —            p (t,s)ds
                   J         d
                       t

Using expression (9) (and the fact that F (t,t,T) — r (t,T) ) one finds
that F (t,t',T) equals the right hand sine of Table ?, expression 1 where
the aboe D'(m) replaces D(in)


                                                22
shown in Table 1, expression (2).21 The rollover par bond holding period

rate H(t,t' ,T)     ,
                        t < T < t' is the yield to maturity on the stream of
payments accruing to someone who buys at time t a par bond maturing at

time T — t+m    ,   reinvests   proceeds in a par bond maturing at time t+2m

and continues until time t' when the last par bond is sold. The linear

approximation h(t,t',T) appears in Table 1, expression (3).

                        IV. Theories of the Term Structure

IV.l Expectations Theories of the Term Structure

     The expectations hypothesis, in the broadest terms, asserts that the

slope of the term structure has something to do with expectations about

future interest rates. The hypothesis is certainly very old, although it

apparently did not receive an academic discussion until Fisher (l896).22

Other important early discussions were in Fisher (1930), Williams (1938)

Lutz (1940) and Hicks (1946). The expectations hypothesis probably derives

from observing the way people commonly     discuss   choices between long and

short debt as investments. They commonly speak of the outlook for future

interest rates in deciding whether to purchase a long-term bond rather than

a short-term bond as an investment. If interest rates are expected to

decline, people may advise "locking in" the high long term interest rate by


        21The quality of this linear approximation to H(t,t',T) is generally
quite
        good; see Shiller, Campbell and Schoenholtz (1983) and Campbell
(1986).

     22Fisher (1896) appears to say that the market has perfect foresight
(p. 91). I have been unable to find any earlier discussion of the expecta-
tions theory of the term structure. Bohm-Bawerk (1891) discussed how
expectations of future short rates affect today's long rate, but appears to
conclude that the term structure is always flat (p. 280). Perhaps there is a
hint of the expectations theory in Clark (1895), p. 395. Malkiel (1966)
claims (p. 17) that "one can find anticipations of the expectations theory"
in Sidgwick (1887) and Say (1853). In reading any of these works, one is led
to conclude that the hint of the expectations theory is very slight.
                                          23
buying a long-term bond. If everyone behaves this way, it is plausible that

the market yield on long-term interest rates would be depressed in times

when the short rate is expected to decline until the high demand for

long-term interest rates is eliminated. Thus, relatively downward sloping

term structures are indicative of expectations of a decline in interest

rates, and relatively upward sloping term structures of a rise.

       Early term structure theorists apparently could not think of any formal

representation of the expectations hypothesis other than that forward rates

equalled actual future spot rates (plus possibly a constant).23 Early

empirical work finding fault with the expectations hypothesis for the

inaccuracy of the forecasts (Macaulay (1938), Hickman (1942), and Culbertson

(1957)) were later dismissed by subsequent writers who thought that the

issue should instead be whether the forward rates are in accord with a model

of expectations (Meiselman (1962), Kessel (1965)). Since the efficient

markets revolution in finance in the 1960's, such a model has generally

involved the assumption of rational expectations.



IV.2, Risk Preferences and the Expectations Hypothesis

       Suppose economic agents can be characterized by a representative

individual whose utility function has the simple form:



(11)       U —     u(C
                 t—0




     23Conard (1959) wrote, "I assume not only that expectations concerning
future rates are held with confidence by all investors, but also that these
expectations are realized. Only by adding this last assumption is it
possible to build a theory whose predictions can be meaningfully tested
empirically." (p. 290)

                                       24
where C is consumption at time t ,               p   is the subjective rate of time

preference, and u(C) is momentary utility or "felicity." Calling v
the real value (value in terms of the consumption good rather than money) of

any asset or portfolio of assets including reinvested coupons or dividends,

a first order condition for maximization of expected utility is that:



                                                             t < t < T
(12)       u'(C)v(t) —      Et{(l+p)ttu(Ctf)v(t*)},

       If there is risk neutrality, then u(C) is linear in C, and

u(C) — a + bC .      It   follows from (12) that:



            Ev(t')
(13)                   (l+i)
            v(t

       If the asset is a discount index bond maturing at time T, then v(t') =

       ,T) and the left-hand side of this expression is one plus the expected
Pd(t
holding return compounded every t'-t periods, i.e., it is one plus

Et(ed(ttT) -         l)/x   ,   where   x equals t'-t .       This means that under
risk neutrality expected holding period returns as computed in the left-

hand-side of (13) will be equalized, i.e., will not depend on T .             This    in

turn suggests that a particular formal expectations theory of the term

structure follows from risk neutrality. Of course, risk neutrality may not

seem a very attractive assumption, but approximate risk neutrality might be

invoked to justify the intuitive expectations hypothesis described in the

preeding section. Invoking risk neutrality to justify an expectations

theory of the term structure was done by Meiselman (1962), Bierwag and Grove

(1967), Malkiel (1966), Richards (1978) and others.

       There are, however, fundamental problems with the expectations hypothe-

                                            25
sis as derived from risk neutrality. It is not possible for all expected

holding period returns as defined in the left-hand-side of (13) to be

equalized if future interest rates are uncertain. This point was emphasized

by Stiglitz (1970), who also attributed it to C. C. von Weizsacker. If

one-period expected holding period returns are equalized for a one-period

compounding interval, then                 =Eopd(l,2)/pd(O,2) .     If two-period
expected holding period returns are equalized for a two-period compounding

interval then 1d0'2 —
                             Eo(l/pd(l,2))/pd(O,l)     .   It   follows that

Eopd(l,2) —   l/Eo(l/(pd(l,2))   .   This is a contradiction, since Jensen's

inequality states that for any random variable x that is always greater

than zero, unless x is nonstochastic, E(x) > l/E(l/x))

     For index bonds, the equation (13) implies that interest rates are

random, and that thus Jensen's inequality does not come into play (Cox,

Ingersoll and Ross (1981), LeRoy (1982a)). This can be easily seen by

substituting pd(t,t') for v(t) in (13). Since t' is the maturity date,

and the real value of the index bond at maturity is specified as v(t') — 1,

it follows that v(t') is not random. Clearly, (13) then implies that

Pd(t,t) is not random either. It will be known with certainty at any date

before t .    Thus, while risk neutrality gives us an expectations hypo-

thesis, it gives us a perfect foresight version that is extreme and uninter-

esting. It would be possible to alter the utility function (11) to allow

the subjective rate of time preference i       to   vary through time, and that

would give us a time varying yield curve. Still, we would have a perfect

foresight model and a model in which preferences alone determine interest




                                          26
         24
rates.

     Risk neutrality is of course not a terribly attractive assumpticri,

given various evidence on human behavior. The theoretical literature does

not appear to contain any argument for appealing simple restrictions on

ferences or technology that singles out for us an attractive versiofl of e

expectations hypothesis; see LeRoy (1982a) for a discussion. Cox, Ingersc.

and Ross (1981) offered two sets of assumptions other than risk neutralitr

that can produce an expectations hypothesis for the term structure: cie

involving locally certain consumption changes, the other involving state-

independent logarithmic utility. 3ut by offering such special cases they

not giving any reason to suspect that the expectations hypothesis shc.ild

taken seriously in applied work.

     Applied workers, actually, have rarely taken seriously the risk

neutrality expectations hypothesis as it has been defined in the theceti1

literature, and so the theoretical discussion of this expectations h-poth-

sis may be something of a red herring. The applied literature has defined

the expectations hypothesis to represent constancy through time of difer-

ences in expected holding returns or, constancy through time of the differ-

ence between forward rates and expected spot rates, and not that these

constants are zero. We shall see in the next section that these theores c-.

be described as assuming constancy of the 'term premia.'Campbell (l9E) h


     24Cox, Ingersoll and Ross (1981) emphasize that risk neutrality tsef
does not necessarily imply that interest rates are nonstochastic. Utity s
not concave, and investors could be at a corner solution to their maimiz-
ation problem in which (13) does not hold. However, they argued that :n tLs
case the expectations hypothesis will not generally be valid.
     LeRoy (1983) showed (correcting errors in his own papers (l982a
(1982b)) a sense in which when there is near risk neutrality," that s,
when utility functions are nearly linear, the expectations hypothesis is
approximately satisfied.

                                     27
stressed that some of the important conclusions of this theoretical litera-

ture do not carry over to the definitions of the expectations hypothesis in

the empirical literature.25

IV.3. Definitions of Term premia26

       There is little agreement in the empirical literature on definitions

of term preinia, and often term premia are defined only for certain special

cases. Here, some definitions will be adopted which are clarifications and

generalizations of definitions already commonplace. As suggested in the

discussion in the preceding section, economic theory does not give us

guidance as to how to define term premia, and so choices will be made here

to retain essential linearity, which will simplify discussion.

       The forward term premium f.(tt'T) ,            i — p,d        will be defined as

the difference between the forward rate and the expectation of the

corresponding future spot rate. Unless otherwise noted, this expectation

will be defined as a rational expectation, i.e., Et is the mathematical

expectation conditional on information available at time t .                  Thus we have:

(14)      fi(t,t'T) —    f.(t,t',T)   -
                                          Er.(t',T)    ,     t   < t' < T ,     i — p,   d



The holding period term premium h.(t,t',T) for t < t' < T will be


           Ingersoll and Ross (1981) showed that if there are fewer relevant
state variables in an economy than there are bond maturities outstanding and
if bond prices follow Ito processes, then only one version of the rational
expectations hypothesis, what they called the "local expectations hypothe-
sis," can obtain in a rational expectations equilibrium. Campbell showed
that this conclusion hinges on the assumption of a zero, not just constant,
risk premium. He also showed a sense in which the other versions of the
expectations hypothesis (which they claimed to reject as inconsistent with
rational expectations equilibrium) may not be im?ortantly different from
their local expectations hypothesis.

             of this section follows Campbell arid         Shiller    (1984) and Campbell
(1986).


                                          28
defined as the difference between the conditional expected holding period

yield and the corresponding spot rate:


(15)         h,i(t,t,T) —       Eh.(t,t',T)   -
                                                  r.(t,t')   ,   t   < t'< T ,   i — p,   d



The rollover term premium r .(t,t',m) for t < t+rn < t' will be defined

as the difference between the yield on a bond maturing at time t' and the

conditional expected holding period return from rolling over a sequence of

rn-period bonds:27


(16)                 (t,t',m)    r (t,t') - E h (t,t',t-4-m), t < t+m < t', i —           p,   d.
               r,i                i          t i


Although earlier authors did not always clearly intend rational expecta-

tions, and often used different conventions about compounding, we can

loosely identify the above definitions with definitions given by earlier

authors. Hicks (1946), who is commonly credited with first defining these

in the terni structure literature, referred to both f(tt' ,T) and

                as the "risk premium."28 Because of a subsequent liquidity

theory of interest by Lutz (1940), and analogy with the Keynes' (1936)

liquidity preference theory, the risk premium has also become known as the

"liquidity premium." In this survey, the phrase "term premium" will be used

throughout as synonymous with risk premium and liquidity premium; it is

preferred to these because the phrase does not have an association with a

specific theory of the term structure. The holding period term premium


     27Note that this risk premium has the form interest rate minus expected
holding yield,in contrast to expected holding period yield minus interest
rate in the preceding expression. This way of defining risk premia seems to
be conventional; the rate on the longer asset comes first with a positive sign.
       28
            See Hicks (1946), p. 147.
                                               29
h,i(t,t,T) is referred to as the expected "excess return" in finance

textbooks.

       From the definitions in Table 1, there are simple proportional

relations between holding period term preniia and forward rate term prernia:


(17)         hj(t,t',T) —          tD.(T-t)/D.(t'-t)    -
                                                            i)tf   .(t,t',T) if t < t' < T


We also have the following relations for the rollover term premium, where

t < t+m < t'       ,   t'-t = sm    ,   S integer:
                                             s-i
(18) t
         r,i.(t,t',m)    —    (i/D.(t'-t))
                                  1
                                              Z [D.(km+m) -   D.(km)]
                                                               1     f,i
                                                                         (t,t+km,t+kni+rn)
                                             k—O


                                         s-i
(19) Zrj(t,t',m)             (l/D.(t'-t)) E




IV.4. Early Presumptions Pertaining to the Sign of the Term premium

       Hicks (1946) thought that there was a tendency for term premia to be

positive. In this context he referred to the forward rate term premium

f,i(tt ,T)         ,   but   if this term premium is always positive then by (17)

above so must the holding period term premium h,i(t,t',T)
                                                                            and by (18) the

rollover term premium rj(t,t',m)

       Hicks' reasons to expect that term premia should be positive had their

motivation in the theory of "normal backwardation" in commodity forward

markets of Keynes (1930). Hicks wrote:29
              •   . . the forward market for loans (like the forward
             market for commodities) may be expected to have a
             constitutional weakness on one side, a weakness which


                  (1946), p. 146.

                                                   30
          offers an opportunity for speculation. If no extra
          return is offered for long lending, most people (and
          institutions) would prefer to lend short, at least in
          the sense that they would prefer to hold their money on
          deposit in some way or other. But this situation would
          leave a large excess demand to borrow long which would
          not be met. Borrowers would thus tend to offer better
          terms in order to persuade lenders to switch over into
          the long market.

     He offered no evidence (other than that on average risk premia them-

selves) that would support such a "constitutional weakness" on one side of

the forward market.

     Lutz (1940) offered a "liquidity theory of interest" that also pre-

dicted positive term premia:

             .The most liquid asset, money, does not bear inter-
          est. Securities, being less liquid than money, bear an
          interest rate which is higher the longer the maturity,
          since the danger of capital loss due to a change in the
          interest rate in the market is supposed to be the
          greater (and therefore luidity the smaller) the longer
          the security has to run.

His theory appears to ascribe term premia to own-variance, contrary to

received wisdom in finance theory today.

     Such theories were disputed by Modigliani and Sutch (1966) by merely

pointing out that it is not clearly rational for individuals to prefer to

lend short or to be concerned with short-term capital losses. If one is

saving for a child's college education 10 years ahead, it is least risky to

put one's savings in the form of a (real) 10 year bond rather than roll over

short bonds. They proposed as an alternative to Hicks' theory the "pre-

ferred habitat theory." A trader's habitat is the investment horizon he or

she is most concerned about, and that person will prefer to borrow or lend

at that term. There is a separate supply and demand for loanable funds in


     30Lutz (1940), p. 62.

                                      31
each habitat, which could give rise to any pattern of term premia. Trader's

may be "tempted out of their natural habitat by the lure of higher expected

returns"31 but because of risk aversion this will not completely level term

premia.     The idea that individuals have a single habitat must be described

as heuristic.32 The intertemporal capital asset pricing model typically

assumes maximization of an intertemporal utility function that involves the

entire future consumption stream, with exponentially declining weights, and

thus no single "habitat." However, the Modigliani-Sutch conclusion that

term premia might as well, on theoretical grounds, be positive as negative

seems now to be generally accepted.33

IV.5. Risk Preferences and Term uremia

       If the representative agent maximizes the utility function (11), and

therefore satisfies the first-order condition (12) then it follows that:34



(20)        er2nldl,r2) —           E S(r1,r2)


       31Modigliani and Sutch (1966), p. 184.

     32Cox, Ingersoll and Ross (1981) consider an economy in which all
investors desire to consume at one fixed date. They find that the risk
premium, defined as the expected instantaneous return minus the instant-
aneous interest rate, may not be lowest for bonds maturing at this date.
Still, they argue that a preferred habitat theory holds f the habitat is
defined in terms of a "stronger or weaker tendency to h.    against changes
in the interest rate." (p. 786).

        LeRoy (1982) has argued that the risk premia are likely to be
positive on theoretical grounds in a model without production, but had no
results on the sign of the risk premium when production is introduced.

       34
       To show this, use v(t') —       — 1 and v(t) —       —           —
                                 v(r2)
                       in (12) where l <
                                                      v(r1)   pd(rl,rO)
                                             so that rd(rl,r2) as welt as
exp((r2rl)rd(rl,r2))
v(r1) is known at time Tj.



                                        32
where S(r1,r2) is the marginal rate of substitution between time                and

        For equation (20), the precise definition of S(r1,r2) will depend on
r2.
whether we are dealing with index bonds or bonds whose principal is defined

in nominal terms, that is, on whether rd(rl,r2) is a real or nominal rate.

With index bonds, S(r1,r2) is defined as u,(C(r2))/(u?(C(r1))(l+)(72Tl)).

With bonds whose principal is defined in nominal terms S(r1,r2) is defined

as u'(C(r2))/u'(C(r1)) x ((T1)/(T2))/(l+)(T2nl). Here, (r) is a

commodity price index at time r, that is, the price of the consumption good

in terms of the unit of currency. Thus, S(r1,r2) is the marginal rate of

substitution between consumption at time            and consumption at time           if

the bond is an index bond and between a nominal dollar at time                 and a

nominal dollar at time          if the bond is a conventional nominal bond.36

        It follows from equation (20) for t        < t' < T   (setting (r1,r2) in (20)

as (t,t'),    (t,T)    and (t',T)) that



              -(T-t)r t,T)      —     e -(t'-t)r t,t')        -(T-t')r t',T)

 (21)
                 +
                     cov(S(t,t'),S(t' ,T))
 In order to put this in terms of the above definitions of term premia, we

use the linearization eX            (l+x) for small x to derive from the above,




(22)         f                 cov(S(t,t'),S(t',T))/(T.t')

     351t follows that increasing the uncertainty at time    about
consumption at    will, if there is diminishing marginal utility, lower
rd(Tl,r2). This point was made by Fisher (1907) p. 214.

     36Beninga and Protopopadakis (1983) describe the relation of risk premia
on nominal bonds to risk premia on index bonds.
                                              33
The term premium         d(t,t,T) depends on the covariance between the marginal

rate of substitution between t and t' and the marginal rate of substitution

between t' and T.37 If this covariance is negative, then forward rates tend

to be above expected spot rates, as Hicks originally hypothesized, and risk

the premium is positive.38 In the case of index bonds, a negative covariance

means that if real consumption should increase faster than usual between t

and t' ,   it   tends to increase less fast than usual between t' and T. In the

case of nominal bonds, the interpretation of the sign of the term premium is

less straightforward. But consider the utility function u(C)
                                                                    log(C).
Then for nominal bonds S(t,t') equals nominal consumption at time t divided

by nominal consumption at time t÷l. Then, the nominal term premium

f                would tend to be positive if it happens that when nominal

consumption increases faster than usual between t and t it tends to

increase less fast than usual between t' and T.

     One can also derive (taking unconditional expectations of (20)) an

expression like (21) for unconditional expectations:

     37                   .

       LeRoy (1984) gives an expression for the term premium defined as the
expected real j-period remrn on an i-period nominal bond minus the return
to maturity of a j-period real bond.

     38Woodward [1983] discusses term premia in terms of the serial
correlation of marginal utility of consumption rather than the serial
correlation of marginal rates of substitution. Her principal result is that
in a case where the correlation conditional on information at t between
u'(c,) and u'(cT) is negative then the sign of the term premium may be
sensitive to the definition of the premium. She defines as an alternative
definition of the term premiui, the "solidity premium" based on forward and
actual discounts. The negative correlation she defines is an unlikely
special case. Actual aggregate consumption in the United States roughly
resembles a random walk (Hall, 1978), for which the correlation she defines
is positive.

                                         34
          Ee(Tt)rd(tT) —       Ee   •(t't)rd(t,t') Ee (Tt')rd(t',T)
 (23)
                + cov(S(t,t'),S(t',T))


From which, by a linearization, we have




(24)        E(tIfd(t,t,T))    -cov(S(t,t'),S(t',T))/(T-t')



Thus, the mean tern premium         d(t,t,T) is positive if the unconditional

covariance between S(t,t') and S(t',T) is negative. Such a negative covari-

ance might be interpreted as saying that marginal utility is 'unsmooth'

between r—t and r—T. This means that when detrended marginal utility

increases between r—t and i--t' it tends to decrease between t' and T. A

positive covariance, and hence a negative term premium, would tend to occur

if marginal utility is 'smooth' between r—t and r—T.

        If the values of bonds of all maturities are assumed to be deeermiriis-

tic functions of a small number of state variables that are continuous

diffusion processes, then theoretical restrictions on risk premia beyond

those defined here can also be derived e.g. Brennan and Schwartz (1983),

Cox, Ingersoll and Ross (1981), Dothan (1978), Langetieg (1980), Marsh

(1980), Richard (1978) and Vasicek (1978). When bond values are such

deterministic functions of diffusion processes, if the restrictions did not

hold there would be riskless arbitrage opportunities. The assumption of

such a state variable representation has been convenient for theoretical

models. It has even led to a complete general equilibrium model of the term

                                          35
structure in a macroeconomy, Cox, Ingersoll and Ross (1985a), (l985b), a

model subjected to empirical testing by Brown and Dybvig (1986).



                  V. Empirical Studies of the Terni Structure

V.1 Empirical Expectations Hypotheses for the Term Structure

     One need not assume rational expectations to proceed with studying an

expectations theory of the term structure if one has data on expectations or

can infer expectations from other data. The first study of the term struc-

tures using an expectations model was performed by Meiselman (1962).

Meiselman proposed the "error learning hypothesis" that economic agents

revise their expectations in proportion to the error just discovered in

their last period expectation for today's one-period rate. This hypothesis

then implies that f.(t,t+n,t+n+l)-f.(t-l,t+n,t+n+l) — a           +   b(r(t,t+l)   -



f.(t-l,t,t+l)).   He estimated a and b by regression analysis using U. S.

Durand's annual data l9Ol-51 for n — 1, 2, .     .   .   , 8.   I-fe took as

encouraging for the model that the signs of the estimated b were all

positive and declined with n. However, Buse (1967) criticized his

conclusion, saying that ".   .. .such results are implied by any set of smoothed
yield curves in which the short-term interest rates have shown a greater

variability than long-term interest rates."

     It was pointed out later by Diller (1969) and Nelson (1970a) that the

error learning principle is a property of optimal linear forecasts. They

found that the coefficients b that Meiselman estimated compared rather
                               n
favorably with the coefficients implied by an estimated linear forecasting

equation. However, the univariate form of the error learning principle

proposed by Meiselman applies only to univariate optimal linear forecasts


                                        36
(Shiller (1978)), and thus the Meiselman theory is unfortunately restric-

tive.

        Other authors have used survey expectations data for market expecta-

tions of future interest rates. Survey methods seem particularly attractive

since surveys can be focussed on the institutional investors who hold most

government and corporate bonds, and who are probably not well-described in

terms of the expected utility of consumption models described in the

preceding section.

        B. Friedman (1979) used data 1969-78 from a quarterly survey of

financial market participants by the Goldsniith-Nagan Bond and Money Market

Letter. He found that the term premium on U. S. treasury bills d(t,t+l,t+2)

and d(t,t+2,t+3) (where time is measured in months) was positive on average

and depended positively on the level of interest rates. He showed (1980c)

that his model differed substantially from a rational expectations model, in

that the survey expectations could be improved upon easily. Kane and Malkiel

(1967) conducted their own survey of banks, life insurance companies and

nonfinancial corporations to learn about the relation of expectations to the

term structure of interest rates. They learned that many investors seemed

not to formulate specific interest rate expectations (especially for the

distant future) and those that did did not have uniform expectations. Kane

(1983) found using additional Kane-Malkiel survey data 1969-72 that term

premia appear positively related to the level of interest rates.

V.2.    The Rational Expectations Hypothesis in Enmirical Work

         Although the rational expectations hypothesis regarding the term


     39See Board of Governors [1985], pp. 20 and 54. Of course, individuals
ultimately have claims on the assets of these institutions; still there is
an institutional layer between them and the bonds held on their behalf.

                                         37
structure has had many forms, it has its simplest form used in empirical

work in terms of the continuously compounded yields discussed here. Often,

the other forms of the hypothesis do not differ importantly from that

discussed here (see Shiller, Campbell and Schoenholtz (1983), Campbell

(1986)). In the definition to be used here, the rational expectations

hypothesis is that all term premia: h(t,t+n,t±m+n) ,        0 < m ,    0 < n

'f .(t,t+n,t+m-4-n) ,   0 < m, 0 < n r .(t,t+n,m) ,   0 < m < n ,     do not

depend on time t.4° This means that all term premia depend only on

maturity and not time, and the changing slope of the term structure can onl7

be interpreted in terms of the changing expectations for future interest
         41
rates.

     The literature testing forms of the rational expectations hypothesis

like that defined here is enormous.42 It is difficult to summarize what we

know about the expectations hypothesis from this literature. We are studyir

a two-dimensional array of term prernia; term premia depend on m (the


     40When dealing with par bonds, the expectations model defined here
relates to the linearized model. The assuiption here is that the point of
linearization R does not depend on the level of interest rates, otherwise
the model will not be linear in interest rates.

     41Note that in this expectations hypothesis, stated in terms of
continuously compounded yields, it is possible for all risk premia to be
zero. We do not encounter the Jensen's inequality problem alluded to above
in connection with risk neutrality. The problem alluded to by von
Weizsaecker and Stiglitz was essentially one of compounding, and is
eliminated when we couch the model in terms of continuously compounded
interest rates.


     42The literature has to do almost entirely with nominal interest rates.
as an observed term structure of index bonds is observed only for brief
periods in certain countries. Campbell and Shiller (l986b) in effect looked
at the real term structure in the postwar United States corporate stock
price data by correcting the dividend price ratio for predictable changes i
real dividends, leaving a long-term real consol component of the dividend
price ratio. The expectations hypothesis was not supported by the evidence.

                                               38
maturity of the forward instrument and n (the time into the future that the

forward instrument begins). Term premia may be approximately constant for

some m and n and not for others; certain functions of term premia may be

approximately constant and not others. Term premia may be approximately

constant for some time periods and not others, or in some countries and not

others.

     Testing for the constancy of term premia ultimately means trying to

predict the right hand side of the equations defining terni premia (equations

(14), (15) or (16) above) from which the conditional expectations operator

   is deleted, in terms of information at time t. This means predicting

either excess holding period returns or the difference between forward rates

and corresponding spot rates in terms of information at time t. Because of

the relations between the definitions of term premia (equations (17), (18),

or (19) above) it does not matter whether the regression has excess holding

yields or the difference between forward rates and corresponding spot rates

as the variable explained; the difference has to do only with a multipli-

cative constant for the dependent variable. Of course, most studies do not

use the exact definitions of term prenlia defined here, in terms of continu-

ously compounded rates or, in the case of par bonds, linearized holding

yields, but the differences in definition are generally not important.

     Some studies may report some tests of the rational expectations

hypothesis that have the appearance of something very different; for

example, Roll (1970) tested (and rejected using 1-13 week U. S. treasury

bill data 1949-64) the martingale property of forward rates by testing

whether changes in forward rates fd(t,t'T) -
                                               fd(tl,t',T)   are serially

correlated through time t. But in fact testing the hypothesis that there is


                                      39
no such serial correlation is no different from testing the hypothesis that

changes in the difference between forward rates and corresponding spot rates

cannot be predicted based on information consisting of past changes in

forward rates. For another example, some researchers have noted that for

large m and small n the holding return h.(t,t+n,t+m) is approximately equ.a.

to r.(t,t+m)-r.(t+n,t+n+m), the change in the long rate, divided by D.(n).

If n is very small, l/Di(n) is a very large number, and the excess holding

return is heavily influenced by the change in the long rate. The rational

expectations hypothesis thus suggests that r.(tt+m)-r(t+nt+n+m) is

approximately unforecastable, and hence that long rates are in this sense

approximately random walks. The random walk property for long-term interest

rates was tested by Phillips and Pippenger (1976), (1979), Pesando (1981),
                              43
(1983), and Mishkin (1978).

     Of all the studies of the rational expectations hypothesis for the teri

structure, of greatest interest are the results in which the explanatory

variable is approximately (or approximately proportional to) the spread

between a forward rate f(tm.n) and the spot rate of the same maturity as

the forward rate, r.(t,t-i-m). This spread forecasts the change in r.(t,t+ni)

over the next n periods. Regressions in the literature that can be inter-

preted at least approximately as regressions of the actual change in spot

rates r.(t+n,t+m+n) -   r.(t,t+m)   on the predicted change f.(t,m,n)-r.(t,t+n



     43The random walk property is an approximation useful only under
certain assumptions (see Mishkin (1980), Begg (1983)). Phillips and
Pippenger (1978) (1980) used the random walk approximation to assert that
the Modigliani-Sutch (1966) and Modigliani and Shiller (1973) distributed
lag regressions explaining the long rate must be spurious. Looking at the
out-of sample fit of the equation does not suggest that term-structure
equations like that in Modigliani-Shiller are completely spurious: see And:
and Kennickell (1983).

                                         40
and a constant are shown in Table 2.

     What is clear front Table 2 is that the slope coefficient is quite far

below one - and often negative -      for   low forecast horizon n, regardless of

the maturity in   of   the forward interest rate, but rises closer to one for

higher n. This result may at first seem counterintuitive. One might have

thought that forecasts into the near future would be more accurate than

forecasts into the more distant future; the reverse seems to be true.

     When both n are in are small, both less than a year or so, the slope

coefficients are positive (the right sign) but substantially lower than one.

Thus, for example when two month interest rates exceed one month rates by

more than the average term premium ri(t2l) the one month rate does tend

to increase as predicted, but by substantially less than the predicted
          44
amount.

     The results in Table 2 look especially bad for the rational expecta-

tions hypothesis when the forecast horizon n is small (a year or less in the

Table) and the maturity of the forward rate m is large (20 or more years in

the Table). Here, the spread between the forward rate and spot rate

predicts the wrong direction of change of interest rates. One might

consider it the "essence" of the rational expectations hypothesis that art

unusually high spread between the forward rate and current spot rate

portends increases in interest rates, not the decrease as observed.

     It is helpful in interpreting this result to consider a caricature, the


     44          .
                                                                Since such
          Regressions for large n and small m are not in Table 2.
forward rates are very sensitive to rounding error or small noise in the
long term interest rates, we cannot accurately measure such forward rates.
     Some more favorable results for the expectations theory with small n
were reported in Shiller (198la); however these results were later found to
be related to a couple anomalous observations (Shiller Campbell and
Schoenholtz (1983)).

                                            41
case of a perpetuity (for which m —   ) paying   coupon c once per period, and

where, for simplicity, the term premium is zero. Then the price of the

perpetuity p(t,) equals coupon over yield c/r(t,,l), and the spread

between the one-period-ahead forward consol yield and the one-period spot

rate is proportional to the spread between the consol yield and the one-

period rate. When the consol yield is above the one-period interest rate

r(t,t+l,l) then its current yield c/P(t) is greater than the one-period

rate r(t,t+l,l). This would suggest that consols are then a better invest-

ment for the short run than is short debt. Since the rational expectations

hypothesis with zero term premium would deny this, it follows that the

consol yield r(t,c,l) should be expected to increase over the next period,

producing a decline in price, a capital loss that offsets the high current

yield. But, in fact when the consol yield is high relative to the short

rate the consol yield tends to fall subsequently and not rise.45 The

capital gain tends to augment rather than offset the high current yield.

The naive rule that long bonds are a better investment (in an expected value

sense) whenever long rates are above short rates is thus confirmed.

     Froot (1987) attempted a decomposition of the departure from 1.00 of

the coefficient in Table 2 here into two parts: a part due to expectation

error and a part due to time-varying term premium. He used used survey data

published in the investor newsletter Reporting on Governments (continuing

the Goldsmith-Nagan data series) to represent expectations. He found that

for three-month ahead forecasts of three-month rates, the departure from


     45That long rates tend to move opposite the direction indicated by the
expectations theory was first noted by Macaulay (1938): "the yields of bonds
of the highest grade should fall during a period when short rates are
higher than the yields of bonds and rise during a period in which short
rates are the lower. Now experience is more nearly the opposite." p. 33.

                                       42
1.00 is due primarily to time-varying term premium. But for forecasts of

changes in 30-year mortgage rates, expectations error bears most of the

blame for the departure of the coefficient from i.oo.46

V.3 The Volatility of Long-Term Interest Rates

     According to the rational expectations theory of the term structure, n-

period interest rates are a weighted moving average of one-period interest

rates plus a constant term premium; that is, from (16) and Table

                                 1
(25) r.(t,t+m)
       1
               — D       (in)   E (D.(k+l)-D (k))E r.(t+k,t-i-k+1)
                                            i      ti              +   in
                                k—01
                                          i —    p,d.

Where           r,i (t,t+m,1) is constant through time. Since long moving

averages tend to smooth the series averaged, one might expect to see that

long rates are a very smooth series. Are long-term rates too "choppy"

through time to accord with the expectations theory? It is natural to

inquire whether this is so, and, if so whether it is possibly related to the

poor results for the expectations hypothesis that were obtained in the Table

2 regressions.

        Because of the choppiness of long-term interest rates, short-term

holding returns on long-term bonds, which are related to the short-term

change in long-term interest rates, are quite variable. Culbertson (1957),

in his well-known critique of expectations models of interest rates, thought

the volatility of holding yields was evidence against the model. He showed


     46See Froot (1987) Table 3. Note that his regressions are run in a
slightly different form than in Table 2 here, but that our Table 2
coefficients can be inferred from his.
        47
             For par bonds, it is necessary to evaluate D (k) with (5) using a
                            .




fixed point of linearization r, so that (25) will b linear in interest rates.

                                            43
a time-series plot of holding yields on long bonds and, noting their great

variability, remarked "what sort of expectations, one might ask, could
                                                     48
possibly have produced this result?"

       It is possible, using the expectations hypothesis, to put limits on the

variability of both long-term interest rates themselves and on short-term

holding returns on long-term debt. The expectations hypothesis implies that

r.(t,t-i-m) —                           ÷     where r1*(t,t+m) is the "perfect foresight" or
                     Etr.*(t,tIm)
"ex post rational" long-term interest rate defined as:


(26)
                 *
            r. (t,t-fm) —       D.(m)
                                        1ml
                                          E(D.(k+l)D.(k))Er.(t+k,t+k+l)            i —   p,d.
             1                   1
                                            k—01
It follows that r.*(t,t+ni) —
                          1
                                             r.(t,t+m)
                                               1
                                                          +
                                                              m+ umwhere    unit is a forecast
error made at time t and observed at time t+m. Since u                           is a forecast
                                                                           nit

error, if forecasts are rational u cannot be correlated with anything

known at time t; otherwise the forecast could be improved. Hence u must
                                                                                           nit

be uncorrelated with r.(t,t-4-ni). Since the variance of the sum of two

independent variables is the sum of their variances it follows that

Var(r.*(t,t+m)) —             Var(r.(t,t+m))       + Var(u) and since Var(u) cannot be

negative, the rational expectations model implies (Shiller (l979):


                                                     *
(27)                   Var(r.(t,t+rn))         Var(r. (t,t+rn)) 1 —   p,d


so there is an upper bound to the variance of rn-period rates given by the

variance of r.*(t,t.+m). One can also put an upper bound to the variance of

       48
            Culbertson (1957), p. 508.

       49LeRoy and Porter (1981) also noted this inequality in a different
context.


                                                       44
the holding period return in terms of the one-period rate (Shiller (1981a)):



(28)            Var(h.(tt+l,t+m))    (D(m)/D(l))Var(r(tt+l))      i —   p,d


where in the case i—p of par bonds D(m) and D(l) are computed from equation

(5) above with interest rate 2r where r is the point of linearization.

       Both of the above inequalities were found to be violated using U.S.

data and m of 2 or more years (Shiller (1979), (1981a), (1986),

Singleton (1980b)). Their rejection could have either of two interpreta-

tions: The rational expectations hypothesis could be wrong, in such a way

as to make long rates much more volatile than they should be. Or, the

measures of the upper bound in the inequalities could be faulty: the

measures of Var(r(t,t+m)) or Var(r.(t,t+l)) could understate the true

variance.

       The latter view of the violation of the inequalities was argued by

Flavin (1983) who showed with Monte-Carlo experiments that if the one-period

interest rate r..(t,t+l) is a first order autoregressive process with

autoregressive parameter close to one (see the next section) the inequali-

ties are likely to be violated in small samples even if the rational

expectations model is true. Such a process shows a great deal of

persistence, and r.(t,t+l) may thus stay on one side of the true mean

throughout the sample thus, the sample variance around the sample mean of

r.(t,t+l) or of r(t,t+m) may be strikingly downward biassed measure of

their true variance.

       Flavin's is apparently a viable interpretation of the excess volatility

results. The volatility tests do not allow us to tell whether there is too


                                       45
much variability in long rates or just nonstationarity in short rates. They

   allow us to reject the idea that movements in long rates can be inter-

preted in terms of rational expectations of movements in short rates within

the range historically observed.

V.4 Encouraging Results for the Rational Expectations Hvtothesis

       It does not follow from the Table 2 results with small n that the

spread between very long-term interest rates and short-term interest rates

is totally wrong from the standpoint of the expectations hypothesis. One

way of summarizing the relatively good results (Shiller [1986]) for this

spread for larger n is to compute both actual and perfect foresight spreads

between very long-term interest rates and short-term interest rates.

Defining the spread S.(m) —        r.(t,t+m)   -
                                                   r(tt+l)   (in integer > 1) then the

rational expectations hypothesis implies:

(29)        S.(In) —   ES(m)   +          i — p,d
(30)
            St(m)      ri*(t,t±m) -   r.(t,t+l)
                              *                              *
From the definition (26) of r. (t,t+m), it can be shown that S.(m) is the

duration weighted average of expected changes in the n-period rate.

Equation (29) thus asserts that when long rates are high relative to short

rates the weighted average of increases in short rates should tend to be

high. The values of Sd(m) and Sd(m) are plotted for m—l0 in figure 4 for

those years for which data are available in the appendix. The correspon-

dence between Sd(m) and Sd(m) is apparent. This might be viewed as a

striking confirmation of some element of truth in the expectations hypothe-

sis. Moreover, a variance inequality analogous to (28) above is that

var(S(m)) Var(S(m)). This variance inequality is satisfied by the data.

This result does not by itself establish whether or not Flavin's view of t-.e

                                           46
variance inequality violation described in the preceding section is
           50
correct.

     One must consider, though, whether this apparent confirmation of the

expectations theory for large m cou.d also be described in a less inspiring

way: as reflecting largely just that the long rate is much smoother than

the short rate. In fact, the correspondence in postwar U. S. data between

S(l0,l) and Std(lO,l) would still be apparent if the long rate r(t,t-4-l0)

had been a simple trend through the path of short rates. Short-term

interest rates have shown an apparent tendency to revert to trend, thus a

duration weighted average of future changes in the short rate is approxi-

mately minus the detrended short rate.

     It was shown by Modigliani and Shiller [1973] and Shiller [1972]

(following Sutch [1967]) that a regression of a long rate on a distributed

lag of short rates produces distrib..ted lag coefficients that crudely

resembled the "optimal" distributed lag coefficients implied by an autore-

gression in first differences for the short rate. Similarly a regression of

the long rate on a distributed lag of short rates and a distributed lag of

inflation rates is consistent with a vector autoregression in first differ-

ences using the short rate and the inflation rate.51 The basic principle

     50                             *
          Indeed, even if S(m) and S.(m) look good by this criterion, there
could be some small noise contai.inafing S .(in) which, if the noise is not
highly serially uncorrelated, could cause*olding period yields to be much
more volatile than would b implied by the expectations model. Moreover, the
appearance of S.(m) and S.(m) may also be relatively little affected by a
gross overstatement of the variability of r.(t,t+m), so long as it is
substantially less variable than the short ate. See Shiller (1986).


     51Distributed lag regressions explaining the term structure have had
different functional forms: see for example Bierwag and Grove (1967),
Cargill and Meyer (1972) or Malkiel (1966). A comparison of eight different
distributed models of the term stru:ture is in Dobson, Sutch and Vanderford

                                        47
of these analyses can be illustrated by assuming for simplicity here (as in

Flavin) that the short rate r (t,t+l) follows a first-order autoregressive

process around a mean i:                   -
                                               p—                 -
                                                                      p) +     0 <    A
                              r(t+l.t+2)             A(r(t1t+l)                           1,

where     is a realization of a random variable with zero mean independent of

tk k"O. The optimal forecast at time t           of   r(t+k)t+k-i-l) is:



(31) Er(t+k,t-4k+l) — p +         Ak(r(t,t+l)p).

From (25) and (5) for m —         and i — p the consol yield is given by:



                              k
(32) r(t,t+cc) —     (l-7)Z       Er (t,t+l) +   •

where 'y e and r is the point of linearization. Thus, the consol yield

is a sort of present value of expected future one period rates. Together,

(31) and (32) imply:

(33) r (t,t+o)
       p
                 —
                     (1-7)
                              r (t,t+1) + 'i'.
                     (l-7A)

One can therefore evaluate the rational expectations model by first

regressing r (t+l,t+2) on r(tt+l) and a constant (i.e. estimating A in

31), and computing the theoretical coefficient of r(t) using (33). This

theoretical coefficient can be compared with the slope coefficient in a

regression of r(t, t+co) onto r (t,t-i-l) and a constant. Now, in fact, our

assumption that r (t,t+l) was forecast by the market according to (31) would

imply that (33) should hold without error. However, it can be shown that

whether or not r(t,t+l) is an AR-l process if                                is the


(1976).

                                           48
optimal forecast of r(t+kt+k+l) conditional on an information set that

includes r(t,t+l), then a theoretical regression of r (t,t+a) on r(t,t+1)

and a constant should produce the coefficient (l--y)/(1---1A), where A is the

slope coefficient in a theoretical regression of r (t+l,t+2) on r(t,t+l),

(Shiller [19721). With this assumption, there is an error term in (33)

reflecting information held by market participants beyond r(t,t+l).

Comparing such estimated coefficients using more complicated autoregression

models was the method used in the aforementioned papers.

     Note that if y and A are both near one, then (l-y)/l--1A) may be very

sensitive to A. When data are limited, we cannot tell with much accuracy

what A is, and hence cannot pin down what is the value of (l-7)/(l-7A).

Thus, we cannot say with much assurance whether the consol yield in fact is

or is not too volatile.

     Such simple comparisons of estimated coefficients are not formal tests

of the rational expectations model. Rather, they are indications of the

"fit" of the model. If we are given data on a consol yield r(t,cx) and the

one period rate r(t,l), then a likelihood ratio test of all restrictions of

the model (except for a restriction implied by the stationarity of

amounts to nothing more than a regression of the excess return h(t,t+1,) -

 r(t,t+l)   —   (r(t,')   -
                              yr (t+l,))/(l-y)   -   r   (t,t+l) on information at time

t. (Shiller (l98la)), Campbell and Shiller (1986a)).

     Note that such tests may not have much power to determine whether long

rates are too volatile to accord with market efficiency. Suppose, for

example, that the short rate r(t,t+l) is a first-order autoregressive

process as above, and suppose that the long rate overreacts to the short

rate, r(t,c)-.    (p44) + b(r (t,l)-p) where b > (l-y)/(l-A). Then the excess

                                           49
holding return h (t,t+l,u)-r (t,t+l), defined as (r(t) -       -y   r(t+l,cc))/l-

1 - r(t,t+l),    is equal (up to a constant) to   (c-l)r (t,t+l) —
                                                        p            -



 r(tt+2)        where c   b/(l-y). If -y is close to one and c large, then this

excess return is approximately proportional to b, and changing b would do

little more than scale it up or down. If the excess return is not very

forecastable for one b, it is likely also to be not very forecastable for

another b. Then, a regression of excess holding returns on the short rate

may have little power to detect even major departures of b from (1-)/(1-



     Tests of the rational expectations model are not so straightforward

when using data on a single long rate that is not a consol yield and a short

rate. Sargent (1979) showed how, using a companion-form vector autore-

gression, it is readily possible to test the restrictions implied by the

rational expectations model even with such data. He was unable to reject

these restrictions on the vector autoregression of long and short rates

using a likelihood ratio test. However, it was later discovered that

Sargent's paper did not test all restrictions, and when the additional

restrictions were incorporated into the analysis, the hypothesis was

rejected (Hansen and Sargent (1981), Shiller (l98la)). These rejections,

however, do not deny the similarity between actual and optimal distributed

lag coefficients. Campbell and Shiller (l986a) used a cointegrated vector

autoregressive framework, where the vector contained two elements, the long

rate and the short rate, and confirmed both that the rational expectations

model is rejected with a Wald test and that the model is of some value in

describing how long rates respond to short rates and their own lagged

values.

     There is also some evidence that the relation of long rates to lagged
                                       50
interest rates changes approximately appropriately when the stochastic

properties of interest rates change. It was shown by Shiller (1985) that

such a correspondence between the distribution lag coefficients holds up

crudely speaking even when one uses 19th century U.S. data, or 19th or 20th

century British data. In the 19th century in Britain, for example, short

rates appeared to be sharply mean reverting, so that long rates should have

been nearly constant: indeed the distributed lag regressions of the British

consol yield on the short rates showed sharply reduced coefficients relative

to the 20th century coefficients in a distributed lag regression of long

rates on short rates. Mankiw, Miron, and Weil (1986) found an abrupt, and

they interpreted appropriate, given the rational expectations model, change

in the distributed lag coefficients, at the time of the founding of the

Federal Reserve.

     How is it then that the forward-spot spread f(t,t+m, t+m+n) -       r(t,t+m)
seems to predict well only for large n and not small n? Faina and Bliss

(1986) interpreted this finding as reflecting the fact that interest rates

are not very forecastable into the near future, but better forecastable into

the more distant future. He gave as an example the story of AR-l Model

described in connection with equations 31 - 33 above. The expectation as of

time t   or   the change r(t+n,t+n+l) -   r(t,t+l)   is (ynl)(r(t,t+l)i). For -y

close to, but below, one, the variance of the expected change is quite small

for small n, and grows with n. Thus, for small n any noise in the term

premium might swamp out the component in the forward spot spread

F(t,t+n,t+m+n) -     r(t,t+m)   that is due to predictable change in interest

rates.

V.5. Interpreting Departures from the Expectations Theory


                                           51
     Of course, as a matter of tautology, the fact that the coefficients in

Table 2 do not all equal one has something to do with time-varying term

premia. But the nature of the time varying term premia has not been given

an ample description for all n and in.

     One story for the negative coefficients in Table 2 for large in   (   20

years) and small n ( one year) is that there might be noise in term premia

on long-term interest rates unrelated to short-term interest rates. The

noise might be due to exogenous shift to investor demand, or even to

changing fashions and fads in investing. Suppose, for example, that this

"noise" is serially uncorrelated, as though it were due to an error in

measuring long-term interest rates.52 Consider for simplicity consols, m,

for which f(t,t+n,) -   r(t,) (D(n)/(D() D(n))(r(t,) r(t,n)).
                                 —                 -               -


If one regresses r(t+n,') - r(t,) on this then one has r(t,) on both
sides of the equation with opposite signs. Thus, any "noise" in r(tco)

might give a negative slope coefficient in the regression.

     This simple story about extraneous noise like measurement error in long

rates, while suggestive, is not completely adequate in explaining the wrong

signs in the Table 2 regressions for large in   the and small n. If the
problem were just exogenous noise in long rates then an instrumental

variables approach to the estimation of the above regressions with economic

variables as instruments would correct the wrong sign; yet it does not



     52Just as well, the wrong signs in some regressions could be due to
measurement error in interest rates, a point considered and rejected as the
main explanation for the wrong signs by Shiller (1979) and Mankiw (1986).
However, measurement error is taken more seriously by Stambaugh (1986) and
Brown and Dybvig (1986). The latter needed measurement error to study the
one-factor version of the Cox-Ingersoll-Ross model because without it there
would be a perfect dependence among the interest rates of different
maturity.

                                         52
(Mankiw (1986).

      A different story for the wrong sign in the regression is that long

rates do not react properly to short rates. The distributed lag regressions

noted above of long rates on short rates, while similar to the distributed

lag implied by an autoregressive forecasting regression for short rates, are

not quite the same. In fact, the distributed lag coefficient of long rates

on short rates tend to show too simple a pattern, like a simple exponential

decay pattern instead of a relatively choppy pattern seen in the optimal

responses of long rates to short rates implied by the forecasting equation

(Shiller (1985)). This result might come about because people who price

long bonds tend to blur the past somewhat in their memories, or because

people use a simple "conventional" pricing rule for long bonds.53



V.6 Seasonality and Interest Rates

      The above discussion suggests that the expectations hypothesis works

best when interest rate movements are well forecastable. With many economic

variables seasonal movements are forecastable far into the future. If there

is any seasonality in interest rates, one would expect to see a seasonal

pattern to the term structure. We would not expect that long rates and short

rates should show the same seasonal pattern, that is, reach their highest

point in the same month. Instead, the expectations theory would predict a

phase shift between long and short rates. Macaulay (1938) investigated

whether this occurred using data on call money and time rates 1890 to 1913,


         Keynes (1936) said that the long rate is highly conventional . .
its actual value is largely governed by the prevailing view as to what its
value is expected to be." The idea here is apparently that a simple rule of
thumb used to price long-term bonds may become validated when market prices
appear to follow the rule.

                                       53
and concluded that there was "evidence of definite and relatively successful

forecasting,"54 for seasonal movements, though not for movements other than

seasonals.

        Sargent (1971) noted that the maturity on the call rates was not well-

defined, and in fact the actual maturities of the call loans are likely to

have had a seasonality themselves. He thus sought to reproduce Macaulay's

work using more recent data for which maturity can be defined more

precisely. Sargent showed that in a perfect foresight model the simple

expectations theory for discount bonds implies that the rn-period rate

rd(t,t+m) should lead the 1-period rate rd(t,t+l) by (m-l)/2 periods across

all frequencies. He used U. S. Treasury Bill rates on one to thirteen week

bills for 1953 to 1960. He found that long rates did tend to lead short

rates at the seasonal frequencies, but by much less than the theoretical (m-

l)/2.

        The post World War II data set that Sargent used, however, contained a

much milder seasonal than was evident in the prewar data that Macaulay had

used. The Federal Reserve was founded in 1913 to "provide an elastic

currency" and this clearly meant that one of their missions was to eliminate

seasonals, which they then largely did (See Shiller (1980) and Miron (1984),

(l986)). Mankiw and Miron (1986) found a time series on pre-1913 U. S.

interest rates for which maturity was better defined, and found more

encouraging results for the expectations theory.


        54F. Macaulay, (1938), p. 36.

     55Clark (1986) questioned whether the decline in seasonality was due to
the founding of the Fed. He noted that seasonals disappeared in the United
States and other countries at about the same time, and that seasonals
disappeared approximately three years before the seasonals in currency and
high powered money changed.

                                        54
V.7 The Sign of Term Premia

    Kim (1986) investigated whether the observed terni premium between

nominal 3 and 6-month treasury bills in the United States 1959-1986 could be

reconciled with the covariance between S(t,t+3) and S(t+3,t+6) as described

by equation 22 or 24 as the theory prescribes. He used a co-integrated

vector autoregressive model for the two log interest rates, log consumption

and a log price index, and a lognormality assumption for the error term. He

transformed the vector with the cointegrating vector so that the transformed

vector has as elements the spread between the two log interest rates, the

change in one of the interest rates, the change in log real consumption and

the change in the log price index. For the model, the covariance in

equation 22 is constant through time. He tested the restrictions across the

mean vector, coefficient vector and variance matrix of residuals using a

Wald test. The test rejected the restrictions; on the other hand, the sign

of the term premium is as predicted by the sign of the covariance.

     Other studies of consumption and the term structure of interest rates

looked at short-term real returns on long and short bonds and their correla-

tion with real consumption changes, to see if the difference in mean real

returns between long and short bonds could be reconciled with the covariance

of real returns with real marginal rates of substitution. Grossman, Melino

and Shiller (1985) found that the excess real one-period returns between

long-term debt and short-term debt had negligible correlation with real per

capita consumption changes with annual U. S. data 1890-1981 and with U. S.

quarterly data 1953-83. They rejected at high significance levels the

covariance restrictions using a vector autoregression model including real


                                     55
returns on long-term debt, short-term debt, and corporate stocks.56

V.8. Modelling Time-Varying Term Premip

     Since the rational expectations hypothesis can be rejected, as dis-

cussed above, it follows that the term premium is time-varying. Although the

term premium is not observed itself without error, we can study its projec-

tion onto any information set by regressing the variables represented on the

right-hand-sides of the expressions defining term premia, (14), (15), and

(16) above, from which the expectations operators have been deleted, onto

information available at time t. The above discussion of the projection onto

the forward-spot spread concerns only one possible such regression.

There is no theory of the term structure well-developed enough to allow us

to predict what variables to use, so the empirical literature here often

looks like a "fishing expedition."

     Kessel (1965) regressed the forward-spot spread fd(t,t+1,t+2)

                              where the time unit is four weeks to test whether
rd(t+l,t+2) Ofl   rd(t,t+l)
term premia are related to the level of interest rates. He found using

monthly U. S. treasury bill data 1949-61 that there was a positive coeffi-

cient on rd(t,t+l). However, Nelson (l972b) using analogous methodology

found the opposite sign for the coefficient of the interest rate. Both

Kessel and Nelson gave theories why risk considerations should imply the

sign they got. Shiller (1979) in effect regressed f(t,t+1,t+in+1) -

r(t+1,t+m-4-l)   on r(t,t+m) for m very large with quarterly, monthly and

annual time periods for U. S. and U. K. history and found a consistently



     56    .         .   .                 .      .      .
       Mankiw (1986) inquired whether the time variation in the covariance
could be reconciled with time variation in the spread between long arid short
rates in the United States, Canada, United Kingdom and Germany 1961-84. He
concluded that it could not.

                                          56
positive coefficient, which was interpreted as a sign of possible excess

volatility of long-rates. Campbell and Shiller (1984) in effect found a

negative slope coefficient in a regression (in effect) of fd(t,t+l,t+24l) -

                on rd(t,t+l) where time is measured in months, and interpreted
rd(t+l,t+24l)
this result as reflecting a possible underreaction of long rates to short

rates. It is difficult to produce a useful summary of these conflicting

results.

     Other researchers have used some measure of the variability of interest

rates in such regressions. Modigliarii and Shiller (1973) and Shiller

Campbell and Schoenholtz (1983) used a moving standard deviation of interest

rates. Fama (1976), Mishkin (1982) and Jones and Roley (1983) and Bodie,

Kane and MacDonald (1984) used other measures of the variability in interest

rates. Such measures were often statistically significant. Engle, Lilien and

Robins (1987) used an ARCH model to model time-varying variance of interest

rates, and concluded that the risk premium so modelled helps to explain the

failures of the expectations theory.

     Still other variables have been used to explain time-varying term

premia. Nelson (l972b) used an index of business confidence. Shiller

Campbell and Schoenholtz (1983) used a measure of the volume of trade in

bonds. Keini and Stambaugh (1986) used a low-grade yield spread variable (the

difference between yields on long-term under-BAA-rated corporate bonds and

short-term treasury bills), and a small-firm variable (the log of the share

price, averaged equally across the quintile of smallest market value on the

New York Stock Exchange). Campbell (1987) used a latent variable model of

the returns on bills, bonds and common stocks to infer time-varying risk

premia in all three markets.


                                        57
V.9. Flow of Funds Models

      Clearly term premia do vary and are correlated with observable

economic variables. But what kind of structural model might clarify why they

vary? One might expect that when the federal government issues a large

amount   of   long term debt, the supply of long-term debt should rise and other

things equal term premia should rise. One might also expect that in time

when funds flow into life insurance companies, major purchasers of long-term

bonds, then the demand for long term debt should rise and, other things

equal, term premia should decline. Thus, the term structure might be related

to such flows of funds.57

     There was a flurry of research on the effects of government debt policy

on the term structure following the policy, brought in by the Kennedy

Administration in the U. S. in 1961, known as "Operation Twist". Operation

Twist consisted of Federal Reserve open market operations and Treasury debt

management operations directed toward shortening the average term to

maturity of outstanding public debt, with the intention of 'twisting' the

term structure.58 Okun (1963) and Scott (1965) correlated the term structure

with federal debt measures without accounting for expectations. Modigliani

and Sutch (1966), (1967) added dummy or debt composition variables to their

distributed lag regressions of long rates on short rates, but found evidence


     D7Co:iversely when the government attempts to peg the term structure,
there should be consequential flows of demand across maturities. Walker
(1954) noted that when the Federal Reserve attempted to peg an upward
sloping term structure there was a great shift out of short-term securities
into long-term securities by the holders of government debt. Such a shift is
implied by the expectations hypothesis.

     58Operation twist also involved relaxing some interest rate ceilings.
The federal debt structure during the early 1960's in fact went in exactly
the opposite direction to what was implied by operation twist, as the
Treasury's debt policy was contradicting the Fed's. See B. Friedman, (1981).

                                         58
of only a "weak" effect of national debt on the term structure. Indeed the

simple distributed lag on short rates explained long rates so well, that

there was little room for much improvement of fit using debt policy varia-
                                       .
bles. 59          .   .   .
           The Modigliani-Sutch conclusions were criticized by Wallace (1965)

for the assumption that government debt policy is exogenous over the sample

period.

     There is a substantial literature on models that relate interest rates

to such flows of funds, see for example Ando and Modigliani (1975), Brainard

and Tobin (1968), DeLeeuw (1965), Friedman (1977), (1980a), Hendershott

(1971), or Backus, Brainard, Smith and Tobin (1980). But much of this

literature makes no explicit use of expectations of future interest rates

that ought to play a pivotal role in the term structure of interest rates.

Many of the models are not complete, e. g. providing estimates of some

demands for funds, and not providing a general equilibrium that might give a

theory of the term structure.

     Friedman and Roley (1979) and Roley (1982) estimated a flow of funds

model (along lines of Friedman (1977), (l980b), and Roley (1977)) but

incorporating as determinants of the demand functions not yields to maturity

but rational expectations of short-run returns.

     Flow of funds modelling has offered the promise of estimating

consistently general equilibrium models of the determination of interest

rates, but such modelling has to date been hampered by the same problems

that have prevented any consensus on other inacroeconometric models. A lot of

subjective judgment goes into specifying the identifying restrictions,


     59B. Friedman (1977), (1981) did find a significant coefficient in a
term structure equation for a variable which was the ratio of outstanding
federal long-term securities to outstanding federal short-term securities.

                                           59
exogeneity specifications and other assumptions that lie behind a compli-

cated simultaneous equation model. Hence, there is a lot of uncertainty

about the validity of particular models.

                      VI. Some Concluding Observations

     There has been a lot of progress in our understanding of the term

structure in the last twenty years. We now have formal heuristic theoretical

models of the term structure in terms of the ultimate objectives of economic

agents and the stochastic properties of forcing variables. These models are

beginnings that have changed our way of thinking about the term structure.

We have now an extensive empirical literature describing in great detail how

the term structure is correlated with other economic variables. But we could

hope for still more progress.

     It is of course very difficult to say where the actual opportunities

for productive research lie, but it is possible to say where there are

problems to be solved.

     Theoretical work on the term structure, while it has offered many

insights, still does not allow us to say much about the term structure we

observe. Most theorists are currently using a representative individual

utility of consumption model, while most corporate and government bonds in

the United States are held by institutions. Even if institutions were

somehow behaving as if they were representative consumers, we must face the

fact that the expected present value of utility of consumption model has not

held up well in tests of the returns on assets other than bonds. Probably,

the theoretical model is just not a good descriptor of human behavior.

     Most of the theoretical work on the expectations hypothesis has worked

on the term structure of index bonds, but freely tradable true index bonds


                                     60
of varying maturity are virtually nonexistent. The theoretical literature

has tried to find justifications for a zero term premia model, while the

assumption of zero term premia has never been an issue for empirical

researchers. That term premia are not zero and change through time has not

suggested any well-posed problems for theoretical researchers working in the

current paradigm that would produce any idea as to how to expect them to

change.

     Empirical work on the term structure has produced consensus on little

more than that the rational expectations model, while perhaps containing an

element of truth, can be rejected. There is no consensus on why terni premia

vary. There does not seem even to be agreement on how to describe the

correlation of the term premia with other variables. A lot more research

could be done leading to consensus on, for example, the senses in which long

rates may be influenced by government fiscal policy, term premia are related

to some measures of risk, interest rates overreact or underreact to short

rates, or be influenced by or depend on rules of thumb or "satisficing"

behavior. Flow of funds models have some interest, but seem to have been

largely dropped by researchers in the wake of the rational expectations

revolution, just when they should have been integrated with it.




                                      61
Figure 2. The term structure of interest rates r (t,t+n) (solid line) and
the instantaneous forward rate f(t,t+n,t+n) (dased line) for the end of
August, 1978.
Source of data: Tables A-i and A-2 in Appendix by J. Huston McCulloch



Figure 3. Instantaneous Forward Rates. Data plotted are f(t-n,t,t) against
time t and horizon n. The annual data series f(t,t,t) —
                                                              rt
                                                            seen at the far
right of the surface is the instantaneous interest rate for the end of June
of each year, 1957 to 1985. Curves on surface parallel to n axis show path
through time of the 'forecast' implicit in the term structure of the
instantaneous forward rate applying to the date shown on the t axis. If
there were perfect foresight, we would expect these curves to be horizontal
straigbt lines. In the expectations theory of the term structure with zero
risk premiuni, they should be random walks. Curves on the surface parallel t
the t axis show the path through time of a forward rate of fixed forecast
horizon. Data plotted here are from Table A-2 of the Appendix by J. Fiuston
McCul loch




Fig. 4. The long-short spread StA()
and the perfet-foresight spread n) —
                                           rdtt+n) -
                                           rA(t,t+n)   -
                                                           rd(tt+l),     solid line.
                                                                          dashed
                                                            rd(t,t+n),
line, where rA(t,t+n) is the perfect foreiht n-period rate defined by
expression (2), n — 40 quarters. Thus, rd(t,t+n) — (E(r
=t,t+39)r(r,i-+l))/40. Data plotted are quarterly series for end of the firs:
month of each quarter using McCulloch's three-month and ten-year discount
bond yield series, Table A-i, Appendix. S,(n) is plotted for 1947 first
quarter to 1975 third quarter at annual rates.




                                      62
    9
                   te

1                  It
        5p0 0te



    7




                            yeOt
                        2
            mct'




                  63
                          0
                     0
                     40




               :3-
               0
               N
               0
               :3

               :3




     0
     :3

     40




0•
          '0



                          '0
                          0

                               0

                                   0p.
                                                              percent
                  •   '                 0                          —                              P..)   Pb.)    (4)   (4)
                               0
                                        0                                                         0              0
                                                 I
                                                                   0I
                  I                     1
          -oI         0I
                                                                  __)    _____,
                                                         4.

                                                         C
          —
          '0
          P..,                                   - -4,

                                                                                        - .4...




                                            1.



                                                             .1

0'
Lfl

      0   P...)
      3'                                                                                    4ç              r
          —
                                                                                   4:


                                                                                        t
                               U,                                          -- -
                                                                        )_
                                                 -—:                      -- - -
                                                                                              :a-

                           -
                                    -

           '0                                                                                                   —-
           P.,)




           '0
           '.4
           '.4
                                             Table 1.



        Formulas for Computation of Forward Rates and Holding Rates




   I. Time t forward rate applying to interval from t' to T
       t t' T


                                D.(Tt)r(tT)
                                 1          -                 D.(t'-t)r.(t,t')
                                                                      1
      (1) f.(t,t',T) —                  D.(T-t) -             D.(t'-t)

 II. Holding period rate or return from t to t' on bond maturing time
      T, t t' T


                                D.(Tt)r(tT)
                                 1          - [D.(T-t)                   -
                                                                              D.(t'-t)Jr.(t',T)
                                                                               1        1
      (2) h.(t,t',T) —
                                                               1(t'-t)



III. Holding period rate of return from t to t'                                rolling over bonds of
    term m — T-t   ,  T t' t
                        s-i
      (3) h.(t,t',T)
            1
                     — ( Z (D.(km+m) - D.(km))r.(t+km,t+km-+-m)
                                        1
                                 k—O 1           1


                               + [D.(t"-t) -         D.(sm)]h.(t+sm,t',t+sm+m))/D.(t'-t)
                                      where s =          largest      integer     (t'-t)/m




Note: In above formulas, substitute i — d for discount bonds, i — p for
par bonds. Par bond formulas give linear approximation to true rates.
Duration (from which the second argument, t , has been dropped here) is
                                                     -
                                      = (1               Rm
given by Dd(m) —       ,       D(m)          -   e            )/R ,    where      R is the point of
linearization, which might be taken as r(t,T) .                              These formulas may be
applied to data in Tables A-i and A-3.
                                                     66
                                    Table 2.

              Regressions of Changes in rn-period Interest Rates on
                     Changes Predicted by the Term Structure


                           r.(t+n,t+m+n)-r.(t,t±m) on
                     f.(t,t+n,t+m+n)-r.(t,+m) and constant

Study           Country    Sample                   n       slope   Std.
                                      (years)    (years)    Coef. Err

Shiller          U. S.    1966-77     >20.0      0.25       -5.56   1.67 .201
(1979)a
                 U. S.    1919-58      >20.0     1.00       -0.44   0.75 0.01

                 U. K.    1956-77                0.25       -5.88   2.09 0.09

Shiller,         U. S.    1959-74       0.25     0.25       0.27    0.18 0.03
Campbell
Schoenholtz      U. S.    1959-73       30.0     0.50       -1.46 (1.79) 0.02
(1983)b

Mankiw          Canada    1961-84       0.25     0.25       0.10    (0.07) 0.02
(1986)c
              W.Geruiany 1961-84        0.25     0.25        0.14   (0.07) 0.03

Fama             U. S.    1959-82       1/12     1/12        0.46   (0.07) 0.13
(1984)d
                                        1/12     2/12        0.25   (0.10) 0.02

                                        1/12      3/12       0.26   (0.12) 0.02

                                        1/12     4/12        0.17   (0.10) 0.01

                                        1/12      5/12       0.11   (0.10) 0.00

Fania and Bliss U. S.     1964-84       1.00      1.00       0.09   (0.28) 0.00
(l986)e
                                        1.00      2.00       0.69   (0.26) 0.08

                                        1.00      3.00       1.30   (0.10) 0.24

                                        1.00      4.00       1.61   (0.34) 0.48

Shiller          U. S. 1953-86          0.25    rollover*    0.61   (0.17) 0.090
(1986)

Note: Expectations theory of term structure asserts slope coefficient should be
1.00. Not all regressions summarized here were in exactly the form shown here: in
some cases a linearization was assumed to transform results to the form ShOwn
here. Significance level refers to tes of hypothesis that coefficient is 1.00.
*Dependent variable is approximately S (m,n) and independent variable Is S(ni,n) as
defined in expression 26 in text.

a.   Page 1210, Table 3, rows 1, 4 and 5,. Column 2 coefficient was converted
     using duration implicit in y given in Table 1 rows 1, 4 and 5 column 1.

b.   Page. 192, Table 3, rows 4 and 10, columns 5 and 6.

c.   Page 81, Table 9, rows 2 and 4 columns 3 and 4.

d.   Page 517, Table 4, rows 6-10, columns 1-2.

e.   Page 23, Table 3, rows 1-4, columns 3-4.

f.   Page 103.




                                      68
                                                     APPENDIX I

                                            Mathematical Symbols

D(m,t) -       Duration       of an rn-period bond at time t .                Second argument will

sometimes be omitted.

fd(t,t' ,T) - The forward discount interest rate at time t applying to the

        interval from t'            to T ,       t    t'    T .      The term of the forward instrument

        is niT-t'
F(t,t',T) - The forward par interest rate at time t applying to the interval

from     t      to T ,         t   t' s T   .    The term of the forward instrument is m = T-t'

f(t,t'       ,T) -   Linear     approximation to F(t,t' T)

hd(t,t',T) - The discount holding period return. If t                                      t'    T it is the return

from buying a discount bond at time t that matures at time T and selling it at
time t '.            If   t    T   t' ,     it   is the rate of return from rolling over discount

bonds of maturity in               T-t ,    until    time t'

H(ttT) -             The par holding period return.If t s                    t'        T   ,    it   is the return from

buying a par bond at time t that matures at time T ,                                   receiving       coupons between

t and t' and selling it at time t' .                        If   t   T        t'   ,       it   is the rate of return

from rolling over par bonds of maturity m —                       T-t    .   Until         time t'
h(t,t',T) -          Linear     approximation to H(t,t',T)
In -   the term of a bond, equal to the time to maturity T-t
p(t,T) - The price at time t of a bond that matures at time T ,                                          whose princi-

pal is 1.

Pd(t,T) - The price at time t of a discount bond that matures at time T , whose

principal       is 1.




                                                       69
r(t,T) - The interest rate (yield to maturity) at date t on a bond that natures

at date T

r(t,T,h) - The interest rate (yield to maturity), compounded every h periods, at

date t on a bond that matures at date T

rd(t,T) - The interest rate (yield to maturity) at date t on a discount bond

that matures at date T

r(t,T) - The             interest rate (yield to maturity) at date t on a par bond that

matures at date T

Si -     The amount of the th payment made on a bond, made at date t.                .       On a

         coupon bond s. — c         ,   i<T,   ST
                                                    — l+c

t - The date of the 1tF payment on a bond.
T - The date on which a bond matures.

f,i(t,t,T) - forward term premium, equal to f(t,t',T) -                  Er.(t',T)       ,         t   < t'

< T ,      i — p,       d.

h,i(t,t.T) - Holding period term premium, equal to Eh(t,t',T) -                   r.(t,t')                 ,
                                                                                                                   t
<t <T ,         i—p,         d
                    -    Rollover   term premium, equal to r.(t,t') -
                                                                        Eth.(t,t',t±m)         ,       t       <

t'   ,   t<t+m<t'            ,   i—p,d.
w - The number of payments promised by a bond when it was issued.




                                                    70
                                   References


Amsler, Christine (1984), "A 'Pure' Long-Term Interest Rate and the Demand for
Money," Journal of Economics and Business, 36: 359-70.

Ando, Albert, and Arthur Kennickell, "A Reappraisal of the Phillips Curve and the
Term Structure of Interest Rates," xeroxed, University of  Pennsylvania, 1983.

Ando, Albert, and Franco Modigliani, (1975) "Some Reflections on Describing
Structures in Financial Sectors," in Gary Fromin and Lawrence Klein, editors, The
Brookings Model: Perspectives and Recent Developments, North Holland, Amsterdam.

Backus, David, William C. Brainard, Gary Smith, and James Tobin (1980), "A
Model of U. S. Financial and Nonfinancial Economic Behavior," Journal
Money. Credit and Banking, 12:259-93.

Begg, David K. H. (1984), "Rational Expectations and Bond Pricing: Modelling the
Term Structure with and without Certainty Equivalence," Economic Journal, 94:
45-58.

Benninga, Simon and Aris Protopapadakis (1983), "Real and Nominal Interest Rates
under Uncertainty: A The Fisher Theorem and the Term Structure," Journal of
Political Economy 91:856-67.

Bierwag, G. 0., and M. A. Grove (1967), "A Model of the Term Structure of Interest
Rates," Review of Economics and Statistics, 49:50-62.

Bohm-Bawerk Eugen, V., The Positive Theory of Capital, G.E. Stechert & Co., 1891.

Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, Flow of Funds Accounts Financial
Assets and Liabilities Year-End, 1961-84, Washington, 1985.

Bodie, Zvi, Alex Kane and Robert McDonald (1984), "Why Haven't Nominal Rates
Declined?" Financial Analysts Journal, 40: 16-27.

Brainard, William C., and James Tobin (1968), "Pitfalls in Financial Model
Building," American Economic Review Papers and Proceedings, 58:99-122, May.

Brealey, Richard, and Stephen Schaefer (1977), "Term Structure with Uncertain
Inflation," Journal of Finance, 32: 277-89.

Brennan, Michael J., and Eduardo S. Schwartz (1980), "Conditional Predictions of
Bond Prices and Returns," Journal of Finance, 35: 405-17.

Brown, Stephen, and Philip Dybvig (1986), "The Empirical Implications of the Cox,
Ingersoll, Ross Theory of the Term Structure of Interest Rates." Journal of
Finance, 41:616-30.

Buse, Adolf, (1967), "Interest Rates, the Meiselman Model and Random Numbers,"

                                      71
Journal of Political Economy, 75: 49-62.

Campbell, John Y. (1984a), "Asset Duration and Time-Varying Risk Premia,' unpub-
lished Ph.D. dissertation, Yale University.

_____________ (1986) "Bond and Stock Returns in a Simple Exchange Model,"
Quarterly Journal of Economics, 786-803.

_____________ (1986), "A Defense of Traditional Hypotheses about the Term
Structure of Interest Rates," Journal of Finance, 41:183-93.

_____________ (1987), "Stock Returns and the Term Structure," Journal of
Financial Economics, in press.

Campbell, John Y. and Robert J. Shiller (1984), "A Simple Account of the Behavior
of Long-Term Interest Rates," Anerican Economic Review Papers and Proceedings, 74:
44-8.

______________ (1986) "Cointegration and Tests of Present Value Models,' NBER
Working Paper No. 1885. (a)

_______________ (1986) "The Dividend Price Ratio and Expectations of Future
Dividends and Discount Factors," NBER Working Paper. (b)

Cargill, Thomas F., and Robert A. Meyer (1972), "A Spectral Approach to Estimating
the Distributed Lag Relationship Between Long-Term and Short-Term Interest Rates,'
International Economic Review 13:223-38 June.

Chambers, Donald R., Willard T. Carlton, and Donald W. Waldman (198-.), "A New
Approach to the Estimation of the Term Structure of Interest Rates,' Journal of
Financial and Quantitative Analysis, 19: 233-52.

Chen, Eva T. (1986), "Estimation of the Term Structure of Interest Rates via Cubic
Exponential Spline Functions," unpublished doctoral dissertation draft, The Ohio
State University.

Clark, 3. B., (1895) "The Gold Standard of Currency in Light of Recent Theory."
Political Science Quarterly, 10:389-403.
Conard, Joseph W. An Introduction to the Theory of Interest, University of
California Press, Berkeley and Los Angeles, 1959.

Cox, John C., Jonathan E. Ingersoll Jr. and Stephen A. Ross (1985a). "An Inter-
temporal General Equilibrium Model of Asset Prices," Econometrica, 53: 33-84.

______________     (1985b), "A Theory of the Term Structure of Interest Rates,"
Econometrica, 53: 385-408.

________________(1981), "A Reexamination of Traditional Hypotheses about the TerrL
Structure of Interest Rates," Journal of Finance, 36: 769-99.

Culbertson, J. M. (1957), "The Term Structure of Interest Rates," 0-_arte:y

                                       72
Journal of Economics, 71:485-517.

De Leeuw, Frank (1965), "A Model of Financial Behavior," in J. Duesenberry et al.,
Editors, The Brookings Quarterly Economic Model of the United States, Rand
McNally, Chicago, pp. 465-530.

Diller, S. (1969) "Expectations and the Term Structure of Interest Rates," in J.
Mincer, editor, Economic Forecasts and Expectations, National Bureau of Economic
Research, New York.

Dobson, Steven W. (1978), "Estimating Term Structure Equations with Individual
Bond Data," Journal of Finance, 33: 75-92.

Dobson, Steven W., Richard C. Sutch and David E. Vanderford (1976), "An Eva1uaion
of Alternative Empirical Models of the Term Structure of Interest Rates," Journal
of Finance, 31: 1035-65.

Dothan, L. Un (1978), "On the Term Structure of Interest Rates," Journal of
Financial Economics, 6: 59-69.

Durand, David, Basic Yields of Corporate Bonds. 1900-1942, Technical Paper
No. 3, NBER, 1942.

Dybvig, Philip H., Jonathan E. Ingersoll Jr., and Stephen A. Ross, "Long     Forward
Rates Can Never Fall," xeroxed, 1986.

Dunn, Kenneth B., and Kenneth J. Singleton (1984), "Modelling the Term
Structure of Interest Rates under Nonseparable Utility and Durability        of
Goods," NBER Working Paper No. 1415.

Echols, Michael E., and Jan Walter Elliott (1976), "A Quantitative Yield Curve
Model for Estimating the Term Structure of Interest Rates," Journal of Financial
and Quantitative Analysis, 11: 87-114.

Engle, Robert F., David M. Lilien, and Russell P. Robins (1987), "Estimating Tifle
Varying Risk Premia in the Term Structure: The ARCH-M Model," Econometrica,
55:391-407.

Fania, Eugene F. (1984a), "The Information in the Term Structure," Journal of
Financial Economics, 13: 509-28.

Fama, Eugene F., (l984b), "Term Premiums in Bond Returns," Journal of
Financial Economics, 13: 529-46.

Fama, Eugene F., (1985) "Term Premiums and Default Premiums in Money Markets,
Journal of Financial Economics.

Fania, Eugene F. and Robert R. Bliss, "The Information in Long-Maturity Forward
Rates," Graduate School of Business, University of Chicago, October, 1986.

Financial Publishing Company (1970), Expanded Bond Values Tables, London:
Routledge and Kegan Paul, Ltd.

                                      73
Fisher, Irving (1896) "Appreciation and Interest," Publications of the
American Economic Association, pp. 23-9 and 88-92.

_____________ (1907), The Rate of Interest, Its Nature, Determination and
Relation to Economic Phenomena, Macmillan, New York.

Fisher, Irving (1930) Theory of Interest, New York, Macmillan.

Fisher, Lawrence (1966), "An Algorithm for Finding Exact Rates of Return," Journal
of Business, 39:111-18, January.

Flavin, Marjorie (1983), "Excess Volatility in the Financial Markets: A Reassess-
ment of the Empirical Evidence," Journal of Political Economy, 91: 929-56.

______________   (l984a), "Excess Sensitivity of Consumption to Current    Income:
Liquidity Constraints or Myopia?" NBER Working Paper #1341.

________________(l984b) "Time Series Evidence on the Expectations Hypothesis of
the Term Structure," Carnegie-Rochester Conference Series on Public Policy, 20:
211-38.

Friedman, Benjamin M. (1981), "Debt Management Policy, Interest Rates and Economic
Activity," National Bureau of Economic Research Working Paper.

_____________ (l980a), "The Determination of Long-Term Interest Rates: Implica-
tions for Fiscal and Monetary Policies," Journal of    Money.    Credit and
Banking, l2(Part 2):331-52.

_____________ (l980b), "The Effect of Shifting Wealth Ownership on the Term
Structure of Interest Rates: the Case of Pensions," Quarterly Journal of
mics,     94:567-90.

_____________ (l977a), "Financial Flow Variables and the Short-Run Determ
ination of Long-Run Interest Rates," Journal of Political Economy, 85:     661-89.

_____________ (l977b), "The Inefficiency of Short-Run Monetary Targets for
Monetary Policy," Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, 2: 293-335.

_____________ (1979), "Interest Rate Expectations Versus Forward Rates: Evidence
from an Expectations Survey," Journal of Finance, 34: 965-73.

________________ (l980c) "Survey Evidence on the Rationality of Interest Rate
Expectations," Journal of Monetary Economics, 6:453-65.

Friedman, Benjamin M. ,and V. Vance Roley (1979), "Investors Portfolio
Behavior Under Alternative Models of Long-Term Interest Rate Expectations:
Unitary, Rational or Autoregressive," Econometrica 47:1475-97.

Froot, Kenneth A. (1987), "New Hope for the Expectations Hypothesis of the Term
Structure of Interest Rates," reproduced, Sloan School of Management, M. I. T.


                                      74
Grossman, Sanford J., Angelo Melino, and Robert J. Shiller (1985), "Estimating the
Continuous Time Consumption Based Asset Pricing Model," NBER Working Paper No.
1643.

Hall, Robert E., ""Stochastic Implications of the Life Cycle-Permanent     Income
Hypothesis," Journal of Political Economy, 6:971-88, December    1978.

Hamburger, Michael J., and Elliott N. Platt, (1975) "The Expectations
Hypothesis and the Efficiency of the Treasury Bill Market," Review of
Economics and Statistics, 57:190-99.

Hansen, Lars Peter, and Thomas J. Sargent (1981), "Exact Linear Rational Expecta-
tions Models: Specification and Estimation," Staff Report, Federal Reserve Bank
of Minneapolis.

Hansen, Lars Peter, and Kenneth J. Singleton (1983), "Stochastic Consumption,
Risk Aversion, and the Temporal Behavior of Asset Returns," Journal of
Political Economy, 91:249-65.

Hendershott, Partric H. (1971), "A Flow of Funds Model Estimated for the Non-Bank
Finance Sector," Journal of Money. Credit and Banking, 3:815-32, November.

Hickman, W. Braddock (1942), "The Term Structure of Interest Rates: an Exploratory
Analysis, NBER, mimeographed. Results shown in Kessel (1965), Appendix A. pp. 103-
5.


Hicks, John R. (1946), Value and Capital, 2nd. edition, Oxford University Press.

Homer, Sidney (1963), A History of Interest Rates, Rutgers University Press, New
Brunswick, New Jersey.

Fiopewell, Michael, and George Kaufman (1973), "Bond Price Volatility and Term to
Maturity: A Generalized Respecification," American Economic Review, 63: 749-53,
September.

Huizinga, John, and Frederic S. Mishkin (1984), "The Measurement of Ex-Ante Real
Interest Rates on Assets with Different Risk Characteristics," unpublished paper,
Graduate School of Business, University of Chicago.

Ingersoll, Jonathan E. Jr., Jeffrey Skelton and Roman L. Well (1978), "Duration
Forty Years Later," Journal of Financial and Quantitative Analysis, 13: 627-50.

Jarrow, Robert A. (1981), "Liquidity Premiums and the Expectations Hypothesis,"
Journal of Banking and Finance, 5: 539-46.

Jones, David S. and V. Vance Roley (1983), "Rational Expectations and the Expecta-
tions Model of the Term Structure: A Test Using Weekly Data," Journal of Monetary
Economics, 12: 453-65.

Jordan, James V. (1984), "Tax Effects in Term Structure Estimation," Journal of
Finance, 39: 393-406.


                                      75
Kaldor, Nicholas (1939), "Speculation and Instability," Review of Economic
Studies, 7: 1-27.

Kane, Edward J. (1980), "Market Incompleteness and Divergences Between Forward and
Futures Interest Rates," Journal of Finance, 35: 221-34.

______________ (1983), "Nested Tests of Alternative Term Structure Theories,"
Review of Economics and Statistics, 65: 115-23.

______________ (1970), "The Term Structure of Interest Rates: An Attempt to
Reconcile Teaching with Practice," The Journal of Finance, 25:361-74.

Kane, Edward J., and Burton C. Malkiel (1967), "The Terni Structure of
Interest Rates: An Analysis of a Survey of Interest Rate Expectations," Review of
Economics and Statistics, 49:343-55.

Keini, Donald B., and Robert F. Stambaugh (1986), "Predicting Returns in the Stock
and Bond Markets," Journal of Financial Economics, 17:357-90.

Kessel, Reuben A. (1965), The Cyclical Behavior of the Term Structure of
Interest Rates, NEER, New York.

Keynes, John M. (1936), The General Theory of Employment. Interest and Money.

______________ (1930), Treatise on Money.
Kim, Se-Jin (1986), "Explaining the Risk Premium: Nominal Interest Rates, Infla-
tion and Consumption," reproduced, Yale University.

Langetieg, Terence C., "A Multivariate Model of the Term Structure," Journal of
Finance, 35: 71-97, 1980.

LeRoy, Stephen F. (1982a), "Expectations Models of Asset Prices: A Survey          of
Theory," Journal of Finance, 37: 185-217. (a)

______________ (1984), "Nominal Prices and Interest Rates in General Equilibrium:
Endowment Shocks," Journal of Business, 57:197-213.

______________ (1982b), "Risk Aversion and the Term Structure of Real
Interest Rates," Economics Letters, 10:355-61. (b)

______________ (1983), "Risk Aversion and the Term Structure of Real Interest
Rates: A Correction," Economics Letters, 12:339-40.

LeRoy, Stephen F., and Richard D. Porter (1981), "The Present Value Relation:
Tests Based on Implied Variance Bounds," Econometrica, 49: 555-74.

Lindahi, Erik, Studies in the Theory of Money and Capital, Rinehart and Company,
New York, 1939.

Long, John B. (1974), "Stock Prices, Inflation and the Term Structure of
Interest Rates," Journal of Financial Economics, 1:131-70.

                                      76
Lutz, Frederick A. (1940), "The Structure of Interest Rates," Quarterly Journal of
Economics, 55:36-63.

Macaulay, Frederick R., (1938) Some Theoretical Problems Suggested by the
ments of Interest Rates. Bond Yields, and Stock Prices in the United States Since
1856, New York, National Bureau of Economic Research.

Malkiel, Burton C. (1966), "The Terni Structure of Interest Rates: Expectations
and Behavior Patterns," Princeton University Press.

Mankiw, N. Gregory (1986), "The Term Structure of Interest Rates Revisited,"
Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, 61-96.

Mankiw, N. Gregory, and Jeffrey A. Miron (1986), "The Changing Behavior of
the Term Structure of Interest Rates," QuarterlyJournal of Economics,
101:211-28.

Mankiw, N. Gregory, Jeffrey A. Miron, and David N. Weil, "The Adjustment of
Expectations of a Change in Regime: A Study of the Founding of the    Federal
American Economic Review, June 1987.

Mankiw, N. Gregory, and Lawrence H. Summers (1984), "Do Long-Term Interest Rates
Overreact to Short-Term Interest Rates?," Brookings Papers on Economic Activity,
pp. 223-42.

Marsh, Terry A. (1980), "Equilibrium Term Structure Models: Test Methodology,"
Journal of Finance, 35: 421-35.

Marsh, Terry A. , and Eric R. Rosenfeld (1983), "Stochastic Processes for Interest
Rates and Equilibrium Bond Prices," Journal of Finance, 38: 635-46.

McCallum, John S. (1975), "The Expected Holding Period Return, Uncertainty
and the Term Structure of Interest Rates," Journal of Finance, 30:307-     23.

McCulloch, J. Huston (1971) "Measuring the Term Structure of Interest Rates,"
Journal of Business, 44: 19-31.

_____________ (l975a), "An Estimate of the Liquidity Premium," Journal of
Political Economy, 83: 95-119.

_____________ (1981), "Interest Rate Risk and Capital Adequacy for Traditional
Banks and Financial Intermediaries," in Sherman J. Maisel, ed., Risk and Capital
AdeQuacy in Commercial Banks, University of Chicago Press and NBER, Chicago, pp.
223-48.

_____________ (1975b), "The Tax Adjusted Yield Curve," Journal of Finance, 30:
811-30.

______________ (1977), "Cumulative Unanticipated Changes in Interest Rates," NBER
Working Paper No. 222, Cambridge.


                                      77
_____________ (1984),   "Term Structure Modeling Using Constrained      Exponential
Splines," Reproduced, Ohio State University.

Meiselman, David (1962), The Term Structure of Interest Rates, Prentice Hall,
Englewood Cliffs, New Jersey.

Melino, Angelo (1983)), "Estimation of a Rational Expectations Model of the
Term Structure," in Essays on Estimation and Inference in Linear      Rational
Expectations Models, unpublished Ph.D. Dissertation, Harvard          University.

______________ (1986), "The Term Structure of Interest Rates: Evidence and
Theory," NBER Working Paper No. 1828.

Michaelsen, Jacob 8. (1965), "The Term Structure of Interest Rates and Holding
Period Yields on Government Securities," Journal of Finance,     20:444-63.

Miron, Jeffrey A. (1984), The Economics of Seasonal Time Series, Ph.D. disserta-
tion, M. 1. T.

_____________ (1986), "Financial Panics, the Seasonality of the Nominal Interest
Rate, and the Founding of the Fed," American Economic Review, 76:125-40.

Mishkin, Frederic S. (1978), "Efficient Markets Theory: Implications for
Monetary Policy," Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, pp. 707-52.

_____________ (1980), "Is the Preferred Habitat Model of the Term Structure
Inconsistent with Financial Market Efficiency?" Journal of Political Economy,
88:406-11.

______________ (1982), "Monetary Policy and Short-Term Interest Rates: An
Efficient Markets -   Rational   Expectations Approach," Journal of Monetary
mics, 37:63-72.

Modigliani, Franco, and Robert J. Shiller (1973), "Inflation, Rational Expecta-
tions and the Term Structure of Interest Rates," Economica, 40:12-43, February.

Modigliani, Franco and Richard Sutch (1967), "Debt Management and the Term
Structure of Interest Rates: An Analysis of Recent Experience," Journal of
Political Economy, 75:569-89.

______________ (1966), "Innovations in Interest Rate Policy," American
Economic Review, 56: 178-97.

Nelson, Charles R. (l970a), "A Critique of some Recent Empirical Research in
the Explanation of the Term Structure of Interest Rates," Journal of Political
Economy, 78:764-7.

_____________ (l972a), "Estimation of Term Structure Premiums from Average Yield
Differentials in the Term Structure of Interest Rates," Econometrica, 40: 277-882.

________________(1970), "Testing a Model of the Term Structure of Interest
Rates by Simulation of Market Forecasts," Journal of the American Statistical

                                         78
Association. 65:1163-90.

______________ (1972b), The Term Structure of Interest Rates, Basic Rooks,
New York.

Nelson, Charles R., and Andrew F. Siegel (1985), "Parsimonious Modelling of
Yield Curves for U. S. Treasury Bills, NBER working paper No. 1594.

Okun, Arthur M. (1963), "Monetary Policy, Debt Management, and Interest    Rates:
A Quantitative Appraisal," in Commission on Money and Credit,    Stabilization
Policies, Prentice Hall, New Jersey, pp. 331-80.

Pesando, James E. (1975), "Determinants of Term Premiums in the Market for
United States Treasury Bills," Journal of Finance, 30:1317-27.

______________ (1983), "On Expectations, Term Premiums and the Volatility          of
Long-Term Interest Rates," Journal of Monetary Economics, 12:     467-74.

______________ (1981), "On Forecasting Interest Rates: An Efficient Markets
Perspective," Journal of Monetary Economics, 8:305-18.

_____________ (1978), On the Efficiency of the Bond Market: Some Canadian
Evidence," Journal of Political Economy, 86:1057-76.

Phillips, Liad and John Pippenger (1976), "Preferred Habitat vs. Efficient Market:
A Test of Alternative Hypotheses," Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis Review, vol
58 No. 5 pp. 151-64.

______________ (1979), "The Term Structure of Interest Rates in the MPS      Model:
Reality of Illusion?" Journal of Money. Credit and Banking, 11: 151-64.

Richard, Scott F. (1978), "An Arbitrage Model of the Term Structure of Interest
Rates," Journal of Financial Econoaics, 6: 33-57.

Roley, V. Vance (1977), "A Structural Model of the U. S. Government Securities
Market," unpublished Ph.D. dissertation, Harvard University.

______________ (1982), "The Effect of Federal Debt Management Policy on Corporate
Bond and Equity Yields," Quarterly ..'ournal of Economics, 97:645-68.

______________ (1981), "The Determinants of the Treasury Security Yield Curve,"
Journal of Finance, 36:1103-26.

Roll, Richard (1970), The Behavior of Interest Rates, New York, Basic         Books.


______________ (1971), "Investaent Diversification and Bond Maturity,"       Journal
of Finance, 26:51-66.

Salomon Brothers, Inc. (1983), An Aralytical Record of Yields and Yield Spreads:
From 1945, New York.

Samuelson, Paul A. (1945), "The Effect of Interest Rate Increases on the Banking

                                      79
System," American Economic Review, 35:16-27, March.

Sargent, Thomas J. (1971), "Expectations at the Short End of the Yield Curve: An
Application of Macaulay's Test," in Jack M. Guttentag, ed,, Essays on Interest
Rates, Volume II, NBER New York. pp. 391-412.

______________ (1979), "A Note on the Estimation of the Rational Expectations
Model of the Term Structure," Journal of Monetary Economics, 5: 133-43.

Say, J. B., (1853) A Treatise on Political Economy, Philadlephia, Lippincott
Crambo & Co.

Schaefer, Stephen M. (1981), "Measuring a Tax-Specific Term Structure of Interest
Rates in the Market for British Government Securities," Economic Journal, 91:
415-38.

Scott, Robert H. (1965), "Liquidity and the Term Structure of Interest Rates,"
Quarterly Journal of Economics, 79:135-45.

Shea, Gary S. (1984), "Pitfalls in Smoothing Interest Rate Term Structure Data:
Equilibrium Models and Spline Approximations," Journal of Financial and
tive Analysis, 19: 253-69.

______________ (1985), "Interest Rate Term Structure Equations with Exponential
Splines: A Note," Journal of Finance, 40: 319-25.

Shiller, Robert J. (l981a), "Alternative Tests of Rational Expectations     Models,
The Case of the Term Structure," Journal of Econo xnetrics,16:l7-87.

______________ (1980), "Can the Federal Reserve Control Real Interest Rates?" in
Stanley Fischer, ed., Rational Expectations and Economic Policy, NBER and Univer-
sity of Chicago Press.

______________ (1986), "Comments and Discussion," Brookings Papers on Economic
Activity, 1:100-7.

________________ (l98lb) "Do Stock Prices Move too Much to be Justified by Subse-
quent Changes in Dividends?" American Economic Review, 71: 421-36.

________________ (1972) "Rational Expectations and the Structure of Interest
Rates", unpublished Ph.D. dissertation, M.I.T., 1972.

________________ (1979) "The Volatility of Long-Term Interest Rates and Expecta-
tions Models of the Term Structure," Journal of Political Economy, Vol. 87, No. 6,
pp. 1190-19.

________________ (1985) "Conventional Valuation and the Term Structure of
Interest Rates," NBER Working Paper No. 1610.

Shiller, Robert J., John Y. Campbell and Kermit L. Schoenholtz (1983), "Forward
Rates and Future Policy: Interpreting the Term Structure of Interest Rates,"
Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, pp. 173-217.

                                      80
Sidgwick, Henry, (1887) The principles of Political Economy, London, Macmillan.

Singleton, Kenneth J. (l980a), "A Latent Time Series Model of the Cyclical
Behavior of Irterest Rates," International Economic Review, 21: 559-75.

_____________ (l980b), "Expectations Models of the Term Structure and Implied
Variance Bounds," Journal of Political Economy, 88: 1159-76.

_____________ (1980c), "Maturity-Specific Disturbances and the Term Structure of
Interest Rates," Journal of Money. Credit and Banking, 12 (Part I): 603-14.

Skinner, Earnest B., (1913), The Mathematical Theory of Investment, Ginn and Co.,
Boston.

Startz, Richard (1982), "Do Forecast Errors or Term Premia Really Make the
Difference Between Long and Short Rates," Journal of Financial Economics, 10:
323-9.

Stiglitz, Joseph (1970), "A Consumption-Oriented Theory of the Demand for Finan-
cial Assets and the Term Structure of Interest Rates," Review of Economic Studies,
pp. 321-51.

Stiguin, Marcia (1978), The Money Market: Myth. Reality and Practice, Homewood,
Illinois, Dow Jones-Irwin.

______________ (1981), Money Market Calculations: Yields. Break-Evens and
Arbitrage, Homewood, Illinois, Dow Jones-Irwin.

Summers, Lawrence H. (1982), "Do We Really Know that Markets are Efficient?" NEER
Working Paper.

Sutch, Richard (1968)," Expectations, Risk and the Term Structure of Interest
Rates," unpublished Ph.D. dissertation, M.I.T.

Telser, Lester C. (1967), "A Critique of Some Recent Empirical Research on
the Explanation of the Term Structure of Interest Rates," Journal of Political
Economy, 75:546-61.

Vasicek, Oldrich A. (1978), "An Equilibrium Characterization of the Term Struc-
ture," Journal of Financial Economics, 6: 33-57.

Vasicek, Oldrich A., and H. Gifford Fong (1982), "Term Structure Modelling Using
Exponential Splines," Journal of Finance, 37: 339-48.

Volterra, Vito (1959), Theory of Functionals and of Integral and
ential Equations, Dover Publications, New York.

Walker, Charles E. (1954), "Federal Reserve Policy and the Structure of
Interest Rates in Government Securities," Quarterly Journal of   Economics, 68:19-
42.


                                      81
Wallace, Neil (1966), "Comment,," American Economic Review, 75:135-45.

Walsh, Carl E. (1985), "A Rational Expectations Model of Term Premia with Some
Implications for Empirical Asset Demand Functions," Journal of Finance, 40: 63-83.

Williams, J. B. (1938), The Theory of Investment Value, Cambridge, Harvard
University Press.

Wood, John H. (1963), "Expectations, Errors and the Term Structure of
Interest Rates," Journal of Political Economy, 71:160-71.

Woodward, Susan, "The Liquidity Premium and the Solidity Premium," American
Economic Review, 73:348-61, 1983.




                                     82
                                   Appendix II.

                    U. S. Term Structure Data, 1946.8760

                               J. Huston McCulloch



     The three tables which follow summarize the term structure of interest

rates on U.S. Treasury securities from December 1946 to February 1987.

     Table 1 shows the zero-coupon yield curve on an annual percentage,

continuously compounded basis. This yield curve is inferred from the prices

of whole securities, rather than being based on the recently developed (but

much less liquid) market for stripped Treasury securities. In Shiller's

notation, this is 100 rd(t, t-+-m), as used in his (1).

     Table 2 shows the instantaneous forward rate curve on the same annual

percentage, continuous compounding basis. This curve shows the marginal

return to lengthening an investment in rn-year zeroes by one instant. The

zero coupon yield for maturity in is the unweighted average of these forward

rates between 0 and in.   In   Shiller's notation, these forward rates are 100

f(t, t+m), as used in his (7).

     Table 3 shows the par bond yield curve, again on an annual percentage,

continuously compounded basis. This is defined as the (unique) coupon rate

that would make a bond of maturity in be quoted at par, and gives a precise

meaning to the ambiguous conventional concept of a "yield curve" for coupon

bonds. The par bond yield for maturity in     is   a weighted average, with


     60Written while the author was Visiting Professor at l'Ecole Superieure des
Sciences Economiques et Commerciales (ESSEC), Cergy, France, on Professional Leave
from the Ohio State University Economics Department.

                                         83
declining weights, of the forward rates between 0 and m. The tabulated

values are essentially 100 r(t t+m), as used in Shiller's (3).

    These values were computed by fitting the discount function that gives

the present value of a future dollar to Treasury security prices. This

discount function (pd(t, T) in Shiller's nomenclature) was curve fit with a

cubic spline, as described in McCulloch (1975b), and as modified at NBER-

West during l97778.61

     Briefly, the data sets include most of the marketable U.S. government

bills, notes and bonds. Closing bid and asked quotations for the last

working day of the month indicated, as reported in dealer quote sheets or

the next day's Wall Street Journal, were averaged. These observations were

given weights inversely proportional to the bid-asked spread. Callable

bonds were treated as if maturing on their call dates, if currently selling

above par, and as if running to final maturity, if currently selling below

par. "Flower bonds" (redeemable at par in payment of estate taxes if owned

by the decedent at the time of death) could not all be eliminated, as they

constituted the bulk of the observations for many maturities during the

earlier part of the period. Accordingly, they were selectively eliminated

during these years if the estate feature appeared to be active. For further



     6l. NBER version fits the actual "flat" price to the sum of the values of
the individual payments. This is slightly more accurate than the version I
developed at the Treasury in 1973 and described in McCulloch (l975b), which fit
the "and interest" price to an idealized continuous coupon flow. McCulloch (1971)
contains further background information on this procedure.
     In only one instance prior to March 1986, namely the zero-maturity rates for
May 1958, did the cubic spline indicate a negative interest rate, of -0.11%. This
value was not significantly negative, however (its estimated standard error was
0.54%), and so it was replaced with a zero in the tables. The zero at m — 0 for
May 1947 is the actually estimated value. Since March 1986 forward rates in the
range 27 to 29 years have often been negative, but these maturities are beyond the
range of the tables.

                                     84
details see McCulloch (1981, 229-30). Since August, 1985, callables are not

used.

        During the early 1970's, a legislative ceiling on the interest rates

the Treasury could pay on long-term debt effectively prevented the issue of

new bonds. As existing bonds approached maturity, the longest available

maturity therefore fell to under 15 years, so that values over 10 years are

occasionally missing during this period. The longest available maturity

sometimes also fluctuates by five years from month to month if the longest

securities are callable and hovering near par. Since the cubic spline does

not lend itself to extrapolation, this methodology cannot be used to infer

longer term interest rates than those shown.62

        The curve-fitting procedure was adjusted for tax effects, as described

in McCulloch (l975b). The capital gains advantage on deep discount bonds

could not be ignored during the earlier part of the period, when most of the

long-term bonds were heavily discounted. The importance of this adjustment

greatly diminished after 1969, however, when the tax laws were changed so

that commercial banks were required to treat capital gains and losses

symmetrically. After this date, the best fitting apparent marginal tax rate

generally was much lower than before, and was often less than lO%63

        The par bond yields in Table 3 are based on hypothetical continuous-


     62The exponential spline approach proposed by Vasicek and Fong (1982) has the
considerable virtue of making such as extrapolation meaningful. Chen (1986) has
implemented the VF approach along with a modification proposed by the present
author, with mixed preliminary results; the forward curves are better behaved at
the long end, but often the restrictions implicit in the VF model and in the
modified model can be formally rejected with a likelihood ratio test.

          should be noted that the identity (9') holds for the values in Table 3,
but only using the discount function that applies to after-tax payments. Cf.
Shiller's footnote 13.


                                        85
                                                                         >4
                     In           In                                     In
                     N            N                                      CM


                         N
                         m >4                                            x>4
                     0
                     ('4 N N0NNNNNNC4NNNCi.                              0
                                                                         N                                            0
                                                                                                                      N

                     >4
                     It)
                            10
                               In
                                       40       04   -
                            — >4 .4 4 .4.1 4 .4CM04.4010
                                                 .4 N4 m
                                                         ,-I
                                                           .             >4
                                                                                .4_I m in o n mm mm ..o
                                                                                                          '0'0'0            m 0.-I ("I N 11% 010mm m 04
                                                                                                                            '0'0 '0'0 o mm CM ('4 ('4 ('4-1
                                                                         In
                     -4     CM    .4 NCMNNNCMNNNCMCMCM                   '-4    CM N CM CM CM CM CM N N CM CM CM

                            N                                                   04 N N ID        0 004 NO                     moo 050 .-4 N ('4.45
                     0
                     '-4    4• 0.4>4
                                            -4.-4NN                      0
                                                                         >4
                                                                         -4
                                                                                .4 .-4 .-4 .40.4-1 CM .-4 N ('4.-I
                                                                                ('INN (MN (MN (MN N N N
                                                                                                                      0
                                                                                                                      '-4
                                                                                                                            .-4.I.4.-400040%0%040%
                                                                                                                            ('IN       CM ('4 ..4 .4 .4 .4

                                  >4 m m N0tfl00m                                   10 '0(MO C N .4 N      '00'0
                            -4                                                                                                0% '0'0 050 m 00CM NO
                     >4                   0    In 105                    >4     SN Nb 40 SN                   S             1010101010 '0'0'0 '0 '00'0
                     It)    - In                          _4...4_4...4   Ill                                          It)   -1.1.4-1.1-1-1-1-1-1 .4
                            o
                            m      >4 NNmIn40                            x>4    40 '0 m 0     in .1 m SO m                  NC. m .o 0'0-1004-4.1-1
                     >4                                                         10101010 '0Ifl 40 N N NS10                  In It) it) it) In mm m N mm m
                     '0                                      .4.4.-I            .4.4.4.4.4.1.4.4.4.4-1.4 '0                 .4.I.4.-4.-lr4.-4.-4 .-4.4 .-4.-4
                            In              Or-b0%mO%NNmCM                      N .-40 510 m 04 N In Cl CM                  40    mm 0 '0040 0.4 ('4
                     >4     .4    >4                                     >4     In In It) '0 m'0 it) In 4040 It) In         '0'0'0 0 '0CM .-4 CM .4CM ('4 ('4
                     m      -m                                           m      - ,-4 - .-4 .1.4 - .4 4 .-4 .4.4      m

                     >4
                            In   'In0CMNONInN.0
                                     000                                        N C) m () It) N Sm -4100
                                                                                mm mm N mm '0 '0 In'0'0                     It) 10 '0m .4N0 ('40 CM'0'0
                            0%>4       0%                                >4                                                 mm mm m ,.4.-I .4-1-1.1-1
                     N      O CM 000                                                                                  N         .1.-4.-4.4.-4 .4.4.4.4.1.4
                            N NU40,-4
                                                                         CM


                                                                                  .4 0 it) N it) 10.4 04                    it) 4' 10 m '0 04001.-I In N
                     >4     N     >4 NNbN0%OO,-4CM.-I                    >4     O .4 .1.1.1.-I .4 (MN N (N ('4              CM N ('4(1 ('4.10.40-4.4.1
                     -4     C          ooooooo-4-..-.                    -.4        .4.1-4.1.1.4-1.4-1.4.4            '-4

                            tn
                            10
                               0              S10NN%0In40
                                             NNN0O.-4.-l0                       N In 00% .-I0 In CNN (''0
                                                                                000.-40.1.-l.1 N CM N N
                                                                                                                            NO 00 m 04000.410 ('4
                                                                                                                            N CM ('4CM ('4.4.4-1.4-1.4.1
                     0'     C     0 0000000,-4,-4.-4,.-4,-4 0' - .-I .4.4.4.4.4.4.4.4.1.4                             0%      .-4,-I ,4 ,-4.-I.-4.-4_I .4.4.4
                                  0 In In .0 0 S 10            100% c In In 10'0O% 40105.-I                                 010CM .1000.4.4 SCM
                            If1                          0% 0.4.40%             0% 04000009.4.4.1CM                         ('4.1CM .4 ('4 ('4.4 ,-4 .4.4.-I ,-4
                     40     C     40 00000000,-I.4.4O                    10     C 0.1.4.4.4-4.4.4.4.4.1               10       .1.1 . .    .-4 .-I,-4.-44_4
                            In
                            In
                               0            .4NInN0%In
                                                 5040000%
                                                                                '0N -4 '0 0 In ('45 '0 m In 0%
                                                                                040% 000000.-4.-4.-4.4                      04 In .4N0000..-I.-4
                                                                                                                            .1.-I N .-4 (N N .40.4.1.1.1
                                                                                                                                                              ('4

                     It)    d UI 00 00-4..                               it)    C 0.-4.-14.-4.4.-4,-4.4.-I.-4         In    ,-4 .-4.-4 4 4.-I.-4.-4.-4.4.4.-i
     1-4                    N                                                   N 100 N mm .-4 In N .-l '0                     '0010 0%C.OOs .4 .-4N CM
                            It)                D%CS0%a%000%                     050% 000000,-4.1,-4.-4                            ('4 -4 .4.4.40.4-4.'-4.-
                     '0     C                                            •0         0.1.-4.1_I.-4.-4r4_I.4.1          '0


                     m
                             E O%O00%
                            cm  0
                                  0 04N.'-4CMNSN10IAON.1                        .4 It)   .4CM ('404 m 00% ('410
                                                                                04040% 000049.40.1.4
                                                                                                                            N 00% 1(4               0010.4
                                                                                                                            .1.1-4.4.-I .-400.-4.-4.-4.1
                                                                                    00 ,-4 -4-40 .-4 .1.4.4.4         m        .4.1.4.1.1 .-4.-4.1 .-4.1.-4
     Q
                            CM 0 mNNLfl.-4In0                                   CM '0NO% 00 m C. .4'0
                                                                                04050% 05000% 900.-I_I
                                                                                                                            It) 1'4 10 '0 i m ill In N ('401
                                                                                                                            .—I —4 .4 ,-4.—I —40000 r'l C
     I-I
     >4    '0
               40
                     ('4    0 CM 000000000000                            N          000.4.40.1-1.1 ,-4_4 N
     ZZCM
     r ,-.
           0                CM 0 CMmCM00%mm'm.-lO                               101"        04    0410        0.1                        .'-IOl m
                                                                                                                            m'0.1 ('40% N 10
                                  Z mm mm CM mm It) N N 0%                                                                  - .4.4-400040400400
                     -4           .4         ccoccoooo                   -4     0000000                               -4    .-4.-4-4.1-4r-400.40.-I.-I
     o0                           0 1004         0%0%Dc'lInOm
                                       .-I.-4.-40000 -4 In 0 0%                 '0C'40 S It) N 04-4010
                                                                                000 040'0%0.-40.-4,-4O
                                                                                                                            0410 moo
                                                                                                                            0,40.40'-4050 N CI m
                                                                                                                                               0'
—              F-.   0      C     0 cccc000c0cc0                         0        .1-4000-4.4.4 ,4 .-4 -.             0        -I.-4.-4.-40000000
                            N          .4NmoIn4oNo%o..4N                        ,4 Nm '0 In 105 0.0.4CM                     .1 (Mm 0 In 10N 040,-I N
(1
                            .4                     .4.4.4                                          .4-4-1                                              '-4.4-4
                                                                                                                      05
                     '0           '0                                      '0                                          '0
                                  04                                      04                                          OS
                      '-4         -4                                      -4                                          .4




                                                                               87
                                                                               In                                   in
                                                                                                                                 -4-4.4
                                                                               N                                    N            NNN
                                                  O.4OOinNIA                                                                     ON 40.4 in 0.05
0
N                                        o
                                         >4
                                         N
                                                  IANNN401040IONN
                                                                               0>4 55N404040405p-5
                                                  NNNCINNNC'IC4N (I NNNNN(1(ICI(1c's(I                              0Cl          .4(10-5-4040.05
                                                                                                                                 N N N N N ('4 (INN
      IA 5.4010400% GIN (IN III
      ('INN N N N N N 00         0%0.4IO('4ONf1ON0
                             >4 000%ONNIOLnIQI-NN
                                                        00'O.4r4,-40%N04Oh40    00(4.00.40 in NO 54(4.4
                             in                     >4 N5N40In40404040ION    >4 • 0.04.4'400 - 5
         N N N N N (INN (INN .4 C'1NNCINNNNC4(I(Ic4 In
                                                    .4 NNC'ICIC4CINNNCINN .4 N (IN ff4 N N N N N N (1(1
    4001 N IAN 0.4 N IA GiN N X IA.40O,-40IflN.4NO X 0.OMO01NNI000NIO                 IC N 400.4.40.041(4.41(45
    0401000.4.4 - .4.4(1CM >4 .4NN'0IAIAONOUIIAIA >4 '0IOIAONOOInNInUIIn              '0550 N 001040550
-0
 .4   -                           o
      .4 N N ('4 ("1 N N CI N (IN .4 CICINCINC.INNCMNNN 0                           0
                                                          .4 NN(INClN(4NNCI('4CM .4 N (INN N N (IN ('4 ("4(1 N
    00 IA IA IA 40 IA ION S N X
    N  5.4.01(4010 NO 005            N.4NIO.4NGI0NIOO
                                  >4 N0O,-4.-4O0s.-4.4,4N
                                                              0ON0N.4N'0iA
                                                          >4 .4C'4.-I.-4.-INNOONNN >4 005 10 04 400400400-4               0005055 0001
In    .4,-. .4.4.4,4.4.4.4.4.4.4 IA ,-44-4NN('4NCI,-4NC'4C1N                   II'. ('4NNC1NNCINNC'4('4C4 in              CI (INN N (I N N (IN ('4(1
      404004 IAN 040.4.4(105
      N N N 000044140N N 40              >4 O.4N04ONOONOINN
                                            NN00000IGI000.4                    >4
                                                                                      '0O(14004%014l.4'0
                                                                                      O.4.40O.4CINNCINN             >4
                                                                                                                          N N.40.4OS 40 N NOON
                                                                                                                          N N 05040 40 N ON N .4
0     .-4.4.4.4.-44r-I.-4,-4.-4.4.-4     0 .-4.4NNNN.4,-4NN('IN 0 NNNN(1N(INNN(I(I '0 CI (INN N N N N (IN (IN
      IA IA
          S ON DIN .-4 NO 00%
      N N CIN N N N '0 IA '040111
                                         z>4 NNIOCINNIn.4O,-01
                                              40IOGI0%0404O00'O                    N.4O0NC'ION('s(-0   40.4 N N .40.5000404.1
                                                                               >4 0100DI0.4NNC"4'sc.4N N N N 4004 UI In ION ('4.-CO
N     .4.4.4.4.4.4.4.4.4.4.4.4           N -4.-I.4NCM.4N                       N .4CMN.4CINCMNNNNC4 N N (MN N ('4(1 N ('4 ('4 CI (IN
      40504000 IA 0010(1(1                 NIANIA04'0NNCI.4CI                     N0Nin11%N.4NN.4O
      .4.4 (MN N ('1 CI N '0 (A ((4 IA   > U,UINN0%0%O                         >4 O%040%0.4N.4.-4NCI                      5400 41% 0' 541% IA 5015
                                                                                                                          .4 CI CI IAN 000.40404
N                                        N    .4.4.4,-5,-4.-4.-4.4.4.4.4(I N '-4.4.4.4.4CICINNNCIN ('I CI (IN N N N ('4 N N .4.4.-I
      IA N .-440N04 0140 N N 01441
      .-4.4N (INN (MN '0 IA '0(11        >4NIAi0N,-4,-40NNO
                                           (nIANNNIDN0I >401InN.40.iA.404o,-INIO
                                                            NNGIOO00.4.4 >4                                               0. (IN ION N.4.-4IA 04010
                                                                                                                          O CI .4040 N N ('.404 N N 40
.4    —'-4.4-4--4,-4,-4.4-4--I.4—        .4 .4.4.4.4.-I.4,-4.4.-4,-4 .4 .-4.-4.4.4.-4NCMNCI('4N .4 N CI CI N (IN N N .4.4.4,-S
                                         o GINNU'I.4O0%O40(1
                                            (AIflNNNN40NN0% o        E %0.4NObNU1ON.4'0
      111 SN tO S ON 010 (I 0% 5                                                                   4000 N 5 %OONOOIO
                 N N NO IA 0411          E                               N5DI0%O00.-4.4            O ('4.40 i(4 Nfl                        -I 5104040
0"    .4.4.4.4.4.4.4.4.4.4.4.4           Q%                                    0'.    ,4.-4.4,-4r4.-4.4NN.4(IN      04    (I (1 (INN N ('4 ('4.4.4.-4.4
      400' 050.-S 0 N IA 00.4
      .4.4(1 (INN N '00 (A 44110
                                         o OGINO,-40%OIA40N01
                                           40UI4DSNI0NNNN E      NI1INOOOOC'4N.4
                                                              o NN40N0%00%0iO.4                                           N GIN 0100.410 N 04 Nfl
                                                                                                                          0.40(1 (ANN ON 0404(4
.0    .4 .4.4.4.4.4.4.4.4.4.4            10   .4.4.4,-l.-4.4.4.4.-4.4,-4.4     40 .4.4.4.4.4.4-IN.4.-4c4N IC (IN CI (IN (1(1(1.4.4.4.4
                                         o
                                         E 0%0'40ON0I0NON
                                           UIUI%0NNNiOSNNN o
                                                           E 0'NIO40NNN.40iUI0'
      100% '0N.4,-SS(I UI 0'. 0.4                                                                                         N S IONS NO' N NO 001
      .4.-4N (INN N '000 UI .0                               ION40N00%0OO                                                 9.40 NO.4.-b        4" OIAO
III       .4.4.4.4.4.4.4.44-4.4.4        In   .44.4.4,-4.4.4.-4,-4.4.4.4       UI                    4,-I..4.-4NC', in    (IN N N CI N ('4 CI .4.4.4.-b
      400105.405 NO 5010                 o N'00%NNO%.-I'-4O0
      .4.4 CI (MN ('1 N 000010              UIUI10IO%0NIDIDNNN o
                                                               x %00NLflNU1,-4UIN40N
                                                                 40N10N0'0%OO                                             010 ((ION ,-4 400.50410 40
                                                                                                                          0.-4O NO.4.40440 N 110
'0    —.4.4.4.4—.4—.4——.4                '0        .4-4.4.-,-4.4.4             '0     ,4.4.-4.-S,-4.4.-4.-I,-4.-.CIN '0   NNNNNNN,4.4,-4.-4.-.
      .4.4N (INN N 0000 UI o OIA.4NLflNtfl0%UI40'0
                           Z UIUIIO.010N101040IOIO o
      UI S N 114 0'. 0110.-I NO 55                                                N1flO'.C'IO%NOI.4.4("lO%IO              SIAN 0 in N CI UI 04.-I N (1
                                                                                  i04DLflNN0%040                          0 .404-1 NO.40% IflN 1110
 N    ,-4.4,-4.-4,-4.4.4.4.4,-4.4.4      N .-4.4.4,-4.-4.-4,-4,-4,-4,-l,-4.4   N .- -4.-4-4.4.4.-4.4CI N                  . (IN N f4 (I N 4.4.4.4,.i
      N 4004 NIA UI .4505 NO'.           o OLfl40UI.0'0,-4UIIONDI          o '04ON1AO40IA0U,N(I                           N .4,-IN N 04.00' '00*0' 1(4
      .4.-4 .4 N (1(14 N NON '00              O'0UIU1411404040.DInUIN z 1fl1iIL11IONNN0%O                                 0'-4OC'IC1SO0.4'0
 N    - _4 .4.4,-s .4r-4.4.4.4.4.4       (I .-4.4.4.-4,-I.4.4.4.-4.4,-4.-$     CM -4.-4.-lN N                             -4NNNN..4N,-4.-4.4.4.-.
      NO 5.40 N 40 UI 0% 5.4441
      0.40.4.4.-I ,-4 ('4(1.4 N N             .4,-4ON'00%O040Q4O o N'0N0U,0.440Q'To
                                         oE (IC'IONNN'OLtIIOC'4NN                                                         (IN 0.100.400% (150 III
                                                                           E NNNIAIONNOIn1'—0.                            5004001100.5(1010(1
 .4                                      _ .4.4.4.4.4.4.4,4.4.4.4.4            .4     .44-4.4 _4.4.4.4.4.4.4__      -4      CI .4 N .4.4.4-4.40.4—
      N0O% (IN 0.000 N NO'. o OON40OO%('90%,-IUIUI
                    E NCMO'0'.0%r4NOOtn oZ 0000%NItIC'44010C'4IAN
      0*0504010450.4505                        0I0I.4NOIONO0NIA         N 10(115 N S (MN IOIA 400
                                                                        4050150.45105 ION 0
 0 0.400000.4.40.40 0 O0,-4000,-4,-4.40.-I.4 0 00.4.4.4.4.4.4.4.4-4.4 0 .4.4.4-4.4.4.4-I 00.4*
       4 (IN 0 UI ION 50'. 0.4 N
                          —.4.4
                                                   N '0UI ION 010.4(1                 .4 N NO UI ION 040.-SN              .-4CI NO III ION 5040.4(1
                                                                .4.4.4                                 ——.4                                  .4.4—
 0
 U,
                                         .4                                    N                                     N
                                         U,                                    IA
 0%                                      0%                                    0%
 .4                                      .4                                    .4
                                                                                                                     01
                                                                                                                     .4




                                                                                     88
                                                 N 4NNN
                                                 >4
                                                 In
                                                    0%0%0%0%.                              LA
                                                                                           N
                                                                                                 Lb      LA Lb N ( ON N .-4 N
                                                                                                         0% 00% 0% 0 4 ON N 0
                                                                                                 N N N N N mm mm LA
                                                                                                                 ("I mmenen..,enen
                                                                                                                                           Q
                                                                                                                                           >4



     (N — 4') ON tO I') 0 LA 0%            0%                          Ne4Lbm0                   IA           IA mm Lb N 0 N — N
                                                 (4 NNNN                                 .N
                                                                                                         0%
0N      '.0 Lb Lb Lb LA IA LA LA IA Lb Lb
     NNNNNNC%INNNNN
                    0                            >4                      0%00%0% >4
                                                                                          0              0% 00% 0% ON .-4 N en LA          >4
                                                                                                                                           O
                                                                                                                                           ci
     0'. en o .- —           .40 N en o
     '.0 LA LA IA Lb LAO IA LA in o Lb           >4            0 - LA N N>4
                                                        0% 0 %O 00 —
                                                         N0%0 0%O%                               ON 0000-40% 0 en O en
                                                 U                      .                  LA
                                                                                                         000% 0% 4 N N en en Lb            >4 .-4mNenoLb%n%nNU%C
                                                                                                                                           LA
     N N N N N N N N CNN N N                     .-l NCMNNNNmN(MNNN                         4                                              .-4       mmm'enmm.-
     0' N (NO .-4 en 0% Lb Lb 00% —
     0004') LAO enoo 00 LA
                                                        LA   0 Lb m Lb 0% Lb 0% .-4 0% N
                                                               N N 0% 0%                              ON D 0% N 0% 0 ON 0% .-4                ,-lLbNen0o,-4,-Ioc
0
-4   N N N N N N N N CNN (N (N
                                                 0,-4
                                                 >4     Lb N N
                                                                     •0
                                                        NNNNNNNNNNe4N -l
                                                                                      0%   >4        00 0% ,-4 0 en 00 N
                                                                                                 N N fl en N N   en men
                                                                                                                                           >4
                                                                                                                                           0 NenmLALb0.o0.eno
                                                                                                                                           — menmmenmenm'ommr
     0' m N en If) 0'. 4 NO-I                           0%NNmm%omo0%oIn X
                                                                                                                                           >4 LA0%NenriNOLAN%.'
                                                                                                 ( N Lb en 0 N N 0 N ,-4 f .-4
     00% 0% NO               0% 0' -4-I N        >4          LALflLb0%NN >4                      N NO .-4 0% 0% N LAO LA Lb N                  Nm0LALbO0%g
IA   N .-4 .-4 .-4 N .-4 .-4 .-I .-I ('3 N N     LA                   JNNNNNN LA                 NC4Nmenm                                  LA

     LA lAO 0 IA 0% ,-4    0%
     0' N N Lb Lb Lb N 0% 0% 0                   >4
                                                        OLOO
                                                                 LANNLb
                                                                   LDIANLOON
                                                                            >4                   0% 0 LA Lb IA %D
                                                                                                 Lb NO - 0.0% N LA
                                                                                                                          LA LAO Lb .-I
                                                                                                                               LA Lb N
                                                                                                                                              OOenLbONNONNU%...
                                                                                                                                           >4 NOOLALDNO0%0
0    .-l .-4 .-4 — .-4 e4 .-4 ,-4 ,-I — .1 ('4                              1NNNN 0              N N A% N N en mm e) men                   0
        '.0 LA (N     .4 00% 00% 0%
     N LA LAO LA 000 Lb N N                      >4LAN0LANLbN0mLb
                                                    0LbNLbLb >4                                  0 0 r4 Lb N N 00% ON
                                                                                                 Lb NON 0% 0. N LA 00 N N
                                                                                                                                           a:
                                                                                                                                           >4
                                                                                                                                              ON0LbOO00O.-4C
en             ,..4 4 ,4 — ,4 ,4 r1 .4           m NNNNC'4NNNNNNN en                             N N mm N N en men mm en                   en



N
       00 en LA Lb Ill LA IA en
     LA en en N N .-4 — NO LA LA Lb
               — .-4 — — 4 ——
                                                 >4 NOLA >4
                                                 c LA LA0%0%   O-IO Z
                                                 N .4NNNNC'4NNNNNN N
                                                                                                 Lb Lb        en LA LAO
                                                                                                 LA Lb 0% N Q% NO LA ON N
                                                                                                                             -4 Lb 0 N
                                                                                                                                           >4
                                                                                                                                                 LDLALAOLbLAO0..-.LAX?-
                                                                                                 N N N en N N mm en men en                 N mmenmenmmenooen
     0'. N 00% Lb LA 000 Lb LA 0.                Q
                                                 >4NNLAN
                                                   0N0%                      -40%c               LA LA en OLD 0% O 0000% 0                    NNLDen0L,-IO,-40%,-4L0-
     ,'-l 4 .-40% 0% 0% ON N ('4 N                                       -4ONcnLbN >4            0 LA NO Lb 0% N en en Lb                  >4 NoenooN.-..-4Oo—
-4                                               .-4 44.-4NNNNNN ,.4                             N N N N N N mm mm m                       .-4 enmcnmnmenoooen
     0 Lb 0% .-I N N 00% N 0
     .4 000% N 0% — .4 ('4                       o
                                                 Z Lfl0uLAtDLAmcnLArn                            0% NO en 0% o en o Lb                     o      OOLr%OLbOOen
0%   0O0O4.-4,-4,-                               0% NNN 0%                                       00 Lb 0%         Lb N -4 N N Lb N
                                                                                                 N N N N N N m mm men
                                                                                                                                           E NONenOLDNO-40%o—
                                                                                                                                           0%        mmrn'ooenme
     000 N Lb N 0% 00.4 '-4 o  NLbNenN,-ILben0%Lfl-4
     0.-40 en 0.0% 0% Lb en 00                             ,-i en o LAO en ,-4 .10 en                                                      o en(NLb,-%omoLAmNb
                            E NNLbNQ%C4.-%,-ILALb        en o 0 N 111 Lb 0% 4 .-l 0 Lb                                                     Z
Lb   - -4.400000-1 ,-4 -4-I Lb      e-4.-4.-4.-INNNNN Lb N N N N N N N N men men                                                           '.0   enmenenenenmenenmen.
     N 0% N .4 Lb Lb N LAO Lb N
     0.0% 0 N Lb N 0% 9000
                                                 o  N 0%NLbC'40%NLA,-40% 0
                                                 Z 4LA0LbLAL00%r-%.-4LflU1 Z
                                                                                                 Lb en          .-4 N en Lb Lb LA Lb 0
                                                                                                 men 0 N N LA LA 00 en LA                  E NmoLANenN
                                                                                                                                           o -40%.-4NLb0%NC%I0%00
LA                                               11%                       NNNc4r4 LA                  NN N N N mm men                     In menmmmenenenmenen
                    en en LA LA N N LAO
     0' 0. ON N Lb N CL 0% 000
                                                  o cntnenu,..-IONLALbenNLD                      LAO     ON 0 0 N m o LANNen-I,.-4CN0
                                                                                                 m en en N Lb 0 0 N 00% N 0
0 00.-s 000000 .-4 ,-4 4 0            -l,-INNNNC4 0                                              N N N N N N C4 N en N men                 0 enmenmenenmenenmeneL
   moo LA 0% c en Lb 0 (N ,-4 o 0%0%0NOLA0-4en
   0% 0% 0 N Lb LbS 0' 00% 00 E 00LA-%,-,0LA                                                                               o 00%.-4NO'.0NOLA0
                                                                                                         NON LA LA 0% en 0% LA 0%
                                                                                                                           E .-INoOmeno.Ar--Lb—
                                                                                                 % N en N Lb 0 en Lb 0% — ('4
en 00 -4 0000000 .-4 '-I en           NNNNC4 C%                                                  N N N N N ('4 N N ('4 ('4 en     menen(nenenmrL
     N N 0. ,-4 Lb 0.-I Oc's en                   o N0%LALANmLA             N.-40% 0             — Lb Lb en 00 0 Lb 4 LA                    o 00%InenLbLb0Oen.O..4,
N    oc-oOcc
     0% 0.0% 5 Lb Lb N 00% 0% 0% 0%               *: ONenLA
                                                  N
                                                                        NO-lOenO
                                                                .I,-I,-44NNNNN N
                                                                                  E              en .—4 N Lb IA 0 N LA NO r—I
                                                                                                 N ('4 N ('4 N N N ('4 N N men
                                                                                                                                            E
                                                                                                                                            N
                                                                                                                                                     0%ONNenOLAIAOr—
                                                                                                                                                     Neneneenme'

-4
     Lb 0% 0% NON .-I0 LA en LA
      0% 0 Lb Lb Lb Lb .-l0%
      0000000-40000
                                         0% 0%    1 0%0 Z
                                                  o OOenOLANNLALALA.-IN 0
                                                  .-4 -1.-I-I,-4NNNN l
                                                                                                   NO en N en 00 Lb —
                                                                                                 N 0% N%D mm o ON IA 0
                                                                                                 N 4 N N N N N N N N (N m
                                                                                                                                            o Lb00%N,4.0r-mLbo.-
                                                                                                                                            E O0LQN0OONenLb—
                                                                                                                                            — enNNmenmm.-.enencif%
      LA 00% N .-I N 000 ('4 Lb ('9               o
                                                  £ 0%-LDm00       0
                                                       0%OLt%-40%) E                                 00 en — en 0 NON en 0                  o LA0%,-4LA0,-4LbOOLb
                                                                                                                                            E omwo-4'.o.nN..,e.
0     ooo-oocc
      0 0% Lb LA Lb Lb en 0% N 0%
                                                  0      .-40      0.-4.-4NN.-4N 0
                                                                                                 N Lb 4 Lb .-4 N '-4 LA (N LA .-4
                                                                                                 N .-l N N N N -4 N N N N en                O    mNNcnmNrc.Nmrei
      .4 N en 0 LI) Lb N 0% 0 '-I N                      -I N en 0 LA Lb N 0% 0 N                — ('4 en o LA LbS 0% 0 N                        .-4 N ("s 0 IA '.0 N 0' 0 Ct
                                     -4 -4 -4                                       -I                                            .-4 _4                              ——-
0
LA
                                                  LA
                                                  IA
                                                                                            0                                               N
                                                                                            LA                                              IA
0'                                                                                                                                          0'
-I                                                0%
                                                  -4
                                                                                            0%
                                                                                            -4                                              -I




                                                                                                89
>4 InONOØN,..IN
    mN,-4(0NNNNN                         >4                                       '.omo..4'.0in                  m'0NN'00,.-4N'.000'0
                                         in OO04040004000%0N.                                                 >4 04NN0%0%000O0
In
N                                        ('4                           ("4 '0'0rme.
                                                                       >4
                                                                       In                                     in
                                                                                                              N
>4
               me',( N '0'0'0'0'0'0'0'0 N '0'0'0'0'0e.mmm
o mNN.4.-4NInNNDDN
("4


   NUC"1.-l0'N0%iflIn
                                         >4 NNNInOInN0%'.O
                                         o 000%0O..ieQO0 >4o 4-40NN0SNØ'.Ø'. >4
                                                                             o
                                                                             N
                         OONNOIn'.Om,.I,.I X
>4
In
   N(.4r40,-4NNN4DD   >4
                      in O040%.-I,-4.'INNNNmIn. In                     >4 4N0N0%O                             >4
                                                                                                              In
                                                                                                                    .40NNtn'00%.-4e.4'4N
                                                                                                                     0.0400%0%00
.-4                                                                    .4                                     .4 mm'.')m'0(.,(.'0'0
X                                                                 X
>4
o                                        >4
                                         o.-4040%N.-4N'0'0'0'InN  >40N'0In0NN.-4OoIn
                                                                  0  %O'00('.4N0%eN o>4                             NN0.00o'.oo
,-4           NC'4N'r)m                       i'm'0'0'0'0'0'0'0'0                    .-4

                                            0O%.-N0'.04.,,.i
In NNNNm
>4                                       >4 0N04.-IN'0In'.D'.Q'.Ci-
                                         in '0'0'0'0'0'0'0'0O
                                                                       >4
                                                                       In                  m'mm               >4
                                                                                                              in
                                                                                                                    InIn'0InNNN
>4                                       >4    0%N04'0In'.0N'.ON       >4                                     >4
                                                                                                                    IninQ'0'.b.
                                         '0                            '0                                     '0
>4 Nmr'00N.0InDInInO >4 0NN'00('ONO'0,.4
                        0%N0%04'0InN'0                                 >4
                                                                              NNIn0%N0'.N                           '0('NNe.)InIn%0In'0InIn
(' NNC'4NNNC'(%)4.) l'
                                                                                                              >4




>4 In00N0NDOU
N
   In.4NO%0mLn.0'0
      N44Nme'.i(.'
                 N0ND%O0%U0%
                                         N ''o'o'o
                                         >4



                                               00%b,4'.oe'.inlnr'4
                                                                       >4
                                                                       N
                                                                                    N('4.-4b,-I,-4O,-4m       >4

                                                                                                              ("4
                                                                                                                    In0%In'0O'.0SN'0(.

>4                                       >4                            >4                                     >4
                                                                                                                    %0NNOInO'.Ør.
'-I N-4,-I.-4-4.-4Nmmm                   ,-l c'm(''0'0'0'0'0In         .4                                     .-4 NNNNNNNNmm
o
E In0%N0,-4,-4N(.O                       o NO%Q%0%,-4'.Oif%0r').
                                         X NN'0'0N0'.N'..flO%n0.O Z    o 0In0.In'.''.O,-,.I o  '00e'0'.InIn'..
0% .-4.4-NN                                                                                 E '.00%NNr-Nr-0'.o
                                         0%                            0.                                     0%    NNNNNNNNNNN
o N,-INNNi%&fl0c(.N
E N'0(.)C40.O,-I%ONN0% o 0%In0.N0In0.0.ON.0.0 o
'.0            .400'4NN                  '.0
                                              Z                               inin
                                                                                .-4(')InInONO'.,-4N.0
                                                                                                0N0           o
                                                                                                              E N0'00'0O.4Ob0.O
                                                                                                                In'0'.InInNN'.J%
                                                                       '.0                                    '.D   N(.4NNN(.4(.4Nc4NNc.4
o
E
  '0.4InInN0'.                           o
                                         Z '4N0%NN'.0r-NNN
                                            0ON'0'.0InNNmN o
                                                           E N'0'0'0NOIn'.N04.- o bInNe.,In.I0NInO
In
                                                                                E '0NInf')In'0'0%InN0.
                                         in                            In                                     In NNNNNNNNNNN('4
                    z 0%0'.0,-IN'.4U1C'4'.DN o                                In'0NInW0.'.t
o
E %O'0I00.00.'0NN'0
  ifl('NNN0'0O'.OO o  0N'.D0NN,-4mmoN
0                                        '0
                                             z
                                                                       '0
                                                                                 NNN(')In                     o
                                                                                                              x O0%00'.0br0r-a'0
                                                                                                              '0
o
E 0%N-0%e'-
  '0N,-4.-40NO%e'1n0.N                   o '.')'.0'0InN'.DN.0
                                                                                          : 0NNbO,-.'.'0'.'0N0in
                                            N0.0.-I00'9DLflUI oz .-4U10N'.QO,-4,-4(.0%'0N o
(%    -4-4000C'4(.4c"4Nc"a               4)    NNC'4N'0'0'0'0          (.              C'4C'4NN('4C"4C'4      )
o
E '00In'.00%NCONO            '0N0N.n'0oQ% o
   '0N0,-I'0t--NInmIn oZ '.0'.DN0%NN0%NNN    z NIn,-4NNNN0.'.
                                               00.000.0)04,.-4,-4 Zo.-I'0NO'0'00'0InInNm
                                                                         In ()N ) N .4 ('4.-I -40 '.0
N         000 c"clc N                        N    N('.-INNN..4NN N NNNNNNNNNNNN
o
       0.,INNN0.0' o NN'0InNO0N
z .0'00%InInInONInNON      '0rnInNNN.0..4In0 o     N0In(.N'040%r') o
                                             z In04'.0'.DO'.'.0N0
.-I           O,40004,-4,-I.4N           -4

o (')00'00
                                                                       '-4                                    .4
                    o
                    E C'4'0'0O0N'0e',-4N
                      CNNQ%'0,-I'.".O o
E    0InmOD-I                            z 00.NInInIn0'.N.0N oE NN('4OOc"i'00%'0oN
o O.-4OO0.-4.j,-4ON 0 NNNe'4NN,-IcmNN.o 0      N-4,.'4(.4,-4.-4,.4 0 .4NN.-4N-I,-4,-,-I,-4NN
      .I('4    '0 In '.0 N 0.0 .-I ('1          N '0In %0 N 0.0.-IN               ("4 '.'0 In '.0 N 0% 0.IN
                              '-4-I-I                         .4-4-I                                  -I—             N    In '.0 N
                                                                                                                                      -4-4—
                                         0'.
                                         In                            0
                                                                       '.0
                                                                                                              '-4
                                         04                                                                   '.0
                                                                       0%                                     0%
                                         -4                            '-4                                    -I
                                                                             90
        enNm0%.u,Ln
4In O0%0%Q0%0%0%0%                                09999090000,.I.-4
                                                       en o ..o in .-i -i f• Q% en                                    0%0enm'.00%
                                                                                                                       N-4-44-4.4,-l,-l-4
                  .                                                                                    -I                                                 >4         -4-4-.4-4Nic'.ien'U
N          en mm en       en en en en N             •0                        p                        In
                                                                                                       (N
                                                                                                                                                          in
                                                                                                                                                          (N    'U'U'U'UU'U
D4
(N    '
   %00000%No%Lneno
o O,-40000010%0%0%
             en en
                                      .o
                          en en en en N
                                                   en



                                                  In
                                                         0 (N N %0 - en oi
                                                  0% 00000000

                                                     % %0 en
                                                                '.4 -4 O

                                                                0 %D 0
                                                                           >4
                                                                           (N
                                                                              N('N.-4ifl'00%.-4O5O(N
                                                                                                           0
                                                                                                           ('4
                                                                                                               0000.4oNIn.-4en'U
                                                                                    (N.-4.-l,-4Ne.4.-4(N(N >4 (NNCN(NCN(NNc'.lenen'Uu'.


                                                                                                       X .-4NIn.-40%4en,-40%Oen
                                                                                                                                                                'U'U'U'U'U'U'U'U'U'U'U.
>1    $0%0%C%OO0O0%0%0%•                          0% 0000000 4 ,.l .-I N                               >1 N(N('4N44(NNCN,-4NN                                   .-4en,-4,-4enNensNoo,o.
                                                                                                                                                          >4 CNN(NCNNc1('4Nen'U'UIn
In
,-i        enenmenmen ,-i                   in
                                                  en                                                   -
                                                                                                       It)                                                in
                                                                                                                                                          -4
              ensr-sci
o>i enenenen'enmenmen• .-i
                        0                         0% N
                                                     0%00000009
                                                  (N 0%   N r4 00% en
                                                                .-l
                                                                            X .-4'0'.0,.40'.0,-IenO'.Na'.N
                                                                    - .-l - >4
                                                                                                              0%ene0enoc',-4'.o'Uo
                                                                               N(NN(NCN.-4C'4N,-4.-4.-4(N >4 -4(N(N(NNNCNN'U'UInb
                                                  en en
                                                                            O                              o
        NN%D00%en
     0%NNOIflLn                                   en oi     0 ,-4 %0 .-40%(NO
                                                        '.0 N N N
                                                                               .-l N                   z>4 O.-lN.4OOO0OO,-
                                                                                                              ONN'.D'.0%0InN 0 oen'U'Usen'.o.ooN
                                                                            0% 00'. 0                                        >4      -4-4('4en'Uit)0%
in enmenenenenmenmenmm in                                                                              In            .00'O0.0                             I',
       (NnenO
      U%IflIfl                                    0 Ifl '.00 IA 0% .-4 en
                                                  LA In LA '.0 '.0 '.0
                                                                                            N en
                                                                                        0% 0% 0        >4
                                                                                                              0smen0ONN
                                                                                                              09,-4-4OO00O0.-iO                           Z
                                                                                                                                                          >4
                                                                                                                                                             %DO('4(N,lNino'UenM'U
                                                                                                                                                             o-4o,-I('4en'U'.no
      enmenenenenenmenenenm                                          menen C', mm en                   •0                                                 0
D.iNNLflNN0iONNNin
   senenoenenmenen                                en
                                                  en en en
                                                                  '.0 4 en 0 ..4 it) In LA S
                                                             LA LA S N N         0'.
                                                                                                              enocNcnInNen >4 CN0'O(N,-4Nen0'Uo
                                                                                                       >4 0l0O0%0i0%0'.0%,-40 000.-400C"OIn,-4
en m                 enenenmenenen          en    en en en men en en en en en en en                    en menmenenenmoo                                   en 'U'U'U'U'U'U'U'U'UO'UIn
      NOin%O.-iNU10%QN(N                                                                               x
                                                                                                       >4r-r-NenLno0%Nen0%
p:                                                it, '.0 u             en        en in in o'. ,-i
                                                        .-4 .-4      en en LA '.0 '.0 N N 0%               0%00%0%N0'.,-40'.                              >4 0%00000%o,-4enc',LAo
N mmenmenencnenenenenm                      N     en en mmmm en en men enm                             (N menoenenenmenmenoen                             (N m'U'Um'U'U'U'UIn
        0%oen4en.-i
      NOO0%ON,-I0%OO                              0'. 0%   ,-4 en '.000% S
                                                  0% 0% 0'. 0 v- '.0 In '.o N                          >4 O-4-4NLA.oo'.sino
                                                                                                       Z
                                                                                                          N0%0%NNN,-4O                                    >4
                                                                                                                                                                en'UC'.Nbenoo'.nIn'U'.
                                                                                                                                                                0-40O00%0,-,me-'.'U0%
 -    enenr4enCNencnencNc.lenen             -4    CNN N en en en en en en en en en                     .-4    menenenenenenenenen'o'o                     ,-4

oz    .OOOO0%
      eNLncno0%0%(Nul
                                                  0%
                                                        N en II 0 -4
                                                        0% 00 .-4 .-              it'. U .055 o
                                                                                     0% '.0 N
                                                                                              Z               NNSNSr'-.-40
                                                                                                              en.oLnu'.%o(Nenr-InLn'ON                    O '.0tn0'.0'U0%NenencN(N
                                                                                                                                                          E     0,-4,-4000%0%,--44".en'U0%
0% mmN           4rnenenN(N(NCN 0%                (N C men en men C". mm en en                         a'.    menenenmenenenenenq.o                       0'. 'U'Uenen'U'U'UOU
o InenNNO%0%c'lenue-o                                   In (N en N (N (N ens u              ON o N0S'.00enIn0%0'.o o i0ensNeneno%o,sN
              s0%ooo%o%o                          00% .-4 0 '-4 0 In it) '.055                 z      s'.o'.o'.o'.o'.osseo X 0.-l0000.0%0(Nc'irn
%D N N (N (N (N (N en en N N N en                 en (N men 4". men en men en en               '.o menmmmmenmenm.oo '.0 'U'U'U'U'Umen'Uoo
oE     Oenenc
      0%O0%O00                                    (N SN (N (N (N 00 '.0 O 50%
                                                  00% .-$ 0 l .-4                 l.A In '.0 '.0 '.0   zO senNeo%ol.ntnenw
                                                                                                          '.0SN%0%OLfl'.0%.OSSOQ%
                                                                                                                                                          o (N-4InLflO('9'.0'U'U'.D('4In
                                                                                                                                                          E 0,-I0000%0%ON('4e".N
((I C4NNN(NNCnC4NN(Nen In                         en N en en en en en en en en en en                   In menmmmmenmmm.oe',                               In O'U'Umenooo
oE NONWN(N-4u1O
   0%0%o\0%o%o                                    (N    N
                                                  00% 00%
                                                                  0% 00 '.0 NO                         o                                                  o NN.-4('40%enO'.(N'.n'.o
                                                                             en          '.0 '.0       E ..0N'.DInit)it)In'.0'.0S0%O'.                    E O%O000%0%O.-4C'N.0
      NNNNNNCN(N(NNNm                             m (N en m m en en en enen en                         0 mmmenenenmenenencnen                                   en'U'U'Uenenen'U'Uo'U
     entnou,mN
oZ NNN0%r-0%0%                                    0'. 0'.
                                                            In       '.0 LA 0'.      S NO'. o
                                                                  0% 00 (N 0 0 l.A In In    z                 1nLAO,INLA,-,'.Oen(NOO'.
                                                                                                                             InLAInIntt)'.0'.bQ%
                                                                                                                                                          oE en'Uo%'.nsa%m,-4enr-
                                                                                                                                                             0%0O%0%0%.-In
en    N (N N N (N (N N N (N N (N (N en            r (N CNN en men en en en en en                       en enenenenenmenenenenmen                          en m'omenenmeneno.o
o      sbsr-o
E %0IflO(0CNbUD0
N NNNNNNN(NNN(N(N N (N (N (N (N m enm menen
                                                  0%
                                                            Il'. 0'. 000% (N '.0 '.0 en
                                                            LA 00 en '                In
                                                (N menmenenmenmenenenen (N en'Ummenenenen'U'U'U'U
                                                                                                       o      0%CNen'.0O'.0,-4sen,-4o
                                                                                                              LA LA                'U it'. In in
                                                                                                                                                          o 0%0'U'Uen'U'U,-4(Na'.(N


      0%tti.00
o eno%Lneno%o%enr-  en 0 In In In '.0 .05 .-4 o Nen.-4cN0%'.o(NoenInen'.o o in5('40%'.Ø0%,-4,-41fl(.4en'U
                    0%   ('4 0% 0% ON 4". (N In
.-4 NN(N(N(NNN(N(N(NN(N .-l
                                                E 'ULALAenCNqenou,'U'.DIn
                                                  (N (N ('4 (N
                                                                                  N0%0%0%'U
                                                                     (NNenenmenen en                    -         enenenenenenenenenenenen
                                                                                                                                                          E
                                                                                                                                                          .-4 mmmenmmenmmr'.en'o
o e4Nu%Denen0%
E                                                 it) cN en en -40%
                                                  0%
                                                                          en in ,-4 (N
                                                               0'. 0% 0 In (NO LA
                                                                                                       oE Uh-4NO(N.-l00'.Sen      o O(N-4,-40eninN.-
                                                                                                          mLnLn.-io(NocNLnenen.-, Z       NNSO%'.0en
o NCN(N(NNNNCNe4(N(N(N 0 N (N - (N (N (N N en en en en en                                              O mmmenmmenenenmenen o enenenenene-'.mc',enenen.o
          N en 0 in %D S 0% 0 '4 (N               .-4 (N en          in '.05          0% 0 .-4 (N                 .-4 N en     In 'ON 0% 0 .-4 N                .4 (N en 'U LA '.OS   0% 0 .-4 N
                             ..-4 .-4 .-I                                                    ,-I l                                           .-4 .-4 _l                                 -4 ,-4 —
 N                                          en                                                         'U                                                 Ii,
 0%
                                            '.0
                                            0'                                                         '.0
                                                                                                       0%
                                                                                                                                                          0
 -l                                         '-4                                                        '-4
                                                                                                                                                          0%
                                                                                                                                                          -4




                                                                                                             91
     OIDNONIAIDO%
4In Inr.N0%r-I0NIn                                                 0O,-INV In                        .-4
                                                                                                     V•     ID0%VIn0%in.4V
                                                                                                            In       O)0%V 010
                                                                                                                                                            NO
                                                                                                                                                            .-4 .4
N      VVV                              •    In
                                             N                                        U;
                                                                                             In
                                                                                             04 in
                                                                                                                                   •
                                                                                                            In In In In In If) In U)         04

                        0NI.D• 0                    .4 In m 004 ID 0 N 0 N                      IO0%VNInN0%C4-4                                     U) N ID 0% 0% 0) '00 '00100)
4
01 VVVV N
O
                                                    In N 1001010 .4 01 In N N
                                                    V 0 V V V In In In In Ia) In In
                                                                                             4O InID0II0NInVVIDOV
                                                                                             ('4
                                                                                                                 •0
                                                                                                     InU)InInInInInIflII)InIOIO              N
                                                                                                                                                    U) V '001100)01 l NV 1010
                                                                                                                                                            ID         101010 10101010

       VO.-INN.-400%DUN                                     V 10 N ) In QI 0% ON 4
4               ON0%O%O                 •    In
                                                    U)      10 0 0% 0404 NO) ID N            •4
                                                                                             In
                                                                                                           0ID0In.oOV•                       In
                                                                                                                                                    0 .—4 ON 0)101001 N -4 UI
                                                                                                                                                    It) V U) 0)10 V 0)0110 In 0101
                                                                                             .4 InInIOInInU)U)IflInInIOIO                    .-4          10101010 ID 10 '0 ID ID 10
       010 V.-4IONr-NN
       N-4NInQ0Nr-                                  N NOV10 V U) N 04 .-4 01 N                       O)O%N0%Inmi0InO1In04                           V  N NV N 01 '00010101
o.-4                        flLflIfltflV
                                        • 0,-I      10 100% Oi V 0% V In N N
                                                            V      U) U) U) IAU) In U)
                                                                                             M
                                                                                             O
                                                                                             '-4
                                                                                                     NIO010%0%NiflInION0%V
                                                                                                     InInLninU)IniniflIflInInID
                                                                                                                               •0            I-I
                                                                                                                                                    0)0% V 0% In In V If) 04 NO 0%
                                                                                                                                                    1010101010101010 N lOP- N
                                                    0% 001 N 4 NO V .-4                                                                             V
4 001010 VOVmc                                      ID      V N N V N V In ION N
                                                                                      01
                                                                                             >4      IONO%O0%InInInIONV                             NVU) 010% 4) N V In 10 V N
                                                                                                                                                         ("I 0)1001 01100 Cl N
Ill              f%ItflIDLflLflIflV          In          V V V in in in In In Il) U)         In      InInU%IDU)InInInIflU)InIO In                   ID O 10 ID ID ID ID ID N N N C-
zM     00101000%                                    O OlIn 0% 040% - 0 In V 0% V
                                                    N N mID ID 01.4 V V DN                   >4      ION0100InVVIDNV                                N N .-4 0% In '00101001 N
                                                                                                                                                    €4 In ("IV N .-4 00 N ("IV 0%
V                             U%IflU         V      InInInlflInInU)                          V InInInIDinInIninIfliflIflIO                   o      %OI01010IOC-NNC-NNN

4 NO0LflU0%                                         OlD ON '0 U)
                                                    N 0% In ID NO 0% V ID ID
                                                                            00% N
                                                                                             >4      InNO%00LflVVIOIDIn
                                                                                                                                                    ("I N 0)01 U) ,-*IO0.-4 In ID
                                                                                                                                                    0)1001 V 0% 0) N 0) U) —
                              LflIflInV                  V V V Ia) in U) In In U) In 0) iflInIn%DIDIninInIflIf%InID 0)                              1010101010 N          NN N N N
       V000%rN
       0.-40ONIDID0                                   .4 V V 0% 04 V 0101.4 N
                                                    IDOl N V 11% 04.40% 0)1010
                                                                                                     InIONNVONIO0)Ln0%
                                                                                             >4 InIDO.-40%i1%m'0IOIOin
                                                                                                                                                    01011010 V 0% In 01000110
                                                                                                                                                    0% U) N 0% N V UI'00101 U)           0
N                                LSLflLI% N              V V V U) U) Ill U) In In U)         N U1U)LflIOIDIflInIflInInInID                   €4     ID '0 ID '.0 ID N NO-N         SN
 X OIDr4.-404Nm
 — InU
 o
      o%oON0%a%r-V0

      V(%NInN0%NVLfl 0
                                             -l
                                                    0%      V ID V     ID .-4 00 In 0
                                                    ID ID 000 ,-l 0% V 11% N 0%
                                                                       In I1% In In UI U)

                                                    0% V V 0% U) 0% 10 4 ID V ,-4 0
                                                                                             >4
                                                                                             .4

                                                                                             oZ
                                                                                                     In,-4OIVNVID,-4,-401001
                                                                                                     VInID0%,40%VVVNIO
                                                                                                               IDInISIInInUIInID
                                                                                                     0)InOOInNID0%VONO)
                                                                                                                                             '-I
                                                                                                                                                      .-4 — VON U) 0% ,-4 0 V V
                                                                                                                                                    V In 0)01101010 If) V 01
                                                                                                                                                    1010101010 N N N N N N N

                                                                                                                                                    0110 V 0 ION V 010) ('40
 Z e0%01o010%r-Vo    E                              10   ID ,-I 010% 010040% V 0%                                                                                      In 0 .-
                                                                                                                                                    In U) 0% 04 U) 1010 U) N
 0%                            flInIflLfl    Q%                  rn V in U) In In U) UI      0%      U)inU)in10If)InInLflInInlD              01     1010101010 N N N N N

 o
 z              NInNDCO,-                           V ID 100% V 0 In ID NON
                                                            4 01                             O       NVNO0%V,-liflNID
                                                                                                     I-40)VOICVVVIDNLfl                             — Ia) N In     0501 V 0110 N
 10                     UInInflII            ID     iI)U)U)In
                                                    ID ID            ill N 0% 4 N ID N       Z
                                                                                             ID      InInIninIDInInInU)LflInID               10                        NNN
                                                                                                                                                    U) U) ("4,-I V NV 0% U) In 0 ("


 o N00.-I%CVNNN
 Z 0%NO%C'O                                         0% V N 0% In ON N V 0% 0%
                                                    D ID ,-4 N 0% ID 00 V In
                                                                                             oE 4NVNOID0%mVIONV
                                                                                                  .4In.-l0IDOIO0)O%                                       0' 0' 0400 N 11% In ,-4O ("4
                                                                                                                                                    V V -4.4'00% 0) NV V 0%
 In                         L$UILnInLfl      In                              U) In In In     Il)               IDL1%InU)InInI0 U)                   ID D ID ID ID ID NN N N N
           O-4ONN 0 .4.4
 V     tLflIn
 oE NNNN
    01010
                V
          0%NIDIflO

         O0%INIDV 0
                         N .4 N N 0% N 010 o V.4V04.-4OO%0)VNO% 0
                    ID 10.4 ID '-40110 N V E ON0%ID0%InmN0%IDIDeV) E
                                                         V 00101 '0 '0 '0 V V 11% In         V )If)InIninInU)U')InID V
                                                                                                                                                                     ,-I 0) N N 0% 01 In Ill
                                                                                                                                                    V 0) '-400% 0 ('4 —40)01
                                                                                                                                                          ID ID ID '0 N N N NN

 oE    N
                                 eo                 .4010 N OlIn 010% '010
                                                    ID ID N V 0.4 V In 100                    O InNIVN0)%DW0%O.4                                    0' 001,-400% 0' N 0. U) N V
           VVV              In In In Lfl V                  VVInIn                            E 0%4NIDVNNNInIDe')
                                                                                             0%       '0i1%InInLfli$)Inif)U)LflInID          0)
                                                                                                                                                    ('40) 4 ON V 404
                                                                                                                                                    IDIDIDlD.DIDNNNNN
                                                                                                                                                                                 OlD—

 xo    —   In
         0% Lfl 0   10 Lfl Olin N
       In10IDN0-4,-4%             0 .40% 000)10 '010 In In ID U) o V.4-4IDV0%VVIDNV
                                  E ID In '-I N VOle N 4% V N        z O'-4InN0),-INNV0N                                                            0.-I,.-400%0'0O
                                                                                                                                                            N 0. V U) ON 0) .0
                                                                                                                                                                      - 00 V 0
 N OV0OVVVInInLnIn0 N                                                N VU%LflI1)InInInInInU)InID                                             €4     101010 In 1010 N N          N ION
 oZ 0100 0%0%O%OInNO                V
                                                                     x VO'.VVNOIOInOVNV
                                       N .4 VU) In 0'. 0% U) QI N 01                                                                                In 01 V 4 N 10 14) U) 44) 0.0.
                  InNNCN            In 0)0 U) 01 N N 0104N '0 O         NNOImU)("4.-40C'40)O,-4                                                     0%       D.-4 0.01 U) 00 ID           04
       0VVVVVVInVVV 1-4                                                                       I-i     VVVU)InInInInLnU)InIO                  .-4    U) U) In 1011% ID 10 N N 1010 N

      O-4N%'-40V'0O
  oz I1%N,- ONON%CID 0
                     E 0) N 0% ON 0) N V 0) 1)0% o
                       N N 4 .4 ON 0'. 0% V ON 0        VNNIDONN001InN
                                                    Z IDminoNNO.ID.4Nm0'.                                                                           N V ID '-40)0% '0 V 00100
                                                                                                                                                          0)10 In         In 40100'
   o OVV VVVLnVCIV 0                        0 01 0) O V'0Lninl1)'0'0inIn'0u) 0                                                                                       U) Il) In IC N IDID it

       .-4 N C) V In ID N      010 ,-4 N             .4 N 0) '0 In ID N      010.-I 04                '-4 N 0) V In ION     0'. 0.4 N               .4 N 4") '0 in 10 N 010,-IN
                                 -4 -4 .-l                                       ,-I 4 ,-4                                     1-4 .-4 .-4                                                '-4

                                             N                                                                                               0%
                                              ID                                              ID                                             ID
                                              I-I
                                                                                              0'                                              0%
                                                                                              '—4                                             '-I




                                                                                                    92
If)                                                                                                                         In
N                                                                                                                           N
   mN if)                 NO'.                                                                                                    0
0   ..
>4 ON
N '.010 10
                          mc',
                          '.010
                                   >4
                                   0  O'.mo".
                                   N (AIDIn                              0                                                  0
                                                                                                                            N
                                                                                                                                  0.           OIOmNOONO
                                                                         ('4                                                      '.0          'DNNNNNNN
    N0OIn                                 ONLA               N           x>4
>4 NOWC'S
In  .                     InUI     >4 om
                                   141
                                                             —
                                                                         In
                                                                                                                                  LA 00,-4 ID — In ('S ,-4-I'.D 0'
                                                                                                                                  '0101010 0'. N '-40. (40 -I
.-I   lD'.0'.DN           'DID     — '.010(F)                ID                                                                   '010101010 ION N '.0 N N N

>4 O.-40,-4000N000'.o   NNNIAI'SmUIONIOUIN                                      o '.0 N -4000.4 ('.4 In '0,-I                     UI In N 0.00100.010%
a 0NNInIDInC'1NOC'S  o      N-IIn0.m0'a'Q'. >4
                                   >4
— N'.DIDNNNtSNNNIOI0 — 1010In'.01010'.0%DInInInit, 0
                                                                                ON N ('1 .-4 ('40141100 m 0
                                                                                                                            0     0 In LII LAN N ON N N
                                                   '-I                                '.D ID 10 '.0 10 '.D 10 '.0 '.0 '.0   -4    '.01010101010 N N '.0101010

>4 0l.-I,-411IID0me0%Oo >4 0-4O,-40%0%0%NO                                      '.0 omm ON ('50.00' ('4                           ON In -'.10100% 10 NON C'S
                                                                         >4     N 100 N 010' .-4 0.-40'.-4                        C'S '010 '.0 '.0 N In 010 1010
In NNNNNNNNNID'.0'0 IA IAIAIn'.0101010InInInInIn                         In     US In ID In UI In UI 101010 In ID           'IS   '.0 '.0 10 '.0 D '.0 N N '.OIDIDIO
                                          C'IOICONOIONN0.00',                   100.0 N 10          10 ('40 u.s N                 00 .-I ('50.0 m c' — ON
>4                                 >4                                    >4     In 00'. N UI           0000.0                     C'S'01010'0 N N .-'. '.00% N '.0
O NNNNNN('-NIDI0UIUI               O U'%LAOIAInIDIOUIIAUlLAUI            0      In USIA US LII UI In '.0 '.0 .0 '4110       0     '.0 '.0 10 10 '.0 IDNN '.0 '.0 '0 '.0
                        ('sNm'.oNooa'.No
>4 01,-IONNIO0CINIDN >4 NNIn10N'..0NNN,-4N0                              >4
                                                                                0'. m In'0          ('40'. N 0
                                                                                N N N US m 10 N 010' 0                            In '.0,-4 NON 00'. (45 NO
                                                                                                                                  C'S ION 1010              '.00% N N
C'S NNNNNNNN'.DIOInIn              C'S    In00InInI0IOInI(5InUIL(I       '.5    IA In USIA In USIA In UI UI 11110           u.s   '.0 10 10 '.0 ID '.0 N N '.0 '.D '.0 10
   NNIn,-4mr.40'UINo'.N
>4 O'.ONNInN,-4'.CInmo     mC'IIn00%O%OLA.-IIDNO x                              0(45 N In     0 '0 N '0.-I NO                     10.-I 0'. 14500 N .-4 m ("4(45 N
                        >4 NN,-4NO0InLflUIOO                                          In .400(4510                100'.           NION ID 0,-IN 0'. N N
N NNIbNNNNN1010UIIA N 000UIIAIOID1(suIUILIso N                                  O In In 111111 In In UI 111 In In           N     ID '.0 ID '.0 '.D NN ID '.0 '.0 10
    '00%InC'5UIN0%O0ID0I
>4 01IDLAONN'.Dm,-l0'.       OIn.40N10..ONNOUIO'. x     000'0 N N m '.00'.         '.00110 ('4 In 0110 N
                          >4 NNIDO%00NNIONN       >4 — NO In In — ('5100 ('1 In                            u.s —
                                                                                   O (450'. NO 111100 In 010,-I
,-4 N10%ONNNIOID'.DIDUI'0 — mmOO%D.0UIIn0'0O '-4 0OIn 0 110 UI UIIn In In '-I '0 ID '.0 '.0 N N N '.0 N N
o 00.-4ON10'.0a'0'.O0o'. o 010'0.-IInmNNN0'm,.-4     0' In 0 C'S ('40
Z 0.01'.DOmONInm.. Z -4l0NUIN0.-4,-40lD.-4                                 '.01010
                                                     0' 0 N ('500 N ('4 In mm UI   N 010'. m 010'. N N N Ill 00
                                                                                   ON 0', N ON N ION C'S C',
0% NIDIONNNICIO.OICUSO 0'. mm0uI0'.J1UIo'0o 0% ('S000'OLIIOUIUSInIAUI              '0 '.0 '.0 10 NNNNN N                    0%


o 100.m..-lO10NomUI.-4 o In,-I0%m,-4NNN0%Om             N N ('4,-40% m N .40.10    N 10,-4 0 UI 0 0% Na'
     O0%UIC'SNIDIOLflN001    N10I0mUIoO'.oInO        N 0,-4C9 1000 m .-4 NO        01,-I 0'.10.-4 ION N '.00 UI
10 '.DIDNNlDlDI010IDIno '.0 omooInusooo.0 ID ('S m 0 00 OOUS In ill iA in '.0 11110 IDNNNNN
o N,-40'OsO10(-IDc',
z OOLAN,-IIOUILI%0,-400'. o UIIO01000'.'0'00%NIn0'                                  ('4(45 .-40%,-I IS In N 010 ('S               () — N 0010 NON ('S N m
                            NUIIDNONI0I0O00I                                    ION moo IAN     .-4.-40                           0% — 10.-IN In N 1010010
UI NIONNID10IO10'.OUIO             UI OLflLflO'0Ou.5                     UI     mm o 00000111 IA In In                      In    111101010 N N N N N
o InNNO10UIN0'.N oE NO0'.0OLI1NNO0',N
Z OOUI'4,4UIc.somooo'. NUIIO,-4O,-IO.0NOm                                       u.S 01010 LA -4 0 UI N 00                         Nm o In N 010% N 0'. Ino
                                                                                UI lD,'-4    0'. m 0 ID 01010 m                         ON In 010(41000 '0
O N10NNI0IO%D'.DIDUIO      0 c'smooLnU1ooo'0m                            '0     mm o mm o oooo In In                        0 In '.0 10 ION NNNN N
o Ooooousomoa'ç,o'.
Z   -4-moNmmIONo o Nm0oN.—IoInNIn0                                                  (45 N ,-4,-410. ON ('4 N
                                                                                m 00'. '.0 ,-4 UI N 0. N
                                                                                                                                  NO (4)01-4 ('410          UI ,-4 ('4 N
                                                                                                                                  NO'. it'. me'0 m '.D N OlD Ill
('1  NIDNNID'.O'.D10It1UIO C's ommOoInIn0000m                            m      mm C'S mm o m 0000 UI                             IflUI10I0NNNNNN
o O%0%mNOulmNN0'.
Z   moo'.NInom,.-4ICNo o InUIONIISmmNNO'.cO,-4                                    0'. 00 N — ON ('4 In m                          Nm ON 10100'.,-'. 010 C'S In
                                   E .-ImUI01m,-4mOUINNUI                       N N 100100% N 014110 0                            ION m ,.-i In m N 0(4500
N NIOIDID%01010ID10In0'0           N mu.1LnLnoo'0'0m                     N mm mm mm m 0000141                               ('4   In UI '.0'.0 ID N          NNNN
O NmN10NNo10In14sN o .-IIn104OuI'-i10NIO'.om                                    N In ('4 0 ID In '00% m                           00' ,-4 m rS 010 m In 010
E 10100InUI.-4O%NUIONUI E .-4NONO\NO.oO9m                                       ON ON UI ID 141 ('1            UI NO'.            '01(5001110 N 10.-4,-40N
— NlOI0.OIDIDInIOUIInoo            '-4 ommc'Ioou1ooom                    '-4    (45(4 ('5 mm ("cc', 00000                   "-4   InLAI010IDNNNNN
o lI10O0%IO('4N,-4In0co o 0'm'.00'NNWO'.UII0NO                                  ,-I10 (40 ,-40'.,-4 N In 0' N N                   N 0'. N UI 0010,-I 0% 0 In ('S
    0..-IIDNc.lOmQ..0000'. E O'.,-4000'.LANOInUIIDN                             0mm mm m ON '00 N                                 ('ION ale m 01 In N 0
o IOIOIDIDI.DUIOIDLIIUIOC',        O rnmmmm000ornmm 0 ('4 mm mm mm 00000 0                                                        III In UI In 10 N N N ION N
        NC'S 0 UI ID N 0' 0.-IN           .-i Nm o UI ID N O%0,-4C'4            — N 0 UI 10 N 0%0,-4tN                            .-4 NC'S 0 In '.0 N 0'. 0,-I N
                         — — ,-4                             .-4 — _-I                                         ———                                                  -4 -4
0N                                 -4                                                                                       m
                                   N                                                                                        N
0%
'-4
                                   0'-I                                                                                     0%
                                                                                                                            -4




                                                                               93
                                                                  m '0'0OI N
                                                                  0 N'0In                                                                        0 In 0110 0' 4') ON 4')
In
N
                                                   >4
                                                   Ill
                                                         .4
                                                          .                             >4
                                                                                       In                                                    >4 0NS
                                                                                                                                             IS)
                                                                                                                                                        ID N0%O
                                                   IN                                  CM                                                    N  5554'- N N5N
      m c.i           N ID N ID          In NO
0     In Q NO% 0 0% '-4 00% '-4                    >4
                                                   0  NIDmN,-4O,In,.O 0>4 010
                                                                           '00% Ui 4') N ('4
                                                                               0 '-400                    >4 NNNInID'C'C0%  ('I ('40CM
                                                                                                                                       4')         mIDNNIDIDC'),.l10ID,,ul
N          NNNNN                          N        N                                   CM       NSNNNNNN 0('4 NNNNNNNNN555
      N .-4         ID ,-40 '-4 .-4 .-I In 0% 0          0"-4IDInIDN')OION                      N ID N N '0 '0 N ('4'0 CM'0 In
              In 0%
           NNNNNNSNS
                             0% ,-4 -4

                                                   -4 NNNN
                                                   >4
                                                   In                                   >4
                                                                                       I')
                                                                                        -I
                                                                                                010%  0010% N S ID
                                                                                                S SN N N('-SS N SN In
                                                                                                                       N0'N'0InInNI')N,.4ID
                                                                                                                   >4 10IDIDIDID.0In"0InSN
                                                                                                                   '-4 NNNNNNNNNNNN
   0010% 01 m ...e N01 In 0 m X 0%'iNNeOINn,NO
0  00          0 N N N ' >4        0%.-40%O0('0%CW >4
                                                                                                0100% 0' 0% .'4 In %0 ID 100% C')
                                                                                                         1010            ID In '00
-4 N N N N N N SN N N O       .4 NNNNNNr_ 0'-4                                                  N N SN N N NNS N N ID
                                                                                                                                             >4
                                                                                                                                             o
                                                                                                                                             .-4 NNNNNNNNNNNr-.
      N In In m 01-4 000 N N
      N In 0 N 0%                         U% 1     >4                                   >4
                                                                                                U) 4') 4')        010% .4-44').4 .-4
                                                                                                '00 4') N ID'0 4') -40N0 4                   >4
In    1010 N N                      NNr-N          In NNNNNNN5NN                       U)       NNNNNNNNSIDID In 'DIDIDIDIDIOIDIDNNNN
      ID      -401 In N 01 N In 0%                    ()UiN0%.4(',-40ID.4IDN                    4') 0% -401000000% 0
      N ID 001 N 1 0%                         N    >4 .4N'0IDO%O(N'0'CN                                               CMID0%O'0C')'0N.0N
                                                                                                                  >4 NNIDNIDInN01(..(N
                                                                                                N CM-4 .4 ID 4') N 01 U) 50%
                                          Sr '0 NIDNNNNNNNN                            '0 rNN N SN N 101010 In U) '0 1OIDDIDIDIOID%DIDNNN
      In 00% ID N In .-4 ,-4 In ,.4 44                                                          001
      N 10-40% N In 9 N >4 0%InONN'0-4N.0O                                              >4
                                                                                                         ID N SN '0 N ID ID
                                                                                                0100. '0-40% ID In ('41010                   >4
                                                                                                                                                   10I0O0%C')U)In01U)
      ID ID N N    NNN m %DI0NNNNNNNNN                                                          10510 ID N N 101010 ID In In                 4')   10%DID%DIDIDIDIDIDNNN
      (N N NO 4 0 N 0% N N -4
           ID N N 0% N 10 In N ID                     .4ID00%InOe'iID
                                                   >4 NNNUiNID5O0%NIO                  >4
                                                                                                0110 1(1   In .4014') N CM 0' In
                                                                                                4') 510 '4) ('40110 '0NO 4') 4')                   N,-4NNI')%D.--4NInONO
N
                                                                                                                                             >4        OO'-40'0'ONNO,..I
      ID ID N                       NNNN N %DIDIDNIDNNNIDNID N                                  ID ID 101051010101010 In IS)                 N IDIDInIDID%DIDIØIDNNN
      N 0% 0%                In     01 ID 4              InNIDIOSIflIDIDNQ%NO
                                                                                                                            N '0 W Z
                                                                                                                            4') ID '0
                                                                                                10.-I '0-41010
      00% N 0% N ID ID N N In                      >4                                  >        It4.-400 ID 4') 0                  >4 InIn'0IS)NIDOCNIn00'
-4                                                 ,.4 IDLflIOID%D%DNNNIIDI            '-4                            10 Ii) In 11) '0 '0    .4 InInInIflInL1)IDIDIDNID%O
           OlIn ID In N
                   4 N 00% 10
      N .-4 ON ID 100% N 10-4
0 N N 0'                                 555
                                                   Z OOUi'C'0O
                                                   o InIn,-4UiN(.i'0'DN0%                       4') 00 '00 IS) U) In 0105 N
                                                                                                4') 0%       N '0.4      ID In I') N N       o '00N0InNNNID
                                                                                                                                             Z m-lC')InU)o%,-.4'0N
                                                   0% IDLflIOIOII4%DNNNIDIDIn          0'       In U) In U) ID ID 11)44)4)11) '0'0           0% InU)U)InInU)UDIDID
                                                   o
                                                   Z NNI0OONOi'DUie                                                                          o
                                                                                                                                             Z InN,-4InN0%,
      N ID 0% '-4 '-4 ID ') ON l 4)                                                             .4-404') '-4 e') U) 050 4')
          In 0% In N N N NO N                        ONNIDe0%ON,-ID                                                                            ,4OO0O4')Nu
ID    NN0%NNN                                      ID         LflIDIIiIDIONNInIDUI     I0
                                                                                                .410 Ui '0.40110 .1) '0 ('41010
                                                                                                U)UiInInInIS)U)In'0'0 ID InIn'0InUiUiUi'CID'C
      In          N N 0% -40% ,-4 10               o OCir4.4O10UimO%,-4N                        ('45N,-4100
      In In    In 0' 000 In m 0   N                z ONOUiNSOI0OIn                              0 '0 C') 4') 0' U)4)'04') '-410 IS) o ID0%4')LnONN'0Inui
                                                                                                                      ,-4   U) 4')    0%

In    NN0%NNN                                      In         LnIOUi10IO'DNLn10Ln      It)
                                                                                                                                    E O0%0C')C')N0%NID'0u)
                                                                                                                                             In    In'0'0'0InInInLS)IDIDID
           ID ,-4
      ID In 'C 0
                      10     10      0' N ) ID
                                  '0 N .-4 N N     o '0NIOOOID'0,-1'iIØN
                                                   Z 0%IDN'0,-4LnNOIN                           N 0% ('4 N 4') .        ID 4')               o InOInIn.-4i"iO(N0%InID'C
                                                                                                  (N ('4-4510 0 ('4 NO In U)                 E O'O1NINNID-4Inm'0
      NN0%NN0%IDNN                                 '0                                  '0                       In U) U) I1)I1)In'0 '0       '0    '0'0'0'0IS)LflU)UiIDIDID%C
      ID   0' '0-40% 10 '0 ON 0% ')                o '0Lt%IDO'0'0O0%Pi0%                        010 t) 0' .-4 N C'-                          o
      ID Lfl ID ON SN m e' 010 -
      NN0%NN0%%0NN
                                                   Z Lfl'D10(NOmIn10'D'C(N                      N .400110'0 ('4 .4.-4Q% U)'0                 E'ILflN,-4NIS)'0N0%N
                                                                                                                                                NI0S4'D9(.,,..(.)
                                                   4')   InInInInL$)'D'D10'DInInIn     C')                                                   4')
      N In In 0 In 0% '0%') NON 0
      1010100% 0% 105 N ON In 0                    z
                                                   o   Nmc.i'0N0'CIO
                                                       'D'0-ic''0.,-                          ID
                                                                                                4') 010% 0 10100101 In 10'0
                                                                                                         '04') ,-l 09          oE IDInLfl0,-4'C0'In'CN
N     SN
                                                                                                                           C')    'CIDInInO0C')'0,-I0'1.4
                      5550% 10 N SN                (N UiInInInInInIDIO'DUiUiUi         N      '00'0 IS) IS) U) U) It) '0 '0'0 (N '0'0'0U)U)InUiInIOInI0
      N    .4 'DIn In 010 N In S                   o 4'Nui'05O,-410m10                        N    N 0 '000 N '0-410 o NN4'0O'CIn'0,.4NN
      In Ui Ui N 1010 Ui NO ,-4 N                  Z UiO%N,-40%IDO0%m,4O
-4    N N SN        50% 10 N S ID                  "-4
                                                                                              It) ION N CM 4') .40% ON '0 N    E InInIn'00'0'NmN.4'D
                                                                                       '-4                      Lfl U) U) 0 U)        '0      4    '0'0'0'0'0'0InU)InIOInU)
      10     -4 N Ui Ui '0SIDS '0                  o N10N100%5c'iuiN 0                        N %DNID0ID0% 04') 0' SCM                       o .4 '04') 0 10 It) U) 5 ,-4
           ,40 In In 'DO .4 N () '0Ifi                               z                        11) '0 N            (NO '-4104') ('4           E In'0Inm0%,-')5(Nr
0 NN NNNO' 10105 '0                                O          In'0'0InLflLIi'DLn 0                                                           0 '0'0'0'0'0'0InUiUiIDUiIn
           (N 'i 0 Ui ID S 0' 0.4 N                      .4 N 4') '011) lOS 010-4 (N               CM 4') '0 U) IDS 010-4CM                        .4 N (")'0 U) ION 0%0,-4 N
                                              -4                              .4-4-4                                             .4-4 _-4                              _4_4 _4
'0                                                 In
N                                                  N                                   '.0                                                   N
0%                                                 0%
                                                                                       4'-.                                                  N
'-I                                                '-4                                 0%
                                                                                       '-4
                                                                                                                                             0%
                                                                                                                                             -4




                                                                                          914
       o N 0% N 0010-4 N -4 m
       N N N mm 4 mm '.0 in                >4
                                                 ininomo'a'mommo_i
                                              In%0ID0101InIOI0IDInIn                       N 4', NON in 0010 ON IA
                                           In                                       >4
                                                                                    in     In 0% 01 0-410 '00 0' Cl 010      >4
                                                                                                                             In
                                                                                                                                GI'0_iID0InID10'0N
                                           N 01001010101010101010101                CII    000000100         _i.40
                                                                                           -4_i_i_i_i _i,-I_i_i.-4_4         N    0_i_i.-4_i.-4_iNc.iCl_i_i
                                                                                                                                  -4_i_i -4 -4_i_i_i_i_i_i -4
       10 N 0% ID em 100%
       .-4 N N m in in N 100%In_i.0
                                  in             m 010% In 0 N 10001 '00101         x>4    ION 0 m o 0110 In N o -4             ONICO_iOmID_i.-401N
0('4                                       >4
                                           O
                                                 ION N 010110 b 01 N 10 N
                                                                                    0N     NO Nb '00 01 0 In 01010
                                                                                                _i _i_i .- - _i
                                                                                                                             >4
                                                                                                                             O
                                                                                                                                NN410mIO0101'0IDInN
                                           CII                                             c
                                                                                           _i _i _i_i_i _i.-l _i _i_i_i _i   N _ir'41'4NCIINNm'0mNm
                                                                                                                                 -4-4-4-4-4_i_i_i_i_i_i_i
      010% N 10 N m .-4 in 0 in     N01010_iOc'i01_iC',1010         01mb IA 0110001 C'% 0' N
   00 _i N In N In 10 ION Di IDOl0100IbOO_i00al                 >4                                     N01Ifl01O_iN01'0_i01O
                                                                    0101-4010 NON N _i_i 0% >4 _iNIOmO_iIDm_iNNN
                                U,                               in
                                .-4 0100101010101010100101 '-4 0 $ N 000 .-l _i _i N 04_i In       _i NNNm('4mm'0In'0NC',
                                                         -4         -4_i_i_i_i_i_i_i_i_i -4 -4         -4_i_i_i -4 -4_i -4 -4 _4 -4 -4
   _i N NON In 0% em 10 N 10
      ale _i N m  N  1010           N NON   N  ('1 0110_i_i   N Z O01N_i_iC'.iOOInoi'.o'0              Ol_i0100%0%0%,-410_iInN
0
-4                              0   N 010%_i 011001 0._i 4% -40
                                                                 0
                                                                 >4
                                -4 0101 0% 01 0101000 _4 ONN0000_i_i_iN,-i o
                                                                                                   >4

                                                         -4_i_i     -4_i _4 -4_i _4 -4 _i -4_i_i_i
                                                                                                   _i NNNmC'4mm'0in'0Nm
                                                                                                                                  -4_i_i -4 _4_i -4 -4 -4_i_i_i
       _i 10 in mm _i 0100% mm ,                 N 010% 01100 ON b_i m  X  N_i0100N,.IO01q0100
       '.DN 0% .-4 m N N N ID 0                  %00 01 Or'- in N _i Cl N NO
                                                                        >4  NOlm'0N'0_i'0InmIO, >4 mc400lmN'.D'0NmNN
In     NNNN                          0%    In    01 010101001 0101000 in Or4NOQ'.GIC_i,.INNN in NmmmmmuInin'0Clm
                                                                 — _i_i     _i_i_i_i  -4_i_i_i__i  _i ..4 _i ,..4 _i 4_i ,..4 _i _i_i
           0.01010 NO_ibm 010.                   01 N m 01 NO'0IOOIO '0 ('1            '0Ol_iOOlIOInmN,ONIO                       001000NOOininalN
       U ID N oo m N ('4 ('401100                '.00010 bin N .-. m 01 N_i         >4 N_iN'00C10%'0i0001_i                  >4 '0mOOIAOoIIDOmInN
'0                                         '0                     0101000 '0 O('%C'400%0%01.-4_iClCl
                                                                     -4 -4 -4 -4_i_i_i    -4_i_i_i_i                         '0 -4_i_i_i_i_i_i_i_i_i_i
                                                                                                                                NmInin'0NC',           -4
       N    0% m _i 0% mOb ID m                  NON '0_iNN 01 In m '00%               oinIno'0Olbro1010r-.
           In ID 00 m N m 00 m                   01 Cl_i N Olin 01 Cl'0 Cl mm       >4 OlIONm_iONN.oin_iN     >4 O'0Ol_i01O%01001NInIn
m      N N Nb 01010101010% 010%                  0101 0101001 0.0%_iO0              m or',moo0%0%_i_ir.m C'I NC'I41'0mc-IInInIn'0Nm
                                                                        -4 -4 -4       _i_i_i_i    -4_i_i_i_i    -4_i_i_i_i_i_i_i_i_i_i_i
       01 0101100% 1010 in in In 0%              '001 01mb_i C'S 100101010          x _iIOinOC-4IntA10001'0N                    ON_iOIn0%min_i'.om
       N In N 0% N N N N N N                     m in '0 ION NO UI bin 0101         >4 C'lO_iInOOlION011010In                >4 OInOm_i_im_i_i_iNin
N      N N N Nb 010101010% 010%            N     Ol00%0%0'q'_ioo
                                                            _4 -4_i
                                                                                    ('4
                                                                                           -4_i_i_i          -4_i_i_i_i      N        4100 InIDIDOCMm
                                                                                                                                  -4_i_i_i_i -4 -4 -4 -4 -4_i_i
       N ION N 0100010 '.010 m                   ON b.-l 4 _i 01-i 01 '0 %1 _i                                                  InOION0INIAIn_iOIDm
       -4 _i f in N N N m '.0 ION m                0% N GIlD_i '0 N '00 '0          >4 N0%N01100_i_i01_i'0(1                 >4 1000110ID'0NmOI_iInm
-4     Nb N Nb 01010101010% 0
                                  _i
                                           -4    0101010101010100 N_i_i
                                                                 -4 _i -4 -4_i
                                                                                    _i _iOIn001010%_i_im'0m
                                                                                        _i_i_4_i    -4_i_i_i_i               _i rnc4'0'0'0'0n'0_i',
                                                                                                                                -4 -4 -4 -4 -4 -4 _i -4 -4_i_i_i
       N 0101 N N 0001 0% N                      1001001 Nm o ON 01 C'S CII         o InNInNC'4'0_iOIONC-40                  o 0_i'0NIDIOOmNN_iin
       00_i m ID 00 N ID Nb ('I                  010010% N N .0 4'I in ION 01       a: O01010iflmOal0%N01O                   a: _imNOOIn01100_imo
0.     NNNbr-01001Ol0.O                    0'.   010          010041_i_i 01 Nin,-4O01O_im.m 01
                      -4                           -4           -4_i_i_i_i        -4_i_i_i           -4_i_i_i_i     -4_i -4 -4 -4_i_i_i_i -4-4-4
       ID N N 0110 In N in 1000110               m 0mm 01 in m 0% N 4'% me     o mmN'0'.Dom_iInNmo              o 0%DIAIOInIOO.-IinOIIOIn
       0101010mb '00110 In In                    NO' 0101 N Cl '0 _i in NO m      '0NOlOmNOlb0.ClOo a: InIn%O0IO%IOOIAIDIDOin
 ID    1010 0 N Nb N N 01010% 0%           ID    010101010101010041 Cl N 10 NOIn01o_imoo ID O'0N000InIDinrn_ic.,I
                                                                 -4 -4 -4 _4_i     -4_i_i_i          -4_i_i_i_i     -4_i_i_i -4 -4_i_i_i -4 -4 -4
       N _i Nmi m             0% _i in N         01 N 000% '00100141 In In O m'0minInm000%_iIn01 o O%N100%DInNC'IInN'0O
       NO 010% N ID 01 in      N                 ID 010101 N N In_i o N 01 m      '0in In 0'. N -4011001 N N IA E IDID100010IOmm'001r',
 In    10 10 ID ID Nb Nh O% 010%           In    OlOl0%0%0lO0h_iCII
                                                                 -4 _i _4_i_i
                                                                               IA NIn0O01O.-4'%'0'0
                                                                                        -4_i_i_i    -4I_i-4_i   In 00NInInOIflIOIn(',
                                                                                                                  -4_i_i_i -4 -4 -4 -4 -4_i_i -4
       b 0110 N 01 m 010% _i 0                   mm 10100mm Cl ON I'                o 0'NOlN0.-lbO0%'0bin
       1010   b NO Nb 0mb                        ION N 0101 N In 001001 C'          E mm,401..l,-401InN_iNN o   IDONO.41flNIn'0_i01b
                                                                                                              a: OION_imIOin,.4ONN0%
 '0    IC ID ID ID N N N N0% 0'            '0                     0041.-IN
                                                                  -4 _i -4 _4_i '0
                                                                            -4_i_i_i   -4_i_i__i '0 -4 _i_i -4 -4 -4 -4 -4 -4 -4 _i -4
       m '.o N _i _i in _i0   N 0 bin      o IDN-401001DN0.01N01 O 10N'001_i10010mOlIDID o NON0NIn_iO,Df',N
       in In 10 in 01 NON m a. ,-I in                                    a:                       a: 0N01NID'.000N,-.tflin
 m     1010101010 N N N 01010101           4I OlOl0%Ol010%0'OON.-4C1 m NInON0101O_iN'0'0 m inN'0U10'0t%4..4
                                                            -4_i_i—_i       -4_i_i_i   -4_i_i_i_i     -4 _i_i -4 -4-4_i -4 -4 -4_i -4
       In_i_i In 0 In 1010 in 10 In        o OlIninN01C',NO'0Ln0% o 01100CMIO'0NIDNOOO o IO10'001_i_iN'001OlNa.
       m in N 100% Nb 01 ON                a: 0101010N.-lCl_im.-l,001 a: ('4N'0LflN0%inO'0In0(1 a: OIn0101OIDNOmomr-
 N     10101010101010 b 01010% 0%          N GOl0'OlOl0%O'OOCII_i_i ('4 N'0LI% ONNO01.-IN'0'0 N in'0N%D'0tAIn'0r',O0
                                                            -4_i -l -4_i    -4_i_i_i     -4_i_i_i     -4-4-4-4_i_i_i_i_i_i_i_i
       b
       ON in 0 10 010100% 10 o 4m0101'0.-..N-N
         m ID m .-i in 010 In 0% %'
                                    in ID In in N 0% .-l Nb N N o NNN0%In100001001o
                                                                E O01OmO'.DOr'iNIDmOl 0 NOm_i_i_i01001N'0_i
                                                                                      E NNO_iNq'0%IDIOOlb
 -4
                                                                                                        -4_i_i_i _i '0'0m'01000InmNoG
                                           ,-4   Ol0'O%01O%010%OO.-.-iO             _i     _i',In0N%DN0%,4_i'0r'4
                                                                   -4 _i -4 -4 _i          -4_i_i_i                  -4 -4 _4 -4 -4_i_i__i_i_i
                                           o 00000C'%N010%0-N
                                                                               0N419'0N0'CIIIO o    a: bOONN4',Oo'0In
       0% 01 ' ID m 0 In Olin in
       100% 0101 C', N '00 01 m 0110          ID In in in 01 N (101014141-4 o
                                                                            a:m01OlONOlr'-N01mmo       0%0_iinN0in'0IDr-_iN
 0               ID D '.0 ON 0101 N        O Ol01O'010'0%01Ob o .4mmO'0%D01oorno O                       'mNI0'0'0inNNO
                                                                     '-4 _i    -4_i_i_i     -4_i__i                               -4 -4 -4 -4 -4 -4 -4 -4_i_i_i
               '0Lfl ION 01010_i N               _i C'i C'I'0 in 10 N 01010-I N            .-4 Nm '0 in ID b 01 0' 0 -4 CM        _i CM ('10 In ION 01010_i N
                                -4_i_i                                   —-4 -4                                   -4—_i                                   -4-4—

 N                                         0%
                                           N                                        0
                                                                                    01
                                                                                                                             -4
                                                                                                                             01
 0%
 -4
                                           0%
                                           -4
                                                                                    0'                                       0.
                                                                                    -4                                       -4




                                                                                          95
4 OinoNa%_I.-rr-- IAz>4                                                                                                               MC.- Cl ID N In N N N 0% U)
                                                                                                                                                ID C.) .00 C.) In NM
t.,I-4_INr'I.4,-4ooo                   N .-4000000..4..4.4                                U,
                                                                                          N .-4,-4NNMMNN,.4.-4,.4_I                   0.4000O0.Oi0.
x>4
 0N
         .4.1 .-4 .4 .-4 .4 ,-4 .4.4.4
                         L(%LAOLn0%0%
            _INIOr40',-4N.                   >4
                                             o
                                                      O4NUl
                                         .4 _I — 4.4.-4,-4..4_I..4_I,.4
                                                    InOOOin                               0N
                                                                                          >4
                                                                                                  .4.4.1.4-4.4-4-4-4.4.4.4
                                                                                                  '0Oc'DNf)
                                                                                                                                      _4_4_I _4 -4 -4_I_I_I
                                                                                                                                      .401 .40.4,-I
                                                                                                                                      W
                                                                                                                                           N 01.4N0 C.)
                                                                                                                                                    N .4 N
      .4.4.4.4.4.4.4 .-I .4.4 ..4 .4         N                                                    p-IC'4NNMMC'4N..4.-4..4..4          .-4.4.-4.-400.-40 00001
                                                                .1.4.4.4.4.4.4.4.4                .4.4-4.4.4.4-4-4-4-4.4-4
                                             Z                                                                                        .4MM .-4 ('4 U) 0% ON MN 0
.-I N.-IOO0
>4
In
      .4.4.4.4.4.4.4.4 ,-I .-4 .4.4
                                             >4
                                             In
                                             -4
                                                                                          >4
                                                                                          U,
                                                      0OO.-44.-4.1.-4.-4,-i,.- .4 .-4.-4N(NM('I(NNN,-I..I
                                                    .4.4.1.4-4.4-4.4.4-4.4.4        .4.-44..4-4_I444_I-4-4
                                                                                                                                Ii)
                                                                                                                                -4
                                                                                                                                      MeNlO ID 010% ON ,4 ID
                                                                                                                                      .-4N.-4.-I0000.4000%
                                                                                                                                      .4-4-4-4-4-4.4-4.4_I_I
      C4NO%Ifl                                                                                    MON NU')IflM'0                    ('4100.0 C.) 01 In M ID 0% N



                                                         Me'                                                                    0-4 .4
o.4
>4
                                             0.-4
                                             >4
                                                                                          0.4>4        Ifl%D4Ifl..0                     In             M 0 In 0
      .-4 ,-4 _l I — -44 .4.4.4.4 -4                .40000.4_I.-4,-4..4,-4,-4                     r4.-4NNMMNe'4N.-4_I..4            .4.4.4.40000000% 0%
                                                    .1-4-4-4.4-4.4.4.4.4.4.4                                                          -4.4.4-4.4.4.1.4.4-4
>4
      or-Inr-InIn,-4m                        >4
                                                                                          z
                                                                                          >4
                                                                                                                                          0 W 0 '0 In NO U) M lO
                                                                                                                                      N U) ('401         .-I       In N U)
In                                           U, OG00lOQ.-4..4..4.-44
                                                .4 _4 .4.1.4.4.4.4.4.4                    U,                                    In    0.4.40010100101010%
>4
      O.-4ONr-
        .4 _4 .4.4.4.4— ,-l .4 ,-I -4
      01D'DuI.-I                             z
                                             >4
                                                           NIn'0NO0In                     Z
                                                                                          >4      O0%.-IMCfl',-4N0%N           C')
                                                                                                                                      r4_4,-4,-4
                                                                                                                                   MO iD_I
                                                                                                                                                 ,-4
                                                                                                                                                         ('4 N 04
                                                                                                                               In NO '0 Il) 11)0 In In ('401 C.)
                                 4OOO
      _I ,-4 4 — .-I -4 .-4 .4.4 -4 4 .4            00lOOlO0.-4.-4O,.l,.4.I
                                                    -4 -4 -4.1-4-4.4.4-4.4                        -4.-4.-4NC.)MC%aC.4N.-sOO '0 0O0%0i0%010i0i
                                                                                                  .-I-4I.4.4.44_I_I-4_I-4      .-4__ -4
>4    01O0mnQ%                               >4 ON0'0.1.-C.-O%                            >4 '00It)C'4OMN0%,-4'0.0                    NM            .1.0.4 C.) 100 In ('4
                                                                                                                                      ('401 ION M.-4 If) C.) NO ION
m
      .4.4.4.4.4— .4 4 .4 _4 4
                                      CCO%   M OO'O0100.-4,-40000
                                                    —-4-4.4.4.4-4-4
                                                                                          C.)                                   M     000001010101010%
                                                                                                  .4.4.4.4.4-4.1.4.4-4-4-4

      4C00
                                                                                                                                      ———-4
D
>4                                           >4
                                                                                          X
                                                                                          >4
                                                                                                                                      101000%
                                                                                                                                      N MN .00% N U) C.)       0N
N                                            N 010%010'0%00.-40000 N                              00.-4.-INNNC'4.-I000%         ('4   01000%                              N
      4 4 p.4.4 4 4            .4.4                                      .4-4.4.4-4.4.4           .4.1-4.1-4.1.4-4-4-4-4                  I.4
x>4 _INNNIflNO%
                                                                                                                                      CiIn'0N010
                                                                                                                                             .4 In Qi MN ,-4 In
-                                            >4
                                             -4                           000101010%
                                                                                          >4      ID0%I00%01%0I0.-I,4LI')_I
                                                                                                  0%0O0.-4,-4_I.-4,-4O0%0%      -I
                                                                                                                                                   N 0010 N In
                                                                                                                                                      NNNNN

                                             a' oo
                                                                                          .-4                                             010%
      -4 .-4 ,-4 .4.4— _4 -4 .-4                                                               -4-4-4.1-4_I_I_I
o                              0C4NU1In      o£            0MO.-4'mnN                     o 0%In0%ON_I.0M0%_I                         MID '0N N U) %DO U') ('I
                                                                                                                                      NM IlO D'0 N N '0
0%
      .-4 - .4.1 -4 .4.4.4                                                                Ci          O0.'4_I-4O0%0.u,
                                                                                                      ——-4-4-4——
                                                                                                                                0%        010% N N N N N N N N
oE                     _INMMN0 o                           N_IIfl_I.4C'IN0
0 .-4 .4 .l .4 .-I .-I.4
oE 0'N00%0OOM.4.i
                               z
                                 0a          i0
                                                           O.0ON0N.1mn o£ NN'4mM10iflQsN
                                                                            NMO0%0_IND0%e4
                                                                               0%00%0%    '0 010%OO.-4O_I_IO0%
                                                                                                 -4-4_I_I -4 I.4                ID
                                                                                                                                          MN 0%
                                                                                                                                          .-I C.)
                                                                                                                                      01NNNNNNNN
                                                                                                                                                          '0 U')
                                                                                                                                                      ('4 '011')
                                                                                                                                                                   .-4 '00
                                                                                                                                                                   I!) '0 C')


                                                    ID M .4 0 0 (NO In ,-4
                                                         N 0 M O,-4 N .-4O N              o£ UIONN0%M,-N0%NU,                         In 0 NO MOO'0 '0.-lID
                                                                                             N%0NNNN0'O'0iflN                         MON C.) '0 N '0'0 C.) N
In
      ,-4 _l .14 4 .-4.4                                   0'     010' 0% 010' 0% 0% 0%   LI')        O00O0.-4O0%
                                                                                                      ————.1—_I
                                                                                                                                U')      0%   NNNNNNNN
o -40%N00%,-4InLfl
                                                           0' 0.0 0 100 .-4 C.5 o                 I
                                                                                   In .4.4 '0 N 0% 10 N4 0
                                                                                E 4NLfl%DNI0(NO'0N0'
                                                         N In UI C.) 0% 0 In N 0% ('1

                                                                           00000% 0 010%OOOOO0O0%
                                                                                                         E ND0%M,-4'0.-l0%OM
      .-I.-4 ,-I   .4 - .4_I                                                           —.1-4.4.4-4_I                            '0    NNNNNNNN
   0NN-_Ie-.-
o£ LflN0c,r-.-4Q%N                                  IDID ID
                                                    NO (N 0% 0C.')0% '0 (N N NO o ONN10'0N(NOUINM
                                                                  C.')
                                                                         NO N E -4M0%01O.-4UIU')N'0..I                                0% .4 .-4 N MON '0111 N
                                                                                                                                      .4 N U') 0% MO'0 N N MM_I
C.,
      _4_4 _4 .4.4_I_I                                            0'0'00% C.') 01010%01OOOO000
                                                                                       __4_4-4 -4
                                                                                                                                C.)   NNNNNNNNN
o£ _INNNrC..-4,-4
   InNNC40-                                         In '0 (N 0' .4.4 N In ( N o NN0%IID.0ID.0                                         C') N N'000 LI) (N 010 '00
                                                    .4Q' N .4 N ('4 (N           U')      E O.-1NN10MN'00%                            O 4') C.) N N 0% N (N .-4 1') .40'
N N.-4CNO'r-NN                                        N           0' 0'                   N O%0%0'0'0%0%O0ON N
oz UI,-40NNN
 .4 C-4_I0%N0NN
    ,-1 - .4 .-4 .4
                   UNO
    .1.-. - ,-4 .4.4

                                             .4
                                                    N .4 D 010 N U') .4 N 0% C.')
                                                    00' LI') - UI I4') 0' ON UI'0         oz
                                                                                          -4
                                                                                                     -4——
                                                                                                      O0%'00%m'0'0NOM
                                                                                                   0%Lfl'0UIMON'0UIOC.4
                                                                                                       00%0%0%00ON
                                                                                                                                      C) N '0NO N ID'0.1 '001'0
                                                                                                                                      N '00 In ON ON .-44 It') N
                                                                                                                                      N N N N O N N N NIDID
                                                                                                            —-I-I
oEN,c0'0o
       .-4Nul
o _ION0bN
            N_I                              o
                                             £ .4010NIDN
                                             O
                                                                                              NND'0NUIC'0M 0Z
                                                                                          £o NInNIDIJ')C.5NNNNO
                                                                                          O                0%C'OONID
                                                                                                                                      0%NN'00%01NIn(NtnID0%
                                                                                                                                      NNIDN'0'0e")O0%ID,4
                                                                                                                     0 NIONNIOIDIDNNIDIr)U')
      _4.4__I 4 .-I                                                                                            -4 -4
      .4 N C.)       In 0 N 0' 0.4   N
                               .4-4 .-4
                                                    .4      C.) '0 U') ID N 0% 0.4 N               .4 (NM UI ID N 0' 0-4 N            .4 NC.') 0 U) ID N 0% 0.-I N
                                                                                 .1-4_I                                -4-4—                                       .4-4-4
N                                                                                                                               LI)
0%
-4                                           0'
                                             -4                                           0%                                    0%
                                                                                          -4                                    -4




                                                                                              96
       ONO
>4 01N01              en-4en .>4In OOi
In
N                                          NN
>4
              -4mN01enenN
                O-4t-enu0 •>40(PIN
0
N                                          N
     N .-I en 010 N 01 en ,-4 en
>4
If,
    NUI0N01NNCnN00             . >4
                                 If,
                                     0%
1-4                              .-l NN
       Nen U10en                                 InN
0 01 N N NN10
>4 N .-4      en ION en >4 en N
           N N N N N N .-4 N N       .0
   IONr1NNNUen >4 NN
>4 loeenenoenN10NolN
In NNNN10r-IOID10 In                             1010


>4
       100.Or400,-4r-100o
        01 N N 04 en .-4 In ON 10 N >4           1010
       NNNNNN%0N%0%010                           4010


>4 011010NIOIn0n01.-4OO
   -4N00N,-4NNIflON                        >4
en       N N N N N 101010101010            en 1010
       NInN,-40140O%'ee-IN                       IflOl
>4 01400404eno01oN.-4en >4
N NNIO10N.OIOII11010IO10 N 1010
                N 0.0 In
>4 enN      IONO%
   en N 04 N -4
                        >4                          04

.-4    NNIOI0101010InLflLflLflUI           .-4   InIn
o 0O%100    4 en en 00 N -4 N 0 0 N
   N If, en N NO N In 10          N
0% N N 1010101010 In lt* In In Ifl         01    In In

o NNNOON.404fl..-4IDN
   N N en 10-401 C4 In In N
                            0                    N 10
ID     NN                      flU1In      10    IflIn
oZ NNON N it. N en en in 10
    N N In .-I 01 N en In N
                            0 -N40
In NNID                  flIt.LflInIn In         I$Iifl

oE .-lNOr4In.-401Nmenu,
     010Nm0InNenc4,-4.-l 0                       Nit.
       NN%OIDIDIOInLnInInLnIn
o 10010 en .-4
Z .-4N                    N 0100 E
                         C'4enen 0 0Nit.
                                     In
en N N 101010 I In LI In in In In          en    in in
o ID N 040 ION It. 10 '0 N N 0 ben
E 0,-4'0.-4en0N.-,NNenIn       lOin
N r-N101010%DInInIninLnIn N U4In
 o
 E .l01en,-4010Oen'0Q
    in01NOiflNOe4O 0 Ino
       104010 In 1010 in '0in in in In     ,-4   In It.
 o          enN%or-'0In10r-
               -lO%Orn.-l1000
                              0
 O %OlOlOinIOinIn0In0u1O 0 mm

                               1-4 ,-4 4

 10                                        N
 0%                                        0%
 1-4




                                                          97
           >4          >4                                      >4
           U)          U)
           N           ('.4
                                                               141
                                                               (4

           >4
           0
             .0
             N• >4
                 0
           N (N (N             •.-.....•..
                              0%0%00.UIU)O0.mO.0
                              U U '.0 U U .4 W NON 0
                              N N (N ('44-4 (N.-4_I('4 .4 N
                                                               >4
                                                               0
                                                               N                                           0
                                                                                                           Cl

           >4
           it.
                 U)
                 0• >4
                 4')   .4
                               ••••••.....
                         .4OmWONNO%_IWo'.U)
                     it. 000'.0'.OO.-I0000%W
                              mmCNc'ImmmrnmmNN
                                                               >4
                                                               It.
                                                               .4
                                                                     '.0W U N .-4 rn it. U 10-40W
                                                                       W 0' 0% 00% W W W 0% W
                                                                     N (N N N C') (N N (N N N N N
                                                                                                                 0% NON UN .4 U 0055
                                                                                                                 W W 0'.0.0% W             W SN
                                                                                                                 (%4('.4 (N N N N N N CNN ('.4 N
                 4')          N(NLt.'.4mO%0Wo-.m.4O                  ON 10,-I_I U) LII 4.-4W WO
                              InInInLflUIin.0%O10NWW                         W 0'. 0% 0% W
                                                                                                                 N '.0 N C') U) LAO'. I') 0'N100
           >4
           0     14)
                       0.4
                       >4
                                                               0                             W NW 0%             0' W 0% 0% 0% 0'. W W SNNN
           .4
                   •
                 ('4          N(N(NNN(NN(NCN(NNN               .4    (N N N N (N (N (N (N (N CNN N
                                                                                                           0
                                                                                                           >4
                                                                                                           .4    (N N N N ('4 N (N 4-IN CNN 4-4
                 U            rnm,-4,-IWUS.-4.0SO_I                  NO'. N U) U 50.0W .-4 Win                   .-40% U U U U W N%00
           >4    0%    >4     0'0'0'0'W0'WWWo.-4rn             >4    4') N N N_INN C') (N 4-) N N          >4    (N _I_I.4.4000% 0' 0% 0.0.
           UI    .4    LI'.                                    It.   (N N N ('4 (N (N N (N N N N N         I')   (N N N N N N (N .-I_I_I .4.-4
                              0'_I%OWUIOC')O'.r>Om.0                 W U.-IN U N C') U) m W N N                  .-4.-4 U UI N 0.0%_I U U 0'.
           >4          >4     NWNNNWN10'.OWO%.                 >4    _I.-4_I00% 0.-4.4,-I.-I.40                  000% 0. 0'.NNNNSr-.o
           U     .4 U             .4_I    4.-4'-4(N            U     N N N N_I N N N (N N N N              U     (N N .4-4.4.4.4-4.4_I_I -.
                 .0           .—I LA N U W U 0.014)4') U 0           NW m W (N UI U 0% W 4') UN                  ON 4') 11)0' 4-4 r-4NW C W
           >4    '.0   >4     10%0In%DUI10LAUU'.ONO            >4    00% 0% W NW 0' 0.0'. 00% W            >4     W SN '.014)14) U U in U U
           4')   .4    4')    -4I-4.-4_I4.-4_I.-.-4N           C')   (N-I_I .l_I.-I_I_I_IN .'.4.4          m     4_I_I_I .4.4.4.4.4-4.4-4
                 W
                 1')
                     C>4 UNO0'In0.QLA0..0U.0 Z                       .04') 0'. '.00% (N 4') 0.4.0.0 in           N_I.-44') Nm .4 NO ('1 N U
           >4            '-)C.'.C'1(')4-lmUC'.4e9UihN >4             SN '.010 U '.0 NW W W N '.0                 it'. '.014114) U (N N N (N N 4-I N
           (N    .4    ('4       -4_I_I4,.-4.-4.4.-4           ('4                                         N     1-4.4.4.4.4.4_I_I_I .4.4.-I
                              10W'.OmUIIflC'-CU.0Om.0                U U U'. It. in C') 0'. 10.-I U W.-l         11)54') me U NO.00% ON
           >4    0%    >4     0'.0%0%000.-4.-4_Irnmrn                ml') 4-'. 4') N 4') 4') U U) Ill U          m m m C.'. m .10.400.4.4
           .4    0     .4     000        l_I,-44_I_I,-I.-4     .4                                          .4          1-I_I  4.4rI4_I,4_I.4
           0     5 0E         '.0.05 (N '.010141.44-'. .0W U
                              WWWO%0'Q%O_I_IN(N(.I
                                                               0
                                                               Z     .44') U '.00% U W U 04') 0% it.
                                                                     (N (N N N .-4 (N N m U U 4')                000W      SlOW 0% NO'. ('-1.-I
                                                                                                                 4') 4') C') CNN -4000 O_I.-4
           0'.   0     0"     000000.-4 .4.4_I_I_I             0.    .4.4-4.4.4.4-4-4-4-4.4_I 0.                 .•4-4_I.-41-4_I_I-4_I,4.4_4
           0     U
                 N 0          UU'.0.-4NiflNO_I(Nm.
                              NNNWWW0'_I.4N(N_I                      NO U LAN 10 '.0.4W 0% W W                   It. 4') N C') It. 0000-410 N
                                                                                               N N (N            ('4 N N (N 4-IN .4.4_I.4.4.4
           '.0   0 '.0        0000000,-i .-4 .-I.4.-4          '.0   .-_I 1-4.4_I            .—4r4.-4.-4   '0    -4-4-4-4.4-4-4-4 .4-4-4
           0
           Z     0N 0         00'mNUNU0%0.4_I.0
                              N'.ONNODW0'0,-4N(NO                    N '.00 NO ') (N '.0 U U It. '.0
                                                                     OO.-4'-I.-.-I_I.-IN N N (N
                                                                                                                 U 010_I LA_I .-4.-4 . C'-) W I')
                                                                                                                 (N (N (N N N (N .4-4.4.4 r .4
           Ill   0 II)        0000000_I_I-I .-4 1-4            LA    ,-4.-4.-4.-4 44I-4.4.4.41-4.4         U)

           0 11'.
           E '.0 Z
                  0           10LA0'C.'._IW.-40%C%0%0..-i            W N '.00% WON .—4 00. .4 U                  NW LAO U mm N C.) U 0 U
                              %0%0%ON W N 0.00.4.40                  0'. 000 0.-40,-4 (N .4 ('4 (N               N ,4 N ('I (N N .4.4_I,-4 ('4.4
           U     0 U 0000000.-_I.-4.-                          U     C .4_I.4,4.-4.-4.-4-4                 U           -4-4-4-4.4_I_I -4.4.4.4
           0     .4
                 '0
                    0         (40.00. W U) W W 0' W 5.0              4') SN U) '.0 N 4') '.014) U SN             .-4 U) U W U LA Urn U LAN 14)
                              10%0'.0'.ONNWO0.4.-l0%                 0% 0%   000000.4 .-4 .-4 N                  N_I (N .4 N (N .-4 .-4 .4_IN .4
           m     0 4') 0000000.4.4.4.40                        4-)                                         m      4_I.4I.4.I_I_I.4_I,.
           0     50
           Z U) Z W'.0NLfl0.-4Lt.NWNLt..4
                  14114) '.0.0 N N WOO_I .40%                          C') W .-4 4') U W -4-40% 1') 0.
                                                                     W 0.0%    0000.O.-40.-4,-                   0. mm N 4-'. ('-10 U '.ON U) in
                                                                                                                 .4_IN .4 N (N _I.4_I_IN.4
           N     0 N 0000000.4.4.4.40                          N       00.40_I4,-,-_I                      N     -4-41-1-4.4-4-4.4_I .41-4.-I
           0 U) 0
           E U                11) U NO'. (N U N (N '.00.0.           04". 100._ION NW NO LA                        N W U NW 0.5.4.-lID N
                              UUUUU)tfl.0W0.0%0.W                    0% 040%   0% 000%   000.4.4                 '.0
                                                                                                                 .4 _I.4-4.-I_I00.-.-4,-4.4
           .4    0 .4 000000000000                             .4    0000.-I.40.-i.-4-4.-4.-4              -4
           0     W
                 .- E0 '.00% m W 0 W '.O%D(N U) 0 m                  U N OWN U) Nm 0. .4010                      0110 rnOe.40IDW
   zux     E           .4 -4.40000.-lit.    U           100%         0000% 0'. 0% 0.40.4.40 0.40.40W W W (N  NI')
                                                                                                           W W 0'
N  I-I     0     0 0 000000000000                              0 I.4'—4000.4_I.-I.-4.-4.- 0 -4_I.-4.-4.-40000000
I XU)Z
      E4

                 N            .-INmUIII%DNW0%e.-4(N                  _I(N 4-) U It. '.05W 0.0.4 N                .44-44') U U) '.05W 0.0.-Ii
                                                                                               I-I 1-4.4
   -40     '0          N
                                                                                                                                          —4.4—

           U           U                                       U                                           0i
                                                                                                           U
I- tuiti   0'.         0.
                       .4                                      0.
                                                               1-4
                                                                                                           0'
                                                                                                           -4




                                                                     98
                                                LA                                                                          >4           U)C%)5
                                                                                       U)                                   11)
                                                ('4                                    N                                    N            C.)C.)C.)

                                                                         NOU_I'.0C%)NU),-4..
                                                                                       cz                                                0% It) U NUN 4%) 0
0                                               0N
                                                >4                   >4  UU)UU'.DU)NLAN                                                  c%Io%,-Iu)mNC.)NU
N                                                         NNNNNNNNNN O
                                                                     ('4 NNNNNNC'INC'4NN                                    0
                                                                                                                            >4
                                                                                                                            N
      C.) 0_IN N 00% U _I'.O N                                                               O'0_I0%0%U)U)U)N_I
      SN N'.O '0 '.0 LI) LI) U'. '.1) U U       >4
                                                U)                                 .   >4    '-C0%N0%O0%O0%O,..iN           >4 .INNNOONC.)C.)C.)

                                                '
      N N ('ANN N N N ('4 CNN ('4                                                      U)                                   U)
                                                ,-4   NC'4CNC')t'INC.)NC.')NC.)C.)     ..4   C.)NC.)NNC.)Nc')NmmC')         ,-4             C.)C.)C.)C%)C.)(%)C.)C.,
      SN
      N
         '.0_Itt) .-4_I SN ('40                       N.-IOU)0%CAUQ%C.)U),-                N'.DU).0NUC.),-4N       Ui0%mNLO_INN'.0N
               0% 0% 0% C 0% 0'. 0' 0% 0        >4
                                                O     OONO%,-4.-lO0%o.-io.             >4
                                                                                       O O_IO0%N_I0%. 0         >4 O_I_IC.UNNr')0'_IN0%
      N N N N CNN C.) N N N N C.)               .l           NNNC')C.)C.)              _I C.)C.)C.)NNNNNC')NNN ,-4
      C.) '.00% 0 C.) '.05 U)      -.4 '.0            '.0CAUNNUC.)NN,-4O%                    LI)C.)0%NUN..40%C.)U)
      000 -.4,-I_I_I .-4 -.4 N N N              >4                                     >4                                   >4 NNOU_I_INNU)
U)    ('4 N ('4 N N ('4 N N N N (N N            LA    NNNNNNNNNNNN U) NN('4NNNNN('4NC.,I('4                                 U)    ('4NC'4C.)C')C.)4%5C.)('4NN
      0(4 U)       0% U N C')      '.4) 0%%0
                                                                                             ONCAU_IONNNN0%
                    0% 0'. 0% 0'. 000           >4                                     >4 UCAUC')C')C.)ULA'.ØU)UU                .4U.-4NCAN_I0%N0%NN
                                                                                                                            >4 '.O'.ONO%(%)OO_INSNU
U     .-4,-f_I_I.-4.-4.-C_I -.4 ('4 ('4 ('4     U     ,-INNNNNNNNNNN U                                                      U C'4NNNmC')C.)e')N('4NN
      LI) '0 C.) ('40% U 0'.              U                                                  C')0%.-ILI)UU,%)UCANU)            0%UUO0%_I,4NUO
      CA LA U')'.O '00'.0 .ON                   >4                                     >4                                   >4 UULI)N0%-4NS'.ØU
C.)   - _I_I_I_I_I_I_I_I.-4_I                   C.)   .-4'-4C'INNNNNCINNN              C.)   NNNNNNNNC'INC'4('4 C') C'4NNC4C.)NNC.)NNNN
         SOS C.) ('4 C.) C.) '00% '0.-I               U)'.O N 0 U)   C.)   0'. ON N
      N N C') C.) C.) U C') U U) '.0 %0'.O      >4                                     >4                                   >4
                                                                                                                                  LAU)U_I'.0m_I.00%o'.U
('1      -4_I_I_I_I_I_I_I_I_I_I N                     .-I.-4NNN-I.-4.-4NNNN N NNNNNNNNNNNN N
      C.) C.) LAN 0' U) NN0% UN U                                                            O0%C'4CANU)C.,0U),.'0
      .-4 _I_I N _I N_I (NC.) U) U U            >4 LI)U0%N'.00%0%O                     >4                                   >4
                                                                                                                                  0%'0U)NC'N50%C.)LI),.I,-I
                                                                                                                               .4NNLfltAUU('4OO0%
-4    - .-I_I -4.4-4-4 _I ,-4 ,-4 _I            .-4   -4.--I..4,-4_I_I,-4N             _I   1_I.4_I_INNNNNNN                — NNNNNC'4NCqN(.4N,4
      C') U C.) N SN_IC C.) N                                                          o
                                                                                       E '.0U'.0LI)C')N0U)O0N
                                                o U)0%UC'4N_I.-l'.00'.0')0%                                                 o LAUO%C.)'.ONO'0mOo'.,.I
      .-4_I_I('4N ('4 (NC.) U U) U              z                                         O'0%OO.I_I.-4NN                   Z -IN-4CANUUC._I0%
0'.   - ,-4 ,-4 _I_4 .-4 -4_I_I__I_I            0'         _I1-I.4.-I_I,-4             0% -4-4_I_I-INC4NNNNN                0'
      CAN N N 0_IN U LAOS
'0
      .-4_INN N C.) C.) C.) U U) U) U)          X     '.0U)NS'.Co'.
                                                o _INO%_IU)'.fl..I0%U5,-'.0            o C.)0'.OC.)O'0N,40%U'.0 o IC')UO%0%OC.)C.)..4CAN0'.
                                                                                       E       O'0%O.4O0..4.-l              E _IN_IU'0UmNONN'0
                                                '.0              4.-4_I,.C.-4_I_I.-4   '.0   -I-C_I-I4,-4C'4C'1NNNc'4       '0 NNC4NC'ANNNN_I,.4
      '.00% U ON U 0 U).0 _I,-'.
      .-4.INN C.) C.) C.) U U LA LA '.0         E '.0'.0NNN0'
                                                o U.-IN_IU'.0NO_I.4Ui o _INN0UO0.NNU)N o 0C.)NN_Ia'.No'.'.n
                                                                           N0%0%0OOO.-4.-l             .-IN-.4U'.DC')C'),-40%'.05'0
In       -4 _; _I__I_I_I .4_I_I -4              U) _I____I_-4_I_I_-4_ IA _I_I—4_I_I,-INC'4C'4NC.IN In NNC'4('4NNNN_I_I,-i
      SOS OC.) U 0% U SN C')'.Ø                 o SIflIA-.4C.)0'C.)NO'..IU
                                                                    o OUi'.0C'4O%NN'.00UII)                                 o NOSU'.0UC)lU.-4
      _I N ('4 C.) C.) C.) C.) U U U) It) '.0   £ '.0%0NNNNo'.      E N0%O%O00.-4.-.4                                       Z ON_IU'0C.)N.-40%'0'0'0
U        _4 - -4 - _; -4_I_I_I__I U                         -4-4.-C U _I_I_I.-4NNNC%IN                                      U NNNNNNNN,-4_I,.-4,-4
      0'. ('40'. N '.0.0 C.) 0%                 o     O0m_IUUNIm
                                                      NNS0%NrN0% oZ NN0%0%OO0%,-4,..
                                                                      O%C.),-I0'.0U)UC.
                                                                                    o
      _I N N 1%) C.) C.) U U U U) IAN
                                                                                    E NCWU)NU'00%U'0
                                                                                      0N0U.0C.NOLA'.ØU)
C.)                                             C.)          .4,-4_I,-4.-4NN.-INC'l C') NNNNNNNN,.4_I,.
                                                                                       C.)


      0 U N U 0'.            N NONS o U'0.-I_INU'0NU0%NN o '-4-4.4NUNN'.0,-4N O '0N%DU0%_IC.)UNNO'.N
      N ('4 C.) C.) C.) C') U It) U) '.0 U) N NNN0%NSN0% Z NN0%OO0',.4,.4 E 0N0UCAC.N0inLnij)
N     -4 _ - -.4_I _4 -4-4_I_I__I               N -4.-4,-4,-4
                                                         N _I.-4--l-I4NC'4.4NN N NNNNNC'4N1'.l,-4,-4,.4_I
                                    z U)CA'0'0'0N'.QN'.o'0'.0 o    E C.)5C.)0('4N005U
      It) U '.0000'. 4') U '.00'. 0 o  %)CA0UUU)Ifl0-4inN
-4
      _I_INN C.) C.) C.) U U U U'.D                                    '.0'.DU)S0'NU'0 oE SU)NO%C.)'.0,..4mNCAO
      ,.4 - - 4 _I .-4 _I_I .-4 .-I_I,-4
                                    .4      4_I4_I,-I.-I,.44,.4,.4 .-4 '1l-4_I.-4--4.-4-I-4.-4N '-4 NC'4NNN_I.-4_I.-I_I
      500'. ('4 C.) 0 '000 C.) NO'. o 0UC')'0O0'.N0'..4LAIA o U000%C.CU)N.O'.ONInN o C%)'0InC.)NN'0LA'00%
      0'. 0 0'. 0'. 0'. 0_I 0 N         NNO'0.0INC')U0U)                                        z
0                                               0                                      0                                    0
      _I N C.) U U) ..0S        0' 0.-IN              -.4 N C.) U Ih'.ON 0' 0-.IN            4 N 4%) U U) '.ON   0% 0.-IN         .4 N C.) U U)'.ON     0% 0.-C N
                                   —-4—                                      -4——                                 '-4——                                    -4_I_I
0
If)
                                                -4
                                                U)
                                                                                       N                                    C.)
0'.                                                                                    U)                                   U)
'-4
                                                U'                                     0'.                                  0'.
                                                -4                                     -4                                   -4




                                                                                             99
                                           2>4                             2 '0IA_Ir4'.OIAIflO'.(N('-IA'0
                                                                           >4 010%-I.4O'.0'.01IANOI               2
                                           IA                                                                     >4
                                                                           IA                                     IA
                                           ('4 (NN(NNN(N(N(N(NN4,,N        ('4   e'4Nc'4mC'5c'4c%I(Nc.4('.s(N     N '0m'0'0'0'0IflIno
   '04,) _I01'0mr- 44500) 2
   ('440O0101C'ID >40                                                      2  OO0'.O_INtn0'.
                                                                           >4 04OO0%0%0%N0%Qo 2 IA0NU)S0%N'.0Ne'
a
(N  44)44)44)445 ('INN ("IN N (N ('4 (N
                                                                           o                                      o
                                                                                                                  >4
                                                                           N NNNC')44)N(NNN("I(4)445              ('4                44)44)14)4,5

2  N '0N-4 NON m ON_I 2 '0NIA00I'0N'0NN 2 _IO44,N0mme'5_INm 2
>4 .410 N S LA ID U) InS 0% >4          >4 0'.O%00%0%04O0%0'.,-u.) >4
U)                                         LA                              145                                    IA
'-4   (4)('ICNN(NNNNNNNN .4                                                .-4   NNN44)(NN(NC4)(Nc44)e4)          .-4    NN(NNNNIm'0,'%
      44) SN _IO'0NO% m 0.-4'.O
      ON 010'. N("-SN0'                    2 '0NN0'NIDmO%'.DC')SN          2                                2  1DU)NN..4NQO'040r'.
0
-4    C') ('4 N N (N N (N (N (N N N ("'1
                                           >4 ,'4000010,-4040%O%010%
                                           O                               >4
                                                                           o                                >4
                                                                                                            o   or'4,-4NmU,m'0NLA'0
                                                                           ,4 (NC4445C'I(NNC')44)44,44)m4,) .4
                    mm LA'0 2 0%0'O'0LAONIAm0'44) 2 N00NmLAOLA'.0IA 2 N'.0O0'0m'.0r-om40
      '.0     N%00% N 555 >4 NN0,4OOCl >4
            0'01 4,1044)
                                                                    >4
U)    (N N N (N (N N (N N ('1 N N N        LA NNCN('1N44)mmC',(N(NCN       U) c'4c'4mmc.'Immmmmmm                 LA mmrn'04414-,')m,')
      LAN mom 4440% SOC'S N                2
                                           >4 IDNNN0%.-40OCl 2  IDLAO_I,-ILAO'.'0,-ILA,.IO                        2  IDID0010%ID,-4N40N40
      LAID '.A 44) N LA U) LA LAID 405                       >4 _IO0%ONLA4')LALAN                                 >4
'0    (N NN NN(N ("I ('INN (N N            '0          NNmmr')Nc.icN       '0                                     '0
2     0 445 N '.0 N U) LAN U) (4)010%
      '0N .4010_I N_I_I '0 '0 Il)
                                           2>4 LA10IDIDNOOQCl              2 m4,I.-4%oanNLnmr-mbN                 2
>4                                                                         >4 _IO0%0('540e4)LAu)40                >4 cNm'0LnNNInN'0
      N(N (N _I (N NN (IC ('INN (N         C', ('4c4N(NNcNmmmc4c'4N        m r'Nmm(Nmmmmmmm                       4')

      N It) '0(4 4 4') N Nb N              2
      _IN4001b,N09r.                       >4 m40'.o'.o'.DS01OS01Cl 2 '0OOO.-I'0ma%Nuo%'0
                                                                    >4 NN4450O'040LAU)1040 2
                                                                                           >4_IS_IIAN'0'00%0%0
                                                                                              Nm'01DIDr-1Doo'0N
N     N _I_I_I.-4 I_I .4_I N N (N          ("4 NNNNNNNC')(NNN(N N NNmmmmmmmmmC,) N mmc'5mmC'5mrn'0mme
      N '0'0N0% smm 0 '0'0                                      2
                                                                >4 LAN_IC4)OO%'0NID4001 2
                                           2 LAN'0LA0%0'0"QID'.0O(N
      U) mm (IC N_I .-4 N U) LA LAID       >4 0'NNmNmLnN.CIAo'.o%                       >4
-I                                         .4 .4NNNNNCNNNNC'L(N .-4 NNmc')mmmC'5 .4
   0mm     m _I N '.0 mos
   ('5 (N (N .4.400_I m'0'0'0 o                  o (N0'.400%'00%IDN'.0N o _I('INID_IO0%IA'0O'0IA
                              £                  E IA1D0'CN0'.C'4LALflU50104 £ 44)LALAIDIDO%Q%(')'0(NLAN
0' 44-4-4-4.4.4.4-44-4.4-4-4 0) .-INNNNN('4NNNNN 0' ('4('4N")Nelmmmmmm 0'. mmmmmmm'0'q'0me%
      01 (Ne's 040 '001.40 400)
      -4-4.400%      0 CNN (N (N
                                           o NO'I,-4NLAN(NOID o LAONr-.-4(NNc')O'0ON o '0IDmo'.meINUS(Nou)r-.
                                           z '00101QN'0(NmN-  E '0IDNO04SOm'0'0o%o £ 441IA'0'0LA04I)4,_IIAN
'.0   - -4.-4_I000_I_I.-4_I_I              '.0   -4,-4,-4,-4_INNNNNN       '.0   e'IN('l5e4cIC'5mrnc')m'0         '.0
      (N 010 LA .-40".DN U) e's ,-4 m
      -40-4 0% 0' N 0% .4 (N N N           o 0'-4OLAm'.n0%'0.-IN o mb01oN.-'INN40.4LA o '010'.A.-40'40NU)UCLAO
                                           £ mNNo%0),-lmNcqNr-.  Z '0LA100'.DQ%(N4,)mO £ mU)m'0'0N(N(NoLAN
U)    .-4.-4,-40000 0_I_I_I_I              LA         -1.4_INNC'4C'I(N(4   IA NNNm('44%4('4m44,mm'0               In mmmmmmm'0'0'0mN
      000 N 010_I_I_I o£ 01O.-4NNInt-(N.4mr-
      IA LA 100' U) ('5 (N '0O%NNN
                         NN40r-OmNN4040                                    o _Im0'_IU)N01_I'00%m o NIAS_ILA0%ONIDO
                                                                           E                                      £ mu,cNm'0'.D,-4,-o.'.A
'0 _I.-4_I00000,-I_I_I_I                   0 .-4-4--4,-4,-4.-IN(N(N(NNCN   '0 NNN44CN(Nme')mc",m '0
      N.-4 4,5 '00501044) (N (NO
      0100            '.Db0%0_I_I.-4
                                           o  0%O'001N0%'.Dm £ 0%04N4NIAC%'.00%'S_I
                                           £ -4IDLASIDN01r'l,-I.-IIDIO o 4,5'0'0LAID0'_I_ILAN o NN4O_INI')G.-4'.O.-.
                                                                                              £ (NIA,-IN'040N0O0'.ifl
      000000,-4.-I,-4_I ('5 '-4-4.-4.-4_I.-4NNN4                           4') r'1c4(NNCIINC.INmmmc.)             m
      o 0 '0_I40b40 01000
      010'ONNIDS    IDN'0 o .-4_ILA0O0%'0N00'. o IDLA0%C')S.-4_IU5'.001'0e o ClN0%IAN14)IDNIAN
                          £ OLA'O'.D10400'..-4_I..-4LAiA Z I4)'0(4)NNIAIAOOc4)'0 £ -4'00Om'.A.0o.u)
N     00-4000000_I_I_I (N _I-4.-4NN(NNN N NNNNNN(N(Nmme')m                                                        N              mC'544'mmc%
      0' N N 50' (N '.0_I 14)0'.           o
            01 04N'.D IAN 0101010101       £ '0m'0LA.or—su)mNIDo
                                             OmmLnm'0r-o,-Iornu, o
                                                                 E _IIDNIA.-4'.0e'aN_I'0o
                                                                   I4)N(N%OU)'0e4IDO_I o    0%C4)10-4N_Ir40.4
                                                                                          E om0%oNmmusIOLA_IN
'-4         000000 0000                    .4                              '-4 CNNNN4,NCNCNNNmC4)                 .4
      IA'0O'. N_IN '000 ("410 N            o
                                           E 01_Im'0.440m'.omo
                                             .40144"004OLA0445 o '0Om_ICn'0(NONmo
      o G'10 IA'.Q IDm 015 01                                  £ NID-4'.D.-4N.-4LANLfl,-4 o
                                                                                          Z U)0%—4In'04100040'.c
0           00 d 000-40000 0 .-40,-4.-40_I_I.-4NN.-IN                      o N-4NN('4('4.-4(N('4('4N445           o mNNmmNC.INC-'4mC-44N
       .4        '044) .05 010_IN                 N 44) '0LA '.05 010_IN           N '0 U) ION 0% 0_IN                  ("44,1 '014)105 GO_I N
                                -44-4-4                             -4_I                                 -4 4-4                         '-44-4 .
'0
U)
                                           IA                              ID                                     N
                                           IA                              IA                                     US
                                           0'.                             01                                     04
 -4                                        -4                               -4                                    -4




                                                                                 100
lx                                               lx                                        lx          040In,-4,-lmOONO,.4
>4
In
   NIn40In(NeNN00%0%                             >4
                                                 In                                        >4
                                                                                           In          00%0NNO04NC'- lx
                                                                                                                     >4
                                                                                                                        C"€4)N40InN(N40eIn(N
(N                                               (N                                        (N
                                                                                                                                   41%
                                                                                                       0C')04%)4%)44)0C'%c')f')m   N
lx 4(N4DIn0C4)mN0%.-40                                                                     lx LflN.4(.4(N(NU,0In lx
>4
o                                                >                                                                  40ON00NO%CNONN
                                                 o                                                               o(N 040%N40InN0%NQ
(N                    (%,0(4)C%,C4)C4)(%,        (N
                                                                                       . >4
                                                                                         o
                                                                                           (N Inmmoo,,         . >4
lx 0%In-l0040e'O0                                lx NN0%..-440(NN0mIn                      lx                                      lx
>4
In
-l
lx
      44)4%) (4) C') 4%, C') 0(4)44)4%) (4)44)
                                                 >4
                                                 In

                                                 lx 0QLfl0%C')N.-4b0%
                                                                                           >4
                                                                                           414
                                                                                           ,-4           O00e.-                    >4
                                                                                                                                   Il)
                                                                                                                                   '-4
                                                                                                                                       00%N0%Q000%

>4                                                                                         lx                                      lx 40InInrN-4InInN(N(N(Ne
o InIn0O4040LflN404040
.-4
                                                 0
                                                 >4                                        >4
                                                                                           0                                       >4
                                                                                                                                   o  00400000000.-.4(N
                           4)m(4)C')4)4%)        ,-4
                                                                                                                                   _4

lx
>4
   04040(N0%00In-
   (N(N00—4.-4In0%r-0                            lx
                                                 >4
                                                       0%mCNLn0c%40C')o                    lx                                      lx InNNN.-404N(N(N(N040
                                                                                           >4
In                                               In    om00000.O.                          It)    O000004%).i
                                                                                                                                   >4
                                                                                                                                   1)    0(4)0(4)00000000
lx N0%NIn404%%00%C,—40                           lx                                        lx
>4                                                                                                                                 lx
0
                                                 >4                                        >4                                      >4 00040C')(NOO(N(N
                                                 0                                         0                                       0
lx                    In N
      40,-I In 00% (N (N In 40                   lx (NNcNOmInc.4a%o0%o lx
>4    00%NIn0%In0%0%0%NQ                         >4                                        >4
                                                                                                  ,-INC4)OmOInF--040.-4r-.
                                                                                                         C'4NLt5r-4InN0504,-4(.
                                                                                                                                   lx
                                                                                                                                   >4NInIn00000In(N400
                                                                                                                                      0%Nb0c')(NOOOO
(4)   C'%(NN(NCN(4)C'4)C4)(4)O                   (44                                       C')           0'0(4)(')C4)(')O(4%       C')

lx In0%0(N0(N40Q00%
>4 0%4040('%m00%r—o lx                                                                     lx DN40Q440O,-0'                        lx In(NIn(NLn,-4.-4mc.0
                    >4                                                                     >4                                      >4
N (N(N(N(N(.4(NC4)4%%c4)r')C4)C')                ('4                                       (N     00000OC')C')c4)(')(')m           N 44)44)44) ('54%) (4)4%) (4)4%) c')4%5 C')

lx
>4
                                                 lx
                                                 >4
                                                     bD0InODfl0%0(N        lx
                                                     N040%04-l40InLn(')0%O >4 N04A00%(')D('4(                                      lx
                                                                                                                                   >4
4                                                ,-4 '4)C')')')'00000oIn      4)00C')4%4)c.4(4%c4)(N
                                                                                           ,—4                                     -4
O  0%Ln-44000e.4inm4. O (N(N00,-440bC4)(N401n,-4      o In(NOOr—0r4)40,-4040(N o 0InN,-40S0OInN40
Z In.-4040NN(NInc.)In0 x N400%0%,-4.-40r-.0%400..     z 00r-(N400(NN z 0.4O(N(N(N(N0C')4%4(N4%)
0%   (N(N(N4%,mc-(')m 04 C'%')C%,C%,00Ln000In&n           00C')004%)(')(N(N(')(N 0% (4(')C')4%)C')(4)
                                                                                           0%


oE (NN004%%InOU)(NIn(N
   0N0-4,-40In(NO00% o InC')O0m00N40InN O 0%40(N40404000NIn0,-4 o 0In040In.-0,.-0
                               Z InIn('44%%,-40%0.(N z 0440,-44%%,--40%0%D.-.140 Z 00-400oe.-4,-4..4(N
0 (N-4-4-4-4-4-4(4)4%)C4)r#)44 40                         oomoC')C'4(NNr4(.5(N 0
                                                      40                                          c.sc#)
 o   In40ON0%40,-noo
 E 0NIn0(N.-4C4)0n,.-4In(N Z 00Nb(N0N0%40,-4(N E 00N4%4(NOO,-4O,.40 o
                               o   0%N40C'O\CNN       O  C4)0N0%0000.-4.--4         N0N0O4InIn
                                                                                 E N000%u.-40e,.I
In CN(4)C')C4)C') In                   (4)0000In041In In In0C')0()mt(%,(N In (.N(')N(N(N(N4%4(%,(%,4%%(')4%)
 o   4000In,-IIn.-I o InN0r-0r'-soIn o 0tD.-4(N40(N40m00o O 0N.-4(.4cN40In40N(N
 z NC4)In(4)0CNON(N0In40                         E              4040(NN40N.-ir. E 0InNNInO04(N00040 E N04IflN40400%004O%,.I
0                                                0                                         0                                       0     (N(NN(N(N(N4%4(N(')(N(N4')
o
E 0%.-4400NNe'04040
  4004%)N04,-NIn0In0 o                                 0%(NC4)14)40InC4)c-40(Nto           o r-I(NN0%,-40%4014)N40.-4r-
                     z                                                                     Z      0%NInCN0NN('4(N0In               O
                                                                                                                                   E     ONNInNN.-4(N0400440
(4)                                              (4)            C')C"C'%C')C%,OInOu%In     €4)    04%)(4)(N(Nm4%,(Nm(N             (4)   (NNNNN(N4%4(N(NC'4(N(4)
o     0N0,-4InOflC4)                             o (N040CN0(N0%,-4(N00 O ('4C')(N.-4(N.-400%-40,--i
Z                                                E                                         Z 0Ine')4-4InIn004InIn.o o 00%00%0%%fl40N,-((NO
IN          00,-I(N(4,N(4)(N                     (N                       4%%000u%0        (N     OOm4)C'5(N(N(N(N(N(N(N           N N(NIN(N(N(N(NcNe.c'I(N(N
o ,-I0%00Ina%In0mC4)40 o 0In400%Q%N0%04,.4 O ,-I0000NCN(Nfl40NN                                                                    O     04(NU%(NLI%0e')0eo.-o
  0.-4O.--4In40C'%N0N40  %0%0NNNNN0%0(N        00%OIN000,-I0%(N                                                                          .-4InmmC')(')(Nf'5.-4.-4In40
,—4                000Nc-.ac.i                   4-4   N(N(N(N(NN(N(')44)%,oO
                                                                N(Ne4NINNe.INN             .-4    (4)0(Nm(4)(N(NN(N,-4(,(N         .-4

o (4)00O00u1Oe4)4.)      o (N0000N0C4)0N oz 00(NInIntn0%(Nor-
  In#-IO%.-40u1c%,OO E                      (NIn0(N40040(N(N OE b(N(N00(N004oo(N
o     0.-400O.-4,-,-40(N o NN(N'-4(N(N0 o                     o      CN.-4-4.-4,-4,-44%4(N
         (N 44)0 In 40 N 040 .-4 (N                    .-4 (N   (440 In 40 N   040 -4 N           v-4 N (4)0 In 40 N 040.-I (N           ,4 (N 4)0 In 40 N C' 00.-4 ("I
                                       _4 (44                                    4-4-4-4                                   _4 _4                                     4-44-44-4

(1%
                                                 Oi
                                                 In                                        00
0%
-4                                                                                         0%
                                                 '-4                                       -4




                                                                                                 101
>4 O'4LAU)LA0NC'OLA40
   (')LA04a.a.No,40                               (')0NQ'.U'4LANEN'a'a'a       0404NC')m4040,4U)ENON
LA
                                           >4                               >4  000                          '-4.-INNENON
                                                                                               ,-4,-l,-IO >4 Oc)LA'aLAm40'0LAOa.EN
N 'a'aC.)re,'a'a'a'a'a'a                   LA
                                           (N
                                                                            LA
                                                  '0'a'a'a'0'aC')'a'a'a'a'a (N 'a'a'a'a'a'a'a'a'a'0'a'a LAN 'a'a'a'a'a'a'a'0'a'a'a'a
>4
O
N
      OONQ'.O'.
      'a'0'aC')c')r')..)c")                0N>
                                                  0'. LA'aO'. 'aC') N C') C') N LA
                                                  a.a.04000a.o'.a'.a'.o,- X        >4
                                                                                   o
                                                                                      ''4a.N,-IN,-404C')O40m a: 'aOLAN,'-4'aN)a.a.m
                                                                                      O0.O-40O,.40,-4,,.4 >4
                                                  C')C')C')'a'a'0C')C')C')C''a'a N 'aC')'a'0'a'a'a'a'a'a'a'a O
                                                                                                             EN  'a'a'0'0'a'a'a'0'a'a'a'a
>4
IA
4
      ENLA0.0.40ONC')00400
                                           >4 O'.COl00a.O0%,4N
                                           LA
                                                                                            >4
                                                                                                    EN0N,-4O,-4NCS,.4N
                                                                                                        N-4.'C'4,-4NN                            >4
                                                                                                                                                       OO,'-40C')O
                                                                                                                                                       EN-4NN.-INNNEN,-4C')C')
                                           ,-4    C')'a'a'a'a'a'a')..'a'a                   LA
                                                                                            .-'l    'a'a'a'0'a'a'a'0'a'a'a'a                     LA
                                                                                                                                                 ,-I   'a'a'a'a'a'a'a'a'0'a'a'a
      EN-1,-4ENN,-INENEN                          CNC')40WN0\,.-40'.OLAC')5                 a       ,4C04C')N,-4,4040C',O a: 0'.LC4'a0'N400.NNN0.
0>4                                        >4
                                           o                                >4  C')C')CNNE'.INCNC")C")ENNC')
                                                  'a'a'a'0'a'0'0'a'0'a'0'a o,-l '0'a'0'a'a'0'a'a'a'a'a'a
                                                                                                                          >4
                                           ,-4                                                                                                   O
                                                                                                                                                 ,-I   'a'a'a'0'a'a'a'a'a'a'a'a
>4    C')C'),C.jENr')ENC'),4Q              I
                                           >4
                                                                                            a:
                                                                                            >4
                                                                                                    0N,-400%04400'40O0'.
                                                                                                    C')C')C')C')ENENC')C')EN(NNN
                                                                                                                                                 a:
                                                                                                                                                 >4    NCNENENC")NC'4C")'aLI)LALA
LA                                         LA                                               LA
                                                                                                                                                 LA 'a'a'a'a'a'a'a'a'a'a'a'a
>4
      .-)0'.'aS0OC')N'aØ'.0.                                                                        ,'4'a  'a (N .4 N NON 4)                     a: EN0NNmLANNN,4Q'.40
                                           >4                                               >4      C'91'CCNC')NEN'aC"CENN,..IN                  >4 N EN N EN (N EN EN ma LA LA N
'a                                         '0                                                       '0'E'0'a'a'0'a'0'a'a.                        'a
>4
      0'.'aO4EN4040,-4UCNCN40u)
                                           >4
                                                  NNO'a,Ofl4040LA
                                                  0'O0'0OOQ0.-4O,-l                         X
                                                                                            >4
                                                                                                                                                 a: LA040'.'aO400.C')N,-O
                                                                                                                                                 >4    '-40"4'-4.-IENENENC')'a40O
C')                'aaC')'amm              C')                                              C')                                                  C')   'a'a'a'a'a'a'a'a'0'a'aLA
      0440C")40LAr4,40'.O
>4                                         >4                                               >4
                                                                                                    C')Oa.OLA0"aoa.ENNN
                                                                                                    0-4NENC0'.0'Oa.o,..0                         a:
                                                                                                                                                 >4
                                                                                                                                                       Nm0N0NO,.4
                                                                                                                                                       COC'-4-400.-4NC')'a40EN
EN                                         EN
                                                                                            EN '0 '0'aC') ma m'a'a'a                             (N    'a'a'a'0'a'0'a.O'a'a'aLA
      40EN4EN'a,-400,-4,-4 >4 000'NNNLA40.NN0'. a:                                                  (N (N'a C'4 .-140 C')'aO 'a'am
                                                                                                                                                 >4 NSENcN0'.)Na.,m
                                                        N',C")r.
>4
,-4                C')C')CflC")C')C')C')   .-4
                                                >4                                                                                                  OOOO0OC')'aLA,.l
                                                                                            '-4                                                  ,-4   C')'a'O'a'0C')'a"a'a'aLA
oE    'a,-'4ENO40'a0(N40'aa.               o  40ENN00'.0S, z 0'0%LAN.-(NQ'.LA40,,-04
      'aENO'.,-4,-.I0'0EN0'.00.            E 0'04N,-'4O-4'a404040N04 o O'.O0.00404ENa.                                                           o N'a0.40,-4C,-40(N,.0.
                                                                                                                                                   a.—400,"4o.o,-4'a'a'ao
0'.   C')C"ENC')C')C')mmNENEN              0'           NC')C')C')C')C')e')C')              0'.     C') C')   'am 'a C') C') C') C') C')'a C')   0'.   m'a'0'aaC')'a,.'a.a'aLA
oE C')..4N004Q'.C')N0'a.o'.
    0LA0O40O'.40LAQa.40 o '0LALAO0,-4O40.a. o 'a4040O'aSr')LA0a.,
                                                                                   o 0
                               z O'.O.'-4,-'IC-4LA4040NN                                 LA -4 '0 '0.-I N
                                                                                       NNEN,-I,-4O0EN'a'aLA,,
 40 C')C')CNC")ENNmC")ENNc,)EN 40
                                                               C')C')e')'aC.')'a'a '0 'a'O'a'0'a'a''a'0'aLA
                                                                                            40

 oX NEN0'(NCN'aa., o 0ENENLA40')40,..5 o -440LALAC')400'.0'.O'a o LAN,-I40C')C')N..-N'aNO
                               z 00'N,-4,-4,-lLA4040N    a.a.Na.0'.C'),-4
LA                                         LI)                                              LA                                                   LA    'a'a'a'0'a'a'a'a'a'aLA
o O0.'aN.l40m5,- oz 04NNLAN(NO0a.'0LA                                                       oE LALA0.04(')C')N,.N(NN o 0'N'aLA0'.NNLA40'a40
                     00LANENLA.bN                                                              N0.a.N4040NNa.04N,.. E .-IN,-4,'-400%O(N'a'aLAO
'a    C')C')C')ENENC')mc')C")C')'4C')      'a                                                                        'a 'a'a'a'aC')'a'a'a'a'aLA
o
E NC')'.0LA'a0'0N o '4b00 r .-4'0 N 40 CNN                                                  o   LA'a0ms oz O'-4O'-40a.Oom'a'aN
C')
                  E '-tO'0,-IN('9LflLA40NN                                                  E NN40u)4040,.,0 LAC'440.-4,-4'aC')N'aOS
                                           C')                                              C')
                                                                                                                                                 C". 'a'a'a'aC')'a'a'a'a'a'a
oE O'.0'0'.a.Oo'.a'.-.o'.
    0.CN'a'-4,-ILAr.J40,-4SNN              o         O'.—404.-I0'C',LALC'aLA,-              o,                N0,-444')ON                        o LA'a'aO,-IEN00440C.)N
                                           z O04EN0.,-40'0Lf')'040N40                               40N40404040'.O40'.ONOO                       E O"-4000040.O,-iENm40
EN NNNNNENC")ENNENC.')N                    N C') (NC') EN C") C') C') C') C') C') C') C')   N                                                    N
o                                          o
                                           E 4O0.-f,-4NOEN
      N0.40(NC')ONNN(')EN                                                                   o       a.400.'aNa.'aUI40CNLAO
      N4040NN0'.NN40O'.0'.                    0.LAO0.EN'aC")'aLALA                                                                               o a.4004'a40LAC')O0%O'aLA
                                                                                                    'aLA'a'a41)LALALALALI)a.                     E     O040'a.04a.O,-4LA
,-4   (NNNNNNENCNCNENNN                    ,-4 ENe')e')m')C')C')                            ,-$         rnmmC',I')me')C')C')C')                  ,-4

o
z O'0LANOe.)NLA       o LAN
  NN4040-.4a.LALA4004 x                                                                     o LA,-INOEN,.4Oa.NC') o ,- '-40 (N 'a .-C -I0 C') LA N I
                        0.0.0'.OLA(NOLA                                                        C')LALA,-CONQNLAC')m,.l                           E '040NNSO40C')
0 CNNNNNNCNNN(NNN o NN.-4CNC.4(NNC')C')(')C')m                                              O                             C')C')f')C')C')C")     0 rnCC')CC')'a
      ,-l N C') 'alA 0 N 040 '- EN               ,-4 EN C') 'aLA   40 N 0.0,-4 N                    ,    N 4') 'aLA '0 N 040,-I N
                                  ,-4 _4                                       -4 ,-4 ,-4                                              -4              ,-4 N C') '041)40 N 040-4 N
                                                                                                                                                                                 -4
N                                          4.)                                              '0
040
'-4
                                           04
                                                                                            40
                                                                                            a.
                                                                                                                                                 LA
                                                                                                                                                 40
                                                                                                                                                 0.
                                           -4                                               '-I                                                  -4




                                                                                                   102
>4
IA                                  >4
                                    LA
                                           IDNLAN(.OI
                                               NN.-4ID N
                                                       0                 >4
                                                                         U,
                                                                                IA
                                                                                LA
                                                                                       01Ifl0N.
                                                                                       ClNO%0%INClb          >4        OlIN
N                                   IN          '0U)LflIAflIA 0          N                                   U,
                                                                                                             N         ml!,

o
>4                                         IA0N..I.4mON
                                           1LALAN%DNOINLA).,                  0cNAl.-40%.-4O..4.)N X        INNLflmN'0IflOIn.C
IN
                                    oN>4                                 oIN LAInIAIA0InLAIAIAIAInIn
                                                                         >4                                 0ClOID0%U,NN
                                                                                                     oN>4 IDIAIALAU,U,IflIn)AU,InIA
      I0%DNN,-4.00%OOm                                                      NC'4)LA0NInIDLAN
>4    IN'LflLAINIANLA               >4                                   >4 I0OIN%O0%NLA
.-4 00000ou.o.o
IA                                  It)
                                    —                                    IA
                                                                         ,-)
                                                                                                             >4
                                                                                                             If)
                                                                                                             —
      0LAN0NANNInOQIN                                                       0O00%0%OClc..      NIDNIDInONOLA
>4
0                                   o
                                    >4                                   >4
                                                                         o NN.-4NClInLANOU, >4
                                    —                                    —
                                                                                            o IDLflIDC4N.-4..4Cl0(.ID
                                                                                                             — IDIDIDIDIDIDIDIAIOIDIDID

>4 NO0N0%C.)10                      >4                                   >4 l00%0%ONIAIDNNO%N                >4
In CIAUU1IAIt)0.CLA.0               LA                                   IA     InLflIAU%IDLflIALt%4AULA10   11%
                                                                                                                   IDInIDIDID10IDIDNID10
>4
    OO0%NLfl10mIANo
                                    >4
                                           I00%.-INIDON4
                                           IDI0ID0%NNLANNO               a>4 ',LAIDNNIDIAIDN.-INO
                                                                                ID0%NIA1010NN                      ON.)flN10N..4
                                                                                                             >4
                    IAiAuuU. 0 LAIALALALAIALA                                   LALALflIALALflIALALALflLAI   0     IDIDIDIDIOIDIDIONIDIDN
>4                                  >4                                   >4 IDCl.-4IAIDLAIOLA10m             D
                                                                                                             >4
m                                   C'.
                                                                         C) LAIAIAIDLAIAIAU,InLALA10         C4    ID%DIOIDIOIDIOIDNNNN
>4                                         IALfl.-4CN0%LANINIDN
                                    >4                                   >4 I0O,-iONInmIAU1..,LA >4 NC, N LAO (N — — N ID N
N     LAIAIALA&AIALA10IALA          N                                    (N IAIAIDIDIOIALALALAIAIAID
                                                                                                 N %DIOIDIDNNNNNNNU3
>4    ONOONr.)0mIDN0%               >4
                                           NO.-4ONOIANO,..               >4                                  >4
.-4   IAIAIAIALAIALAIDLALALA.0      '-4                                  .-$    LAInInIDtDIDInLAInIAIAID
                                                                                                IOI0IDIDIONNNIDNN
                                                                                                             ,-4


Z '0.4Cl00OID0%10
O
  ClC'O0,-4,4N0%ClID.00% O
                         z                 NID10OIA.0
                                           IDI0.-4.-4.-4IDLAID10N9       O  NN,-4NC)O0INLALA O OINmONOa,
                                                                         E NIDC,0ININ.0AN0%10 Z 0r'mNOIO.4NID.0
C,           IniALflIAIniAUUU.      0%
                                                                         0% IALAIAIOIDIDLAIAIALAIAIQ         0% IDI0IDIOIDNNNNN
oE 0%N.-4mLAN0ILAO O LANON10r-.IDNQ o                                                 O0%.-4In,-40%iAIn.-          N.-40NClOIN.-4N
                                    z                                                                        O
ID    '0IAIAInInLAIAtDLAIAU 10 000IALAU)LAI0ID10                         ID     IflLAIt)ID10I0InU,LflUD10    ID
O LAN DO   N.-400.-i O
E 0%NNIncoe..-.410IN E ION                 0%INNIAc'io                   O      INmNIA'0%In,-,-4.-).-LA
                                                                                                O OCl.-41m'000N0%o,-4
                                                                                0'DNO'CONNNNOCl E
LA UULflInLflIn%0IDIDULfl           IA                                   LA IALAIAIDIDIDIAIAU,In10ID         IA
oE    DNN'.-4ID.-41010ON               NN0c.ic.00%In oE
0
o
      InInLAInInLAIDID10LAIA
                                    O
                                    E 10N1ONCN)NIDO
                                    0

      0%0%NNN0%IN.0N E OIDDLfld%N.O0%
                                                                         0
                                                                                I00%In0010..4InINN
                                                                                     IAIAIDLAIALAUUILAID     '
                                                                                                             oE 0%N00OU,U,,-ILA
                                                                                                                NNNmNIAIDIAOInm
                                                                                                                   %DIDID%0lONNNN
                       IDIACNN4.')100C.IDC, o
      C,IAID0%CN00NNAlIA            O
                                                                                                             Z NNN0IInIN.0C,ID
                                                                                IDOlClLA0NNIDO10In,.         O
                                            E
). LAIAIALALA                       ()               I0UUILflIALA m InUIAIAIDIAInIAInInU m IOIDIDIDIDIDNNNN
                                                                                                               NIn0INIAID'0O10.IN,..4

oE LAID NU.-4O%..4mtt)s O InOIDN'010,-4NN,. O ID0NN0%,.ItnNO o
   NNID01N1010NO        Z                   z oe.No%.oINf.,mNC,. Z NmIN1010.o0%N
                                                                   'CIA00%mIDInONNON
N                                   N ')I000U.0IAIA                      IN     IAIAIALAIAIAIAIAIAIAIAID     N I010IDInIDIDNNNN
O     0NIANNNNINN
      InNIflNN10O%Nf.e zo In-I.-410N%D,.4IA..N0                                      NIDIANI0N
                          I0N.-I0%0NIAO% o                                                                   oE lb.-IU1.0OmoU,om
                                                                                                                0m.-LAm..-IooIDm
—               OOCIAIAIALA0        — 0.0.oo.o.o                         —      Ifl&flLflIAIntflIAInIniAlb   .-I ICIDIDUIDIONNNNN
o     000I,-lNCl.-4O.010O           oZ NN.-4.-IONOl0%.CONO   0NNID0NNOIAN o
                                       N0%0NIN.0LA0% oE 10In0NNClID..INCl E NID.-Imo%.0.0oNoo
0                       UC           o                     o
                                                                             mIDLAIA,.4NOCl
                                                                 LAUulIA 0 LAIAOIDLAU,IAIDNIDIDIA
      — IN      11% 10 N 010.-I N          — Al C'   In ID N O'0.-I N           — N In ID N 010.4 N
                          — .-4 —                              .-4 — —                             — .4—
                                                                                                                   — N t)     LAID N 010.4 N
                                                                                                                                      ———
lb                                  N
lb                                  IC                                   ID
                                                                                                             Cl
Cl                                  0)                                   Cl
                                                                                                             ID
'-I                                                                      '-I
                                                                                                             Cl
                                                                                                             '-4




                                                                               103
                                                    >4
445                                                It,
(SI                                                N
X
                                        .It)In. 0N>4 o5(40
                                                         '-i
                                        0%.
>4 %DO ..D
       .. .                             O4                   N                                                                                                             0%
O
N %0%Ø                                                sO 5050
                                                                                                         0
                                                                                                         ('4                                                        0      (45            4LflNsO'00
                                                                                                                                                                    ('4
      N-4ND
      0O0%                                                Ifl05sO
>4
             . . Lfl.                   N.D
                                         ..        >4     ($51150                                                                                                         (05(4 N      '00% '.04') 0.4500%


      0O >
It,    .                                           It,                                                                                                                           DOs 050 ('4 ,g        (4) _
                                        'O D

                        N%DOSN,n
o
>4

      NbbN..
      O                   NUNOc, >
                                                   0
                                                   ,..4
                                                          050% ON
                                                          ON N In1154.)sOLI)
                                                                          0' sO SN 4.) (.4
                                                                              500 50 In
                                                                                                         0s-I
                                                                                                                 N '.0 N'0 U') '50 '.0 N '.050 N
                                                                                                                 O I') '.0 US '0 N ('I N '.0 445
                                                                                                                 N '.0 '.0 '.05050 '.0 SON 5050 '.0
                                                                                                                                                                    0
                                                                                                                                                                    -4
                                                                                                                                                                          NO      C') 500% 45
                                                                                                                                                                          N US '01(50% 0%
                                                                                                                                                                          '.O '.0
                                                                                                                                                                                                0-4O 4150%
                                                                                                                                                                                                     '0 N'0
                                                                                                                                                                                    '.0 '.0 '.0 sO S N N   SN N
                                                                    '.00     In 4.) 0 In ,-l                          so ('S US ('4(0 N 00% In'0
>4                                                              0   4        0 '-4 N N '.0               >4      '.0 US '05.4.0         '0UI '0 '.0.0 ('S'0               In N 50
                                                                                                                                                                          I') US LII US
                                                                                                                                                                                          ('S '.0 .-4 4') s-I N 4150%
                                                                                                                                                                                              50 ,-4      N U') US'0
((4                  NNNNNN4%0 ((4                        50 (0 '.0 '.0 sO N N '.0 '.0 '.0.0 '.0         1(5                                                  sD    (IS

x>4                  OCI(4O%0fl                    >4     0' '.0 s-I N '00-4 ('44.5 N '. N
                                                          ,-4 N In .-4 In NO                Os                  .050 4') s-S ('4 '.00% N            ('9 '000              0' In 0(40 '0.-I '0 N NO
                                                                                                                '04.5 '0 ('4 C'S 4.) N'0 N ('4 -           N              N In In 50550         .-IN US 50 U') In
      NNNNNNNNNr..Ø                                                                                 0    'O                                                         '0    5050505010 SON 5050 '05050
>4                      NC4Nc >                                 '.00 '.0
                                                          ((5 N 50
                                                                             0'. 0500% 4.) 5 (.4
                                                                       50 05 s4 s-I C            sl N
                                                                                                                N IfS              In 0', '0 In 04.) '0N
                                                                                                                ('S s-I ("5 ('4 s-I s-I 4.) 4') s-I N s-I ,-4
                                                                                                                                                                          Os N N      '041)4') '00 (45 .-I'0
                                                                                                                                                                          ('540 In 445.0 US ('4 US ('5 ON '.0
4.4   NNNNNNr-.r-N                                 4.,    '.0501(5 '.0      '.0 N 50 '.0 LII '.0 III     (.4                                                        ('S

>4
                        bO.-.I0,-
                           0%0%-4 >4 00                                UI 4.50      s-40'. '.0 ('54.4
                                                                  C4N0 4.50% C') ' 4.)                          '.0 N ('40% s-I '0N 415 N ('50% N                         ('SN In '.0-40% ('4 US 4.) 050
                                                                                                         >4     0%       ('I ('4        0'. m c r        S's.0            '.0w In Ifs ('S '0 '0115 s-b US US
N NNNNNNNND%DLf                                    ('4    US In '0(0 sON N 415 LII US III In             N      L     In '.0.04 5155050 '.0 '.05010                 ('4                         N5050b5050
Z
 NNtI
>4
'4     -,
      0%0%




o %DOf.)
                          NO%N>4
                        0'NO'0,f,                         NO s-I 50 ON '0 ('4 C'4,-4 ,4
                                                          5150 '-4 s-I N 4.5 N '.0 N N s-I
                                                                'O'0 In US '.050 In LII Its (15 In
                                                          4 - '.0   NO      N 05 ('4 N In 0% 4.5
                                                                                                         >4
                                                                                                         s-b
                                                                                                                '01150% 4') ('4.0 ('1415 '00% 050
                                                                                                                050% N s-I 0 '.04.) '.00% 'ON
                                                                                                                      '0L    (IS (151(4 15 (15 US In In In

                                                                                                                N '0 '.0 It) 0.00% 0' 'ON s-I N
                                                                                                                                                                    '-4
                                                                                                                                                                                         0% '00 N
                                                                                                                                                                          ,-4 N SO US SO '00%
                                                                                                                                                                          ('4 NNs0 SO In '.0004.)

                     SN0OD-4.4O
0%    N SN                             InU
oZ 0%N 0%mNSbOO 0 '0'0 '04.4 415 ('5 s-I '0 s-lOS
                                                   0%
                                                                    0' 0' '0 '.0 s-I N '.00% In
                                                                                       US

                                                                                       Lfl               0%     ULtInIn
                                                                                                                US sO (15          0% sON sO 0% N '0 '0
                                                                                                                                                                    OS
                                                                                                                                                                          '0C'S 054(40% '0.0 '.0 ('5
                                                                                                                                                                                 500% NO,
                                                                                                                                                                          50505050 '.0 N
                                                                                                                                                                                                               115 N
                                                                                                                                                                                            1') sOs-IS'S 0%.O In
                                                                                                                                                                                                       NUSsOsO


   NNN0 0
o 0%0N
                  s-I N 0' '0 N N '0'0
                                                          .u ('54.5 '0 '0 '.0 '.0 LII LII '0'0'0         '.0
                                                                                                                ON 00 It) N ('4 ('4 ,-I N ('550
                                                                                                                4.) 1') N N '.0.00% 0 sONS

                                                                                                                                                    0(1 445515      '.0   aa)rN
                                                                                                                                                                          '04.) N 0% s-I N N ON 00%
                                                                                                                                                                          s-I'0 I'S s-b 04') ('4SOO,4


z     O                     NU—R(O
                              In0%0%
                                     0                    .-4 ('50% UI    ('1 In ('40% N '.0                    s-I SN '0(15               US .—4     N US 0%             LII s-IN LII 50510 s-IsO 100%             0In
                                                          C')       '.0 SN s-I N In '0 (15 N (.4                4') ('40    0 N '0(4 OS '.04.- N
Its   '0NNN                                                                                                                                                                  '04.50'. .'IO N 0'. S'S N         US




                     Nti
                                                   In                 o'o '.0 '.0 In (15.0.0.0           UI           '0£! .0.0 U) 445 In III In US In              US

o -SON
                          l0NLf,00% 0                     s-I
                                                                N '.0 In 4' 00'. l (15 ON
                                                                    N LI) LII US s-I ON 10 '.0.0
                                                                                                                O LII SO ('S ('4 ('5.05104') US In
                                                                                                                ('4 s-I 0'. US LI) s-I 4.) 445 U5 S
                                                                                                                                                                             '0N 4') ('SN '04.)
                                                                                                                                                                          '-I '0(90 N 0% NbC') ON N
                                                                                                                                                                                                          '-40.0
                                                                                                         'O                                         LII U U   ($5   '0
o             ONNN4.sm-lo                                 N '.0
                                                          N 10             NO, '0(15 N III N                    N       '05'S ('5055 LII OS N In s-I                      '0N S 0% 00' ON s-I ('450
                                                                           '004.) '00(11.0 III                  N OS N ('5 ('4 '0 1')
4.)                  NN'0Lfl. 4.4                         '04.) ('5.0.0th 415 '0In'0 '0.0                C')
                                                                                                                                                    '0 4') (450
                                                                                                                ('S C') '0.0 '0.0 '0 '0 lAS US US U'S
                                                                                                                                                                          .-I I'S 00% ("4       N 500 US ('S
                                                                                                                                                                                                          NN
o NNO%                         ,'0 0                            s-I 501150% ('4 ,
                                                                                                                                                                    ('S   s0'.ONsOSN


                     NNit, N
                                                                                    In ('5.0 ('5 ,-4            N -400" N ('50 '.0 ,4 '050
                              ('4C'9N0 X                  .-4 US    N s-I '0 ('44.) ('S S In In Os              In It) ('4         0%   4'50 II)      050% 4')
                                                                                                                                                                          5010
                                                                                                                                                                          0505 In0"C')
                                                                                                                                                                                   ('4,-I 0 '00% '0 US
                                                                                                                                                                                       NC') N ('4 US '.0 N
N                                                                                                        ('Si                                                       N     US 10 SOs,ONN               SN N N
o .-IOON4.).-4.-SNO,.40 0                                      ('I 50 N '.0 ('IN
                                                          0% '.00 Sf1               N                           sON    '.0 '0 ON N NO                                     '0.-I N ('S '.0 0% 0
                                                   Z .-4 C')U5 0 '0 ('4 '0.0.0.0 ('5.0                          '0(4 Its ('5500550                  'OsO 0                          NUS'0(4.0
                                                                                                                                                                                         '.0 US
                                                                                                                                                                          sO N 4') s-IC'. US In
-I                                                 —      '04.45.4 '0 ((4 US '0 '04')                                                      ' . . In                 -4    USIn%0'.0S0N10SN
o
z InO0%NN,SL(40                                           0' 4') 100' N ('4 QS (IS '.0 N'0
                                                          0' 0.00% US S '0115 US so ('I                         '-I so ("50 -I 0' ,-IN (II 0', C N                        N 0% N In 0010,-IC'. '0445 ('5
                                                                                                                '0 ('5 ('5 C'S S'S C') '0 N 50 '0 N                       N '0N 0% 0 4') 05 '0445 N
o 10                          LtUl"C) 0                   5•S 4') ('S ('I ('5.0 '0 '0.04.) 4.) ('S       0                 ('54.4 . 4')'0 '0 '0.0 '0                0     In US In 51) SONS NsONN
           ('4 (.4    In 10 N 0%   0_4 ,-4-l N-4          ,-4 N '5.0 In '.05 050-4 N                            s-I ('I 4') '0 Ii) '.0    N         050-4 N               s-I ('4   5') '0In SON 050-4(5*
                                                                                            s-I ,4 s-I                                                -4 I .-4                                           s-4 .-4 .-4
0
N                                                  -I                                                    N
05
                                                   N                                                     N                                                          4',
                                                                                                                                                                    N
                                                   05
'-4                                                '-4                                                   0%                                                         Os
                                                                                                         '-I                                                        '-I




                                                                                                                OL+
                                                       0%        5     N040
                                                                      N-  N                                                                             04040     5 4') 404)) 0.
                                                                                                                                                        .-4 405)14 0
                                                 >4
                                                 U)     .                  •             >4                                                      >4
                                                                                                                                                 In                      5100     .
                                                 N -I-4          40
                                                                                         U)
                                                                                         N                                                       Cl       SSS             Sr-S
                                                                                                NO
                                                                                                O N 00 4ID  00104') 0% 5 Z
                                                                                                                          NN 0
      C') NON ('40%         N 40          —            40
    04 IDS U) '0 U) '-40440
0N NS0%oso4r-N                                   >4
                                                 O
                                                       II,mNOo%.c,bNmNN•                 0N
                                                                                         >4              4') N NO 000 N  >4                                   0%04O00N,-44').
                                                 N                                                                                               N
      ('4 .-440 4)) 40N 04') N '010
      ('44') 05 N 5504 N 4') .-4


      C') ('40440 0 '0 N U) ,-4N .-4 C')
                                                 .-l SS ,-4
                                                 >4
                                                 U)


                                                             5400
                                                                                    •    In
                                                                                                In.-) N 0 ON U) 040% 40 In
                                                                                                O 4') ON 0 N '-4 00 .-4 N


                                                                                                000% In 0% .-4 4') ON .-4
                                                                                                                                                 >4
                                                                                                                                                 In
                                                                                                                                                 .-I

      40S U) NO. IONO. (8) .-4 C')               >4
                                                 o                                  •0          N NO ,-4 N .-4 N N .-4 N In N                        O0O0Ot-S0%O.
        N C.: F ('-SN               5            .-4                                     .-4
                                                                                                                                                 >4
                                                                                                                                                 0
                                                                                                                                                 .-l   NNNNSS
      4040 0 N ("4100% 08 C').0 0                                                               400      0% 4') 4') '0 0 0% 0%
        04 N N40 4)) SN U) U) 400                >4    100%NNN0%00Ln0                           4' 0040% 0% ON 004 N ,-4                         >4
In    40 0 N N SN N NNN N                        U)                                      u             N NS                      S N SN It) SNSNNNSNNNSN
      0% - N C') C') C')LI) .-4 NO               X                                                 In SO N 0% NO In 4')                          z>4
      S0% 4')      N 0% N N40400                 >4 0S0N.-400N0c)0                              N 0%        0% 0040              N 00 N
      40 '0 NNNNN NNNN                                                                          NNNNSNN 0                                        '0    SSNSNSN5SNr-5
>4
      0) N Cl) U') C) C) 000 if) 0 C)
      N0% 0040% C') 0 ,-400 C) ('4
                                                 X
                                                 >4
                                                       400%100U)N
                                                         b-40%UO0% >4                           N 4') N 00%
                                                                                                        NNO% S 4') 4') 0400
                                                                                                                               0% In 00% N             .-4mIn4oSoo.-4e9o.O
      4D%ONSN C) C) C) C) C) SN                  m     NNNNNN 4')                               NNNNNNNr—%04040
                                                                                                                                                 >4
                                                                                                                                                 4')   SNNSNNSNSSSS
      0 LA 0(l) 40 ('4 01') N N N LI)
      SNO N In .-I OC) 08 04')                   >4
                                                                                                540 N N 00% SN .-4 b 040
                                                                                                4040 11) N N 0 C') 00' 40.-I
                                                                                                                                                 x>4
N     4DIONNNC)C)NNNNN                           N S%0NNNcONN                            N      NNNr-NNNN 40404010                               ('4   104040404040404040555

>4
      0080% C) 0.-4100'. 08 C) C) N
      C') C') U) ,-4 ,-1 m U) 08 0 C) 0          >4
                                                                                                  N 0% C') N 4001)04 Q% 00
                                                                                                In 0% OS ('40 10 C') ,-) 00                      x>4
I-I          NC)C)C)C)NN40S                       4            N0NNNNN40                  -4    40 40     40 N S N N 40 40 40In In               '-4   104040104040404010N55
      U) 4 C') C') ,-4 C)'0O% U) C) N 04         o
                                                 E N00m0%0%      0                              0400% '-400010                   N In C') N          InN)O,—4mIn
                                                                                                                                                 oE 0%O5040%04')In4'4N

                                                       0-4 0
      U) 000       ("4 C') .-4 C) (' N .-4 0'.          U0%SO%U) E                              0% lOIn 40 ,-4 500 04 40 00
0%    4040      08040% 080% C) N hID             0%    405105555404040 0%                           010 N%OIOIOInLnInIn                          0% InInInIn10L1i40%010N55
      SN   001') U) 0" bOO'S N
      040" 0,-40% ('4 N 0404050
                                                 oZ 0%N400%NN Z                                           (4 .-4
                                                                                                U) 4') ('4 .-4
                                                                                                                        In S1040 00 ('4
                                                                                                                        U) .-40% 00%
                                                                                                                                                 o O00O,-4In0Lt)404010
                                                                                                                                                   10InO40NC')040O0O
0     4040 0%C)08O%OO8NNN
                  -4
                                                 10                                      40                        40   0 ID U) In /4 0 0        40 4fl4i)LnU)InIn40IDIDNSN
                                                 ox ,-lO%000
                                                      S40Lfl.-4SO0NO40N                    0810000 o C')ON40.-44')0U)4'50O
      U) 40 U) 0.-IC) N 40 U) N 540
                                                                  -4NO Z0 SION   U) 0
U)
      .-4C') 005114 C) 4C') 40400
                    C)   C) 040085 C) S
                              -4
                                                 U)    %                  0 ('400%
                                                                      DNNr 040
                                                                                      11) ,-l08 00%
                                                                                         11)
                                                                                                    E InONONSNO10000%
                                                                                                11)4040 U) 401040 In U) U) 00                    In    U)LnLnInU)U)%OIOIONSID
      C) 4') 0O%S U) N 404') 4') 4') S
      C') U) U) C) 400400040.-) C')
                                                 o 0041 Dm040N0Q%
                                                 z N04040   40NOLn E 0                                4') '0 N 000% ON N N
                                                                                                      0                            0             o         0C')0%0%4000,.4
                                                                                                4')          N U) 4') OhS                        E          -4C')U)40O4')40.-40%04
      NoC)C)C)r'
           -4
                                                 0        NSN40401t) 0                                    41) 44' 40 40 40 Ui 4)) 1/4 0 '0       '0    LnU)InInLnU)4040405040
      5(4 In C) ('44') 40 05 .-1010 C)
      100 In ,-$ .-40 C) U) 0 C) 0'. U)          oZ NOOLnONmONID                                0 ,-4 In   N 04') 010
                                                                                                N N In I)) 0 40
                                                                                                                        In o NNC')N10%0S0%O
                                                                                                                   C') 40 r- E N.-l04.-400.-I4n045
      NN%0%C)N04SC)r-b                           4')   10      40U)40NNN4040U)            4',   In U) U) In 10 II) 114 In In U) 00               1')   Li)In'0IflInInU)4040404040
                             o N0%O-4N0O%NN400,-4
      C) 40050 C) C) 0500 N '-44')                                                                                                               o 0NC')40.-40OS0%0%.-4
                                                       O0%0NoSr-Oo
                                                       0-40% S .-4 04') U) C') ,-4 InO
  5 In 40 N 40554') 4') N NO
N NN08C)NN04%0C)SN                               N%
                                         %D%DLfl40U) N
                                                       Q 4') .-4 .-4 U) 4') ('1 ('4-4 U) Li)
                                                                    InLflInU) In U) '0.0
                                                                                                                                                 E 0%04NNN10N.-40040
                                                                                                                                                 ('4   0'0'00InInU)InIDIOIDID
      U) .-4 4') N 40 C) 04') 0 C) 0' ('4
       ID C) C) 05 C) 4004 ("4 0% 500
                                                  ox 00               0%
                                                                                                In
                                                                                                      0405 In U).0 4') In N U) ()
                                                                                                             40 U) C') .-4 .-4 0 04')
                                                                                                                                                 oE 40%0U)In004C')qSO0N
                                                                                                                                                     .-41fl.-4IDOSU)U)0%1000
-4     55 C) C) SSN0% U) SNN                     1-4    In                      InU)U) l        .0           '0 In U) U) It) Li) .0.0.0          ,-4               U%'0IflInU)IDIOIO
       40 C)   4 C') It) It) 051050.-I
       4') .-40 In U) 400.'-4N 4') .0 UI
0 55 C) C) SSI"044040N40
       .' N 4') '0In IDS C) 080,-4 N
                             -4-4-4
                                                  o
                                                  o     Lfl00IOS0%U)S
                                                        000N40U)0%SNNIDO%

                                                        1-4 N ') 0 U) 40 N   040 .-4 N
                                                                                          0
                                                                                                ('41051010100%
                                                                                                U)    0N

                                                                                                      N 4')'0 114405
                                                                                                                        ('40
                                                                                                                               04') 04 SN
                                                                                                                                 ,-440 C') N


                                                                                                                                  040-4 N
                                                                                                                                       .-4 .-4
                                                                                                                                                  oE .-lO4')O10U)InS
                                                                                                                                                 O 00'0InU)U)40U)U)
                                                                                                                                                            4',   .0 U) IDS 0.0-4 N
                                                                                                                                                                                  '-4

'0
N
                                                  U)
                                                  N
                                                                                          0N                                                      N
                                                                                                                                                  N
0)                                                04                                      0)                                                      0)
 -I                                               -4                                      -4                                                      -4




                                                                                                105
>4 ONOOSa)0
U,                                             >4
                                               US
                                                  ONN'0.-4OS0',-400m0                                *0 N *0.-IN 004*0 OS 0* 1'S
                                                                                                     41)   '00*00(450- *0.-Ia) *00•                 a) a) '00 ('55 US N P-SN N
                                                                                                                                                    N ,-4 1') '00 OS a) -ISO ('SN
N                                              ("I     0O0OSNa)a,a) N                        U,                                              Ii)
                                                                                                                                             ('4

>     USO.4*ONNNSN'0O       >                                                                        .-4 N In N 41) *0 N ('4 N US '0 ('4            S NO S In US -40*0 US ('1 ('S
0
N     00                    0('4 a)O00Na)0' 0('4                                                                       •0
                                                                                                     051') '05*0 '0145 N 4') *005(45                   0 ('SO OS 0540 Ci .-4 lii .0
                                                                                                     OSOSOOSOSOO*OSOSOSOO N                         000000 SOS NO-4 0
>4
      40ONO.-40'Lfl
      U4 *t4 '0*00*0*0 *0 N     *0(4) O OS lii ('5-4 '0(4)40
                                    N a) 0*5 N *0 N ('4 ('4*0
                                               >4    415*0
                                                                                                     O0415*0NI45NNOSa'.a'                           *0NO'0L1500SO*0*00
                                                                                                                                                    SO'0*ONUSS,-INO*DO.
In
      0000=000=0                               US
                                               -4      00 = a) a) =00' OS OS
                                                                                             >4
                                                                                             1.15

                                                                                                     OO,-4000.-4.-404N04
                                                                                                                                             >4
                                                                                                                                             In

                              - N r' .
                                                                                             .-4
                                                                                                     -4 -I .-I 4 -4 ,-4 .-4
                                                                                                                          ,-.-4 .-4 .-1 -4
                                                                                                                                             ..4    '4NNNNNN'a'145'0N('5
                                                                                                                                                    -I -I -4 I -4 -4 -4 -4 -I -I -4 -4
      '-4 q     N OS *0 .-4                          a) OS N 0 ('4 N OS-I N OS 0' 0'
      NN           U, S *0 N *0 Ui '0*0        >4 *00=0000= -.4*0*0 OS                               S*O('5NOO*,-I*0OSO*0,I
                                                                                                     OlJim.-4OSa)*0,-Ia*oa)os                       .-4US('5,-I40NN415O
                                          a,   0
                                               -I    05 05 00 (0 05 OS 05 05
                                                                                             >4
                                                                                             O                                               0".4
                                                                                                                                             >4
                                     cx                                                      .1            N,-400.-4,.-4.-404,-4,-.$                NNNI'5CSN'5'a".4'Nm
                                                                                                        .4-4 -4 -I ,-I ,-4 ,-.4 4 -4 -4 I
      N 0 5 ('540
      OS 0 .-4 -I ('5 '5 ('5-4
                               N ('5 US N
                                               I
                                               >4
                                                     a) (45=0 US *0 N a) '0*0 ('SN
                                                     SOS = ,-4 a) 1.15       005 a -         Z
                                                                                             >4
                                                                                                     0('),-4OS*0O4*0'0ONOSUS
                                                                                                                                             >4
                                                                                                                                                    -I -4 -4 -I .-4 ,-4 ,-4 ,-4 .-4 .

                                                                                                                                                            OS'0mOS1*S.040NU
US                                             445       OSOa)0a)OS00s        445-4 000004.—I,-I.-4                                                         N('SNN1'5'0'0.0('5('5
                                               I                         -I                                                                  US
                                                                                    -I ,-4 .-4 .-4 .4 .—$ .-I 4 .-4 .-4 .-4                         -I -4 -4 -I I .-4 .-4 .-4 .-.( .-I .—4 .-I
           OS a) ('5 N N .-4 ('5 N *0
      OS*0000  ('5 N N ('5' ('5415             >4
                                                     ('SOON 0 ('5'00 0' NO
                                                                  US
                                                     '0*04150 US '0* 0000 4(5    40OSNmOSNI150*0NN
                                                                                             >4      '0NOLOUSO**OOS.a'OOS
                                                                                                                                             z>4    NIUiOOSmOc's'a'uso
                                                                                                                                                    ('4O-II1SLfl'0,-.4'0*0,g5OS.-
'0                                             0               00 0=000-IOS
                                                                         -4
                                                                                             'a'     0000*O-I.-1('4.-4,-i
                                                                                                     -4-4-4-4-4 -4-4-4-4-4-4 '0
      N N .-4 OS - N OS a) N OS
      0 OS 0 OS N ('5 N 041505 '-4
                                          *0   I
                                               >4
                                                     Ui 0= 0* N         -4 *0 Nm 415051.15
                                                     N ('ION 4 N ('5 N a) ('SN               >4
                                                                                                     05050 moosm,-IUSOO Q
                                                                                                     00NU,NN'0NOS >4 9NN*0CSN*0mN*0O
                                                                                                                                                    I 4 .—4 .—4 .-4 .4 ,-4 4 .—I .—4 ,—I .—4


1')        SON a) a)                = a)             r a)      a) a) a)    = a) 00' 0'       ('S     0000SOINc's                             ('S Nrn(*41'5'0u5US.,..
I
>4
                                               I
                                               >4
                                                                                  '-4

                                                                                             >4
                                                                                                     -I-I-I-I-I -I-I_S-I-I-I
                                                                                                     *0*ONUSNIflO,-.45Nm*0
                                                                                                     ('lOC'S&1SOS                            >4
                                                                                                                                                 -I -4 -4 .-I ,-4 -I .-4 -I .4 ,-( .-4 -I
                                                                                                                                                    N .-40N0 1'5              .-4 C 0 --4 0
N                                              N     000\Os000000SOS N OOS0OS05.--Ic,xN.-4                                                   ('1                                  u5'0m
                                S
      OS *0 OS N OS N a) *0 a) 0 ,-4
      ('5. 50 .-I *0*0 US OS ('50              I
                                               >4
                                                     NO.0500
                                                                 -I     -I-I-I
                                                                ('4*0 NSa) a)US
                                                                                 -4-4-4-4-4
                                                     N *0 N '0 ,-4 '0 *0 US 00 ('4           o *OUS¼OmNOUSOOSU4S
                                                                                             >4      005             *0O.OOS*Dm'0OS
                                                                                                                                             X
                                                                                                                                             >4
                                                                                                                                                    .4 ,'   .'4 ,-4 .-4 .-4 .—I ,-4 .-4 -4 .4

                                                                                                                                                    NmO.-404.-4O*O40N.-.4
-4    NNNa0cxsoso                              -I
                                                                                  -4 —I -4
                                                                                             .-4     .-4'00O5,-.4.-40
                                                                                                     ,-4-I-4I -4-4-4-I                       ,-4    ('i('9('S('5C'5'0LflaSStjSr.SN'a'
                                                                                                                                                    -I -I 4 -I -4 -4 -I 4 -I ,-4 -4 .-4
o OS*00'00mDNC-,-I                                                                           oE -I00*0Lt4'0SaS,-INO
                                                                                                N05,-40USN'0505OOS o
E    NOS5'0a)O,..                                    OS *0                   ,-IN
                                                             N a) a) '0C'4 N N CS
                                                                                                                                                    0OS'0USO.a'4OmOa,05Ifl
                                                     0.05 OS'0O '0 ('5 Lr N ('4 N
OS
                                     -I -.4
                                               CS
                                                       4-4
                                                             OS OS OS   OS -I-I-I-I-I
                                                                           0' 00N00          OS-4-I-I-I
                                                                                                0'0O0005Na',-4                               05     Nm4'5'0O4f5,f5u5.a'N.a'
                                                                                                                                                    -I .-4 .4 .-4 ,-4 .4 ,-4 ,-4 ,-I .4 ,-4 .-4
      .-4
      ('5
          OS 00s00 .-4 ('50*005
              iS OS ,-4 ('5*0*00
                                               0     0(4505 ,-4 N N 0*05 SN N         NS,-I'0C'5OOOS40mSN o 0400m*0Noa'
                                                                                  oE ,-.4SN'0OS*0-I0m
                                                     US N OS (')0 OS C .-I l'i'0 US 0
                                     C
                                                                                                                  E N.-4*00U5*0Omc')oa)
      SN       N NO 00 0000                   '0 O00S00*OsO*00(..lN,- *0 N415N.-400s-INmuim *0 ('S'a'N'0'a'*0N5u'S,-4('5
                         -I -I                   -I -4 ,-4         -I --4 -I -I (     -I-I-I-I         -4-4-I-I-I      -I ,-I .4-I 4 .-4 ,-I ,-4 -I ,-4 .-I .-4
          N 00 US 0 N m a' 0 .-i -i 0
                      a) OS ('14150*00
                                                 OS ('lOSeS N a) Lt) N 15 N o
                                              x '-(ON                                 O'0.--I.-IO*OON.-ION o ..4ON*0O%,-4.-.4u'SNNN
      N                                                 *0 N OS N *00 N ('4 445
                                                                                   Z       NUSOS'0O.-4C4U505*O E 05m14S*0,—4NNos5*0N
      N N N 50000 OS 000 US 0*00500.05 OS 0 ON N N 4(4                                     N.-IOQ%,-4c9c'5'0('5 US ('5N0'0*C5*0'0,.-4('5
                                   -4 -I -I         -4 _4          -I-I-I-I-I                          -I-I-I-I-I      -I 4 4 .-4 .-4 .-( .4 .-4 .4.4 .-4 ..-4
      .-I .-4 N *0 a) N .-400O 0
                                                 S 1(4 '0*00 -I a)'0 ('4 N -I ('4          N0SOS'0'0c'5SN o '0OOSOLflm'0.-,Os5'0,..4
                                                                 N *00 Na' o
          OS NO ('5      ,-4 4(5 N OS OS OS
                                              E 000505 ('50                                                       Z -.4'0f'5USO400,-4541)uj5
      N N N N N a) a)          OS  OS OS 0    '0 O'00O50O'OOrnNN '0                                               '0
                                         '-.4       -4 _4          -I-I-4-I-I                                          ,-4 -I .-4 .4 .'4 .-4 .-I .-4 ,-l .-I .-4 .4
      O ('5*0 N 15 ('5 415 ('50 'a' OS
      0050 N 'a' 05*00 N U'S -I                  ON 000 ('50. 0 Ui NON o
                                                 ON a) 0 ('5(44 N N a) a)             '00       0l'a'*0OSOS       0    N05*O'0m40'0'0*Ø40Na)
                                                                                   z                              E *0N'0.-IUS*0N'0'0NN
      N*ONNNa)NNasosc,So m OS Os OS 005 OS 0.050 ('5 .-4 N
                                         -I                                                            -4-4-I-I-I ('S '0'0NU5'0'0U5*0u5
                                                                                             (45
                                                         -4           -I-I-4('4       ,-4-I-I-4                        -I -I -4 -4 .-* -I -4 -I — -I -4 -I
0Z Oa'NO'5NONUS,.-4
   ON*0NOS*ONIUON,-I                                 SO.  S0 ('41.15*00'00 US o N1'SSNOSOS.-IOUSO40S
                                                     US *0505= ('5*15 OS '0OS                                                                0E N*0('540504U,004N05
                                                                              US X                                                              1')ONO'0*DN'0Nsin
N     4040IO*ONNNOOSOSO
                                          -I   ('4           OS0c'sNr)
                                                                  ('4-4-4-4
                                                                                             ('4     N'0USONOSOSO,-4(45u540
                                                                                                     r-4,'-4,-4,-4            -4.-4,-4.-.4
                                                                                                                                             N 41541 4*0US'0U50u5mO.i
                                                                                                                                                         I -I -I .-( -I .-4 .-I -4
                                                                                                                                                    -4 _I ,-4
      O 'a' ON a) *0 a' ('5 ('50 145 'a'
      'a' 'a' N 1(4 OS N N ,-4 00                    ('5*0'0 US N 0 OSOS OS '0*0
                                                     '0*0*0*0 N .1 #-4 ,-4 ('5 .-4 0. '0     oE      OIIn.-4NOO*OS4'54'5O40
                                                                                                         0Lfl*0*0OOS.000siIS
                                                                                                                                             0      *0OUSmOON*OUS'0.a'a)
-I    *0*040*0 * *0*0500 OS OS                 -I    0' 050504 OS OS 0.00 N -IN              ,-I NONOOS,-IN'0a'
                                                                       -4 -I .-4 4 -4                                                        4-4    In'0NIn40'0415u5'0moo
                                                                                                                                                    _4 -I .-4 .4.4-4 .-4 .4.-( -4 .-4 ,-I
      OS
      40 OS
           0 *0 ('5 a' 0 US OS 1.154(5 ('5
                   ('5 N '000(505                    '00 0 00(44 NO OS '0 N ('4
                                                     *0 15 415 US = N N OS OS (4 N ,-        o mOSOSONOSNSmma)
                                                                                             z       ONOCNNO'0NOSN*Ø                         oE     SOONNC'500.a'IJSN*0
                                                                                                                                                    OS*0.-4UiNOuS'0405N
0                                              0     O.05O.05OSOSOS.-4ON O -I('5('5OO'O40000mO
                                                                   _4 -4                             -4_I-I-I                   -4-4_4 O me'5mN*0'a"041,4N00
                                                                                                                                            4-4.-4-4-4-4-44-I-4-I '-4
      —4   N ('S '0415*0   N a) 050-4 ('4              ('S('5 '0415 *0 N = OS 0 I N                        ('1(4) '0145*0 P-a) OS 0 .-4 ('4
                                          -I                                      -4 -4 _4                                        4-4 -4 -4
                                                                                                                                              ('4(4) '0Lfl40P-a)Q*Q 4 ('4
                                                                                                                                                                                      -4 _4 -4
a)                                                                                           0
N                                              OS
                                               N                                             a)                                              -I
0*                                             OS                                            0*
                                                                                                                                             a)
-4                                             '-4                                           -4
                                                                                                                                             0*
                                                                                                                                             '-4




                                                                                                    106
      CM .-4 .-4 0 Nb 0 0 '.0 .-4                           '0 '00 In '.0 '.0 00 .-4 m                      X                                                   it) '.0 N N m '0(1 in 00% N
               N           .4CM        '.00% CM             in 0% .-40%            N          .-l 0% 0      >4 4%0'0mNo0'.u')NNo'..                             it) NO N 111 . in 0'.'0 N '.0
                                                                                                            U,                                            I,)
               N 000% .-4 00'.0 '.0 r-
                   _4,-4 __.-4                                      t '.0 Nh 0'NN 0% O'.                    CM     0O,-4.-4C".mO%N,-400%0%
                                                                                                                                        -4-4-4
                                                                                                                                                          CM    00
                                                                                                                                                                -4 -4
                                                                                                                                                                              0% '.0 ("0 '.0.0 '0 It)
         '.0 .-4 00% 0'. 0 4 m .0 in .-l
      in ifi       '.00% '0 '.0000
                                                            in in '0 In In '.0 N '.0
                                                            It'. .-4 0 0 '00                  0' '0 '0             o.-4m.-4a'.4CMmm'.o                          NO0%CM0%'00%,-4.-4in
0        0% 0' 00% 0% 0000 0
                           N .-400a'O0..-4.-40000
                                                    >4                                            ..0 0'.
                                                                                                            o>4 '00iCMinNin.-4cMNØ.N
                                                                                                                 -4.-4NNeimN4ooe o
                                                                                                                                     >4                         oinmLn-4('4in'.n'o.-lu')cM
CM
                             _-I_4,-4 '-4,-.-i                                                              CM                       ('4
                                                                                                                         -4 -4.-C .-4.4.4.-4..4,-4.-.4          O.-I.-4.-400O0'N0'.a'
                                                                                                                                                                .-4 .-4 .-4 .-4 .-'.
      0' N 0'        ,-4
         0% in '.0 m N
                           .-4 CM a' m .-4
                             '.        '.0          >4
                                                            '.0 '.0 '.0'0 4 m
                                                            U.'.   0'. N N 0'. 0%
                                                                                              '00% N
                                                                                              '.'. .-4 in   >4
                                                                                                                   l-4%0CM0%
                                                                                                                   ,-lLfl'0a'O.O'.NN'.omoa'               >4
                                                                                                                                                                '0ON4D'0iDOCM..-4NmN
                                                                                                                                                             '0r'lm.-INOO'.No'.ONN
                                                    in                                                      in                                            U,
                                                    -4      CM CM 4 .-I N .4 4 N N N CM N                   .-4    NNCMCMCMC'ICM.-4CM.-4                  .-4   .4CMNCN.-4('4,.4N.-4r4.-4.-4
        -4 - ,-4 ,-4 _l -4 ( -4 -4 .-4                      _I 4 ,-l .-4 -4 -4 -4 ,-4 .-l .4 .-4 ,-4               _4 -4 -4 __4_ -4 -4 _4 -4-4-4                -4-4-4-4-4-4-4-4-4-4
      ON C'. '.0 '.0 in 09 '.0C                             00' N 0'. N'0 0. '0m 0                                                                        X  mo'0c-o'.oN'0oine
      m N 0% in                     in                                                                             inN         in0%'0'.0'0IflN
0                                                   0>4-4   m ma. N (MO '.0 C".'0                           >4                                            >4
                                                                                                                                                          0
-4
      -l___-4 -4
               N CM CM N CM .-I 40% a'. o                   00'. 00' 0 .-4 — .-4 .'-'. .-$ I .-4
                                                            -4 -4
                                                                                                            O
                                                                                                            .-4                mCMC'lN4..4..-4
                                                                                                                                                    .
                                                                                                                   -4-4-4-4-4 .-4 .-4 ,-4 .-4.-4.-I ,-4
                                                                                                                                                          .-4 -4N0.-I.-4.-400'.
                                                                                                                                                              -4-4-4-4-4-4-4-4-4 .-4 -4
      .-l N in .'-I .-'4 in '0 in N In in
      ..0,-4N Lt)'.D0 '.0 m 0 0.-4                  >4
                                                                    m '.0'0 In '.00-4 .-4 N In
                                                            0'. 0% 4 a'. N CM C 4 0                         >4
                                                                                                                   '0mho.-lma'o%'0'0                      >4
in    mm mm m'0r',m ('4-4 N-4                       in      .40 r'4 0 .4 r4 CM ('.1CM CM .4 N               it)         Nm'0mCNCMN.-4NN                   in    .-4NNN4,-4.-IOØ'.
      -4-4-4-4-4-4-4-4-4-4-4-4                              r4 .-4 .-4 .-l .-4 .-4 -4 .-l .-4 .-4 .-I .-4          -4 __4 -4 .-( -4-4-4-4-4-4-4                 -4-4-4-4-4-4-4-4-4-4-4
                                                            NO'.      0 CM in 0 N '.0
                                                            O '.0 '.0 m 0% ,-4 .-4 CM 0' ON Z
                                                                                            >4c'40%bmN,-4'.0o'.m
      .-4a' .-s C') N 04.-I C". -400'0                                                                            If) ('4 '.00% '.00'. 00CM U'. 4
>4    0% in N ,-6'.0       ("4 '.0 '.0 0            >4                                         O0O'00'0%.DNO0 >4 '.0mNNLt)C'4.-4N0%0N
'0             mmmrl.-lo-4o                         '0
                                                            —0' 000 .-I CM CM .-l CM N
                                                                _-4_-4,-4,-4-4                              '0 CMNNrnC".mC'.INCI,-4NCM                    '0 .-4NN00.-l000'.O

C".
     -4-4-4-4-4-4-4-4 _4 _,-4_
x 0'.'.0.-4LflNLOr-40%N,-INO
>4 ONNN'0NON'0.-4
               mmm'0C".C..4,-4,-4.-4
      -4-4-4-4-4-4-4-44-4-4-4-4
                                                    >4
                                                            m C". CM CM N '.0 Na' 0' CM Lfl
                                                             4 N N in 0'0-4 '0          0'.
                                                              40000 ,4 4 CM r4 ,4 ,.4 ,-'.
                                                               r4 .4 .4 r4 r4 4.4r1 ,4 ,4 .4
                                                                                                            >4     0it)U')
                                                                                                                  -4 ,-4 -4-4-4-4-4-4-4-4-4
                                                                                                                   oinmCMr-.'u')in'.OLnCM
                                                                                                            C". .-4N4N('4,.-4.-4,-4
                                                                                                                  -4-4-4-4-4-4-4-4-4-4-4
                                                                                                                                                          Q
                                                                                                                                                          >4
                                                                                                                                                          m
                                                                                                                                                              -4-4-4-4-4-4-4-4-4 .-1
                                                                                                                                                             otn.000'mo'.ca%mNo
                                                                                                                                                              moN'0m8no.NCMm
                                                                                                                                                                -..-ooooooo.o'.
                                                                                                                                                                -4 -4 -4 -4 4-4 -4 ,-) -4-4-4
      '0in'0'00b'0.-40
>4 0".O.-IN'0'0'0NOO'0c.i >4                                      h .-l 0'. m '-40'. '' ON 0
                                                            '0 CM 9 '.0 NON In NO                           >4
                                                                                                                                      4.-.4-4N'0m
                                                                                                                                                          >4 a'Lnma'Nc'4'.oem
N mm'0mC".'0rnNCM.-loo N O 0% 0000.-l.-4,-4 .-I ,-1 ,-4
   -4-4-4-4-4-4-4-4,-I .-4,-4,-4                                 ——-4———————
                                                                                                            N ICMNN.-1r4r.4
                                                                                                              -4-4-4-4-4-4-4-4-4-4-4-4
                                                                                                                                                          N     00O0'.04O%
                                                                                                                                                                -4-4-4-4 -4
    '.OinN'.ON'ONNOO%O...O
>4 N'0CMOO0'.c..4'0C')0'.CM
                                                            in '000% CM In '0 '0 NO'. N'0
                                                                          '.9 '0 '.0 C". In in CM '.0
                                                                                                            0
                                                                                                            >4
                                                                                                               0'.-4r-4OONN.-4m
                                                                                                                N%0'.0a'OOifl'0.-l                        >4
                                                                                                                                                                -40' in .-I CM N '.Dma' ('40% C".
                                                                                                                                                                0%    in C") in a. .- N C'4'.0.-4
— O'0'0'0'0C')mN,-4O0                                         000' 00 '-4-40000
                                                            -4-4-4 -4-4-4-4-4-4-4-4 .- O0.-4.-4mmNCMN.-400                                                      0% 0000' 0'. 0'
                                                     -4                                                          -4                                                                                    N
  -4-4-4-4-4-4-4-4 _4 -4-4-4                                                              -4-4-4-4-4-4-4-4-4-4-4                                                 -4 -4 -4
o %ONNO%CM0%'0O'.ONIfl'0
X N0%ONinininU')O,-4'.0.-4
                                                            in '00CM '0
                                                            C".   '00 in               '.0 in ON
                                                                                       N 4.-40N             o N0%CMNm.-4'0O'.O
                                                                                                            z 0'NO'.N0CMCMiniflOO
                                                                                                                                                                '.0CM '.0   'ON'0O            Oc..'.
                                                                                                                                                                In ,-4 0" '0 '0CM it'. ('lIne 0 '.0
0'.                                                  0'     0'      0' 0'. 0% 0% 000000                     0'.0'00..-4c'4m('IC'.l.-lOOO                  0.    0% 00'. 0'.                            N
      4-4-4-4-4-4-4-4-4-4-4                                                   -4 -4 -4 -4 -4 -4                  -4-4-4-4-4-4-4-4-4-4-4                            -4
o O%0N'.0in'00'.'.0m-I.0                                          CM '.0 N 0% '.0 N N '.0 .-4 N             o ONa'a'mmr-CM'0c%Ime.4                             ('40CM N %0'0 0' '0 N in'0 N
                                                            N ('40 '0CM U') N '0N N 0'.                            b'0'.OON.-lO'.DCM                            0'.0 '0
                                                                                                                                                                      N it) 0.0 a' in
'.0 '0mmmN'Om.-4oo.o'.
     -4-44-4-4-4-4-4-4-4
                                                     '.0            oao'.ocoa'o'.oo'.                       '.0    0'.000C'4CM.-I.-C.-COO%Q%              '.0   0% 0.0% N N N N N N N
                                                                           -4 -4                                      -4-4 .-4 4-4 -4 -4 -4 _4 -4
o ON%0Nmc'INNIn.-4.pN             O 1 N ('40'. N C". in In C".'0 it'. o '-4'0O'.D.-4NU')0%NCM                                                                               in '.00. '.0 ("40' in
E oC")oLnNin-4'.oO'.'0min          '0 .-4 U'. CM in CM'0 '.0 '.0 N    E '.OOinN.-40Lt'.inOO'0',O                                                                N U') CM       '.0'00% 0.'.0 N in'0
in '0'0'04')C'4'0C".,-4O0'.0% U'. 0%0'0%O'0O0'.0%O%0'. U') 0'O0OClN.-4.-I-4OO% in
     -4-4-4-4-4-4-4-4-4                                                                                               -4 _4 _.-l_ .-4 -4 -4 4
                                                                                                                                                                0'0'NNNNNNNN
o     N.-4'.D.-4C".,-4r-4m
E 0N.-INinIn.-ImN'0InIn                                     0'. CM it) 0'. '.0 N Nm 4 .-4 '.1'.             o                                                   it) in N 0.0 N (M'CIn in 0'0
                                                            N in CM it'. N'0-4 C". U". '0 '.0 N             Z '0O'.'.ONOInOmOoNC".                              in in .-4 N %0'0 0. Nit) in '04".
'0             '0mr'4'Om,-400'.o'.a '0
      -4 -4 -4 ,-4 -4-4-4-4-4
                                                                    0'.      0% 0% 000% 0% 0% 0%
                                                                                   _4 -4
                                                                                                            '0 0%0%00-4.-lOO%
                                                                                                                     -4 -4 4-4 -4 -4 .-4 -4-4
                                                                                                                                                          '0    0'0.NNNNNNr-N
o inmma%.-40'0.oinr-'Oo                                     C". 00 m '.0           0% N NO' .-4 0%          o '0InO.l0%0%inin(M                                 .-4 C". .-l       0' (M'0*OO C".
E NNO%'0m'0'0CM'.OON'0                                      '.0 '0 ('1 in .-4 C". 0'. OC .-4 it) '.0                                                            U". in 0 In in C". N Ifl'0'0 '0in
4". m'Ommc.a'0e.4oa.a'o% m
      -4 -4 .-.4 -4-44-4-4-4
                                                                             o0o000a'
                                                                                -4
                                                                                                            Ce'.    a'a'OO.4.-I,-.40o%a%
                                                                                                                        4-4-4-4.-I -4 -4 -4
                                                                                                                                                          C".      0% 0'.      N N Nb N N N N


('4
       —-4—————
               mNm
o (M-4O%0%%0'O0%,-4'0'ON
      ('Como%o%-4%ooN'.oN

o mo'..-4a'oo,-lmNmo%o
                                                      CM
                                                            U". (MN N moo .-I N 0
                                                            C". .-40
                                                                    0'.
                                                                          ma'. (MN NO'. m in

                                                            '0'0'00% m in in
                                                                                0% 0'. 0%


                                                                                        .00 In
                                                                                                   0% 0%
                                                                                                            o
                                                                                                            E            (MN 4'.DUl%OOr-
                                                                                                            (N 0%04O0OOOOOO%O%
                                                                                                                  -4-44-4-4-4-4-4
                                                                                                                                                          ('4
                                                                                                                                                                o in a' mm 00' '0 '0
                                                                                                                                                                '.1'. 4". N N In N in (Mm'0 0%
                                                                                                                                                                   0'.         N Nb N N N N N
                                                                                                                                                                                                    in N


                                                                                                mm          o CMCMNmo%%omoN'.oo                                 0 in '.0       in (MN 0 '0 '00'.
   in .-I it) C". N N '.0.-4N 0-4                           .-40% N.-4N            N CM     If) 0'. 0               ocMr-Nv'.mN'0o'0o                                    4". N CM 0' N .-I ('Im 4". 0
.-4 N('4mN.-4c'4a'NNN
    -4-44-44-4-4-4
                                                      -4                                                    —       0%0'0O00%U)
                                                                                                                          4-4-4-4
                                                                                                                                                          -4                         N N N N NN
       C in N .-4 '.0 in 0'
       N in 4' in '.0             In
                                        .1 N in       o .-I0inm'0b'.0N
                                             '.00 Z oa'momN%ONN'0..-4.-l                                            N U'. N '.0111 C') N (MN NO
                                                                                                                       0 (MN '0      '.0 N 41)0'0 C".
                                                                                                                                                          oZ C'4t-'.0N%0'0mQ0.'.o.-4
                                                                                                                                                              0'NN'00'0%Nin(Nin'.00'.
 0                 CM .-40 N '.0 N N
       -4 -4 -4 -4 _.I -4
                                                      o                                                      0
                                                                                                                                         4-4 -4
                                                                                                                                                          0 N'.ONN'.0'0.ONN.OinIn
       .1 (Mm         It'. '.0 N 0'. 0 .-4 N                 .-4 CM m '0in '0 N 0' 0-4CM                              Nm'0 411 '.0 N 0% 0.-C CM                    (Mm 'Oil'.       'ON 0'.-4 0-4 N
                                        .-4 ,-4 -                                              -.4——                                     4-4-4-4                                                  -4
                                                      C".                                                    '0                                           In
                                                      0'                                                     0'.                                          04
                                                      -4                                                     -4                                            -4




                                                                                                                   107
>4
       N 'U LA N to 4 to 0 UI
       UI N N 'U N _I 0% UI NO ,-4 >4 0 UI
                                                  00
lit
N                                   . UI
       to tO to lit 'U N N m 'U 'U mm N 'U 'U

       'UmUINNmo%moatotat
                       —
0>4 40%'U0%IAtONmLnfI4N >4
 N NNUt0,-40%0%N0%0t N
                       •0
                 _4 _4
   _IUUltomatto'UOmNN                             NOt
>4
UI
   LaImc4tONNatat'Umm•                      >4    tom
                                            UI
,-4 0OtOt0%0t0tOtO0 -4—
                        _I 0%0t
    eNotoo'UtnNNtcmm
    UINattoN'Uo%0mm• >4
>4
0
_I 0'-4 N N N    0%
                         0,-4 lAm
       _I N to   mUlCt 0%
>4     UI N mm .  UI N 0% UI 0% 0 >4              'U 'U
UI     0%NNNNNNNN UI NN
   ate
>4 m    to oat oe o N -4                            m
     tO atm UI N N Otto to                  >4    NO
'U     0tNNNNNNNtoto 'U NN
C   0% ('4 .-4 0% NOt 0%        'U .-4 to 4m
>4 00' UI m 0% UI N             m UI 0 >4 ON
(_t    OtNNNNNNNNNN 11 NN
>4
       0%   ('1 'U m UI 4 NO >4 N
                                N fI
       m _I .-t too 'U N m 00% m 'U
                                  UI
N NNNNtONtotor-                             ('4   totO
       tOOt_I .-l N 'U N   to_I 'U 'U             to UI
>4       'U mat UI .-l N        ('9 _I 'U   >4 0 m
— NNNtoNNtoLfltotOtotO — toto
0E to'U0to.-ttD'UNO0%O,-4
    LnmN'UUImototo,-4'U 0E Nm
                           0_I
0%NbNtoNtOtoUItoUIulto 0% tOto
0 %OmUI'U-4OUI0%NtoN
Z lN4C'l0%'UNtOtototo 0 tOO
to     NNtototototOUIUIUIulUI to UILA
0 m 'U         'U Ot.-4    _I NON UI 0 4
       'UN'U'UNNO%r'ItototO
UI     NNtDtotDtOU1UIUIUILAUI UI                  UIUI

 0 toUt('9UIQ,NUI('4NOt    0 Ot
   N,-4'U'UNC9O%,-lto'Utoto Z toto
'U     N N to to tO to UI UI UI UI UI Lit   'U    Lit UI


    NN'Umtoc'9ee4lrtmtoo 0 Nto
 0
 Z 0%UINtototo0tOUIm       .-4N
 ll    NNtotOtototoUILflUILitto m UILA
 0 m'U'UmNUI.-4,-4UIm'UUIm
      atm to UI m      at  0 Itt 0%
                                LEl
 ('4   N N to to to to to UI UI lit UI to   ('4   UI IA

 0 UI Otto N UI to 'U In N mat UI 0 mm
 E _I .-4 'U_I m 0 N N mm N         N UI
 ,-4   NNtototOtOUIUIUIU1UILA               —     UIUI

 0 -4mcq_Itor--'UUItoN
    tI IAN _I ate ('I 4 to 00 0                   m'U
                                                  N 'U
 O tototOLittDtflUl'UUI'UUI'U 0 IIIUI
       _INm'ULntONoto_IN
                                 -4-4-,
                                            N
                                            Ut
                                            -4




                                                           108
                     U)
                                                                                           I
                                                                                           >1



                            '
                                    U)                                                     U)
                     CM             N                                                      N
                     I
                     0
                     >4  N
                             0
                             •
                                          SD U) ('500 N sO ('S UI s-I N
                                          N N N CM CNN CM N N S'l (5)
                                                                                           I0
                                                                                           >4
                                                                                                                                                  0
                     4.4 ('4 N            N N N N CNN N N N CNN                            N                                                      (54

                     1
                     >1
                            0.4           00% Na) a) ('511) ('10000
                                          -40000-4-4.4-IN ('SO                                   00 U) 0'005.4-4.4-40 a)
                                                                                                 00(5) ('5(51 S'S0000-0 (.1                             NO '(I U) UI a) 000' 0' NO
                                                                                                                                                        I'S ('S ('5 ('54'5 CNN N.4 s-Is-I s-S
                     U)      s
                     s-I  N .4 N (MN N (N ('INN N N N N
                                    415
                                                                                                 N N N N CNN N CNN N N N                                N N N N ('IN CNN (MN (MN
                     1    0          00'5555
                     0s-S a)s-I• 0-4 U)
                     >4
                                          a) 0% a) NO a) N N S'SS
                                               U) U) S U) 050-4
                                                                      0
                                                                                           I     0' 500(5)41)00' 0'05-4 N U)
                                                                                                 s-I s-I -4.40 s-S s-b s-I s-I N s-S s-S
                                                                                                                                                        -40 N N SONO 0' 050' 0' 0
                                                                                                                                                        -4-40000.0% 0' 0' 0' 0' U)
                                     s-S .4 s-S s-Ss-I s-I s-Is-I N N -I                         N N N N N N N (.51CM N CM N 0
                                                                                                                             -4                         CNN N N N .s-I.4s-I.4s-Is-I
                     Io
                     >4
                            s-I           U)    0 SO s-lOS ("5(5) UI 0' C'S CNN
                                          ('50 ('50 (.100 ('SC'S UI sO N
                                                                                           I
                                                                                           >5
                                                                                                 0' sO ('S s-SO'. 0550.4 N 500% ('S
                                                                                                 NNNS 1155050' 0' a) SN
                                                                                                                                                        N U) C'S ('lOst) N 00-4.40
                                                                                                                                                        5050505050000 000
                     UIUI                                    s-I s-S s-S s- s-             UI    s1 s-I         s-I s-S.4s-S s-I s-I s--I .4      UI    s-I -4-4.4-4-4.4-4-4.4-4-I
                     I
                     >4
                            Os
                            N
                                          50U) 0005 NO sO 0 UI N 50
                                          (MN N (SN C'S ('IN (.10511 sO
                                                                                           I
                                                                                           >4
                                                                                                 500 (MO U) a) UIs-IN 5005 C'S
                                                                                                 505050500 UI sO N SN 5050
                                                                                                                                                        N a)          ('5'5oa' 0' -4-40
                                                                                                                                                        UI UI UI Lt'I UI ('SC'S CNN C'S Is-SC'S
                     0      s-S 0         -4-4.4-4-4-4-4-4_s-S-I-I                         0     s-I s-I s-S s-I s-I s-I s-I s-I s-b s-I s-Is-I   -0    s-I s-S s-I         s-I s-S s-I s-S -I s-I s-S s-I

                     1
                     >1
                        0
                        -4
                                          N 005 SOs ('5 U) N 50 (MN
                                          s-S   s-I s-I s-I s-I — (Is-SCM ('50 UI
                                                                                           I
                                                                                           >1
                                                                                                 .40050' S UI C'S 0' s--I UI 0% N
                                                                                                 UI UI 0O(')051I UI 5050141 UI
                                                                                                                                                        500' (.1 ('500050' 0' Os-S s-I
                                                                                                                                                        00000        N s-I s-S s-I N N CM
                     ('S-(.,              s-I s-I s-I s-S s4 s-I s-I s-I s-I s-S s-I s-I   ("5   s-s-s-Ss-Is-                                     ('S          s-     s-I          .4
                     I
                     >4
                            UI
                            as
                                          051)00CM ("10 N 1(5 U) NO
                                          050505000-4 s-S -4CM ('5(51
                                                                                           I
                                                                                           >4
                                                                                                 N ('S (51 C'S U)s-SN S'S 0' .4500
                                                                                                 ('IC'S ('SC'S N ("5(5100 UI 00
                                                                                                                                                        UI 50 ('5 (.1-ISO NON
                                                                                                                                                        (5) (5) ('5(5) (.1-4.4-4-4.4-4-4
                                                                                                                                                                                                   00
                     (MON                 000s-I s-S s-I s-b s-S s-I s-I.4 s-I             N     .-Is-Is-Is-( s-Is-Is-Is-Is-Is-Is--Is-I           N     s-S s-I s-I s-b s-S.4s-I s-s s-S -4 s-S .1

                     I
                     >4
                            N
                            N
                                          ('4-40 U) ('5 ("IN 111 U) U) Os-I
                                          NNN N U) U) 0500.-I N s-S
                                                                                           I     U) s-IOU) NUISO s-I 0' 0' 0' 0'
                                                                                                 0.4s-S s-S s-Is-Is-I (M N N CNN
                                                                                                                                                        UI (.150 ('10 0' 0500% s--I UI N
                                                                                                                                                        N CNN N N s-S 0-40.4-I s-I
                            0                   000000 -Is-S s-S s-I s-I
                                                                                           >5
                                                                                           -4    -   s-I s-S s-I s-I s-S s-S s-Ss-S,-S.4 s-S      s-S   s-S s-I s-4 s-b s-b .4 s-I s-S s-I s-I s-I .4


                     Z UI
                     0    0               UI LI) U) s-S N 'OSCM 500500                           (MU)0' 00% -40 UI N N ('SO                             N 000(510,000 s-I SON
                       sO E               5050 SDSNN U) 00.-I s-I 0                              000 s--SO s-I s-I ('4CM (MN                            N (MN N N s-I s-b s-S s-I s--I s-S s-S
                     0,00%                00 000 0 0 s-I s-I s—I s-I s-I                   0's   s-I s-I s-I.4 s-I s-S -4.4-4-4-4-4               a'    -4-4-4-4-4.4-4-4-4.4-4-4
                     0 a)  0              0' N s-100 U) ON NO s-S N                        0 500'S') UI Li) SOO055050NsI                                O 50 N 0' s-bOO 0 s-I s-I N N
                     E sI) X              UI 141 sO SON 0 U) 050-4 s-SOS                   Z 0.05000000 s-S s-Is-I N                                    N s-I N .4 N N s-I s-I s-I s-S s-I s-I
                     50050                0 00 000 0 0 s--I s--S s-S 0                     so        O          s-S s-S s-I .4 s-S s-I s-I s-I    so    s-I s-I s-I s-I s-I s-I s-S s-I s-I.4 s-I s-I

                     0
                     Z
                            LI)
                            UI
                                          5000' s-SN UI N UI-I 0' 0% UI
                                          UI US LI) SD 0 '05050000%
                                                                                           0
                                                                                           Z     ONs-IO0 LI) (MN 0 C'S '0 0%
                                                                                                 0505000000 s-I s-I s-Is-S
                                                                                                                                                        0% UI .-IN000 0% -4-INN
                                                                                                                                                                Ns-IN N s-I 9 s-I s--I s--S s-I
                     U)OUI                0 000000 0 s-I s-I s-ID                          UI        Os-I s-I s-I s-S s-I s-S s-I -4 -4 s-S       UI    s-I s-I .Is-S.4s-4s-(.4 s-I s-I.4 s-b

                     0
                     EU)N                                   0 CM SOON ('SC'S-I It) CM s-SO U)
                                          Ns-I 5115(51CM ('IN U) 11 SD (.1
                                                            E 050,000000-4-4-4-4
                                                                                                       0' 0050050500% s-I.4N N
     a)
     I               000                  UI UI UI LI) SO O NO' 05000%
                                          000000000 ,-I -40   O0
                                                                                                       s-I s-I N s-I s-I s-I -40 s-S s-S s-I S
                                                                                                     0 s-S s-I s--I s-I s-S s-4.4 s-b s-S s-Is-S s-b
                     0O
                      0
     I—S                                                                    s-I s-I s--I s-S s-I s-S

     U)                                   U) N s-I N NNNSO UI ON s-S                             s-I UI 0' 0CM ('40' 0005CM SO                          5(51051150' 0' 0' 0' 0050.-I
              N      X                    00 LI) UI UI LI) sO 0' 05000%                          0505050000.0.40 s-b s-I                                s-I s-I s-I sI s-I s- 99 s- s-I.4 s-I
              U)
                     C'S     0 ('5 000000000-1-40                                          (5)   000-4-4-40-4-4-4-4-4                             (.1   s- s-I sI s-I s-I           s-S s-b s-b.4 s-S s-b

     o               0 NO
     050so
               I
                     XOE                  ('I NO UI NO' 0' 500' s-S UI 0
                                          000000 Sf1 N 0' 05050%
                                                                                                 CMOS 05000' (.10% 0' .40
                                                                                                 0.050505000' 000-4-4
                                                                                                                                                        UI (.1500 UI (.1 UI UI 0' SN QI
                                                                                                                                                        s-I s-I s-I s-S s-S -40000-40
           r_, '—.
                     N       0N           C           0C          000000                   N      0000-4-40-4-4-4-4-4 N -4.4.4.4-4-4.4-4-4-4.4-4
     I—IZN
     >S-I             0
                      X
                             (N           N ('5 NO 0%    ('10' (s-SOC'1 s-I 0                     SON U) 0' 0% 0' 0' 500' 0' Os-I                       ('5 Os-IN 0' N 500' s-I 0' s-I C'S
                             C's          S'S ('1 ('1(51CM ('1(51 UI S N 0%                       0505050' 05050' 000.-Is-I                             s-I .4.4 s-I 00 0% 0' 0 0% 0 9
                     -40-I                         cCCOc00OO                               -4        000000.4-4-4-4-4                              -4   - s-I s-4.4 s-S s-IOOs-I0s-S s-I

                      0                   sO 0' (510' 00' 5050CM UI 0% ('1                        ON 00' 5 UI CM ('I 0% s-I s--S 50                     0550 C'S 00.40,500' (MN ('5
      ox
     04 E
                      E
                      0
                             s--S


                             00
                                          s-I s-I s-40000 s-I UI
                                                                      OO          UI 0%

                                                                                           0
                                                                                                  0000505050-40.4-40
                                                                                                  s--I s-I -4000 s-S s-S s-I s-I sSs-I
                                                                                                                                                        0-40.400' Na) 0' 0' 0' 0'
                                                                                                                                                   0 s- s-I s-S sI.40000000
                             N             s-I N (.10 UI sOS 0' 050 s-IN                          s-I N (.10 UI 5050' 05 Os--IN                          .4 N ('SOUl sO N 0' 050-4CM
                             -4                                               -4.4-4                                                -4.4.4                                                      -Is-Is-I
—
.0                                   N                                                     a)
(V OZ
                      SO
                      O
                      0%
                                     0
                                     0%                                                    as
                                                                                                                                                   0
                                                                                                                                                   0%

I—                                                                                                                                                 Os
                      s-S            -4                                                    -I                                                      -4




                                                                                             109
                                                                                                                                                           '.0004
                                                                                                       >4
                                                                                                       U,                                       >4
                                                                                                                                                In
                                                                                                                                                           -4r40
                                                                                                       N

0
N
                                                             >4
                                                             C
                                                             N
                                                                                 ONNNO.-4              >4
                                                                                                       0
                                                                                                       c
                                                                                                             Nr-sr..              CM,-IN'I?

                                                                                                                                  r4Nr,N
                                                                                                                                                >4
                                                                                                                                                O
                                                                                                                                                eq
                                                                                                                                                           .-4C'40O,-4a'Ø'.O

       1 N CM C40mm
       0% N In       e' N
                 mm mm m mm
       N N Cl N N N N N N CM CM ('4
                                               0%'. 0%'. 0


                                                             I
                                                             >4
                                                             1(1
                                                                                Na'O%a'ND
                                                                               NNNC4c,9NN
                                                                                         .             > 4ONNN
                                                                                                       U,
                                                                                                       .-4           NNCINNC4NC4
                                                                                                                                                >4
                                                                                                                                                In
                                                                                                                                                .-l
                                                                                                                                                   NONO0,.4Na"..

0'-4
         '.00'. CM
       0% a' 0'.
                          N -4
                      00000 N ,-400'.
                                  N4
               .-4 ,-4 ('1 N CM CM N CM N N ('4
                                                             >4  4ULfl    -4NNm,.44fl
                                                             .-4 NcN.lN .-4 4C4NN
                                                             o          o                              >4                              UIñLfl              a'a'0%NNO%,.N
                                                                                                                                                o.-4 NNNNe)NNmNNNN
                                                                                                                                                >4




In
       'C NO In 0 '.0-4000%' N
           U, It'. LI '.0 U 'C N N N
               ,-I r4 ,.4 ,4 4 ,4 .4 4 .4 ,4 ,.4
                                                             >4
                                                             u•                       C'4NNe4
                                                                                                       X
                                                                                                       >4
                                                                                                       U,
                                                                                                                     0'mmm                      >4      N0NNN
                                                                                                                                                      a'InU,.q'IJ,mOO
                                                                                                                                                      NC'4NNmNC4NNNN
                                                                            00Om
                                                                                                                                                In


..
       In 'C 0'
       mm m


       U) It'.
                             4') 0%'




              N 4') .-4 CM 00%
       N N N mm mm U) '.0 '.0 U)
                                          ,4 .4 NO
                                          In '.0 N N '.0
                                       -4 4 .-4 ,-4 _4 4


                                                             >4mNN4a'0Na'
                                                                OOO%O
                                                                          . NNN
                                                             >4 00O.-Im0NO%ND
                                                                NN0000a'a'000..-i z                    >4




                                                                                                       >4
                                                                                                             N-4O4fl.-40N.4NO
                                                                                                                                                >4         00%D%DN.4'mq,.-4
                                                                                                                                                      NNNNmNNNNNNN
                                                                                                                                                           N0%Nmmo'.
                                                                                                                                                >4
m                  -4 ,-4 _4 -4 ,-4 ,-4 _4 - 4 ,-4           m                                         m                                        m NNNNNNNNNNNN
       'C NO '.0 U) 0 U)
       -l .-4 N Cl CM 4') Nm In'.0 U,
                                   CM ('4
                                      It)                    >4
                                                                   NflN-1N
                                                                      NNOOO     a'a'a'Oc               >4
                                                                                                                 NO N U, U, m -4 N N 4
                                                                                                                                                >4 -4NNLflNq.,.40%a'
N                                                            N          4r4,4(4                        N                                        N       NN4Ne4
>4
-4
       U) N ,-4 It) 'C a' 0' '.04') (Ma' U)
       .4 .1 CM N N N N 4')
                   -4 ,-4 _4 -4 -4 -4 -4 -4 -4
                                               U-,    In     >4
                                                             4
                                                                           NNNNa'
                                                                              -4--l
                                                                                                       X
                                                                                                       >4a'&flN,.4a'a'0(.
                                                                                                          NNa'OOOO, >4 0NmNa".N'.
                                                                                                       ,-4   'I-4.-4,-4.-4.-4NC4NNC4N           ,-4   NNNNNcqNN,-4,,.j
       '.1'.        0 ma' CM 0%
                   C') '.0
       -4 .-4 ('4 (MN mm c". '0 In '0it)                     oE               OO0¼DN o
                                                                           NNbN¼Nro     E
                                                                                                                a'NNfor- oE NOOm'.boa'O
                                                                                                             NNNa'a'OOa',   ONInNN'.O'.
a'     -4_I 4 4 ,-4 ,-4 ,-4 -4 4 _4 _4 ,-4                   a'                  4,44-4 0%                                0% NNN4NNNN,.4,.
       -C      a' '0 NO .-4 C ('I U) 00 '-4
               ,-4 N ('IC') mm      It) I!) '.o
                                                             oE    0a'OQ0ua'
                                                                   I1NNONNNN                           o
                                                                                                       Z        NONN,-4 o mbo%oo,4'.cNa'NN
                                                                                                             NNDN0%Oa'a'o   O'-40mIt4NNON,g,
'.0            -4 ,-4 -4 ,-4 ,-4 -4 _.4 -4 -4 -4             .O                                        '.0                                      '.0
       '.00% '0 N            .-4 '-4
       .1-4CM C m m '0 '0' In '.0
                                       N ('I In 0% 0,-'.     o
                                                             Z               0a'Omc'
                                                                             NNr-.DNNNN                oz a'NNN,-4Ø%Lfla'  o 0.40moN,g1
                                                                                                          '.0N'.0N0%0%a'00 z N'.0NNN0%mNq.a'a'
Lfl      -4-4-4-4-4-4 __4_ -4 -4 Ifl
       'C a' 0 N 00     N N 0 0' 0
       '-I '-4 N ('4 mm m '00% o- '.0 o
                                      z                            NNN-4,--4Q
                                                                                                       U,

                                                                                                       oz    '0ON               C'4NNNN,-4
                                                                                                                     N0%O%0O Eo ON,-4'.0a'No
                                                                                                                                O,-4Oma".m
                                                                                                                                                It)




              4') In 0% 0% '.0 .1 m '0 N N
       -l .-I ('4CM                         o                                                          oz    N     0' N a' ma' -4 -4     a'     o NOInmNIna',..mN
                      CM N 4') '00 '0 '0U'.
                             -4 -4 _4 _4 -4 _4 .-4 1         ,                             4r          m                                        4' -4NNC'4C'1NN4
N
       4') '.00% N U) It) ,-4 NO N ma'
       '-4 .-4 ..4 CM N CM mm o m '?0                        : c-,cT.,o
                                                             o
                                                             N
                                                               DUflN                      -1,-i,-
                                                                                                       oE
                                                                                                       N
                                                                                                                       U,OOr4N o
                                                                                                                               E e4mNa'0%a'I,,
                                                                                                                                 0%-4ONN0..4
                                                                                                                                     444N       N
       NO             ,—l m '.0 It) 0%'
       0-40 '-4 '-4 '-4 ,-4 ('IN.-'. 4", ('4
                                                      U',    oE                                        oZ    mLnO4'.0a'
                                                                                                             mmNN.InNQ                          oE NN0%'.0m,-4.a'NN,
                                                                                                                                                   Oa'O0%'.00%NNa'.'N
-4                                                           -4                                                         -4.-'.-4,-4,-i,-
                                                              OOu1u
                                                                                                       ,-4


                                                             z00OO.-4,O,4,4
                                                               NNOij o
                                                                                                                                                r-4

       NO 0% NC') 0 '.000 m N 0'
       0%'.    0      0'. 0% 0% 0 .-l ON                     o                                         oE                                       oE    mNN'.U,'.a'
                                                                                                                                                       a'NN.0'.DmO
0      0.-400000,-4,-IQ ,-4 0 o                                                                                                                 o --40O.4.4
               ('44') '0 U) 'C N            0% 0 ,-4 CM
                                                      -4
                                                                   .-4   N f' ' U D   a' ,-4
                                                                                         0-4 .-4 .-4
                                                                                                                 N     In '.0 N     0% 0 -4 N
                                                                                                                                       -4-4-4
                                                                                                                                                       N    If'. '.0   N   0% 0 4 N
                                                                                                                                                                               -4
0
U,
                                                             '-4                                       N                                        m
                                                             U,                                        U,
a'.
'-4
                                                             a'
                                                             '-4                                       a'                                       U,
                                                                                                                                                0%
                                                                                                       -4                                       -4




                                                                                                       110
                                                  ONm'0NIA'0'ONN'OOS                        US W NsQsD 445 sD_I_I 115(15                     _IItSIAOm'0t—O'OOSN
                                            >4 WWWWWWOs0'soswosw
                                            IA               . >4                              W 04004040 CM 4 Nm'0                   >4 NNN'0OIflIflSO50500
LA                                                                                   LA                                               us
Cl                                          N C_INC_INNNC_ICINNC'IN N                       (IN N N ('5 44)              (45 m m      C'. mmmmmmc'smmmm
        004_IW sO'O_IC'sm W SN
0
C_I
        W US sOIlS sO IA I/SIn US 1155050
        N N N C'l (INN N (INN C_I
                                            o
                                                  0 LA_I '0—C N N 'OI US c'so
                                            >4 WWWWWWOS0'0'W0405 >4
                                            Cl NNNNNNNNNCMNN N                 .0           'ON 0 IAN 'OW IAN SO In SD
                                                                                               W 000505 ON_IN m IA
                                                                                            (IC_I 44514) C_I C_I m c's c's mc's c's
                                                                                                                                      o
                                                                                                                                             mS_I'0_Ioos_ISO(INc_I
                                                                                                                                      >4 ,-4NNm'0IA'OLASON50(-4
                                                                                                                                      N mmmmmmmmmmmm
        W N N 040055005_INN                                                                 I'S SD 'OLA 0 115 m N SO U5,-4'0                 US_IN_Ic_IS115Nc'5.-4LA(-
        50 IA In '040 '0 '0 In '01154040    >4
                                            U)
                                               NWNWNWOSOsO'wo.os•                           w w 000504_I m N'050                      >4 4 C'S (1.0115 SO SO SOW W 1.5 .1
                                                                                     I/S                                              IA
        NN NN ('IN N N C_I NN N             .-4 NNNNNNC'.INC_INNC_I '-4                     N C_I c'S m N C_I mm l's mm c's           _I mmmmmmmmmmc'sc',
        WIn_I me NW '0L(5mW 04
              '04'S 115 '0 m'O'O'O'0'0
                                                  moasuIN'0NInWoOSN
                                            >4 SON 50 N NW 0405 W
                                                                                            _I m N500 N 04_I'ONO_I                    Z C_IsOC—mW0I05,-4_INIAus
                                                                                               W 000%0S_I'Oc'S '01155
0'-I                                        o               •
                                                              05
                                            4-I NNNNNNNNNC_INN _I
                                                                 >4
                                                                 0                                                                    >4
                                                                                                                                      O
                                                                                                                                          CMc'SmIA40WWWOOSmO
        N N N N (INN C_I (IC4 C_I C_I                                                       N N mm N N mm mm mc's                     _I mmmmmc'smm'0mmm
        w Nc'SN C') IA O%_IW_I m 0              0%0SDNNU5N0%W01I5W X                        N%Osom 'ONN'0 N_I m _I                           LflOSNSNNNNOIISC_IIg5
        OOS05NOW W05 05_I_IN                >4 N'O'OLALISSOWWNNWW >4                        N N O_I04 OS N In '0 I/S sO N             >4 Nm'OLnsOwaswOos'0W
I/S     N_I_I _I N .4_I_I '-4 N N C_I       IA C_INNNC_INNNNNNN IA                          NC_I c' C') c_I C_I mm mc's mm            IA c'smmmc'sme's.OC'smc-.
        LAW U) 05145 '004_ION 05W                 WOOS 40 IA W IA InC_I sOON Z              W'0 USSO 1(51(5 N'O 11)050_I                  'OomSO'0bNoc'sr—us,-
        05 N N IA W 5040 NW 05050           >4 ,-4'0445'0'OUSNWNSOWW >4                     5ON0_I0% 05 N IA '0 In SOS                >4 N'0'OIn50SWWOOS'0W
'0      _I_I_I_I_I_I_I_I_I_I .-I CM         '0 NNNNNNNC'INCINN '0                           c' C_I rn c's c_IN m c's c's mm m         '0
        W SO 'ON W _I'OW 'OW 05W                  II) _I04W 14)50 LAW _I04 c'SSD            c's_I m _Is0 N 5044505W ON                    '0N'OsOO'O'OUO_IWW
        S ItS In '01(5.00 '04055W           >4 omNmm-OSOSsOUSWW >4                          SD NO N 0505CM 115.0 'ONS                 >4 N'O'0LISSDSWW_IO'ON
m       -4_I_I_I_I_I_I_I_I -4 -4_I          145 N N N N N N N N N C'4 N CM           ('5    N CM C ('S N N C C' 4 mc's l's            445


        m '0.0mw 415401/S In US 445 _I         'OSOmuSWWO%soSOo_I'O Z                       11550 W N i/S 11505050.05                        SOUSIA'0sQ'0'OOs_IUSWN
        us mm N N .-4 _IC'i'0 In In 50      >4 W_I_IN_INOsO'OU5W   >4                       US 400% N 05W CM '0515 'OS N              >4 N'O'0USuSSWO'NO'0N
 N      -4-4-4-4-4-4-4-4-4,-I .-I I C_I _INCMNNNNNNNNN N                                    (IC_I ('1445 CM N m c's c's mm c's        N mmmmmmmrn'O-om
        Os   N '00440 In 0 '0050 In 0%
        _I_I_I0%05W 050 N N N CM
                                                  SN W LAN 5005.-lW _IOsC'S
                                            >4 '0WNO%W0s,-I'0Nm50N >4
                                                                                            1(5.0145.0.005mm mm 050
                                                                                            'OIA NO W 5005CM mm sO W
                                                                                                                                      0  NNSONOS,-IO_IW_IUSN
                                                                                                                                      >4 C_I'OC'S'O'OSW,-_IO'0N
 '-4    .-4_I _I0000.-4.-4.--4,-4.-4        _I _I_I_I_I_I_ICMNNNNN _I                       (INN m N CM N mm mmc's                    _I mmmmc'smm'0O.Oc'SN
        05005_INN '004CM W We               o IAOInUIIIS'0WC'5c'SI/SmW 0                    .-405N'O .-4 m 040 C'S '0,-ISO            o SO40Nm'0Ln'0sOo'OmW
        .--I000SW NW 05_I_I_IN E mSSDWSW0mNNSO50 z                                          'O'0SOO%W SON_I CM N sON                  E N'0N445.0SONO,-IO.0r
 as     ,-4 _I_I00000.-i_I_I_I OS _I_I_I.-4_I_INNCMNNN 0%                                   N C_I (INN C_IC_I c'5 i-sm mc's           0. rnmmrnc'sc'sm'O'Omc'scI
        0,-I'Oc')O' W 04504450500
        000W ('-SO S 0400_I_I oE N%O(MC'SN.-lsDC'SO%WIn_I
                                 NLISIISSSONO%N_I,-ILA5O Z
                                                          0                                 S.-IW N '01150 m _I0 '0 m
                                                                                            145.0 '0 W bUS sO 0%_I_I '050
                                                                                                                                      o mc-4sO_Iw'OCMoInmbOS
                                                                                                                                      E N'O_IN441115s00'osWmr-
 50     _I,-I_I00000_I.-4.'-4,-I SO _I_I_I_I_I_I_IC.4NNC_Icq SO                             N N C_I N N C_IC4 C_I 445445 mm           so c'smmmmmmmmc'SmN
        SO' N_I 40505 LAO SOWN               o N_IN05NSON0%NUS.-I05 0                       sOW mW_INN 50 LII If) sO'O                o _I05_ISsOO%NN05W'0OS
        0.040W NsONO%0000                         ,—IL15'O5OInSOQ4_I.-4_IUSU)               mm .055 In In W 90141 In                  E Nm.-I,-Im'0LAWWNmN
 115    00_I00000.-4_I ,.-4 _I              In         #-I,-4,-4_I.-4C.JNNNN         1(5    N NC_INN CM NC-i mm mm                    'A     c.Smmc'sc'5c'Smc'sc'sc'srsc-.i

        LAN_I W mc', In IA C— CM Lfl'O       o 44SLIIc'SL/SOONLASDmNSO 0                    It) 'OW 'ON W 'OWO W SON                   o WUSNCMm'0_I,-I_INWO%
        05050 N SSOSO% 05000                 E _I'O'0SOInSOW_I_I_I'0Lfl E c'sc's m bsD '0 'Oh 90.CM'0                                  Z _IC'50,-4m'0USN-WNNN
 '0     OO_I000000,-I_I_I                    '0 .-I_I.-4,--I_I_I,-ICMNC4NN '0 Cl N C_I N N N Nc-i m mm                                 '0    c'smc'sc'sc'sc-,mmmmc',c,.
        NOO ItS 05_I m 50 'OWN_I
        04040 N 5040505050500
                                             o wasome'souso.—im 0
                                             Z ommsO'0Inw_I.-s_I'0In Z                       (41 W NON In 1150% 1450% In 0%            o 'O04_INOSONWOUS0SW
                                                                                             C's C_I 445 N.D '0141400' .-4 N           X ..-4Noomm'OU-ssso.-IS
 m      00_I0000000.-4_I                     m .-I_I_I_I_I_I,-4CMNNN(4                445    CM C'4 N N CM CM (1CM CM (4 mm            m mmmmmmmml-smmCM
        N N 04-4500_ION 44) W W              o N05LI5InNC')U1'0'0N_IO'. 0                    ,-IW 50501410 'OW '050,-I LII             o OWIACSs04000c'S'O_Ib
        05 05 055 sO 50 NO 04 05 0% 0%       E oNmInm'Or—o.-som'0 Z                          C's_IN SD ItS 'ON LAWN 0.-I                     _I_Io'OC_IC_Im'OlnInoN
  N     0000000-40000                        N _I_I.-4_I.--4_I_INNNNN N                      (I N CM CM N CM NN44 c-imm                c-I   c'sc'SC_Imc',c'smmmmmc_I
        400505 NON W -40115 m In             o 0 '0 m 0 LAN N I/S IA In_IN 0 W Somr- m W 00S0,-IW                                      o 50'OO%e'i.-IW%ONmSOc'sm
        05W 045050 SO 50,-I 04 W 050%            _I_ImIA_INSOo%_Io_I'0 Z N 05(440mm o 'ON US WO                                        z OOWOC_IOO0CMc'5sON
  '-4    0                     C        C    _I _I_I_I_I.-I_I_I_INNC_IC4 _I N_INN C_INN C_IC_IC_I Nm                                   .-l   (SNNm(4)c'Smmmc'sNC_I
         U) '005 N_IN '000CM 50CM            o 0%_Im'O_I'OInmsOc'so'0 0 '00 m _Im 'OW NON c'50                                         o IA05_IIn'O_IsOOWOsDSO
         O W 0450 us 50404'S 045W 05               ,-4051'S'OQ%OUSW_IOWl'S E                 (ISO_ISO_IN W _I In CM In _I              E omwo_IwsoLtss_IOsO
  0 _I000000_IO 000 0 ,-40.-I_I0_I.-4_INN.-IN 0                                              N .-I (INN N_IC_IC_I N CM C'S             O mNNC'sc'SCMNNNmNN
         _I Nc') '01155Db W 050_IN                 _I Nm '0 IA 505W 050,-I N                 .-I N '0 In sON W 050.-IN                       _I Nm '0115 %ONW 050_IN
                                   -4_I_I                                 4-4 -4_I                              -4_I_I                                              -4 _I _I

  '0                                         IA                                       So                                               N
  IA                                         LA                                       LA                                               IA
  05
  _I
                                             05                                       0'                                               0'
                                             -4                                       '-I                                              '—4




                                                                                          11
      P4NP4Di'0LflCIIAOODi                     ,4.4Di.4LA.-4ID.-4P410m
>4
U,
                                         N m'0'0'0
                                         >4    OO01O0'.4O.-s,io.m >4                          '.4 '0111
                                                                                              NO N .4 DIN
                                                                                                              0,-s '.4 '0 '0 N
                                                                                                                             DI     >4     DiNN01ooDIDio

                                                                               •
                                         IA
N mmmmmmmmmmmm                                                                     U'S
                                                                                   N                                 m i. s', m m
                                                                                                                                    In
                                                                                                                                    CII

>4 C"4N('4,-4.-4r4InNNID%D >4                  .4IDLA'0NNDiIAm,                          DI m IAN ON 11) '.4'00i N .-4
                                                                                         I)                                          Z
o   mmenmr',mmmmmmm o
                                               ODIDl0O.-4.-4.-4..-4,.-4N.0         >4       ('JON P401 N
                                                                                                                                    o>4 DINN0101o.0'DIDio
('4                        N                   '0mm'0.,'0'0,O                      N                                                ('.4

>4  ('4-4.-400.-4mNN'O.0 >4 DINNmNN.DNNDINID                                             '0 ON
                                                                                         m 01001100.-s 10 ('I -40101
                                                                                                                                     >4 NN0I0101ODIO
U,
.-4 mmmmmmmmmmme., IA                          . IA
                         .-4 mmm'0'0'0'0'0'0...O -4                                      '0 '0 '0ir       .-4 '-4         010% N
                                                                                                                    me., me., mm
                                                                                                                                    In
                                                                                                                                    '.4

                                               DiDIN0%'0P4.-4Oe1flN                      In ('410 In 10        0' '0 DIN N '.4
>4
o                 >4 01NDi'..-IP4.DtnU,U,IAN >4
                  1-4 mmm'0'0'0'0'0 ..-4
.-s mmNc'4pi('4mm o                          0                                           ID'0O m .4             .-IN N DIN          >4
                                                                                                                                    o NNNDlDIOO
                                                                                                                         mmmmmmmmmm'0'0
                                                                                                                                    1-I

>4 IOIn'0mIAIDN%OIO                      >4
                                               Dl'0O0N'OON'0.4
                                               Dl N 01.-I P4 '0 In ION 'ON
                                                                           Z       >4
                                                                                         ID DI11   0   In IA N  '0 -4
                                                                                         N In 0 '04') 010111 IA ION'0 >4 IDIAIA'0U'CNN'ON
In NNNNPIC'4Ne.,mme.Im                   US    mmm'0'0'0.oo'0 IA                         0'0'0 '004') m mm mm c., In mmmmmme.)e.,mmmrn
   G('4tOIANON'0ONO'0      IDIOIONN0ICNN,.4O,0
>4 NIn'0N.-4'0NIONIO10N >4 0%N0.-I.-4mIA'ON10N >1 '00 1110 e1 10 '0 'ON DI
                                                  N 100%  '0 m 0' '0'0IA'0 N                                                        >4 IA'0'04')'0IDNNIDLAIDN
'0                                       '0    mmm.o'0.o'0'0'0.0                   '0
                                                                         0 m '0m mm mm mm '0
      01IDNIAO%N'0'0NmInm                      0%-4Nmo'.4Dl,-4o'0,- X '.4 NO U '0 .-4DI IAN .-4
>4                                       >4     N 010-4mm In N '0   >. N In Dim ('4 N 4') (144') IA .-4 >4 '0'00N0%'0ONIAN
                                                                                                           mmNNm'0IAIDIn'0U,In
m                                        I.,                        C., '0'0m'0'0mmmmmmm e'
      '0'0DIO%LDONLAONNIA                      m ON N N '0In DI 'ON In
                                                                                              '0 N N .4 ID .-4 r-4'04')  ON
>4                                       >4 NIODI'.4m'010m01 >4                          01        '0c') 0110 m                           '0LAmOIn10,..4'0N
                                                                                         10                        0.-s 4')         >4    '.-IOONNNC')e.'CNm'0
('4                                      N                                         (.4        ' C') '04') mm mm N                   N
      '0O'OION0NIO'.ODIDI                    OO.-410%OOIONIn'0N X
                                         >4 '0mIA'.oo%'0IADIIn0%O >4 .40(11   InN '.4 0 In 0
>4
'.4   Nmmmm                              '.4   mmmmmm'0'0'0'0'0In
                                                                     N '010.-jO'. .40'
                                                                                   .-4
                                                                                                                            C In    >4
                                                                                         '00 4') mm N N CII N 4') (11 .4 ('4NNNNC.sNmmNmm
                                                                                                                                          NDl0%0%00010'.1
0 LA'O0%N'0'.4O(NOmDI o N0%OI0I.-LA'001Inm
E 0%IO'0m,-4'.4C'm01(...o E (N (14 '0 '0N 0% (14 In 0'. LA 0100                                                                     o
                                                                                                                                    E '0Oc'4DlIAmN'0mIA
                                                                                                   LA N '.0 In 0% In 4') 100.4
                                                              E                               In 0% N Dl N N 01 In
                                                                                         104')                                        'OD%NNNNNDiDiO
Q%                4-4.-4'.sc'4mcI4me.,   0'. mmmmmm'0.'0'0'0u.. 0'                       '0'0mmmrlc.4c.4cI4Ne,4N                    0% NNNNNNNNNNNm
 0E s'0mN0101,-4IONN0%
      NNN.-4mInOmmN 0 0"001NOLAO'.UION'0'0 0
                              E O'-INmIONNmo%'0a'. z                                     'ON .-4 m In LAO N 010
                                                                                         IA 4') '0111 '01010      10 N'0
                                                                                                                             N'0    o N0'0O'00,-40NO'0
                                                                                                                                    E IA%D'0IOInInNN100'
ID                           '.0 mmmmmmm'0'0'0'0'0 '.0                                        04') C') m N N N ('4 N N N            '0
                                                                                                                            NNNNNNNNNC'.INN
  0E IO'0NNOLA,-4N'.401
      '0.-4Ln'0mLAN'010IO.-4 0 ON0%C4NNIONIONN
Ill
                                         E OOIOIANNmN                                    Nb C') '04') (NO In '.0.-401,-4 0 NInNe.'CIA,-4O(NIn0%
                                                                                             mm 4') IA LA        In 100 E '0NIAC'CIn'0'0%OIOInN
                                mmmmmmm'0'0'0'0'0 In
                                         IA                                              '0'0mmmc%INC'4c"4Nc,4N                     It)   N(NNC4N(NN(NC'4NN(.,I
 0Z L11m,-4NNNO'0O10o
       IO'0'.4'00%OO%'0NN'0 0 01NIOONNOmmONN 0
                             E 0'0.-4N'0m,-4LANDN Z                                      ("C It)  'ON N N It) 0110
                                                                                                   I')
                                                                                         mm (14 '.4 N 4') N N 4') In 4')
                                                                                                                                    0
                                                                                                                                    Z ODIOO10NNONm
'0                          '0 NNmmmmm'0'0.o'0.. '0                                                                                 '0    NNNNNNNNNNNN
       DIm'0Nm.-4In 0 .Omo%'0mIO'0In.-SIONIO
  0E '0N.4,-4'.DN0%r.In01N
                                N0%O,-4O0'NOIAIn Z0                                                       100.-I ,-4 C') 'ON
                                                  -IN 00 '-4 N (1410 It) -4 '0 N o       ONNNO,-4'0IO'0(NeIn
                                                                                         '.4 It) 0%

m                                                                                      E m'O'0N'0mNmmm10N
                   Q0OC.4NC14NCI
                      m N("JNc'4c)c)mm'0.o.o'0 C) '0'0mmc.,NNNNN(.4N m NNNNNNNNNNNN
0 '0OLA'.DO%(NmONoN 0 .-l'0(NONmIn'0O01mN 0 N IA .-4 N N N (1410-44') 0%'.O
E '0(NO'.4'0NNIAmInIO Z 10IONa)01NN01N(NN E          001000% 0 4')                     0 '0NO'0'0OOInUINm
                                                                                           ,-4InmN4')N.-4N,.'0IO
N -I4,-4000(MN(4p4('4 (N NNNP4NC.4p4mmm.o.0 ("4                                          '0
                                                       N e. 4') .-4 ('4 N ('4.-I N ('4 N NNNC'INNNC'.JNNNN
0 IO'0OI%OLALAONIANON
E '0.-40%.-4NNN0%cO01'0                  o  NN'0IAN0'0Nm 0E
                                         E '0mLANNN'0'0IO'.IIAO                          '0.4 N 0104') N '0,-4 01 m
                                                                                         IA        '.001.010         0'. 4 10 N 0   0 '00%m'0'0In0%ID
                                                                                                                                    E O'0.-40%NONODI01N'0
'.4        0.-I000.4'.s.-4.-4('4         '.4   NP4(NNP4N(.4mmmm.o                  -4                                               '.4   NNN.-4N('4.-4(N,-4,.4P4(N
0 mo'0O'0'0LAoco o N'0'0OON'0m.o,..4N 0                                    o NNNO0N'00%'00N
                         E mo'0r-No%..4'0.,0 Z NLA'0NsO'0'.O(.4
                                                 00% ('IL!) In LA (14 '0 N
o    O.-4000,-4.-4,-j0p4                 o           N('9('4(Nr-4mmp,u 0                 mm N N .—4 ,-4,-4.-4 ('4 .-4.-4.-4         0 '.INN.-4N.-4.-4'.4,-4'.4pj(N
      '.4 N e.1   '0 In ION 010-4 N            .-4 (N t') '0111   ION 0%0.-4 ('4
                             -4-4-4                                      -4-4_I
                                                                                         '.4 N 4') '01(1 ION           010-4 N            .4 N'0 IA ION DI 0.-4 N
                                                                                                                          '.4-4-4                            '-4-4—
                                                                                   0ID                                              -4
                                                                                                                                    ID
                                                                                   0'                                               0%
                                                                                   '-4                                              -I




                                                                                   112
                                                                 x 404000               40  0 >4 ss-IC'4,-4(.4(Ne')(0'044)
In'OONCO(NN(00NC.)e')(N
    ••••••.•••••
>4 0-405050404_IO04ososos
                              In
(N 'O'OCOCOC.e')'O'0COCOCOCO (N
                                              0%00000000,-4_I_I >4
                                                                 51)
                                                                             '0(0
                                                                     -4 -4 N (N_I_I_I_I
                                                                              (.3
                                                                                        .4-4N
                                                                                              U)
                                                                                                                                  (N 'O'O'0'0'O'0'O'O'0'O'0.
z>4 40NU)'0N05NON
       ...••....•.. 0 ••••...•.••• 0
 o(N OO0405040%O0%0%040%
                               (0.-4NS0'0'ON_I40_IN04 Z
                               0500000000.-i_i_i >4
      •0'OmCOCOm'OCOmC.)COm (N m'0'0'0'O'o'0'0'o'0'O'0 N
                                                                                     N  (0040 '004005 N 04_i
                                                                                     -4 -4 (N (N ,-I .-4 _i N_I ,-I _i (N                0000_iOCNInCOIninIn
                                                                                                                                  o(N (N(NN(N(NNCN(NCOC')'0In
                                                                                                                                  >4
                                                                                                                                      '0'0'0'O'0'O'0'0'0'O
      _IIn40IflOSNOSWNifl_I
In     •.••.......• In 0500000000_i-i_i
                        •••••.••...• 414>
>4 _I.-40505040400%040%OsO%
,-I 'O'OC.)COCOCO'0CO(OC.)COCO
                       CO'O'O'0'0'O'O'0'O'0'O'0 .4
                                       s-I
                                                                                     ON In s-I 400 (.40
                                                                                     (N (N (N (N_I_I (., (N (N -4 _4 N
                                                                                                                        0% (.4
                                                                                                                                  >4
                                                                                                                                  In
                                                                                                                                  s-I
                                                                                                                                         O(N'-i04')_ICNNNOON
                                                                                                                                     (N(NN(.4CNNc'ie's(0'OInsD
                                                                                                                                         '0'0'O'0'O'0'O'0'0'0'0.
xDiNNN_I.-I%0'0In'0'0(.4
.-i
       •..••.....•. 0
 o _IO0%0404oosososos
      '0'0CO(0(0CO'OCOCOCOCOCO         s-I
                                              044D05N040Ci0%N,-i40
                                              0%05040'O%0O0.4,-4_I D's
                                                                              0'-4
                                                                                     04  N 400 '00.-I 40 s-I
                                                                                     .-I (N CNN_i -4 N (N ,-I s-I _i (N
                                                                                                                                  o,-4
                                                                                                                                  >4
                                                                                                                                         NO0C'404NNO40'0(0
                                                                                                                                         _INN_ICN_I(N(N'O'0InN
                                                                                                                                         '0'0'0'O'0'0'0'0'0'O'O'O
      COCO0CO'OU)'040s0C.)N(N                 (NN04OO0%N_Im0b40 X '0.-I 0440 N 11) N 41440 U) (N
                                              404040NNN0s0%O040 >4                                                                       05(N'0'O'00Nm40'040N
Di                                                                 0'-i,-i.-iOOOOOO,-s,-i                                         >4     0_I.-I_I,-s_I_INCO'0Ino,
In            COC')COC.mC.             I')    COCO(')COC')C')COCO(0'0CO'0     414    '0'0'0'O'0'0'0'0'O'0'0'0                     U)     'O'O'0'0'0'O'0'o'''
      (0004CO0O'OCO,-IOsIneO
      40'0In4040NInIn'0'0'0                   05OIn05O0(NInm(N(N
                                              '040U)In404004050 Z                    04 Nb CON 0504.-sO NO                               400N(N_IN1140'0eiin'0
D's                                                              >4                  040.-is-400.0%000_i0                         >4     O_i,-4_I.-40,-4c'sCOq,s.o
'0 COCOC'rnCOmmmm4')mc') '0                            C'C'COCOC.CO(')O '0           (O'0 '0'0 C') CO'0'0'0'0'0 '0
      04D'OCN,-405'O_IcN(N'0                                                         'ON '040           _I N (041) NC.)'0             CN0'0-4_INm0'O04
D's   N'0CO'0CO'OInCO(0COCOCO                 CO(0(0'0In40NNN0%               D's    0%0_I00%04 050405-40                         >4 000.-400.-4_I(')'0&flO
C')   COCOCOCOCOCOC.)CO(0C')mCO        C.)    (0C.)C.)(0f0(0COC')4')(0(0(0    C.)    C    '0     '0(0(0(0(04') CO'O'0             (44 'O'O'O'O'0'0'O'0'0'OQ)
    N05'0In_INNInON_I
>4 InN    _IN'0_IO.-4,-4(N                    InInInN,-IcNCOIn400'_I Z                                             04NNN40IrICO'00N
                                                                                               N 40 (.4(040(004 (N (004
                                              _I_I_I(NCOCO4040%0NNOS D's                  0%OOsO% N             >4 0400000%0_ICOC')tnO
                                                                                                                      04_IQ%
(N (0(0(0(0(0(0(0(0(0(0mm (N                                                  (.4    CO(') (0(0(4) (0(0(0(0'0(0 N CO'0'O'0'0CO'O'0'0'0'0l4)
pD's
  _i040%O'0CO40CO_I,-4                        0%'00%_IcN4000%N'0_I Z
     (NO00%OCN_I0%00                          040%040,4_I'040In0N > N04_I,-4
                                                                      05 (NNIn'004
                                                                             NN
                                                                                   N 4140    (0'ObNCO0O40In'040
                                                                                      _I0 Di 0_i090040.-4C.)C')'004
'-4   (0C.Nrne'sr.,C.,mcN(NmC.) _I N(.4(NC')C')COCOC.)(')(flr')(0             '-4    (0 (4) C.) CO ('5 (0 (0 (0 COC.)'0 '0        s-I    'O'O'O'0'0CO'0'0'O'O'O.
o 04NInCONO0504NInO%                          NCO400_ION0%40CN
E 0O050_I00%040s                              040%00,-4,-I'0In4040NN 0Z (040404040_ICON
                                                                         N      NNNNN
                                                                                           4011) 'ON o 40InO40'O04eim(0(Nc',
                                                                                                 _I0 z 0_I_I000'0%_I(0m'O04
04 COfO(NNNCOCOC.)N(N(N 05                    C'(C'COCO(0COC.(4COCOC' 0% (0(0(0(0(0(0(0(0 COC.)'0 '0 05 '0'O'0'0'04')40'0'O'0'O.0
o InCONN0%0%CNCOL0NO
E 0%05N0%O00500'O                             —IU)(NCO(N(NCNP)NU)OsN 0 NON 40 'ON 4004 05 0 o 40ONNCO(')N00%NN
                                              O0%,-40--4_I'040404040N E so N 40 tOSOsO 40 N bOO                                          0s-IOO00500(N(Nm
40 CN(N(N(N(N(NCOCOCNNNC.) 40                                                 40     C') (0 C') C') C') C')   C') CO (0(0 0 '0    4° '0Cfl'q'0'O'0.
oE 0%0In400%COCO'0'400 0 (NNN(N(N(NOO40'0NO% 0 'ON C.)(N 0 0 '0 '0414(0
                      z: 004_IOr-4--4'04040,04040 E SO N N 4040404040 N N 90% o
                                                                              E N'-I'O40ONs0'0'OsO(N40
                                                                                  0-4O000040c'iNmN
U) N(N(NN(.N(NC.)C4(N(N(N(0 U)                COC4(0COCOC.)COCOC.)C')CO       In     (0(44') (0(0(0 (0COCOCO'O(0                  II)    'O'O'0'O'OCOC0'0'O'0'0'O
o
E (N'0O(N'0NNO,.-4InO
   04N0%040%050%0 Z3 NN'00%0040N(N0'0'0       0                                      ON N N 4040 '0OOSON'0                        oE 04O000%0%0%_I(N(N40
                                                                                                                                     NN_icW05CO(N4040
                      00400'_I'-iC''0In404040 Z                                      sO N 40 In In InInsO 40 N 050%
'0    (NNCN(N(N(N(NNCN(N(NC.) '0                                              '0 C.) C. C' (0(0(0(0(0(0(0(0(0                     '0 (0'0'0'OCOC,)('4(0'O'O'0',
oZU)40COcNLflOInmInmN
  NNNN0%04N0%04 E0 '0In'040In0%'ON'0N     0                                          4144000 (N'0 s-I 40(0 N 00%                  o (N'O0%IflN04CO,-4CON
                      0'0%0%OOCNO'0U)In40 E                                          404040404040404040400%                       E 0%00%0%050s_i_I,-i40
C.)   (NCNN(N(NCN(N(N(N(N(N(.4         (0     (NNCN(NCO(0e')C')CO(4)C')(0     CO     4' (4) (4 C,) 4' (0        (0 (0 (0(0 (4     (4)    (0'0CO(0mC.)COC.)'O'0'0'O
o %0U).-ICO40N_IN'0In40'0 0 '0In040004(N4040Cfl 0                                                                                  o
   40%0NN4005NN00% Z                          0%InO0_ICO'0'0'0Lfl Z                  04    (N (040 '040,-I N(0 _I0
                                                                                     '04041)0 '0In '0404040                        E040'O'0(')'0'O-4N0%(N
                                                                                                                                     00%040%00OIn
N (N(NNCNNC'JNN(N(N(N(N (N                    (.4(N(.4(NCOCOmCO4')(0(4)CO (N         (0(4; (4; (0(0(0(0(0(0(0(0(0                 N (0'OC')COC')COCOC44'0'0'O'O
o 0%CO0%InCO400%CON'0 0 CO'00InInLt440'040N,.-4 0 (N CO_I (N 0440 (N 04')U)(0sO                                                    o U)N(.44005_I,-IInc's(N'0
E '0'O4040'004404040U)400% Z O%(N0%040r4'0')NIn Z '04040(0 N '0 rn '041) 04040                                                                   N0%040%'0
,.4   (N(N(N(NN(N(N(N(N(N(NCN _I                      4(N(.4C.)C0(0(0CO(0      _I    4') (4) (0mm (4) (0(0(0(0(0(0                 ,-I   (04C')C.)(0CO(0(0CO(0m'0
o O'0'0NO4cNU
E (N(N'0'0_I0\U)U)40mCO0%                     In(NCOCO_I0'mU_I(N 0 U),-4N
                                              040'050In0In E                 0 N_I 00% N (0 o _I_I0(N'0.-4_I0COI1)N_i
                                                                   CO U) In_ION 9 (N II) CO C.) s-I S0%ONNN0%40(0
o (N (N C1 (N (N (N (N (N (N (N N (N 0        (NCN_INCN(.4(NC')COm(0(0 0              (04'; C,; (0(0(0(0(0(0(0(0(0                 o
      _i (N (0'0 4040 N 040_I (N              .-4 NCO'0Lfl 40 N 0% 0 _I (N                (NC.) '041440 N 040,-i (N                      s-I   (NC.) '04040 N 0.0_I (N
                          ,-4 ,-4 _I                               -4 -4 -4                                           .-4 -4,-I                                 '-4_i_i
N                                      (0                                      '0                                                  13)
40                                     40                                      40                                                  40
04                                     05                                      0%                                                  04
-4                                      s-I                                    -4                                                  '-I




                                                                               113
>4 InN%D%0NN40 >4 .-I NO m ui c 4') N ('1 40                                   04       UImN0%ON40                           air-
in             in U)N40.-4.-INNIn 40                                     >4
                                                                         in
                                                                               '0.                                >4         P1.-I
N '0'0'0'0000ifl0000                  N '000 O'0in in in in in in N IA   in in i in in In in in N   4040
                                                                                                                  In

      O.-Ii0000U)oiInin                   mNNONmNmP1In'0 >4 0Inin'00inONN,lN                      0%Dini0m'040440inin
>4
o
('4
                                      >4
                                      o
      0000000In0000 N 00000Ininiflinininin                        o iO4004NN40'0'0iøO'0 >4 in'0'0N40Ome440iJia,
                                                                         N InInU)InU)InInInInIn40%0 o
                                                                                                    N                   iDiOiDi0404040i040404040

   4004N0Qmoa,,-.I40 >4 NmN'0inN40.-I.-4mO X
                     in in400%04NNm'040r- in
                                           >4 404000%iOinin.O
>4
in                                                                                                                >4
                                                                                                                  in    '00'0m40in'0'040ai..-l
      '00 '000 U) Inin mO in '0       .-I 00000ininininu)InU)            .-I   ininiOInininininInIAiOiO -4

o.-4 N0%O%,-4NiO,-l,-4NN
>4
     0in000inifliflininin'0 o
                            ,-I 00000InU)iflu4u)inU) o
                                      >4                                 >4    biOa,a,a,F-inin40p.a,'0
                                                                                                                  o-4
                                                                                                                  >4    mC')'0miniOiniOmso'0
                                                     .-4                       tflInU)InU)iflu)U)IninIniO

>4 ON04O4N'0O'0m4., >4 0.-I0O,-4O'0ONN0
                          iOONN'0N'0In40N                                >4
                                                                               NO04')iflplNONu)'0'0               X     iniO0%O%'000Qr.4N
in ininininin,n40u)u4in'0                                                                 U)inUi,                 Di
                                                                                                                  In

>4
                                            00%U)('4C.4N,-40U)'04')'0
                                      >4                                 >4            >4 NinN'0N.-40,-INNOa,
'0    Lflin'OtninInU)iOU)U)in'0       '0                      tflinin40ininuin.ninin, '0 404040%D4ONNNNNI-r.
                                                                         '0

                                            O400%40minNoNb c
>4    ONOONm'0NiOU)in0%               >4                   >4 LflN04OOLfl'0'04040in >4 NNNN,440N-4O40in
4')   inininlninu,u)iOI.ninU)'0       m                                  C')                                      C')


>4
      '0.-I'0inin00%0,-4c'i
      0,-iooc.im'0N40400              >4
                                                                         Z  '0%D.-4N'0Or-u44minQi x
                                                                         >4                       Di
N     iflIninLflLfliO,nin,flin        N     '0'0'0"0ininLfliflinifl,fl   N     U)U)U)40%DtflU)IflU)inin40         N 4040%O%0i0r-NNNNN
      0mr-U)InN.-I'0,-4,-im                                              X           -4'0N'040..4..-4040N         o>4 o,-Imo40'0m.-.4o4fl'0
>4                                    >4                                 >4                                           '0inmN4o4o40in'0a,
—     'Oin'0ll)UininULflifl           .-4   00000ininiflLflU)inifl       ,-4   U)ifliflinhlhl)U)inifliflifliO     — 4O%0%O%OiONNNNNNN
oz N'0mN'0NNmmin o m'0'0a,u)NinoLrl'0oa, o m000inNiOm'0oN4', o I4000u1,-4m,-NN'0
                 E                       E m'0400%,-4'0'0'0N40 Z InU)mNu)4o40inN4no,.
0%    OinU)'OinInLflinLflin           0%    '0'0'Or'm'0Lnu)intninln      0% LfltflIniniOu)ininU)U)Lfl%D           0%    40%040NNNNN
o '040tflNinN0%Lnm0%,- o                    m%D404')O'0NIniONON          oE N'0N00%m,-0N40
                       E                    4040.-40%InN0%,-4N,oN           .-4m'0o40'0'0'040bin o
                                                                                                 Z                      .-IinNON0400%'0,-IinN
                                                                                                                        U)inN.-40N'0mU)inON
40                          40 000mm000inininin 40                                        40U)inU)U)U)in40        iD %O%Di0,O4ONNNNN
oE N0N400%,-440'0NNN
     0%NWN0LnN40mo o             m'0N'0Lt)0NNmN O
                            Z 40io'-NmioOO'0In                                                            0%N0040inLflN
                                                                                        ifl.-4040040m oE '00.-I
                                                 Z                                                              '-4004 C') NO00% N
 in '00'00'0LflLflinu)InLfl ill 000mm000inininin U)                            IninInU)iOLflininu)inin,0          In    4040'D%D4O40NNNNN
oE    0%N0'0LflQ%00,-IQ%9             o NN.-INNm,-u.)o X
                                      E 4040,-4O.-m40N'0 o                     0.-4ON,-I00%m'0Na,
                                                                               oNm40a%inmNm4040m o
                                                                                                                        ,-40% N   .-4 N N N C') N in
'0                                    '0                                 '0 U)ininU)LflU)Li)LflLflininiO          '0
oE NN40S4040,-4'0mNa,
    N'0.4O0%N.-4NLfl'0 o                    .-I04%DN04Lfl0%04m040        oE 0%,4N40'0NNNin40m
                                                                             InN 4'0Nm40O%o,-4 o                        0N.-400%0%N0%in40m
                       x
4')                                   m                                  I')                                      C')

o .-1u)ma,inO40u)a,inN
   %0iOiniO4040NOm,-i o .-40%00m400400in40'0 O      '0.-IX,-I4000%0040N'0
E                                                 Z 0.-IU)Nm,-4c'4N'0'0N o     E 0NQ%'0in0r-moa,
                                                                                   .-I-400%0O0.-iQ0,a,
N  "0'0'0'0'0'0LflU)infl'0 ('9 000mm4',000000 ('9 '0iflU)U)ininifiiflLJ)u)iniO N 40%D%0LI)40%0N('-N4ONN
o
E NO0m0OWO%QinNO
  U)in'0%0inInInNN40N o    Z 0N.-4'0'0In0%minr-m
                               inmou)mNNa,N.-IN'0 o  '0O%O C') Na, 0 U) 0 ONO
                                                  Z NNO%C')U)N..40N4')0,.4 o   E in0%'0.4N40ininma,a,
                                                                                   O'%0-40%NU)00%ON
— 000000U)'0'O.O                      —     '0llm4')'000o
                                                      O'0OU)Ininininu1inin .-4 InifliniOU)4040NN40,QN
                                                                         .-4

o inN.-4'0NNONONiOiO
E   000%'0.-4r40,,-400400 o NN,-4,--I.-I('40%0400NO o '0NNN0NN0%mU)N o N'040-4ma,'0'0oNoo
                          Z                         Z
0 00000000In'0mo 0 '0mmmmmmm'0mmm o iomLnoc'9No%in,..IC.4ma, E0 U)40In411In%DN%D%DU)
            '0ifl 40 N 04O,-4N              .-4 Nm '0in 40 N   0i0.-IN               Nm '041)40 N 0% 0.-IN              .4 N '0 in 40 N 0%     0.-IN
                         ,-4 ,-4 -4                             -4-4-4                                -4 .-I -4                                '-4-4-4
iD                                    N
40                                    iD                                                                          0%
Oi                                    0%
                                                                                                                  40
-4                                    '-4                                                                         0'.
                                                                                                                  -4




                                                                         114
                                       In
                                       N
      '44'
         ,-4
                              4'U)
                              ('IC')
                                              S0                                                                                          U)
                                                                                                                                          5                       N'.OUINCV4O.0'.,.-4
>4
0
N '.O'.D N                    ID%0
                                       0
                                       >4
                                       ('.4   UI%OIfl
                                                                              0Cl>4                                                     0
                                                                                                                                        N
                                                                                                                                                                  Q4CV)..40'.NON
                                                                                                                                                                  '.0 ID N S ID NNN
      SOCV)0
>4
U)
   Ol0U)
      5101,05                 1010
                                       >4
                                       U)
                                       ,-*
                                          0,-IN•'.
                                               411)4'

                                              '.0.011)
                                                                   0
                                                                   '.0
                                                                              >4
                                                                              UI
                                                                              -I
                                                                                                                                              50100 N CV) N '04'S CV)
                                                                                                                                              UI U) '.010   CV) '-4 .4040
                                                                                                                                              '.00 .01010.0 N NIDN.ON
x>4 UIN'.DUIUIU)el_CCV)N
    UIN4'NNN4'CV)0%'.0Z 0.NN,-4CV_CCVNUI,-4NN
                      >4 Oa.'.0_C4'0%el0'.o'.
                                                                                      W UI N CV) '.00% N 4' CV) 5.0                           N  .00 100_CS U') bID
o                     o
,-4 N'.DIOSNSNNNNID'0 .4 '.0U)UIID10%0'.O10UIUIUIUI 0
                                                                                      ('4.4.4.40-4 ('14' Cl) CV) ('4 CV)
                                                                                                                                        0     4' U) '.0 UI N 4' ON SN
                                                    -4                                '01010.0.0.010.0.0.010.0                          '-I   '.0 '.0 '.0 ID '.0 IONS 40 '.0 .0 '.0

>4
      mNa.c'4O,-IIQCV)4'mN.0                  a..-Ca.0NNON,-44'
                                              N4'O00NO%0%NN4'                                .4 CV) ON NO
                                                                                      O CV) 00'.                                               N 5,-C N 4' .4 UI UI U)
                                                                                                                                              CV)
                                       >4                                     >4      SIDON%O0.0',-4000'._C                                   CV)I0'.0IDl0N.0,,'.0 '.010
U) NNNNNNNNN'.D'.041)                  UI UIU)UI'.D'.,DIO%OLflUIU)u')U)       U-C     UI UI '.0 UI UI UI U') 1010.0 UI'.Q               UI                        IO'.D N 5101010.0

>4 0.00IO4'CV)0% >4 U)0%N4'UIN x>4            I04'CV)UICV)NCV)04'IOIOU)               N 11)_C
                                                                                      UI 4' 01.0 UI
                                                                                                      CV) 0 CV) 00 N,-C 10
                                                                                                                    000010                    4' 4' 0. ('44' N UI a. UI,-I,-4
                                                                                                                                              CV) .0.0.010 N,-4I00%510
4' NNNNNNNS'.Q10UII.fl 4'                     IIIU)4'IflUIIO'.OU')UIUILnU)    4'      U) U1 U') UI U) UI U) '.0 10 '.0 U) 4,0           4'    '.0 '.0 '.0 10 '.0 .0 NN'.D 10.0 10
    10NNOCV)a.,-40.QN
>4 01,-40%NN'.O4'N'.0'.DN                     0.4'O0UI4'4'0.N.0el                     '.0010 N .4 IDOlS ID '.010eV)                           4' UI N N 100% ,-4 UI_C CV) 4' N
                                       >4     -CNUI'0N10N'0'.0,-4N0           >4      ("I N N UI CV) '.010              0.0% 0                CV) '.05.0.0              0'. C') NOIS N
CV)   NN'.ONNSNNI0'.DUIUI (I)                 11)4'U)UI10%DU)UCUI41')UI       CV)     UI U) UI UI UI UI UI U) UI UI UI ID               CV)   U; 10.010.0.0 N 51010.010

                                              SC'4_C,-44'4'4'LIlUIOO x
   NN4'0N4NCV)N,-410
>4 0.0NNU)N,-4.0UI('1'q                       N.-4UINN4'O4".,0N                       CV)NOC%I N LI) .0 UI 0 U) 0%                            1000% U') _C'.D 0% 4' '.0 CV) UI 4'
                                       >4                            >4                         II) .40.4' m '.0              10              ("4 ION10   0.-ISa. W SN
C'l NNIDNNNNNID'.OU)U)                 N 4'4'4'UIUIIO'.OUIlnt1)Lfl4'          ('4     4' 4' UI U) 4' UI UI It) UI UI U) UI              N     ID ID '.0 '.0 40 NN 10 ID '.0 10
      '.0a.UIN4'_C0%O4',o0.    4'4',-CCV)'.DUI%D.0SOInO'.                                CV) 00110.05.0 CV) 5.0 0'.                           100% '.0 N UI 0105 014' ('4
>4    a.IDin4'cwS'.0CV,-la. >4 NSIO0%OOC'CN%DNN                               >4      .4 N 04' UI ,-4 CV) '.04' CV) UI                        O 0.5010.04' UI 014' .4
                                                                                                                                                    CV)

.4    NI0'.DNNN'.D'.D'.D'.,DU)'4.      .-I    CV')CV)4'0.0UIUI4'4'4'          '-C     4' 4' UI 4' 4' UI 4' Cl) UI UI U') UI             -4    ID '.0 '.0 '.0 N N N ION N

      a.a.IO4'CV)0N1flCV)0 o 0.0.4'0UIN,-4.4.00'._C
o 0%Or-44'_CUI100%0%Oa.0%                                                             0% UI NCV) CV) ,- CV) 5 ('1.010 n                       N 0% N 0%0%NSN II) 04'
                           Z -C%0NUINO,-4,-44".D,-C                                   0'.ON CV) 4' 05 N UI CV) CV) U)                         0 N 0%NONN'.O N CV) ('I
0%    N'.DIONNNID%0%D'.OUI'4.          0'.    mCV)4'4'UIIOUIUI4"4..4'         a'.     ('14' 4' 4' 4' UI 4' UI U) UI U') U)              0%

o %00%N001IONCV)C'aLII,-4
Z Oa.UICV)NN10'.DUINOa. o U)_C0%('1.-I.0NelO%O')
                        E N%D%DCV')Lfl4'0%4'UIO
                                                                                            N ID N .-4 0'. CV) N 4 '.0
                                                                                      N 4' ,-4 ('4104' 0 CV) .-I ('44'
                                                                                                                                              I0.0O.4UI4'N       0I10O'.
                                                                                                                                              0'. .40% '.0-4 ID N N '.00 UI
'.0   0'0NN10IDIO10IOU)4'              10                                     '.0     CV) CV) '4.4' 4' 4.4' UI UI UI UI U)              '.0               10'.ON('-NNN
o S00%N0'.O'.ONN'.0CV                   oZ NLn'.0el4'N.D'.o4'4'0.
                                            UI100.4'4'01CV4'a.NUI                           N CV) .40% .-4 UI 4' N 0% ION                                 N CV) 011) .-40N CV) N CV')
E     OOUIN,4I0U)UI4'_C00%                                                            '.05 CV) 00 U') ('4               .40.44'               CV') .-4
                                                                                                                                              01.-I  10,-I N UI N 10100.0
UI N10SNIO1010'.010UI4'                II)    CV)CV)'4'4'UIUI4'4'4'4'CV)      UI      CV) CV)      4' 4'          4' 4' U') UI UI U)    UI    UIIO'.O'.ONN        NNN
o U)NN0%%DN4'N0%N                       o N00%CV)OUI('4N('10%N                        ('10.010 UI ,-44' If')               N4' 4'             N CV) 0% UI N Na. U) CV)
E OOUI,-I,-4UICV)4'CV')OOo%             E NUIIO,-44'r-44'4'N4'm                       U) ID .-4        0% CV)0.00%0'.Om                         010 UI 0%D CV) '.04' 4' .0
4'                         m'4'UIUI'4.4'4'4'cV)
      N%DNN10IO'.0'.0'.DUI'4' 4'                                               4'     CV) CV)      C) CV)            4' 4'UI U')        4'    Ln'.o'.o%oNNa)NNNN
o ,-4.-4CV)(V)NCV))ION0 o NN4'4'N.-4OUINUIO                                                 4' N N ,-4 .4'.D_C4' N N ('.4                     NO   ('101,-IN '.0 UI_CNN
z O04'00Lf)4'CV)00%O0% E _C4'10OCV).-4C'I4".OCVICVN                                   1')   4' 0.10         '-4      UI N 0% N                NO'. UI       CV)   010 CV) ION 4' '.0 UI
CV)   N1DNNIO'.0'.0IOL1IU')4'           CV)   4'CV)CV)4'4'UIU')4'4'4'4'CVI     CV)    CV)   CV') CVI 1") 4' ('14'      4'4'4' U)        CV)   UIUI%O'.0NNN5NN
o ('14'OlN4'OCV),-4.0f--4' o UI4'4'NUIC4CVINC'40%WO                                         014' 4' N ,-4 ON ('4 II) C')                      N CVI CV)N '.0100.04' '.0 CV) UI
E 0%0%C'1N4'UICVNN0%                    E ,-4CV)UI0%CV),-.4CV)4'UINNUI                N N 04' '.00% N 4' UI ID 0                              ION C') ,-4 UI ('150 CV) 4' 4'
N     NI0IO'.O'.D'.DID%OU1LCI4'4'       N     U)UI4'4'4"4.(I                   C")    ('1   CV) C') CV) C') C)       4' '4. '4. 4' U)   N U) U) .0 '.0 '.0 N SNN N
o N(V)N.0NN4".DUIUIN                    o _CUI'.O_COUI,-C'.DN%O'.DCV)                                                                         4' 0%
E O'.D4'UIUI_C0%NUI4'NUI                E ,-4N4'NO%N4'4'0OC.I                         0N N
                                                                                         U') N ON 10 U') 4' 0'. CV)
                                                                                           4' N UI '.0 UI ('14' UI ('-01
                                                                                                                                                            .4 CV) 11)014' CV) UI 010%
                                                                                                                                              4' UI 00 UI 4' N '.0.4.44' N
.4    N'.OID'.D'.D'.DLfl%DU)UI4'4'      r.4   4'CV)CV)C'I4'4'UI4'4'4'4'CV)     -I                                                       .4    UIUI'.O '.0.05      NNN N
o '.t)O4'a.'.Or4NNUIO
E a._C'.DNN4'CV0%O04'0%                 o 0%N'.D0%NNO%0%UIION4'                       .4.0 NOC'4 0%_CS 4' 0% N N                              ('40% N 1(10010.4014' 141 CV)
                                        E 0'..-44'4'0%UIN4'UIIJ)IDC.I                 4' CV) CV) CV) CV) CV) 4' N 04' N                       ('44' N 0.0 ('4014' UI N
o 'D%O'.D'.0%DUI4'IDUILCI4'CV)          O CV)C'I(')Ilr'14'4'4'4'(,')CV')CV)    0                                                        0     UI U) UI UI ID N N N IOSN

      .4 N ('14' UI ION   0.0.-C N            ,-C N CV) 4' UI .05 010,-IN             _CN CV)      4' It) ON            0.0.-IN                     ('4 CV) 4'   LII   ID N 010,-IN
                            -I_C .-l                               -4-4—                                                  .-4 ,-C,-4                                          .4-4-I
0
N                                       -I                                     N                                                        4')
0'.
                                        C—
                                        a'.
                                                                               N                                                        N
.4                                      -I                                     0%
                                                                               .4                                                       0%




                                                                                  115
                                                 > 5N           0
                                                                0 C'C'
                                                                  _IN'0 in
                                                                         N                                                                       ('4504') 0   in
                                                                                                                                                              In
                                                                                                                                                                   S N Ill N
                                                 in     •                                >'4
                                                                                         In                                              >4      N 'C sO SO        Ifl N S
                                                 NS                                      ('4
                                                                                                                                         In
                                                                                                                                         N       NNNN S NNSr-
       00 in 4 '0 ..I N 0 N 'C
0
C.'.
         'C C' C' 0 N N C' a
       NNNNNN           NNS
            sO N 00'00 _I m N 0% 0
                                                 N NN55
                                                 >4
                                                 0
                                                       C'sDmsOin50_I'05.O
                                                       inin_I_IOC'_IN'0ON0%
                                                                                         0
                                                                                         N
                                                                                               _I '00% 4'S CM 00500% In '0
                                                                                               C' Os S 0050% N sO SD C'S _I
                                                                                           SNNNNNNNNNN 0
                                                                                                       C'. NNNSSNNNNNSN
                                                                                                                                         X
                                                                                                                                         >4 In%DSDSOI11'0In'0InN(..


       .-4 N in C' Os 0 N 0 N N                        OC'UI_INONSONmN
                                                       in'0O_IOOsO_I'0C'N                      C' N '0 sO in '0 sOON SD Il) 0
In                                               >4
                                                 In                                      >4            N 50%          N SD in NO         >4 '0Ininin'0p)'0m'0SDSDN
                                       SN        .-4
                                                                                         IS,
                                                                                         _I    N S S N NNNS N N N N
                                                                                                                                         IA
                                                                                                                                         s-C SNNNr-NNSNNSN
       so     — m in Os m 0' in 50 N
       050 in 0%       0% 0 m N 'C                     NC'NNOSD'0'0m_I                         0 ('1 ('4.-I '04') in SO SD '0111 N           N'0_ImNOSN.-4NN
0                                                >4
                                                 o                                       >4
                                                                                         0           S sQ 'C N Nit) 0 N                  >4  NmmmNsm_Ic'.itS
'-I    SON N N N N N N N N                       .-4        NNNNNØNN                     _I                                              O
                                                                                                                                         S-i NSNSNNNSSNNN
       N in  50 _I l' 0 in N 0_I                       OOIflNON_IOinOSS
       N in 00% .-4 5' C' in_I                                                                 0% 0'         '04'S 50500% sON

              NNNNNN
                                                 >4 NOmC'insOO%OC'4itsNm                 >4    C') C'S N N sO '04') DOs sO 0% 0          >4 C'N'COs0'0N0
In                                               Its NNNNNNNN55                          US                                              In 'CSDOSO%O50S0%DNNNN
       so
       N
                   N N m N0'in                      o_IInsoOr-mNmm                                SO'0 SN 'C N SN sO N
              'C _I 0% ('4                   N   >4 _I_ImsO0%c'4msoe4                          ,-4 N_I 0 in C'S _I N '05
              NNNNNN                             '0 N5DNSSNNNNNN
                                                                                         >4
                                                                                         '0    N SN N N N N 'C sO sO U) in
                                                                                                                                         >4 'CN%D'C5DISSN0%C.SC.'Im
                                                                                                                                         '0 SO%DSD%DSDSOSQ'CSDNNN

       N 0S_I
           ('4 0ON
                 ('4 ininiD0 _I 0 (                                                                                                            mNinNsoN,.4m'0
       sO

              NNNN
                                                       LflCCNSDSDLA.-455_I50_I
                                                 >4    C'C'S_I'0_IN'0O                         5050 in In 1') '0 '0 in N In C's'0
                                                                                                     00% '0 s-I 0% 'C U) N SO SD         >4
                                                 C')   5D%O%OSNNNNNNN                    i's                                             C'S   'C%DsO'C50'CsQsOsOSNN

       NNN.-'If' 00
                 ONNO in N N      0% N N.-I
                                                       C'if5inNO'0C'_I'0_I'C
                                                 >4 %DN5OinC.45OsDOC'N50                 >4
                                                                                               S '05'S 505'S ON_I 1(1_I
                                                                                               C') S 'C Ill NC' SO '0NO C') 45)                USO5int155')'0OsQ'0OsO
                                                                                                                                         >4 _IOOSO_IO'0'0Nr.IOO
N      'C 'C N                    NNSN           ('4 %D%Ds0NsDNNNsCN50                   N                          50 sC sO 'C U) IS)   C".   S0'0in5O%OSOSOSO%DNNN
       m 00 0 m N                   'C N m
       00 C' C' N 'C 'C N N in_I >4 inNsDLnsD'0irsln_IC'50C'
                                    _IC'_I0N'0sONits0                                    >4
                                                                                               11)05'S ,-4 U) III SN C') In '0
                                                                                               in_I 00 'CC') 0            N '0                 '0_IOO0m'Csoo'C_I
                                                                                                                                         >4 Inin'0inN50OC'4It5OC'
'-I    SN                    0%     NNN          _I              D%ONNNsOSOsD            _I                                              _I    IISUuIflit)IflLfl5Q'CSDSSØ'C
       '00% sO 'C'0 ,-I 0_I N'00% 'C             o Ifl'00N'0N'C0%
                                                    O0in_Im'o0m                                                                          0
                                                                                                                                         z '00NOInNNNNIflO
                                                                                               C'S 0%   0 C'S 0% '0 5(5 U) 0% ON N
       N _I '0 ON SD 'C 0' NO.' 'C _I                                                          (5)         N 45) _I X 'C U) C'S 55          mm_Im1nLnC'_I'0N
0                                            V   as                                      0'          Ill in sO sO in in in U)'0'0        Os U)inU)ininin1n'C'C'CsO
       N 'C 0%_I 0 iD ('4           ('4 ('       o
                                                 E NOONC.'e'4'Cu)m
                                                    ONNsOmON,-o                                0_ION_I C') 11)0 sO 0 C')                 0Z    '0N_ISISN0%_IN(5)_INm
iO
       '0'0 Ui 0' in C'4 N S sO 0
       SN                  C.' N N N
                                                                                               _I 50 II) '0$ 0% sO U) '0CM 5050                _I0C%0mm0m-
                                                 50         IhSCIflSOSONNU)5OIj)         'C    U) U) U) U 50 its U) IS) in its 0'0       'C inin'0ininitsU)'C'CsO'C'C
            '0 N V'i NC' 00%_I sO                o
       in Ui sf10.' 000 Ui m 0                   E OmN_Iou)'0mo.'ONC.,
                                                       ONOinNSC'OOin                           CM SD SO 'CO 11)0       in 45)0%
                                                                                               0 5') 4') 0% in '05') ,-4 50 IS)          0E '0C'minC'Nc'i'0ing.'
in     NN                    0.' N N N           in 0s0Sins0u)                           U)    it its U) 11 in in in ui U) II)'0'0
                                                                                                                                            O0%O%NmNosN5o'0I4s
                                                                                                                                         in U)'0'0'0U)iniflin'C'C50sp
0      C" 'C _I _I in N sO m 0' 5 m so           o '0b'CC'OD'0_ImsD_I                          NO.' ('4 SN (5) .-4                       0 inoin'0_ImONW'0sOUi
E      sO in O 0 '0                              z 0%'CNN'0_IiflNC.'s                                                'C C')
                                                                                               0% N N_IN 50 0CM ('40 U) in               E C'C'NNC'4s0_Iinm'0
       NN0%bN0.'sCNr-.                                                                   '0    OinLIIIinLrinit'                          '0    '0'0'0'0inifliniflSD'C'C50
       'C C' '0_IC' SO '00% ('4        C')
                       5 N N C') 0 sO _I         o '0iflsO0'05')'00C%c')C'                     0% 0% U) 0%_INNS 0 U)                     0 _IC'inCM_ICMu)m5osN
       'C its 'C 0CM
       NN          C.' N N C' sO N N             C') Lt0LIIU
                                                 E
                                                                                         m
                                                                                               N000% 'C 0 ('4 s-I 4 0% in C
                                                                                                     U) its '0 U) IS U) Li in '0'0'0
                                                                                                                                         E SSON,-I_I'0s00m_Im
                                                                                                                                         C'S

       N U) its 0 in 0% '05') NON 0              o NC'S_I'0e')m'0N0.'sDso                      I')
       SO 'C sO 0% 0% 'C S ('405 its 0                         _Ir4'0'0'0_I                            0% 0%     so 'CO.' 0% in 50'0     0
                                                                                                                                         E 'CUiin0_I'C0.'sfs'CNm
                                                                                               SO         N '05') s-I 00        5')          'C'Cinin0Om_Io.'_I
N      N N SN N 0% sO N S N                      CM in'Cjf1U)U)                          ('4         '00 '0 in U in itS in '0 '0'0       ('1   '0'0'0'0inininil)u)5DIfl.0
       N _I (' SO U) Its 0 'C N its N            oE U)C.'cM_IO."C0C.'e')m_Io
                                                          NU1'0NO_I'CNSO                       ('4  S 0 '000 Sin_I 'C
       U) Its in N 'C sO in (MO_I '05                                                          in 5055 ('44') _I 0% OS '0CM 0
                                                                                                                            E NCM_I'0O'Cifl'0_INCM
                                                                                                                               U)inin'0C'0ScMmN.-4sQ
 1 NNN5N0.'sDr-NsO                               _I                                      -4                         in'0in '0 '0 '0      — '0'0'0'0'0I.flIf1U)'CIf1IS)
       'C _I _I in in '05 sO S '0_I
       C') _I 0 Its in 'CO _I N (' '0ifl         o NsDSsDO.'Smininso.'
                                                            ONsOitINNCMsOQ.'
                                                                                                  N so 'C 'CO.' 05') 0% NC'.
                                                                                               U)'0
                                                                                               CM SO
                                                                                                     N NO             5Dm N L
                                                                                                                             o                 _I'0mooinino
 0 NNNNN0.'sOsCV'-s                              O itsininin'Cin.                        0     '0'0 '0         '011) Lii '0in '0'0'0     0     '0'0'0'0'0'0tnu)ig)sCItsLfl
       _I CM C')   '0 in sO S 0% 0_IcM                 _I N 5')'0 in 'C N 0' 0 _IC'.l          _I CM 5')'0 in SON         0.' 0_IN             _I cM
                                _I ,-I _I                                     — _I .-4                                                                 '011)505    0% 0_ICM
                                                                                                                             5-4 _I _I                               s-Is-i_I

 S                                               S                                       S                                               N
 Cl                                              05                                      05
                                                                                                                                         N
                                                                                                                                         Os




                                                                                          116
I ,-SONCMCIOO%.OCIOUi'O                                                                                                                           I>4'C0'O0UiCM'00'ONa.
                                                OO%O
                                                Ui O N 0% %0    .40 %0 %0C4 0 U
>4 0NC')0C')N0NUi5
It%
                                                            0% '0  N 0.0                                          Lfl .-4 UIO '0 0. 0% LI)
                                                                                                                                                  II)
t_4                                                                                                  CM     O.-4,-IOO0'O..-4,-4...4,..4_s         CM .4NC'4C")NNC')00C')Ncfl
                                                                                     -4
I>4o 0%0.4CMC')'OOCMONUi                        0.0%      0 Ui 0 Ui 0% N N Ui                        I          _4.-4-4         4.-4_4.-4
                                                                                                                                                  IO
                                                                                                                                                     _4-4-4-4-4-4 .4-4 _4 -4 -4_
                                                                                                                                                         OIflOUiC')UIN00bN.0
Cl
                                          0
                                          CM
                                                            00. 0 N 0% 0-40' 0'
                                                            0      C             0' -400' 0          o>4 0NNOO0%04CMC'-4
                                                                                                     CM
                                                                                                         ,-4'-4NN0%NN00.4                         >4     .4SUim.-4S%0,.4ONUi
                                                                                                                                                  N CMNNC')NC')C')'0IflONC.5
                                                                                                         .4.-4,.l.-4.-4 l..-4.-4,.4                      .4-4-4-4-4-4-4-4-4-4-4-4
>4
U)
   0'0—4C'%OOCMON.0
                                                .-4 Ui 000.0 N S NO N
                       N 0 0% .40% D 0% 4 e 00 >4
                                                                                                     I
                                                                                                  I '0SO0.NO'O0%0'C')0%
                                                                      tNONCM%O.-45')O >4 N0'NUiOC')ONC'4N5'0
                                                                                                     Ill
                                           0% 000
                                                                                                  In
-4                                                      '.4 0NN000O.-I,-4(4NCM                    .4 NNCMC')mC')ooU)'ON
I                      00
                                               —-4—          -4.4 4 .-4.-l .4 .-4 -4.4.-I .-4 .-4     -4.4-4-4-4.4.4-4.4.4.4-4
                                                                                                                                                  I
.4
0
>4




I
             NNN    0
                    -4   0%
                            C% 0 N
                       N 00% .4
                              0'
                                   .-4 N 0 .-I

                                        0.0000
                                                0
                                        0 N Ui .-I 0 >4
                                               -4 -4 -4
                                                        I
                                                        O
                                                          ON'CIi'IInUINUiNNOC')
                                                                                                .
                                                                                                      05.ONNO'%O0%UiO0NN
                                                                                                  >4 NON%D0O.-40%C')CM'C
                                                                                                  0
                                                        '-I ONN000%0.-4CMC'IN .4 CMC')N4C')C')O'0UiOr1
                                                             -4.4-4,-s_s -4.4.4.4-4-4
                                                                                                       C'-0.O00-4 I
                                                                                                      -4-4-4-4-4-4.4-4-4-4-4-4
>4 UiN0%.4C')C4CM4')%D0
                                                     00 N 0 N N Ui 0.0. N
                                                N 00% .-4          Ui N .-l N             N -4
                                                                                               r     I 0..-ILflUiN'0UiO.-4N,-4
IA SNC'-N0%                               U)         0'     0%                0.0% 000
                                                                                                     >4
                                                                                                     UI     0c')NO0.G0-4,-4c%aCMCM
                                                                                                                                                  >4
                                                                                                                                                  Ii')       CMUILICOCMS")
I>4 UitON0C')C'4CMr40%N.-4                      Ui          0CM C' N .-5 N 'C .-4 .-4
                                                                                     -4 - -4
                                                                                                     I      ,-4_4_s_s   .4.4-4-4,-s_s                    -4-4-4-4-4-4-4-4-4-4-4-4
                                                                                                                                                  ID.sN.DUic-4S.0,-4enr-
'0     NNtN0%                             0
                                                N 00%.-4
                                                     0.     0%
                                                                   Lfl   N N 50 5 N
                                                                 0' 0._l.100
                                                                          $ l 0 OC')e'IO0%0%0.C4C')c.
                                                                                 .4-4.4-4
                                                                                                     >4

                                                                                            -4-4-4-4-4
                                                                                                       O
                                                                                                                  0%OONO%0.DIflON
                                                                                                               NOC')C')'0t1)%fl'OC'C')
                                                                                                          -4-4-4-4-4-4-4-4-4.4-4.4
                                                                                                                                                       O00%O.O0.0'.0q')Ui'0

I
>4
                                                   Ui 0 0% '00% Ui 4 40 .-4'0                        I
                                                a. CM .-l NO' Ui 5') Ui 00 >4 0%S00,-4ONNN'0CMC') I>4NO,-4N0'N0Uir'INsn
                                                                                                         IflUI0%.-40%,-4%0N'qUi
m                                         C')                                                                                                     C')
                                                                                                            -4-4.4-4              -4-4-4-4-4             -4-4-4-4-4.4.4.4.4-4-4-4
I
                                                                                     ,-4 .-4 _I

>4 N0UiN0%CMNCMOCMCM
                                                '00000%   e 00% N o o 0
                                                  '0Ui.0 N NO Ui           .0 0%
                                                                                                     I
                                                                                                     >4     I')UiNUiO0.'0C-INNUI I>4N%0,-4C')O.4t0N0'O0.
                                                                                                            UiOUiN'-IC')C')LnOrION
Cl CNNC"N0%O.a.                           CM                     0% 0% 0% 05-4 0 0
                                                                                        -4.4 _4
                                                                                                     CM-4-4.4-4
                                                                                                         .-I000C4C'ICM                            N CMC')NOOU').C.,O0(MC")
                                                                                                                 -4-4-4-4-4                              .-4-4_4 -4-4-4-4-4-4.4-4.4
I ..4UiCM,-sNO.0%'CUiUi,-4
>4     .)UiN,-4,-4r40ONC')                      ON .4 N - 0% 4 Ui Ui 0 I Ui0-4.0e.sc')c.i0.-4NUi
                                                 0' NO' '0-4 'ON 00 m o >4                         >4 0.CM.O0'0C')UiUiOUi0'
                                                                                                      40ODNOSC'0.0IflN                            I
.4 NNNNN0%0%0    -4
                                          '-4
                                                               _I 4 -4-4.4 -4 .-4000.-4.4rn'0e')
                                                                              .4-4-4-4  -4-4-4-4-4
                                                                                                   .4 C')ON000II).CLE')O,.4C')
                                                                                                      -4-4-4-4-4-4-4-4-4-44-4
o c's.om-4o%c')-4
E 0o-,.o00%-4.oNNN                              Ui 0.00%         CM i 0' N (' 0
                                                                                                     E 0O.0LI1C'O0.N0% oz NCMOSNNSNO%OON
                                                                                                     o '0.-ILflN,-4C'I,-40%IflNN.D
                                                  0 0% N CM '0 N Ui .0 N                                                    .4C'INU).O0',4C')0
0% F-SNNNNO%O%0                           0%    0.00% 0% 0.0% 0' 00 N ,-4 .-4
                                                  -4
                                                                                                     0%.4-4-4-4
                                                                                                         N0Ui0'Q.-4C')0C')  ON0'0Lfl'0UiO.-4C.,   0%
              -4                                                   -4-4-4-4                                      -4-4-4-4-4 -4-4-4-4-4-4-4-4-4-4-4-4
 o LtI.-4t0U)0.-4LflUi0%Ui                      m 0 5'i                                               o
                                                                                                      E 0N0'OC'),-40%N0%N'O o   E II)tOU).0S.OQ%OC')U)c.,
                                                          Ui N 0% N N CM 0%
 £                                              N 0% 0% N N .0-4 Ui NON                                                              UiUI.O00'.ONLI).O.0OUi
'C '.O%CONNNbN0%0%0%                      tO              0% 0% 0% 0 0% 00CM
                                                                              -4.4II -4              '0
                                                                                                         .4-4-4.4    O')O0
                                                                                                                     -4.4-4-4.4 tO  OON000Ui.0UiC'),-4CM
                                                                                                                                     -4-4-4-4-4-4-4-4-4-4-4-4
 o N.-4SC')0C')C')OO%OUiN
 x N0%N'COUiC')ON                                    N 000%     00.0 N 00 o
                                                        0% N CM Ui .-l 'ON 0% 4
                                                                                                                        Ui0C'%0%OUi o 0%NNOLI).DNC'),-40
                                                                                                            0UIUi0%N.-40%%DCMNLE)      %0.D.000.0.OC')mO0.CM
 U) .O%0.0..DNNC'-N0%Q%0%                 LI)   0% 0%         0% 0% 0%   0%   0 0 CM .-4 N
                                                                              _4 — -4 .-4 -4
                                                                                                      U)_4_4-4_4
                                                                                                          N00.4(')'O'O
                                                                                                                 -4-4-4-4-4
                                                                                                                                                  II)    NLflUiOUi'CLflC")OCM
                                                                                                                                                         -4-4-4-4-4-4-4-4.4-4-4-4
 oz %0.OSNOONSOOC')N
     NUiONNC')C')N0%OO                          % m.c.o0 '% ('i C') C') '0 C') 0                      o N0'NO.-4N0.IC')N0
                                                'CS N    N Ui 00.0 C')                                Z     .-I,-4'OS-4NN o '0N0N0Nuie.').-4t-.0
 '0 %0t0'0%0NNSN0%0%0%                    0                      0%0%0%OON.4r1                        0                                           0 OONUiUiOUi%OLAC')O
                                                                              ,-4 .4 .-l .-I .-4            _s_s_s.s              -4-4-4-4-4         -4-4-4-4-4-4-4-4-4-4.4-4
 o
   .SO00
 C')

 o
       mInNO.-4000CM'ONUi
       Uikfl0UiCM0NC')0%.-4U)


       Ui.-I.4UI0'0.D.CLfl0tO0
                                          C')
                                                'CS '-4 0.0.05') O N N
                                                Ui '0 N N N .4 00 ON N
                                                0% 0% 0% 0% 0% 0% 0% 0 0CM r-ICM
                                                                             -4.4-4 .-4 -4
                                                                       C') (MO 0 Ui 0% N
                                                                                                      C')
                                                                                                            40CM 0 N .-4 LI) 0 Ui Na. Ui 0
                                                                                                            C') C')
                                                                                                            NO U) ON
                                                                                                            -4-4-4.4
                                                                                                                      N '00%,-4   CM '00' S
                                                                                                                                  0.4 NO 0
                                                                                                                                  -4-4-4-4.4
                                                                                                                                                   o N0%N0Ui00LI)CMN0
                                                                                                                                                   E 0t0CMtO%DO0N.-4U)U)
                                                                                                                                                   C')   IICM0U').0'OmO,4
                                                                                                                                                         -4-4-4-4-4-4-4.4.4-4-4.4
       (')0UiCM.00'NN.-'I0CM
                                                0% U) Ui N                                                       U) 0 CM %0'O N Ui CM N00%
                                                                                                                 NO U) 50% Ui 0 Ui                 o tfl%OO.-4,-4N'O50.NO%
                                                 O .0.0.0 N -I CM .-4 C') .-4'0                             CM                                     E 0It)0%0%0t0N5')0C')N
 CM    %O%0%0'D%0N0%0%                     CM    0.0% 00% 0.0% 0.00CM .-4 .4                          N     CM 0 U) ONS 0%_s CM '                  CM    UiONO.DOt$')U')'0C")OO
                                                                              .-4 ,-4   ,-4 .-. -4          p.4444                                       -4-4-4-4-4-4-4-4-4.4-4.4
 o SC'I.OmOIUiSOUiO%C')
 Z 0NUI00t0U)O.O0%.O
                                                     5') 0%               0 .-4 CM C') C') N
                                                 UI '0Ui LI) N 0% .4.4CM N CM CM
                                                                                                            SCM N0% 51)
                                                                                                            W 00 C')
                                                                                                                             CC') 00 LI) 0.0
                                                                                                                             tO   CM CM0 C') 0%
                                                                                                                                                   o  N0.-4050,-%
                                                                                                                                                   z NN0.-sCM0%.O.O0%NN
 '4                                        -4    0%0'0%0%0%0%OO.-4,-4O                                -4    .4 C') LI) ON    050%_s_sON            .4     O'OC')O%000tI)C')CMO0%
                                                                              .-4   -4 -4 .-4-4             -4-4-4-4              -4-4-4-4            -4-4-4-4-4-4-4-4-4-4-4
 o     O%'O%0C'IO000%OUim                        O        0005') CM
                                                 'CLI) LI) Ui
                                                                                    0% ON N                 C') 0.0%
                                                                                                            O CM
                                                                                                                           CM OhS C') C')          o NOONNmOO%C')UiS.p
                                                                       SrI 0% 0% CM CM .4                               CM CM 00CM 0. C4'0         z 0%.O,-4UiNOUim.DN.4CM
 0 UiU)%0UI'0t0%Oa)SN 0                               0%0%0%0%0'0%,-4ON                               0     '-45')    C') 0 0 tD 00  C') 0 0 C')C')C')N%D0OUiCMNQ
                                                                     -4 -4                                  -4.4-4-4              .4-4-4-4
       .-4CM C') 0   Ui.ON 0% 0.-SCM             .4 N C') 0 U).ON 0.0,-I CM                                 .4 N C") 0 U') 'ON 0.0.4 N                   .-4 CM C') 0 U) tON 0% 0.4CM
                               -4 -4 -4                              —4-4.4                                                            -4 -4 -4                                -4 -4 -4

 N                                         0N                                                         0                                            -s
 0'                                        0%                                                         0%                                           0%
 -4                                        -4                                                         -4                                           -4




                                                                                                      117
  mtND
C'S mNCl,.400O
        .4— - ,-4 .-.S .-l — .-4 .-4 .-4 ,4
                                                        >4
                                                        U,
                                                              OIn00%O.4b,-40,-grn'0
                                                                     '0C404ObNU)mfl
                                                        C'S.4-4.4000004.-4,-4
                                                                 .-4 .4-4-4-4-4-4-4-4-4
                                                                                                          >4
                                                                                                          Ii)
                                                                                                          C'S
                                                                                                                     .4m(',mf',
                                                                                                                     ClNmClC'4.-4,-4,4,-4
                                                                                                                .4-4.4-4.4-4-4-4.4-4-4-4
                                                                                                                                                     >4
                                                                                                                                                     II)
                                                                                                                                                     C'S
                                                                                                                                                           OO0,NIfl%00NNtoIn
                                                                                                                                                           .-4'-4,-4,-4000000tØsa'
                                                                                                                                                           .4.4.4-4.4-4-4-4.4
>4
o NC.4IAa'0%D                                           >4 NNN'0OQN(')W'0W >4                                   O'0040%a'id'lN.-4C'I4'l..4
                                                                                                                In         MN O'O'0'0 0                    N .40 ("4 Na' -4 ('44', NW
                                                                                                                                                           0           UI '05 U) tON 4')
Cl
      .-4 .4 ,-4 .-4 .-l ,-S .4 l -4———
                                                        C'S .4000-6,-S,-4,-4 oN
                                                        o
                                                                   .4-4-4-4-4-4-4-4-4-4-4                            NNNC%SN.-4,-4,.4 ('4                              OO0O0
                                                                                                                                                           .4.4.4.4-4.4.4.4.4.4
>4
      UC'bNON.-4.-4                                     >4 ')U5WNO%C'404 x>4
                                                           OWrn0,ONNC')U)'0UI                                   '0NmO'0mrn                                 ON '0 US a' '004040' N II) N
                                                                                                                                                           .4 II) C') '04') tOO U) Nb N
,-I,4C'IN,-l0OO
In
     ,4 - .4 1 -I .4.4.4.4 .4 .-4
                                                        U)                    U)
                                                        .4 .-40000.4,4,-4.4,-4_S                          '-4   ,-4.-4NNC'5m4ClC'i.-4,-4..4
                                                                                                                .-4.4.4-4.4.4,-4.4.4,-4.4.-4
                                                                                                                                                     In
                                                                                                                                                     -I
   ClOa'OIflC4
       NC')mOb0%Ifl                                     >4                                                >4 MN.-4'0UI1'04'5s', 0 '00
                                                                                                                                   0. N '0(4 -4.-S'0.4 ('4 '0
                                                                                                                                         C') ON .4 tO LI) Ma' U) N
>4
o
.4                                                      o a'NInNNO%tDbNUIC')U)
                                                        .4 000000.-4,-4.-4,-4,-4.-4 o
                                                                                    .4
      .4 ,-4 - .4 .-4 ,-4 .4.4.4.4 ,-4 .4                                                                                       .6    ,- .4.400000040%
      om'0oo%oo'In
In COoc
>4

      .4-4 ,-4 ,-4 .-4 .4 .-4 .-4 ,-4 .4.4 -
                                                        >4
                                                        U) 0G0CO04.4.4.4,-4,-4
                                                           .4 .4 .4-4-4-4-4-4.4.4
                                                                                                          >4 O'0O%C%IMN'0'0.-SM,-SO%
                                                                                                          LI)   _S.-4.-4C'44')4')C'44'4C44,'-4.-4O
                                                                                                                ,.4 .4.1.4.4.4-4.4-4-4-4-4           U)
                                                                                                                                                           IntO '040 II) .4 '0 N.4CM
                                                                                                                                                           tOM .-4 Nb NOW N 0.4'0
                                                                                                                                                           .4-4.4.4 040.040040
                                                                                                                                                                       .4


      m-ooc
       OIi
                                  NNLflIfl-4                                                                    '0C'SO%DC'i0O4.0b,-15115                   C', C') Na' 0 U) 00% U) '0044')
>4                                                      >4                                                >4                                               '0.4 a' '061) '0 '0'0.4        4')
      ,4 .-4 .4.4-4.4 ..4 ,-4 .-4 4.4 ,-4
                                                        '0 00400O0.-4,-4O,40.-4
                                                            -4 .4 .4.4-4.4-4-4-4-4 0 0,-4.-4t'Sme'5C4C'4cl,-lQO       '0          040% 0 0% 0. 0
      0N%DO'OUIONb                                        4a'OW0r-                     .4-4-4-4.4.4 .-4.-4.-I,-4 .4.1    .4.4_S 4
                                                                                                                 NC'lW0O-4C%i4O                            U) 40,-SO Ii) 04 '061)0% 4') ON
>4
m     mc,-iooo
      .4IS .-4 .4.4 ..-4 -              .-4   ,-4 .4
                                                        rn0a'UI,-4m.-4C'a'0bs
                                                        >4
                                                           oco,-ccco
                                                              .4 .4.4.4-4-4.4.4.4
                                                                                                          >4
                                                                                                          C') O04,-SS')MNN..4,.400
                                                                                                                                                           .4 tO ('1 ('40 '0 N ,-4 0. '0.-S
                                                                                                                                                           OO0,a'o,o
                                                                                                                                                           4-4-4-4.4
>44'INON0000%C'SN
   N4')0%,-l0%U                                         >4
                                                              b_S.-4b.-4LflNCl'0O
                                                                                                          >4 MbC'S6n%0NCl.-6bc's                           N .-4 U) '0004') tO0'0 04W
                                                                                                                                                           N '0C'Sb %0a' N N LI) ('4
N          .-40%O%a'                                    N 0%O'a'0%a'0000000
                                                                 .4.4-4-4-4-4.4
                                                                                                          N 00.-4,.-4NNC'4N,.-400Q%                  CS


    bN4''IN
    .-4 .-4 .-4 ,-4 - .-4 .4      .-4                                                                       .4-4-4.4.4.4 .4 .-4.-4,-I,-4                      .4-4
z
>4
                                                              Ii) 0 '0 .-4 ,-4 N C') U) 0t .0
                                                              0% 40 Nb 4') 44)1') 4') tO tO N
                                                                                                          z          O0%a'UI.SiflU)m,-4..s                 NM o me '0 N 0.-S '00%
                                                                                                          >4                                               a' 40 '0040 NO 080
-4
      .4 .-4 -4.4 .-4 .4.4 .-4 —
                                        O0%a'O          '-4          0.         a' 0% 00 ot a' a' a'
                                                                                     .4-4
                                                                                                          '-I   0la'O0.-4.-4,-4,-4.-400.a' .1
                                                                                                                    ————.4-4-4-4                                   0'NbNNN
E '0m4'O%04IlLfl
o
a' 4'cooa
        ON 0%0%
                                                        a'
                                                              N      tOot '0             N0
                                                                                        4') ('S N N
                                                              40 NO'0.4 1') 0 '-4'0 ('I UI N
                                                                     0%         0% 0' 000' 0% 0% 0%
                                                                                                          oZ '0C'4.4N.40.'0MO
                                                                                                          a'         OO,4.4,4,-40a'O% a'
                                                                                                                                                           N UI M,-SN '04') 41) a' b'0.4
                                                                                                                                                           N C') .4W 40 '0 5 tO '0 400
                                                                                                                                                           0'a'NNNNNNNN

'0 0%
      -4.4-4 ,-4 _4_ -4.6                                                               .4-4                         -4.4-4.4-4-4-4
oE    0ON.4'N4'                                                    '0C'4 .4 UI 1') 0.-S '0 Cl NO
                                                              U) ("SO '0ON 0% N .4 ') UI                   ox M4DNMa'a'O.-4b400%4')
                                                                                                               N%OM0%%0ClN40'0'0                           4')rn
                                                                                                                                                           '0.-S
                                                                                                                                                                         UI t0'0 '0 .-4400%
                                                                                                                                                                    4') '0 NW UI '0 4) '0(4
      _.4 -, _.4 .-4 .-l —
                                                        t0                                                tO   a'a'OOOO.4,-4O0%                      40    0%NNNNNNNN
oz                  mNN,-4,-4                                 tDrnOO%ONClOUIN
                                                              0NOrnO.4b.-4ON'0 0 UI 0.4 '0 N.4 Na' N UI
                                                                               E N '0 N Nb N 040 tO UI N
                                                                                                                                                           '00  NO. 6') 00 tON 0.-S U)
                                                                                                                                                           C') ON ('4 '0 C'StO'0 C'S'0 '0 C'S
in
      -4.4SI .4 .-4 .4
                                                        U)    oa'a'a'0a'a'0a'    040.0        O,-COtQ
                                                                                        .4-4.4.4.4.4
                                                                                                                                                     U)    0%NN(-NNNNN
oE ONN'0UIN.-4'i'tn
   -4'-4N0%OODN                                                    N UI U) 4')
                                                                   .40,4') a'         0 0'0 UI
                                                                                      a'       '0 Na' N
                                                                                            tOO .4 C')
                                                                                                          oE '0Na'tO'0N.-4
                                                                                                             ONht4UItOtCNO'0tOa'                           b.4 U) tO     C') '-4.0.-S O 06')
                                                                                                                                                           ("Ia' W.4M.-S UI MC') C')
           -4 -4 ,-4 ,-4 .4
                                                        '0                                                '0 a'0%OOOOO0Qa'
                                                                                                                ———.4———
                                                                                                                                                     '0                N 555 N bbS
oE
I'l
      -4   - .4 ,-.4 -4.4 -
o .-4 N N '0C'4 '0
           Nm
                                  0%('lN.I0N
                                                        rn    ors;oa'
                                                              ('SO
                                                                     40
                                                                          C'S
                                                                                C')     4') '0 Cl N Na'
                                                                                      0% '0'0 0% NO .-4
                                                                                                          oZ Ob'0'0'0ONO'0NCl
                                                                                                          e'
                                                                                                               a'a'O,-4U1U)NtO,-4
                                                                                                                a'Cy00OcOOOOt
                                                                                                                     -4-4-4.4.4
                                                                                                            Nba'MCStO'0
                                                                                                                                                     C')
                                                                                                                                                           a' 0.-S N MOb LI) UI %O
                                                                                                                                                           .4 N U) a' 1 0 '0 ('S NM 1') .-l
                                                                                                                                                                    N N N N N Sb N N

E      UNNN-4,-4 0                                                   Na'
                                                              .40.5,-S N C'S C'S
                                                                                        NUImNN
                                                                                           UI 0%
                                                                                                          O
                                                                                                          E O.-4NNtOMf-a'm                                 4') N NW     00 UI ('4080W 0'
                                                                                                                                                           06') C') N ('40'
N ,-.NCN0%NNN
           ,.4   ,-4 ,-I .6 .-4
                                                        N                                                 C'S a'0%0%0%a'Q%OO0N N
                                                                                                                      '-4.4-4
                                                                                                                                                                            ('4 ('4.44') ,—4
                                                                                                                                                                    N NW N N N N N tO
oZ    C'i'Lfl14'C'4NN
             0Nr-4UI0%NO o N-4WOWNUI.40,m
                            O0%UI.4UIUIa'ob'0U)W                                                           Q
                                                                                                                a'tn'0UImON'0InOCl o Nb'0NONW'0,.4tØa"0
                                                                                                                                      NWOUIONON4,-linCl
.4 N-4O%NDNN
    .4-4-4-4.4                                          .-4                                               '-4 a'0O'a'0OOWN
                                                                                                                      .4.4-4
                                                                                                                                                     .4    NNNNtONNNNW0
      4' U) N .-4 '0UI 0% '0 ON U)
      N U) m I1 O '0 UI                                 oZ oa'moMCl'ONN'0.4.-S
                                                            .4OtO.'SLflM'0b40 N 0 '0NNtOtONU)O'04')
                                                                                Z  NU)NU)UIMr-Nr-bo o a'Nb'0O%O('SUINUItOØ8
                                                 O O•                                               Z NNtONtDUIMOa'tO,.4
0     .4.4 '0 ('4 .-40 N O N N
      .4-4-4-4-4-4                                       o                      0 0,0%00400bW       0 NWNNtD4O%ONN%OUIU)
                                                                                            -4-I
       .4 Cl ('1 '0 UI'O N 0% 0.4 r'S                         .-4 N C') '0%fl tO N 0% 0 '4 N                    -4 N C') '044) 406'-   0' 0.4 N                  ('SM '0 U) 'ON a'0.4N
                             .4-4—                                                              -4.4-4                                    —.4—                                  .4_I 4
N                                                                                                         '0                                         U)
0.                                                                                                        Ot                                         0.
'-4                                                                                                       -4                                         '-4




                                                                                                           118
>4LA4N    r-,-loLom.
    Q .-4 0 C'l N 4 .-4 0
                                               >  NO
(4 GNNNbNN
In                                             LA
                                               C4 SN
      ONNO'.-s
'I C NNNNsr- .o
   LA
>4
0 m NDO   OO%O,                                >4
             ci SN

      NS  0
                        0LAqe,IN                     0.-
>4
Sn                     . >4 'oin
      0% N N N SN S N N U.,
                         .-S N N
>4  oem

      SNN
o          Ln..4r-..-4N >4
                         0 SN
,-$   0NNNNNNSNN. .-4
>4                      ,-4u1,-4,O-. >4 SN
In NNNNNNr-.. sn
   OS N — Os C LA LA D m 0 LA 0 .-4
>4 m          N0055fls >4 %%0
   NNNNNNsoNssDso
       LAspbN%D
>4 ,-SNOON  c'NCmsD >4
m SN S SN D sO sO sO sO 50                           5050

                  OsNU0NCNIfl
>4                                             >4 CTh
C4 NNsOsON                     lAsOsOsOsO            5.050


>4
      mNassOoN0%,.I                            >4



o
z oOSmmOsor-    0
     NC40m%DLnS0 £
Os              505.05050 sO 5.1 LA LA IA LA   05    LA LA

o
E
50    NN50
                  mnnr-
                so N so m 5050 0
                                  t%IflULfl    50    lAin
o
E
  .i                 LA N I'     LA 50
                                  Cmusr-
                                               0 .-4
LA N                       LAUILALflLALJ       IA    II;In
o  05 os me c.s m c .-4 0 0LA
E .-4 i c'a LA .-i as es mm LA
                           LALAULLAUI                LAIn

o
E soosOme4oIno
     r4 ('4 mm
           C4
               0E N IA
      SN sO 5050 sO IA IA IA LA LA LA                LA LA

o IDS-SOSO      05OLnS0.NN
    e .-i .- m ON .-4 ('4 m
                            0
                                               E 50 LA
('4 NN5D505050LflUUIflifLA                     ('4   LALA

o 005m,-sosOom.oo
     LAOLf%.,OO E0
s-I   sO                   IACItLAlflLA        s-S   LAIn

o
E
           r4     ('4.-4 50 5 LA N
           LAN s-s as em -          000 0 m
                                        E es
o 5050 sO LA sO LA LAO IA                 In   0 IA IA
                m5nsOr-oso..4c'4
                             s-S ..-I
                                    s-S
                                                     s-I('4

5.0                                            N
0%                                             0%
                                               s-I




                                                              119
