                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




     IS PREVENTIVE CARE WORTH THE COST? EVIDENCE FROM MANDATORY
                          CHECKUPS IN JAPAN

                                        Toshiaki Iizuka
                                      Katsuhiko Nishiyama
                                          Brian Chen
                                        Karen Eggleston

                                       Working Paper 23413
                               http://www.nber.org/papers/w23413


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     May 2017




We are grateful to Hyuncheol Kim and seminar participants at the 2016 EuHEA conference in
Hamburg for helpful comments and suggestions. Financial support from the Kikawada
Foundation is gratefully acknowledged. All remaining errors are our own. The authors declare
that they have no relevant or material financial interests that relate to the research described in
this paper. The study of which this research was a part was reviewed and approved by the
Stanford University IRB. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not
necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2017 by Toshiaki Iizuka, Katsuhiko Nishiyama, Brian Chen, and Karen Eggleston. All rights
reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit
permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Is Preventive Care Worth the Cost? Evidence from Mandatory Checkups in Japan
Toshiaki Iizuka, Katsuhiko Nishiyama, Brian Chen, and Karen Eggleston
NBER Working Paper No. 23413
May 2017
JEL No. I10

                                          ABSTRACT

Using unique individual-level panel data, we investigate whether preventive medical care
triggered by health checkups is worth the cost. We exploit the fact that biomarkers just below and
above a threshold may be viewed as random. We find that people respond to health signals and
increase physician visits. However, we find no evidence that additional care is cost effective. For
the “borderline type” (“pre-diabetes”) threshold for diabetes, medical care utilization increases
but neither physical measures nor predicted risks of mortality or serious complications improve.
For efficient use of medical resources, cost effectiveness of preventive care must be carefully
examined.

Toshiaki Iizuka                                  Brian Chen
Graduate School of Economics                     Department of Health Services Policy
The University of Tokyo                           and Management
Japan                                            Arnold School of Public Health
Bunkyo-ku, Toky 113-0033                         University of South Carolina
Japan                                            915 Greene Street #354
toshi.iizuka@gmail.com                           Columbia, SC 29205
                                                 bchen@mailbox.sc.edu
Katsuhiko Nishiyama
Mizuho Information & Research Institute          Karen Eggleston
Japan                                            Shorenstein Asia-Pacific Research Center
katsu.nishiyama@gmail.com                        Stanford University
                                                 616 Serra Street
                                                 Stanford, CA 94305
                                                 and NBER
                                                 karene@stanford.edu
1. Introduction
Prevention of chronic disease has become a key health policy initiative in
recent years. For example, the World Health Organization (WHO) provides a
road map and menu of policy options that aim to reduce premature deaths
due to chronic non-communicable diseases such as cardiovascular disease,
cancer, and diabetes (WHO 2013). An important part of prevention is
monitoring an individual’s health condition and intervening early enough to
make a difference in the course of a disease. Traditional approaches include
routine health checkups, cancer screening, and disease management
programs. More recently, wearable and portable devices are gaining
popularity, allowing people to monitor their own health in real time.
Advocates suggest that such real-time health signals will lead to appropriate
preventive care and improve health outcomes at a lower cost compared to
conventional approaches, although others recognize that such signals are no
panacea.1
    While the importance of prevention is hard to deny, relatively little
attention has been paid to whether preventive care along different margins
is worth its cost. The aim of this paper is to investigate this issue in the
context of mandatory health checkups in Japan, focusing on risk for diabetes
mellitus (DM). We first graphically look at whether health signals about risk
of developing DM embodied in health checkup reports affect individuals’
medical care utilization, health behaviors, and health outcomes. We then
econometrically examine whether the additional care triggered by a health
signal is worth the cost.
    To identify the cost effectiveness or net value of preventive care, we
apply a regression discontinuity (RD) design. We exploit the fact that health
checkup results just below and above a threshold, e.g., the level of fasting
blood sugar (FBS), may be viewed as random. People with measured values
just above the threshold may receive more preventive care – such as further
diagnostic tests and diabetes-related physician visits – compared to those
with values just below the threshold. This additional care may lead to better
health outcomes for the individuals just above the threshold, compared to
those just below the threshold. By comparing the cost of care and health
outcomes of these people, we can assess the cost effectiveness of providing
preventive care around the threshold. Our RD analysis is a “fuzzy” one,
1   See for example discussion in Patel, Asch, and Volpp (2015).

                                                                         pg. 2
where we use the status of surpassing a threshold as an instrumental
variable for medical care utilization. This alleviates the endogeneity concern
that an omitted variable such as the person’s health status, rather than the
preventive care, affects health outcomes.
    Using Japanese data provides several key advantages. First, we can
construct unique individual-level panel data, which consist of medical claims
data, health survey data, and health checkup data. These data sets can be
linked by a patient ID. This rich longitudinal data set allows us to examine
how health signals embodied in a checkup affect the individual’s medical
care utilization and health outcomes after the checkup. Second, an annual
health checkup is mandatory in Japan; this mitigates concern about sample
selection bias. Typically, health-conscious people are more likely to obtain
health information by, for example, participating in health checkups or by
using wearable devices, and this sample selection is likely to bias estimation
results. Health checkups are mandatory in Japan, which alleviates this
concern. Third, we have health outcome variables suitable for examining
prevention. We apply a Japan-specific risk prediction model, the JJ risk
engine (Tanaka et al. 2013), to our data to predict the 5-year risk of mortality
and significant DM complications for each individual. These measures allow
us to examine directly whether additional preventive care promotes health
as measured by medium- and longer-run health outcomes. This is an
advantage compared to only examining intermediate health measures such
as FBS, HbA1c, and BMI that are more easily available but are also more
difficult to interpret (Lipska and Krumholz 2017).
     DM is an important case to study because it is a costly and incurable
chronic disease of growing incidence and prevalence, and accordingly one of
the primary targets for prevention (WHO 2013). DM is often called a “silent
killer”: individuals at first are asymptomatic and often not aware of the
condition, but in the long-run suffer from various serious complications,
including problems of the eye, heart, kidney, nerves, and feet. Recent
research underscores the economic and human cost of DM: in 2014,
approximately 422 million adults have diabetes worldwide, incurring costs
estimated to total $825 billion per year (NCD-RisC 2016). DM can generally
be prevented by early intervention to reduce lifestyle risk factors (such as
smoking, unhealthy diet, sedentary lifestyle, and obesity). DM and
pre-diabetes can be detected by elevated blood sugar levels (i.e., as measured

                                                                            pg. 3
by fasting blood sugar (FBS) or hemoglobin A1c (HbA1c)), a diagnostic test
commonly included in regular health checkups. Indeed, in Japan,
policymakers consider this so important that in 1972 they mandated that all
employees receive annual screening for elevated blood sugar, as we describe
below.
     We have three main findings. First, at a relatively low diagnosis
threshold (i.e., FBS=110 mg/dl) that corresponds to “borderline type” DM in
Japan (sometimes called “pre-diabetes”), we find strong evidence that
surpassing the threshold significantly increases medical care utilization as
measured by DM-related physician visits and DM-related outpatient
expenditures, including on medications. This finding indicates that people do
respond to health signals by undertaking follow-up visits with physicians,
and thus health signals can potentially promote preventive care. However,
the absolute impact of the signal is small: exceeding the threshold increases
the probability of visiting a physician for DM treatment by only 5 percentage
points (albeit representing a 50% increase, i.e. from 10% to 15%). This small
magnitude indicates that health signals do not effectively translate into
preventive care for the majority of individuals in the present circumstances.
Indeed, we also find no evidence that individuals improve their
health-related behaviors (whether on their own or in response to physician
advice during preventive care). One of the reasons for this low response rate
may be the lack of intervention: currently, after receiving a warning, whether
or not to visit a physician is entirely up to the individual; no one monitors
response or reminds individuals about the importance of a follow-up visit.
    Second, despite the significant increase in medical care utilization at the
“borderline threshold”, we find no evidence that the additional care improves
health outcomes. This is true both for intermediate health measures (such as
FBS, BMI, and SBP) and for predicted risks of mortality and serious
complications using the JJ Risk Engine. Thus, we conclude that there is no
evidence that DM-related medical care is cost effective around this threshold.
The results hold both in the short-run (one year after a checkup) as well as in
the medium- to longer-run (three years after a checkup). These results
suggest that the threshold may need to be reexamined from the perspective
of cost-effectiveness.
     Third, at a higher diagnostic threshold (i.e., FBS=126 mg/dl) above
which the person is a “diabetic type,” we do not find robust evidence that

                                                                           pg. 4
crossing the threshold increases medical care utilization or improves health
outcomes. At first glance, these results are surprising, because the results
indicate that people are less responsive to a signal of higher risk. However,
inspections of actual checkup reports revealed that employers rarely flag this
threshold in their health reports, and thus most individuals do not receive a
health signal when crossing that threshold. Since almost all employers focus
on the lower threshold to signal a warning of pre-diabetes, and neglect the
threshold signifying the higher risk category of diabetes, we interpret our
empirical results as suggesting that policymakers should re-consider the
importance of sending a separate signal at each threshold when multiple
diagnosis thresholds are of independent clinical significance.
     Assessing the cost-effectiveness of health interventions has a venerable,
if challenging, history (Garber 2000). Whereas randomized controlled trials
(RCTs) are the recognized gold standard for judging cost-effectiveness of
various medical interventions, including prevention, RCTs are not always
possible and their results may have limited external validity for several
policy-relevant questions.2 Economists have employed multiple techniques
to assess cost-effectiveness outside the context of a RCT, including exploiting
national experiments (e.g. Finkelstein et al. 2012) and instrumental
variables.3 A notable pioneer in using clinical thresholds to further this line
of research is Almond et al. (2010), estimating marginal returns to medical
care for at-risk newborns. Focusing on the “very low birth weight” threshold
for newborns, Almond et al. (2010) find that those whose birth weights are
just below the threshold receive more medical care and experience lower
one-year mortality rates, compared to newborns with birth weight just above
the threshold. These discontinuities allow them to conclude that medical
care for at-risk newborns is cost effective around the threshold.


2 There is a huge literature on the cost effectiveness of pharmaceuticals and devices based

on RCTs. However, such studies are often limited to a single medication or device and very
few are able to capture the heterogeneity of treatment effects in the general population. The
recent widespread application of RCTs in development economics has also highlighted the
strengths and limitations of this approach (see for example Duflo, Glennerster, and Kremer
2007 and Deaton 2010).
3 See Doyle, Graves, and Gruber (2015) for an interesting recent example using random

ambulance assignment, and Cawley (2015) for an excellent review highlighting common and
creative instruments such as relative distance to a medical care provider offering the
treatment, the provider’s historic tendency to administer the treatment, day of week of
admission, or randomization of treatment for reasons other than research. Soumerai and
Koppel (2016) provide a cautionary view.

                                                                                        pg. 5
    While inpatient mortality is a salient outcome for at-risk newborns, it is
not a feasible metric for cost-effectiveness of many other health interventions
such as routine outpatient care, including preventive care. The difficulty of
obtaining an appropriate measure of health outcome is a major obstacle in
calculating cost effectiveness. We circumvent this problem by calculating
predicted risks of mortality and significant DM complications, using the JJ
Risk Engine.
      Recently, the value of annual physicals has received renewed attention
and our study also relates to this strand of research (e.g., Mehrotra and
Prochzka, 2015; Goroll, 2015). For example, systematic reviews have found
little evidence that annual physical checkups reduce morbidity or mortality,
“though they may be associated with reduced patient worry and increased
use of preventive care” (Mehrotra and Prochzka 2015, p. 1485).4
      Our study is also closely related to Zhao, Konishi and Glewwe (2013),
Oster (2015), and Kim, Lee and Lim (2017). Using data from the China
Health and Nutrition Survey (CHNS), Zhao, Konishi and Glewwe (2013)
apply regression discontinuity analyses to estimate the causal effect of
diagnosis with hypertension (in the 3-4 years since the previous wave of
CHNS) on food consumption and use of anti-hypertensives. They find a
significant increased use of anti-hypertensives, as well as reduced fat intake,
particularly among the higher-income individuals told they had high blood
pressure. Their results are indicative that health signals from check-ups can
lead to behavioral change and preventive care, at least along some margins
for some specific population groups.
     Evidence in higher-income contexts have generally been less
encouraging about modifying long-term behavior with individual health
signals. For example, studying consumers in the US, Oster (2015) finds that
households with a newly diagnosed diabetic – inferred from household
scanner data recording purchase of blood sugar testing strips – exhibit
little change in their food consumption behavior over the following months.
She suggests that relatively modest “sin taxes” (e.g. on sugary sodas) or


4 Our study is also related to health technology assessment (Institute of Medicine 1985) and
systematic review of preventive services (e.g. US Preventive Services Task Force 2009), as
well as studies of the impact of health information on individuals’ health-related behavior
such as smoking and healthy diets (Chern, Loehman and Yen 1995; Kim and Chern 1999), or
response to diagnosis of hypertension (Neutel and Campbell 2008; Zhao, Konishi and
Glewwe 2013).

                                                                                       pg. 6
subsidies of healthy fruits and vegetables might ultimately be more effective
than individual health signals.
     In a recent working paper, Kim, Lee and Lim (2017) study the impact of
screening for diabetes, obesity, and hyperlipidemia under the National
Health Screening Program in Korea. They find that health checkup
information combined with appropriate intervention (such as a follow-up
consultation) can prompt positive behavioral change and improve physical
measures such as BMI and waist circumference. Although closely related,
our study differs from theirs in two important ways. First, we study whether
preventive care is cost effective by taking into account the increase in
medical expenditures triggered by health checkups, whereas the focus of
Kim, Lee and Lim (2017) are the effects of health signals on health behaviors
and health outcomes. Second, for the effects on health outcomes, we study
not only intermediate physical measures (such as FBS and BMI) but also
predicted risks of mortality or serious DM complications by utilizing risk
prediction models. Studying the latter is important because it provides more
direct evidence on whether health signals promote final health outcomes in
addition to physical measures.
     The reminder of the paper is organized as follows. In Section 2, we
briefly discuss mandatory health checkups in Japan and the key threshold
values for DM diagnosis. Section 3 introduces our empirical model and
Section 4 describes our data. In Sections 5 and 6, we report graphical and
econometric results, respectively. Section 7 reports results from additional
analysis, including long-run effects of preventive care. We conclude our study
in Section 8.


2. Background

2.1.    Mandatory health checkups in Japan

     There are two types of mandatory health checkups in Japan. The first is
the traditional mandatory health checkup based on the Industrial Safety and
Health Act of 1972. Under this Act, employers must conduct a health
checkup annually, and employees are also mandated to take one annually. A
checkup must include a series of checkup items as listed in Appendix I,
including fasting blood sugar (FBS) and hemoglobin A1c (HbA1c), both of
which are commonly used to diagnose DM. The second mandatory health

                                                                          pg. 7
checkup is the Specific Health Checkup introduced in 2008, which focuses on
preventing metabolic syndrome (or lifestyle diseases). Insurers are
mandated to conduct this checkup annually for the insured between age 40
and 74. The checkup also monitors FBS and HbA1c levels. Usually, people
receive only one of these two checkups each year. The former checkup fulfills
the requirement of the latter if all required items are covered.
    In both checkups, people receive a report within one or two months after
a checkup. Figure 1 shows an example of a report that an individual receives.
If any checkup measure exceeds a threshold, the report typically gives a
warning (such as “H” for high) for the item and recommends a visit to a
physician for further consultation. Although conducting a health checkup
with specific required screening items is mandatory, the government does
not specify threshold values for each physical measure and employers and
insurers that conduct a checkup determine their own thresholds. Also, after
receiving a health warning, such as “H”, whether to visit a physician is up to
the individual. The person has no obligation to make a visit, and the
employer or the insurer is not obligated to monitor or enforce such a
follow-up visit.
     If a person makes a physician visit after a checkup, fees for the visit are
covered by health insurance, and we observe all the treatments made in our
claims data. A physician has to record the name of the health condition for
which the visit is made, and this information in the claims data allows us to
identify DM-related physician visits. When the physician is not yet definitive
about the diagnosis, the physician puts a “suspicion” flag on the diagnosis,
which we also observe in our data. Because many physician visits triggered
by health checkups may not have a confirmed diagnosis at the time of the
initial physician visit, we include DM visits with or without a “suspicion” flag
in our empirical analysis.


2.2 Threshold values for DM diagnosis

    There are several thresholds that could trigger preventive care for DM.
The Japan Diabetes Society (JDS), which issues treatment guidelines for DM,
specifies FBS and HbA1c thresholds for DM diagnosis. Although DM can be
diagnosed by alternative measures, such measures are rarely available in



                                                                            pg. 8
regular checkups and thus we do not consider them in this study.5 FBS is the
traditional measure used for DM diagnosis in many countries. The
JDS-specified FBS threshold values for diabetes diagnosis and elevated risk
of diabetes have remained unchanged since before our study period.
Specifically, an individual with FBS greater than or equal to 126 mg/dl is
considered a “diabetic type,” while an individual with FBS greater than or
equal to 110 mg/dl but below 126 mg/dl is regarded as “borderline type.”
People with borderline type have a high rate of developing DM (Seino et al.
2010). A FBS value below 110 mg/dl is “normal type.”6 An alternative, newer
measure used for DM diagnosis is HbA1c, which JDC adopted in July 2010.
HbA1c greater than or equal to 6.5% signifies that an individual is “diabetic
type.” 7 Additionally, HbA1c between 4.6% and 6.2% is considered the
“standard value.”8 To summarize, the clinical thresholds for DM diagnosis
are FBS=126 mg/dl or HbA1c=6.5%, and for pre-diabetes or “borderline type,”
it is FBS=110 mg/dl. Additionally, HbA1c=6.3% is also considered a cutoff
value.


2.3 Empirical distribution of thresholds used in checkup reports

    As discussed in the previous section, there are four thresholds (i.e.,
FBS=126, 110 or HbA1c=6.5, 6.3) that are most relevant for diagnosing DM.
However, employers do not have to adopt these values, because they are not
legally bound to any specific signal to employees and can determine their
own thresholds for reporting results of health checkups. Unfortunately, our
data does not have information on the clinical threshold(s) that each
employer adopts. As an alternative, we searched the Internet and
investigated what thresholds are typically used in actual checkup reports.
We found more than 50 checkup reports posted on the Internet that contain
FBS and/or HbA1c thresholds. One of our first main findings is that in all
reports, only one threshold (or standard range) is specified for each physical

5 For example, DM can be diagnosed by examining blood sugar two hours after
ingesting 75 grams of glucose. Please see Seino et al. (2010) for more details.
6 Starting in April 2013, JDS defines FBS value greater than or equal to 100 and less

than 110 as “high normal.”
7 In this paper, we express HbA1c values based on the National Glycohemoglobin

Standardization Program (NGSP) values.
8 Please see the following treatment guideline for DM:

http://www.fa.kyorin.co.jp/jds/uploads/Treatment_Guide_for_Diabetes_2014-2015.pdf

                                                                                  pg. 9
exam measure. That is, no report defines two thresholds for one measure,
such as both FBS=110 mg/dl and FBS=126 mg/dl.
    Figure 2 shows the “empirical” distribution of the thresholds obtained
from our Internet search. It shows that for FBS, clinical thresholds at 110
mg/dl and 100 mg/dl are both common. FBS=110 mg/dl corresponds to
“borderline type,” as we discussed in Section 2.2. FBS=100 mg/dl is not a
threshold for DM diagnosis, but corresponds to the threshold for metabolic
syndrome screening. Understanding the effects of metabolic syndrome
screening is also important, but it deserves a thorough investigation beyond
the scope of this paper. Thus, we do not study the FBS=100 mg/dl threshold
in this paper. FBS=126 mg/dl is the threshold that corresponds to “diabetic
type.” However, as Figure 2 shows, almost no health checkup reports adopt
this threshold. Thus, it appears that in Japan, individuals are not receiving
independent signals from their required check-ups about both pre-diabetes
and diagnosable diabetes FBS values.
     HbA1c thresholds exhibit a different pattern. In contrast to the FBS
values, many more thresholds are used for HbA1c and, more importantly,
these values are in close proximity. This makes it difficult to implement an
RD approach because there is not a large enough “window” to identify the
impact of each threshold. For example, to empirically examine a
discontinuity at HbA1c=6.3% that is part of the “standard range,” we need a
large number of observations just below and above the threshold. However,
because many employers also use the HbA1c=6.0% threshold, only three
data points, i.e., HbA1=6.0, 6.1, and 6.2, can be used to represent the data
just below the 6.3% threshold. For these reasons, we use FBS values for our
RD analyses in this paper.


3. Empirical Model

3.1 Regression discontinuity design

       We attempt to identify the effect of preventive care on health outcomes
using an RD design. We exploit the fact that health checkup results just
below and above a threshold may be viewed as random. We believe this is a
reasonable assumption because blood sugar levels can go up and down and it
is difficult for individuals to precisely control those levels. Moreover, since we
focus on non-DM patients in our analysis, these people are typically neither

                                                                             pg. 10
aware of their blood sugar levels nor have any incentive to manipulate them.
People with measured values just above the threshold may receive more
preventive care than those with values just below the threshold, such as
further diagnostic tests and diabetes-related physician visits. This additional
care may lead to better health outcomes (e.g., lower likelihood of developing
diabetes and lower medium-to long-term cardiovascular mortality risk) for
the patients just above the threshold, compared to those just below the
threshold.
     A concern for identifying the effects of medical care on health outcomes
is endogeneity. An omitted variable, such as the person’s health condition,
which may be correlated with the amount of medical care, may also affect
health outcomes. If so, this will bias the results. We address this issue by
implementing a “fuzzy” version of RD, where we use the status of surpassing
a diagnosis threshold as an instrumental variable for medical care
utilization. Specifically, in the case of the FBS=110 mg/dl threshold, we
estimate the following RD model. The first stage regression is as follows:

      𝐶𝑎𝑟𝑒𝑖𝑡 = 𝛼0 + 𝛼1 𝐹𝐵𝑆110𝑖𝑡 + 𝛼2 𝑍𝑖𝑡 + 𝑓(𝐹𝐵𝑆𝑖𝑡 − 110) + 𝐴𝑡 + 𝜇𝑖𝑡 , (1)

where 𝐶𝑎𝑟𝑒𝑖𝑡 is medical care utilization of person i in year t. 𝐶𝑎𝑟𝑒𝑖𝑡
represents one of the following three variables: i) DM_diagnosis: a dummy
variable that equals one if person i makes at least one DM-related visit
within a year after a checkup in year t and zero otherwise; ii) DM_visits: the
total number of DM-related visits for person i within a year after a checkup
in year t; and iii) DM_spending: DM-related outpatient medical spending
(including spending on DM medications) for person i within a year after a
checkup in year t. We construct these variables by aggregating 12 months of
claims data after a checkup. Appendix II defines all the variables used in this
study.
     𝐹𝐵𝑆110𝑖𝑡 is a dummy variable that equals one if person i’s FBS is
greater than or equal to 110 mg/dl in year t, and zero otherwise. We define
the other threshold value, 𝐹𝐵𝑆126𝑖𝑡 , in the same way. 𝑍𝑖𝑡 captures person i’s
demographics, including age, age squared, and gender. 𝑓(𝐹𝐵𝑆𝑖𝑡 − 110) is a
function that controls for the FBS level in year t. We experiment with both
linear and quadratic functional forms with respect to (𝐹𝐵𝑆𝑖𝑡 − 110) and
allow their effects to differ before and after the threshold. 𝐴𝑡 are year fixed
effects and αs are parameters to be estimated. 𝜇𝑖𝑡 is the error term which

                                                                             pg. 11
we allow to be correlated over time.9
     The second stage regression is given by the following:

          𝑦𝑖𝑡+1 = 𝛽0 + 𝛽1 𝐶𝑎𝑟𝑒𝑖𝑡 + 𝛽2 𝑍𝑖𝑡 + 𝑓(𝐹𝐵𝑆𝑖𝑡 − 110) + 𝐴𝑡 + 𝜖𝑖𝑡 ,     (2)

where 𝑦𝑖𝑡+1 captures a health outcome of person i in year t+1. As we discuss
below, 𝑦𝑖𝑡+1 represents three types of outcome variables. The remaining
variables are the same as in Equation (1). 𝛽𝑠 are parameters to be estimated
and 𝛽1 is the RD coefficient, our main interest in this paper.
     The fuzzy RD approach is valid if our excluded instrument, 𝐹𝐵𝑆110𝑖𝑡 ,
satisfies the following conditions. First, it is correlated with 𝐶𝑎𝑟𝑒𝑖𝑡 and,
second, it affects health outcomes, 𝑦𝑖𝑡+1 , only through 𝐶𝑎𝑟𝑒𝑖𝑡 . We will
examine these conditions in more detail later, but the second condition
requires special attention from the outset. In particular, one may be
concerned that the health signal (e.g., “H” for FBS) may not only increase
medical care utilization but also independently alter the person’s
health-related behaviors such as smoking and exercise habits (without a
warning from the physician to stop smoking or engage in more exercise), that
could also affect health outcomes. If this is true, the second condition above
will be violated. Moreover, we note that whether health signals affect health
behaviors is in itself an important policy issue. For these reasons, we test
this hypothesis in our data by examining changes in reported health-related
behaviors the year after the checkup. As we discuss in Section 7.4, health
signals appear to have little effect on health behaviors, which supports the
assumption required for identification.


3. 2 Dependent variables

    We use two types of health outcomes as our second-stage dependent
variable. The first captures intermediate health measures, including blood
sugar level (FBS and HbA1c), body mass index (BMI), and systolic blood
pressure (SBP). These physical measures are taken from the annual checkup
in year t+1. Although these measures are objective and relatively easily
measured, these metrics alone cannot tell us whether preventive care
significantly reduces the health risks of DM. Therefore, we apply a
Japan-specific risk prediction model, the JJ Risk Engine (Tanaka et al. 2013)

9   This is because we sometimes observe the same individual in multiple years.

                                                                                  pg. 12
to predict medium- and longer-term health outcomes. We use risk factors in
year t+1 to calculate the individual’s predicted risk of mortality and
significant DM complications in the following five years, including (i) risk of
having a stroke, (ii) risk of developing coronary heart disease (CHD), and (iii)
risk of non-cardiovascular (CV) mortality. The JJ Risk Engine uses patient
demographics (e.g. gender and age), physical measures (e.g., BMI, HbA1c,
blood pressure, cholesterol level), and health behavior (e.g., exercise and
smoking) as inputs for calculating risks.10 Appendix III describes how we
implemented the JJ Risk Engine using our data.
     It should be noted that the JJ Risk Engine is designed to predict risks
for individuals with diagnosed DM without complications, not for predicting
risks for individuals without DM. Most individuals in our sample are pre-DM
patients whose risk factors fall outside the range used to construct the
prediction model. While the engine allows us to calculate the risks even for
pre-DM patients, we should be careful about interpreting the results because
predicted risks of mortality and significant complications for pre-DM
patients are based on extrapolation. For this reason, we checked the
robustness of our results using a risk prediction model for cardiovascular
outcomes of individuals without diagnosed diabetes (developed by the WHO
and International Society of Hypertension). The results do not change with this
alternative risk measure.


4. Data

   Our data consist of medical claims data, health checkup data, and health
survey data. All of these data can be linked by a patient ID. The data come
from several employer health insurance groups and are provided by the
Japan Medical Data Center (JMDC). As of April 2014, the JMDC claims data
base covers 1.6 million members. 11 Our data cover the period between
January 2005 and December 2014. The claims data are monthly and we can
track the person’s medical record as long as the person works for the same
employer. Individuals usually have a health checkup once annually; our data
includes the year and month of the checkup. A health survey – asking

10 We are extremely grateful for Shiro Tanaka and co-authors for providing the
computer code for this project.
11 JMDC claims data have been used by a number of studies, including Iizuka (2012)

and Fukushima et al. (2016).

                                                                               pg. 13
respondents about their self-assessed health and health-related behaviors –
is conducted as part of a checkup and thus is usually the same month as the
checkup.
     In this study, we are interested in the effects of preventive care on
health outcomes and thus we focus on those who are not being treated for
DM at the time of a health checkup. We include a checkup in our analysis if
it meets the following conditions: i) the patient was not diagnosed with DM
during the 6 months before the checkup, ii) we have data for the patient at
least 6 months before the checkup, iii) we have data for the patient at least
12 months after the checkup, iv) the patient was 30～64 years old at the
checkup, and v) the patient had a checkup only once in a given year.
     Table 1 provides summary statistics for the variables used in the
analysis. We have more than 1.7 million observations in our data set. Figure
3 looks at the distribution of FBS values. It shows a smooth distribution of
measured FBS values, with no apparent discontinuity at either the FBS=110
mg/dl or FBS=126 mg/dl thresholds. More than 287,000 observations are
available around the “borderline type” signal, i.e., measured values which
fall between FBS>=100 and FBS<=119. We have fewer observations around
the “diabetic type” signal, but we still observe more than 40,000 observations
for the same bandwidth.
     An underlying assumption of an RD approach is that covariates do not
exhibit a discontinuity at the threshold. To check whether covariates are
balanced just before and after the thresholds, we plot the average values of
our covariates, i.e., female and age, for each FBS value. As shown in Figure 4,
there is no apparent discontinuity at the two thresholds for these variables,
indicating that our covariates are reasonably balanced.
    In our data, we observe individuals only if they are working at the same
company and while the health insurance group provides data to JMDC. To
address a potential selection issue, in Figure 5 we plot whether attrition is
related with the threshold values, where Attrition equals one if the person
disappears from our data in the month after a checkup and zero otherwise.
As shown in Figure 5, there is no apparent discontinuity at the thresholds,
indicating that attrition is unrelated to cutoff values.


5. Graphical analysis



                                                                         pg. 14
   We first graphically examine how people respond to health signals. In
particular, we look at the two diagnosis thresholds for DM diagnosis, i.e.,
FBS=110 mg/dl or 126 mg/dl, and how people’s (i) health behavior, (ii)
medical care utilization, and (iii) health outcomes change at the thresholds.


5.1   Effects of “borderline type” signal

      Figures 6-9 present graphical analysis for the effects of the FBS>=110
signal, above which the person is considered a “borderline type.” Figure 6
clearly shows that all types of medical utilization significantly increase at
the threshold. In particular, the probability of visiting a physician for DM
increases about 5 percentage points (from 10% to 15%) at the threshold, and
the total number of DM-related visits increases by approximately 0.2 per
year. Similarly, the use of an oral glucose tolerance test (OGTT), an
additional test to diagnose DM, significantly increases at the threshold.
DM-related outpatient medical spending also increases by around 2,000 JPY
(approximately US $20) per year.
      Whereas we observe a clear jump at the threshold, its absolute impact
seems limited. For example, the probability of visiting a physician for DM
increases about 5 percentage points at the threshold. Although this
represents a 50% increase, it does not seem to be a large absolute magnitude,
given that nearly 90% of people could potentially respond to the signal at the
threshold (please see Figure 6). One reason for the low response rate may be
that only half of those who exceed the threshold receive a warning signal of
“borderline type,” as Figure 2 indicates. Moreover, people may discount the
clinical importance of the “borderline type” signal even when they receive it.
    In contrast to Figure 6, we observe little change in health behavior
(Figure 7) and health outcomes (Figures 8 and 9) at the threshold. In Figure
7, the probability of “walking or exercising” appears to somewhat increase at
the threshold, but other health behaviors exhibit little change. In Figures 8
and 9, we observe virtually no discontinuities in health outcomes at the
threshold, whether measured by intermediate health outcomes (Figure 8) or
predicted 5-year risks of mortality and significant DM complications (Figure
9).


5.2   Effects of “diabetic type” signal


                                                                         pg. 15
   Figures 10-13 present the results for the FBS>=126 mg/dl threshold,
above which the person is considered a “diabetic type.” Although this
threshold represents a more serious signal of DM, responses are weaker than
are those at the FBS>=110 mg/dl threshold. First, as shown in Figure 10,
medical care utilization somewhat increases, but the impacts are smaller
and less clear compared to those found for FBS>=110 mg/dl. For example,
the probability of having a DM diagnosis increases only around 4 percentage
points. This is smaller the impact found at the FBS=110 threshold. The
result for DM-related outpatient medical expenditure now appears
insignificant. Second, Figure 11 indicates that the signal has little effect on
health behaviors, similar to the case of the FBS>=110 mg/dl threshold. Third,
as shown in Figures 12 and 13, there is no clear evidence that the FBS>=126
mg/dl signal improves health outcomes.12
   At first glance, it is surprising to find weaker responses at FBS>=126
mg/dl than at FBS>=110 mg/dl, because individuals presumably would be
more concerned about a signal of diabetes than pre-diabetes. However, the
results are not surprising in light of what was revealed by Figure 2 – namely,
that individuals rarely receive the diabetes signal because very few checkup
reports adopt FBS=126 mg/dl as a threshold. Because people do not appear
to receive a signal that they are a “diabetic type,” it is not surprising that
they do not respond at the FBS>=126 mg/dl threshold. Of course, it is a
serious concern if, as we suspect, high-risk people are not alerted that they
are actually high risk. Such “false reassurance” could offset any health
benefits of (possibly repeated) signals at lower thresholds. One implication of
these results is that if multiple threshold values exist for a physical measure,
it is important that separate signals be considered at each risk level,
calibrated to the strength of the evidence and seriousness of the risk.


6. Results from a fuzzy RD regression

6. 1. First-stage results

     This section reports the results from the first-stage regression of the

12 In Figure 13, “risk for stroke” and “risk for non-CV mortality” appear to decrease
somewhat at the threshold. However, if we estimate a regression as specified in
Equation (1) using these health outcomes as the dependent variables, the coefficients
for 𝐹𝐵𝑆126 dummies are not statistically significant in either case even at the 10
percent confidence level (not reported).

                                                                                  pg. 16
fuzzy RD analysis, Equation (1). We estimate the model by using a window
width of 5 mg/dl and 10 mg/dl. The 10 mg/dl width is the widest possible one
in the case of FBS=110 mg/dl, as there is another cutoff at 100 mg/dl as
shown in Figure 2. For the dependent variable 𝐶𝑎𝑟𝑒𝑖𝑡 , we employ two
variables, i) total number of DM visits and ii) DM-related outpatient medical
expenditure. To save space, we only report the coefficients for 𝐹𝐵𝑆110𝑖𝑡 and
𝐹𝐵𝑆126𝑖𝑡 .
     The results are reported in Table 2. For the FBS>=110 mg/dl threshold,
the results clearly indicate that DM-related medical care utilization
increases at the threshold (please see Panel A). These results are consistent
with the graphical results presented in Figure 6. Specifically, the number of
DM-related visits increases by 0.2 per year and this estimate is stable
regardless of the window width (i.e., 5 mg/dl or 10 mg/dl) and the functional
form (i.e., linear or quadratic). All of these estimates are significant at the
one percent level. We also find that DM-related outpatient medical spending
significantly increases at the threshold. Again, the coefficient for the
threshold is significant at the one percent level in all models. The point
estimates vary somewhat and indicate that spending increases between
1,200 and 2,000 JPY (approximately US$ 12-20) per year, depending on the
model. These results indicate that the FBS>=110 mg/dl threshold dummy
variable is highly correlated with the amount of DM-related medical care
and satisfies the condition for use as an excluded instrument.
     The results for the FBS>=126 mg/dl threshold are in stark contrast. As
reported in Panel B of Table 2, only one coefficient for the threshold dummy
variable is statistically significant. Consistent with the graphical analysis
reported in Figure 10, there is no robust evidence that crossing the “diabetic
type” threshold increases DM-related medical care, perhaps because
individuals are not receiving a health signal at that threshold.


6.2. Second-stage results

     Table 3 reports the results from the second-stage regression. As we
discussed in Section 3, we use two types of health outcomes as our dependent
variables, namely (i) intermediate health outcomes and (ii) predicted risks of
mortality and significant DM complications. For the endogenous variable in
Equation (2), we experiment with two variables, i.e., DM_visits (Panel A) and


                                                                          pg. 17
DM_spending (Panel B), both of which are assumed to be sufficient statistics
for DM-related medical care. We only report the results for the “borderline
type” threshold because in Section 6.1 we did not find that medical care
utilization increases at the “diabetic type” threshold.13
      The table shows that none of the coefficients are negative and
statistically significant. Thus, there is no empirical evidence that the
significant increase in DM-related medical care around the threshold
improves health outcomes. While we only look at short-run effects in this
section, as we report later in Section 7.2., we also do not find evidence of
improvements in long-run health outcomes. Therefore the medical care
triggered by the FBS>=110 mg/dl threshold does not appear to be cost
effective.
      Please note that we have at least 54,000 observations in our regressions
even when we use a narrow window width of 5 mg/dl. Moreover, the
first-stage F-statistics are usually bigger than 20 except for some cases
where we use the quadratic functional form with a narrow window width of 5
mg/dl (not reported), indicating that the excluded instrument is strongly
correlated with DM care, as anticipated by Figure 6. Thus the insignificant
second-stage results are not because of the weak instrument problem.


7. Additional analysis

7.1. Longer-run effects on health outcomes

     So far, we have looked at short-run effects of health signals and found
no evidence that additional care triggered by health signals improves health
outcomes. However, medical care can have cumulative effects and thus we
might observe stronger effects in the long-run.
      To assess this possibility, we graphically examine the effects on health
outcomes three and five years after a checkup, focusing on the “borderline
threshold” where we found significant short-run increases in medical care
utilization. Figure 14 shows the effects on intermediate health outcomes: we
find no apparent discontinuity at the threshold. The results for predicted
risks of mortality and significant complications are similar, as shown in

13Nonetheless, we also estimated the regressions for FBS>=126 mg/dl and found that
the first-stage F-stats are less than 5 in all cases. This invalidates the instrumental
variable approach, as we expected.

                                                                                   pg. 18
Figure 15. The results for five years after a checkup are similar, as reported
in Figures A1 and A2 in the Appendix. Note that for these predicted risks of
mortality and complications, we are in effect examining 10-year outcomes,
since we use risk factors 5 years after the checkup to predicted outcomes for
the next 5 years. In other words, for a 2009 checkup, we use blood pressure
and other risk factors as measured in 2014 to predict probabilities of
suffering a stroke, developing CHD, or non-cardiovascular mortality between
2014 and 2019. Thus, even in the long-run, there is no evidence that
additional care for DM (around the margin of “borderline type”) improves
health outcomes.


7.2 Effects on individuals who did not receive a signal in the previous year

     One might expect that some people are not health conscious and they
may routinely ignore health warning signals even if they receive them. If we
exclude these individuals, the effects of health signals on health outcomes
and medical expenditures might be substantially larger. To explore such a
possibility, we redo the analysis by focusing on individuals who did not get
the “borderline type” signal in the previous year because their FBS values
were below the threshold.
      In Figure A3, we report the results for medical care utilization. As
before, the “borderline type” signal clearly increases medical care utilization.
In fact, as expected, the impacts of the signal are slightly larger than what
we reported in Figure 6. For example, as shown in Figure A3, the probability
of visiting a doctor for DM increases by approximately 6 percentage points,
as opposed to the 5-percentage-point increase found in Figure 6.
     In contrast, as reported in Figure A4, the effect of the health signal on
health outcomes does not appear to be different. Similar to our previous
result reported in Figures 8 and 9, there is no clear evidence that the
“borderline type” health signal affects health outcomes. Our regression
results confirm this finding (not reported). Thus, although individuals who
did not receive the warning last year respond more to the signal as expected,
additional medical care utilization still does not seem to improve health
outcomes. Again, we find no evidence that preventive DM care around the
“borderline threshold” of FBS=110 mg/dl is cost effective.



                                                                           pg. 19
7.3 Alternative health outcome measure

     As an alternative to the predicted risks of mortality and significant
complications using the JJRE, we also experimented with a risk measure
calculated by the WHO risk prediction model (please see Appendix IV for
how we implemented the risk model.) Unlike the JJRE, the WHO risk
measure is based on individuals without diagnosed diabetes and thus
complements the JJRE measures. As shown in Figure A5, there is no clear
evidence that the “borderline type” and “diabetic type” signals affect the
WHO risk measure. We also run the same regression models as before and
found that the coefficients for the thresholds are not statistically different
from zero (not reported). These results provide additional support for our
finding that the health signals have little effect on health outcomes.


7.4   Effects of health signals on health behaviors

      As discussed in Section 3.1, one concern for our identification approach
is that after receiving a health signal, individuals may alter health behavior,
which in turn may also affect health outcomes. If so, this makes it difficult to
identify the impact of medical care utilization on health outcomes. Although
we did not find evidence that medical care utilization affects health outcomes,
in this section, we empirically examine the relationship between health
signals and health behaviors by estimating Equation (1), using health
behavior variables as the dependent variables. Specifically, we create
dummy variables for (i) exercise or walk regularly, (ii) smoke, (iii) drink
every day, and (iv) eat after dinner, and use them as the dependent variables.
We perform this analysis for the “borderline type” threshold where the signal
can potentially work as an instrument for medical care utilization.
      Table 4 reports the results. To save space, we only report the coefficients
for the threshold dummy variables. As shown in the table, only one out of 32
coefficients is statistically significant at the five percent confidence level.
These results are in stark contrast to the results for medical care utilization,
where we found all coefficients are significant at the one percent confidence
level. Thus, we have no evidence that health signals affect health behaviors,
and this result provides support for our instrumental variable approach. To
the extent that preventive visits to physicians might also involve counseling
to reduce lifestyle risk factors such as smoking and sedentary lifestyle, this

                                                                            pg. 20
non-response along margins of health-related behavior could also be
interpreted as further evidence of the lack of cost-effectiveness of preventive
care at this margin.
      The result that people do not alter health behaviors after receiving a
health warning is not surprising in the current context. As previously
mentioned, when a physical health measure exceeds a DM diagnosis
threshold such as FBS>=110 mg/dl, a checkup report usually recommends a
visit to a physician, but typically does not recommend or provide programs
for lifestyle changes. Moreover, lifestyle changes such as quitting smoking
are notoriously challenging. These factors may help to explain why health
behaviors change little after surpassing a diagnosis threshold for DM. At the
same time, the result is worrisome from the perspective of preventing DM.


7.5   Heterogeneous responses to health signals

    In Section 5.1, we found that, on average, the “borderline type” signal
increases DM-related medical care utilization. This suggests that health
signals can potentially help prevent DM by triggering physician visits.
Responses to health signals may differ, however, depending on individuals’
characteristics. For example, health-conscious people may respond more to
health signals, while those who have a present bias may be less responsive.
Information on heterogeneous responses to health signals could potentially
help inform the design of effective prevention programs. The aim of this
section is to investigate heterogeneous responses to health signals.
    To investigate heterogeneous effects, we add two terms to Equation (1).
The first is an individual characteristic of our interest, such as whether the
person has a “poor eating habit,” and the second is its interaction with the
threshold dummy variable, e.g., 𝐹𝐵𝑆110𝑖𝑡 . The coefficient for the latter
indicates heterogeneity and is the main interest of this section.
    We look at three individual characteristics. First, we test the hypothesis
that health-conscious individuals are more responsive to health signals,
using “poor eating habit” as a proxy for being not health-conscious. A dummy
variable, PoorEat, equals one if the person reports either eating before sleep
or skipping breakfast. 14 Second, we examine whether smokers are less

14To be more specific, the dummy variable equals one if one “eats dinner within two
hours of before sleeping three times or more a week” or “skips breakfast three times or
more a week.”

                                                                                  pg. 21
responsive to health signals. Studies in behavioral economics (Laibson 1997,
Chaloupka and Warner 2000, Gruber 2001, Volpp et al. 2009, Giné, Karlan,
and Zinman 2010) have found that smokers have a present bias and tend to
discount the future more than their non-smoking counterparts. These people
may respond less to health signals, because they discount the benefits of
good health in the future, which may result from today’s visit to a physician.
Third, similarly, we also examine whether those who drink alcohol respond
more to health signals.15
     Table 5 reports the results. We focus on the “borderline threshold” where
DM-related medical care clearly increased. We use diagnosis of DM as the
dependent variable and only report the coefficients for the FBS threshold
dummy variable, individual characteristics, and their interaction term. Also,
to save space, we focus on the quadratic specification.16 We find that as
shown in columns (1) and (2), those who have a “poor eating habit” respond
less to the health signal by 1.5-1.6 percentage points relative to all others.
This effect is statistically significant at the one percent confidence level. We
also find that smokers and drinkers are less responsive to the health signal
relative to non-smokers and rare drinkers by 1.3 and 1.5-1.8 percentage
points, respectively (please see columns (3)-(6)). In columns (7) and (8), we
show the results that include all of the three variables at the same time. The
coefficients for the interaction terms become somewhat smaller in this model
but are still statistically significant in most cases. A simple summation of the
three coefficients in column (8) reveals that the impact of the “borderline
type” signal is reduced by half -- from 0.065 to 0.031 -- if the person has all
three of these negative health habits.
     These results provide suggestive evidence that people respond to health
signals differently and those who smoke, drink, and have unhealthy
lifestyles (in term of eating habits) respond less to health signals. Note that
these people are the primary targets of disease prevention and our results
indicate that extra efforts are necessary to induce them to visit a physician.
A caveat of this analysis is that our approach only suggests an association
but not causation because some confounding factors may be correlated with
the characteristics of our interest. A further analysis would be necessary to


15Drinkers are those who drink alcohol “everyday” or “sometimes” as oppose to “rarely.”
16The results are similar for the linear specification and they are available from the
authors.

                                                                                 pg. 22
more rigorously identify heterogeneous effects.


8. Conclusions

     While the importance of preventive care is hard to refute, it is also true
that not all preventive care can improve welfare. Using unique
individual-level panel data, we investigated whether people respond to
health signals and if so, whether medical care triggered by health signals is
worth the cost. We did so in the context of mandatory health checkups in
Japan, focusing on preventive medical care for DM.
     We find that, first, people respond to health signals and increase their
probability of visiting a physician. This result confirms that health signals
can potentially help prevent chronic diseases by bringing people to
physicians’ offices. The result also implies that the thresholds adopted in
health checkups or wearable devices should reflect the cost-effectiveness of
preventive care. If, on the other hand, employers or device makers can freely
determine the thresholds on their own, the result may exacerbate rather
than mitigate wasteful over-use of some kinds of care while not effectively
promoting use of medical resources that are under-used relative to their
cost-effectiveness (Baicker, Mullainathan, and Schwartzstein 2015).
       Second, our results also indicate that only a small fraction of people
respond to health signals along the margins that we study, and thus that the
absolute impact of health signals may be limited. We can think of at least
two reasons for this low response. First, although employers notify
employees about their physical measures from the health checkup,
employers may not specifically communicate that the employee belongs to a
higher-risk group such as “borderline type” or “diabetic type.” That is, the
lack of a clear alert may explain the lack of response. Second, even when an
individual receives a signal that he/she is a “borderline type,” currently,
whether to respond by visiting a physician is entirely up to the individual:
neither is there a mandate for the individual in question to visit a physician,
nor are employers obligated to follow up with employees about the potential
benefits of a visit. In this case, if preventive care is indeed cost-effective, then
to make prevention work, a more interventionist approach may be necessary.
Further analysis is needed to distinguish these explanations.17

17   Results from the National Health Screening Program in Korea suggest that clear

                                                                                      pg. 23
      Third, most importantly, we do not find evidence that additional
medical care triggered by health signals is cost effective. For the “borderline
type” threshold, we find substantial increases in DM-related medical care
utilization. However, health outcomes did not improve, either for physical
measures (risk biomarkers) or for predicted risks of mortality or serious DM
complications. Thus, there is no evidence that additional medical care is
worth the cost around this threshold, and the current threshold may need to
be reexamined. For the higher threshold value that corresponds to “diabetic
type,” few people respond to this signal and thus we were unable to assess
cost effectiveness at that margin.
      There are a large number of diagnosis thresholds that could trigger
additional preventive care – primary, secondary, and tertiary prevention –
and little is known about their cost effectiveness. While we focus on DM in
our analysis, our approach can easily be applied to many other health
conditions and clinically-relevant diagnostic criteria. Such analyses could be
useful inputs for establishing appropriate diagnosis thresholds and
conveying their significance to patients, leading to more efficient use of
medical resources.




information combined with prompting for a follow-up consultation can lead to a higher
response rate, with between 16% and 19% of individuals above the 126 threshold in the
baseline check-up subsequently receiving a diagnosis of DM (Kim, Lee and Lim 2017).

                                                                                    pg. 24
Appendix I: Required checkup items (as of April 2008)


1. Physician's health interview
2. Height, body weight, abdominal girth, visual acuity, auditory acuity,
   subjective/objective symptom, blood pressure
3. Chest X-ray
4. Anemic analysis (hemoglobin content, erythrocyte count)
5. Liver function (GOT, GPT, gamma-GTP)
6.   Blood lipid (TG, HDL-C, LDL-C)
7.   Blood Sugar (FBS or HbA1c)
8.   Urianalysis (Protein, Sugar)
9.   Electrocardiogram


Source:    Ministry    of   Health,    Labour    and    Welfare    (2008)
http://www.mhlw.go.jp/new-info/kobetu/roudou/gyousei/anzen/dl/080123-3a.p
df (accessed 2016.12.29).




                                                                    pg. 25
Appendix II: Definitions of variables (Do we have more variables to discuss?)
Outcome variables       Definition

DM-related              ･Total expenditures within 1 year of the checkup of all
outpatient medical      outpatient claims which include DM as one of the
spending                reported conditions being diagnosed or treated;
                        ・“Expenditures” are calculated from points as follows:
                        (Total points of all outpatient claims which include “DM”
                        as one of the conditions + Total points of pharmacy
                        claims which include an anti-diabetic medication as one
                        of drugs)
                        ・“DM drugs” are drugs categorized as A10 in ATC code
                        Note:1 point = 10 YEN

FBS / HbA1c / BMI /     ・The values of FBS / HbA1c / BMI/SBP measured at the
SBP                     checkup a year after the index checkup

Risk of Stroke / CHD    ・The predicted 5-year risk of developing macro- and
/ non-CV mortality      micro-vascular complications from Type 2 Diabetes,
                        based on the risk factors (e.g. age, blood pressure,
                        HbA1c) measured at the checkup a year after the index
                        checkup.
                        ・These predicted risks are calculated from the JJRE
                        equations as developed by Tanaka et al. (Diabetes Care
                        2013)

walking or exercising   ・Self-report of health habits (walking or exercising /
/ drinking everyday /   drinking frequency) as measured in the health survey
smoking / eating        associated with the checkup a year after the index
after dinner / poor     check-up
eating                  ・“walking or exercising” = 1 if the individual reports
                        exercising enough to work up a sweat for 30 minutes or
                        more per day & 2~7 days per week. (“walking or
                        exercising” = 0 otherwise.)
                        ・“drinking everyday” = 1 if he/she drinks every day.
                          (“drinking everyday” = 0 otherwise.)
                         “smoking” = 1 if he/she has a habit of smoking.


                                                                        pg. 26
                     (“smoking” = 0 otherwise.)
                    “eating after dinner” = 1 if he/she eats a midnight
                     snack 3 days or more per week. (“eating after dinner”
                     = 0 otherwise.)
                    “poor eating” = 1 if he/she has dinner within 2 hours
                     of sleep or skip breakfast 3 days or more per week.
                     (“poor eating” = 0 otherwise.)

DM diagnosis       ・The rate of a diagnosis of diabetes (or at least rule-out
(DMDX)             diagnostic testing for diabetes) within 1 year of the index
                   checkup
                   ・“diagnosis” is defined by the following 2 conditions:
                   1. The individual has a claim that includes DM as one of
                   the conditions; and
                   2. Consultation days > 0.
                   ・“DM” are diseases categorized as E10~E14 in ICD10
                   code.

DM visits(DMDAY)   ・Consultation days for DM within 1 year of the checkup


OGTT               ・Rate of conducting      an oral glucose tolerance test
                   (OGTT) within 1 year of the checkup




                                                                     pg. 27
Appendix III: Implementing the JJRE


Measurement of medium and long-run health outcomes utilizes 5-year risk
of developing CHD, stroke, or non-cardiovascular mortality as predicted by
the Japan Diabetes Complications Study/the Japanese Elderly Diabetes
Intervention Trial risk engine (JJRE) (Tanaka et al. 2013). The JJRE risk
prediction model is similar to many other risk prediction models, such as the
well-known Framingham cardiovascular disease risk model or the UK
Prospective Diabetes Study (UKPDS) risk prediction model often used for
estimating medium- and longer-term risks for individuals with diabetes.
Such risk models use data from research studies to model how “risk factors”
(or predictor variables), such as age, sex, and blood pressure, can predict
specific health outcomes in the next 5 or 10 years. Most such models have
been calibrated for non-Asian populations, and thus are not appropriate for
our sample. The JJRE is specifically designed for predicting risks for a
Japanese population. We are grateful to the JJRE authors for sharing their
SAS program code with us.


The JJRE incorporates 11 risk factors to predict macro- and microvascular
complications among Japanese patients with diabetes (without diabetes
complications except mild retinopathy): sex, age, HbA1c, years after
diagnosis, BMI, systolic blood pressure, non-HDL cholesterol,
albumin-to-creatinine ratio, atrial fibrillation, current smoker, and
leisure-time physical activity. The model was developed based on data from
1,748 Japanese type 2 diabetic patients pooled from two clinical trials. The
JJRE “separately calculates each risk of the first occurrence for five events:
fatal and nonfatal CHD, fatal and nonfatal stroke, noncardiovascular
mortality, overt nephropathy, and progression of retinopathy” (Tanaka et al.
2013, p.1194).


We have used the JJRE code to calculate the risk of CHD, stroke, and
noncardiovascular mortality in our data. We do not estimate risk of overt
nephropathy or progression of retinopathy for Iizuka et al (2016), because
our sample includes patients not diagnosed with diabetes and therefore the
default (diabetic) values from the risk engine are not necessarily appropriate



                                                                         pg. 28
for determining their 5-year risks of these diabetes complications.18


Defining JJRE input variables
We must use the JJRE default values for those values that we lack for our
sample. For each risk factor used in one of the JJRE risk prediction
equations, we code the risk factor as follows.


LTPA (Leisure Time Physical Activity)


LTPA is defined from two questions asked at the health check-up:
EXERCISE==1 if the patient answers yes to the question “Have you been
exercising at least twice a week (at least 30 minutes per session of light
sweating) for over one year?” and 2 otherwise; WALK==1 if answer yes to the
question “Do you walk or exercise to a similar degree daily for at least one
hour?” and 2 otherwise). The amount of LTPA fits at least the JJRE
categories if the self-reported answer to either of these questions is “Yes.”


Then the variable LTPA is coded as follows:
gen LTPA = .
replace LTPA = 1 if EXERCISE == 1 | WALKING == 1
replace LTPA = 0 if EXERCISE == 2 & WALKING == 2


Duration of DM Diagnosis:

Duration of diagnosis is defined as follows: In the JMDC dataset
(4_diseases_x., where x signifies a year such as 2014), a variable named
“FIRSTDX” (first diagnosis date) associated with each diagnosis code exists.
We identified the first diagnosis year associated with diabetes for each
patient in the cohort using data from 2005 to 2014. In the great majority of
cases, this first diagnosis date remains constant throughout all
diabetes-related visits in the data. However, where there are different values
for FIRSTDX for a given patient over multiple visits, we took the earliest of
the FIRSTDX variable. Duration of diabetes diagnosis in a given year is


18
   However, to run the JJRE SAS model requires inputting values for all risk factors and
outputting all five predicted risks; therefore, we utilize the JJRE default values for the risk
factors that are missing in the JMDC data.

                                                                                            pg. 29
calculated as current year – min(FIRSTDX). Patients without two separate
non-suspect (i.e. suspicion flag19=0) diagnoses of diabetes in two or more
years are assigned a duration of diagnosis of 0 in all years.


ACR


JMDC does not report ACR values. We therefore assigned ACR a value of 60
(the default value for a diagnosed diabetic in the JJRE) if a patient has two
or more confirmed (non-suspect) diagnoses of diabetes in two separate years.
Otherwise, a patient is assigned an ACR value of 30.


NHDL-C (Non-High Density Lipoprotein Cholesterol)


We estimated NHDL-C from the JMDC checkup data on HDL, LDL, and
triglycerides, using the Friedewald formula: If TG<400, NHDL=LDL+(TG/5);
otherwise if TG>=400, NHDL is set to missing.


AF (Atrial Fibrillation) and DR (Diabetic Retinopathy)


We used JMDC’s disease data files to determine whether an individual had a
prior history of AF or DR. For each individual, we identified the earliest year
he or she had a non-suspect diagnosis of AF (I48 Atrial fibrillation and
flutter) and the earliest year the individual had a non-suspect diagnosis of
DR (H36, E103, E113, E123, E133 or E143). Then, for each observation for
which a JJRE risk calculation was conducted, we identified whether the
earliest year of AF or DR is prior to the current year. If so, we set the dummy
variables AF and/or DR to 1, and 0 otherwise.


BMI (Body Mass Index)


Height and weight are available in the JDMC checkup data and are reported
in centimeter and kilograms. We calculated the BMI using the standard


19
   The JMDC claims data includes a “suspicion flag” to demarcate claims in which the
physician may suspect a given condition but has not definitively diagnosed it, such as a
diagnostic rule-out test for a given medical condition like diabetes. We use “non-suspect” to
describe claims lacking this suspicion flag (i.e. SUSPECT==0).

                                                                                       pg. 30
formula, weight (kg) / [height (m)]2 after converting height in centimeters to
meters.


All other variables (age, female, systolic blood pressure, smoking status, and
HbA1c) were taken directly from the patient demographic file or the checkup
file.


We confirmed, for a random sample of PIDs with check-up data, perfect
congruence between our JJRE predicted risks (from applying the SAS code to
our JMDC data) and the JJRE predicted risks output from the web engine of
JJRE (www.biostatistics.jp/prediction/jjre).




                                                                         pg. 31
Appendix IV. WHO Risk Prediction Model


As an alternative risk prediction measure, we used the risk charts prepared by the World
Health Organization (WHO) and International Society of Hypertension (ISH) to estimate
10-year risk of a fatal or non-fatal cardiovascular event. Specifically, we use Figure 25
Western Pacific region A which includes Japan (WPR A). This risk prediction chart,
summarizing the WHO/ISH prediction model for 10-year risk of a fatal or non-fatal
cardiovascular event by gender, age, systolic blood pressure, total blood cholesterol,
smoking status and presence or absence of diabetes mellitus, is available at
http://ish-world.com/downloads/activities/colour_charts_24_Aug_07.pdf.


The WHO/ISH predicted risks summarized in the charts are in categories or ranges (not a
continuous variable based on the continuous risk factors of each patient, such as the JJRE
model). Therefore we produced the output variable “whorisk” as categorical variables,
defined as follows:
0 is a ten year risk of cardiovascular event of <10%;
1 is 10% - < 20%
2 is 20% - < 30%
3 is 30% - < 40%
4 is >= 40%


The WHO/ISH chart lists age as 70, 60, 50 and 40.We classified patients into the
WHO/ISH age categories as follows:
a person falls in the 40 category if he/she is < 50;
a person falls in the 50 category if (s)he is 50 to < 60;
a person falls in the 60 category if (s)he is 60 to < 70;
a person falls in the 70 category if (s)he is 70+.


Systolic blood pressure (SBP) categories in the WHO/ISH chart are 180, 160, 140 and
120 only; we classified an individual’s SBP as follows:
if a person’s SBP is >= 180, he falls in the 180 category;
if a person’s SBP is 160 to < 180, then he falls in 160;
if a person’s SBP is 140 to < 160, then he falls in 140;
if a person’s SBP is < 140, then he falls in 120.


Total cholesterol is designated as 4, 5, 6, 7, and 8 mmol/l in the WHO/ISH model.

                                                                                    pg. 32
We calculated total cholesterol as TC = triglycerides * 0.2 + HDL + LDL in mg/dl; we
multiplied this result by 0.02586 to convert mg/dl to mmol/l. Then individuals’ total
cholesterol is classified into the following categories:
< 5 —> 4
>=5 to < 6 —> 5
>= 6 to < 7 —> 6
>= 7 to < 8 —> 7
>= 8 —> 8


The unit of observation is the checkup. Each individual has a predicted risk estimated for
each checkup observed in the data.




                                                                                    pg. 33
References


Almond, Douglas, Joseph J. Doyle Jr., Amanda E. Kowalski and Heidi
     Williams (2010) “Estimating marginal returns to medical care: evidence
     from at-risk newborns,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 591-634.
Baicker, Katherine, Sendhil Mullainathan, and Joshua Schwartzstein. 2015.
     “Behavioral Hazard in Health Insurance,” The Quarterly Journal of
     Economics 1623 (2015): 1667.
Cawley, John. "A selective review of the first 20 years of instrumental
    variables models in health-services research and medicine." Journal of
    Medical Economics 18.9 (2015): 721-734.
Chaloupka, Frank J., and Kenneth E. Warner. "The economics of smoking."
    Handbook of Health Economics 1 (2000): 1539-1627.
Chandra, Amitabh, Amy Finkelstein, Adam Sacarny, and Chad Syverson.
    "Healthcare Exceptionalism? Performance and Allocation in the US
    Healthcare Sector." American Economic Review 2016, 106(8): 2110
Deaton,   Angus.   "Instruments,   randomization,   and   learning   about
     development." Journal of Economic Literature 48.2 (2010): 424-455.
Doyle, Joseph, John Graves, and Jonathan Gruber. Uncovering Waste in US
     Healthcare. No. w21050. National Bureau of Economic Research, 2015.
Duflo, Esther, Rachel Glennerster, and Michael Kremer. "Using
     randomization in development economics research: A toolkit."
     Handbook of Development Economics 4 (2007): 3895-3962.
Finkelstein, Amy, Sarah Taubman, Bill Wright, Mira Bernstein, Jonathan
     Gruber, Joseph P. Newhouse, Heidi Allen, and Katherine Baicker. The
     Oregon health insurance experiment: evidence from the first year. The
    Quarterly Journal of Economics (2012), 1057–1106.
Fukushima, K, Mizuoka, S, Yamamoto, S, and Iizuka T. 2016. “Patient cost
     sharing and medical expenditures for the Elderly.” Journal of Health
     Economics, 45:115–30.
Garber, Alan M. "Advances in cost-effectiveness analysis of health
     interventions." Handbook of Health Economics 1 (2000): 181-221.
Giné, Xavier, Dean Karlan, and Jonathan Zinman. "Put your money where
     your butt is: a commitment contract for smoking cessation." American
     Economic Journal: Applied Economics 2.4 (2010): 213-235.
Goroll, Allan H. "Toward Trusting Therapeutic Relationships—In Favor of

                                                                      pg. 34
     the Annual Physical." New England Journal of Medicine 373.16 (2015):
     1487-1489.
Gruber, Jonathan. “Tobacco at the crossroads: the past and future of smoking
     regulation in the United States.” The Journal of Economic Perspectives
     15.2 (2001): 193-212.
Iizuka, T. 2012. “Physician Agency and Adoption of Generic
     Pharmaceuticals.” American Economic Review. 102(6):2826–58.
Institute of Medicine. Assessing Medical Technologies. Washington, DC:
     National Academy Press; 1985.
Kim, Hyuncheol Bryant, Suejin A. Lee, and Wilfredo Lim. 2017. “Knowing Is
    Not Half the Battle: Impacts of the National Health Screening Program
    of Korea.” Working paper.
Laibson, David. “Golden eggs and hyperbolic discounting.” The Quarterly
     Journal of Economics (1997): 443-477.
Lipska, Kasia J., and Harlan M. Krumholz. “Is HbA1c the right outcome for
     studies of diabetes?” JAMA Published online January 26, 2017.
     doi:10.1001/jama.2017.0029.
Mehrotra, Ateev, and Allan Prochazka. "Improving value in health
     care—Against the annual physical." New England Journal of Medicine
     373.16 (2015): 1485-1487.
NCD Risk Factor Collaboration (NCD-RisC) 2016. “Worldwide trends in
     diabetes since 1980: a pooled analysis of 751 population-based studies
     with 4·4 million participants” Lancet 387: 1513–30.
Patel, Mitesh S., David A. Asch, and Kevin G. Volpp. "Wearable devices as
     facilitators, not drivers, of health behavior change." Jama 313.5 (2015):
     459-460.
Soumerai, Stephen B., and Ross Koppel. “The Reliability of Instrumental
    Variables in Health Care Effectiveness Research: Less Is More.” Health
    Services Research (2016).
Tanaka, Shiro, Sachiko Tanaka, Satoshi Iimuro, Hidetoshi Yamashita,
    Shigehiro Katayama, Yasuo Akanuma, Nobuhiro Yamada, Atsushi
    Araki, Hideki Ito, MD, PHD8, Hirohito Sone, Yasuo Ohashi, for the
    Japan Diabetes Complications Study Group and the Japanese Elderly
    Diabetes Intervention Trial Group. 2013. “Predicting Macro- and
    Microvascular Complications in Type 2 Diabetes,” Diabetes Care. 36(5):
     1193-1199.

                                                                         pg. 35
US Preventive Services Task Force. "Screening for breast cancer: US
     Preventive Services Task Force recommendation statement." Annals of
     Internal Medicine 151.10 (2009): 716.
Volpp KG, Troxel AB, Pauly MV, et al. A randomized, controlled trial of
     financial incentives for smoking cessation. N Engl J Med
     2009;360:699-709
World Health Organization 2013. GLOBAL ACTION PLAN FOR THE
     PREVENTION        AND      CONTROL       OF    NONCOMMUNICABLE
     DISEASES.                          Available                         from
    http://apps.who.int/iris/bitstream/10665/94384/1/9789241506236_eng.p
    df (accessed October 11, 2016).
Yutaka Seino, Kishio Nanjo, Naoko Tajima, Takashi Kadowaki, Atsunori
    Kashiwagi, Eiichi Araki, Chikako Ito, Nobuya Inagaki, Yasuhiko
    Iwamoto, Masato Kasuga, Toshiaki Hanafusa, Masakazu Haneda,
    Kohjiro Ueki “Report of the Committee on the classification and
    diagnostic criteria of diabetes mellitus.” Diabetol Int (2010) 1:2–20.




                                                                         pg. 36
Figure 1. An example of a checkup report
                                  CERTIFICATE OF HEALTH
 Name                                                                         Date of birth
                                                                                                                  This year
Under Medical Treatment       None
Medical History               None
Subjective Symptoms           None                                                                                Last year
Objective Symptoms            No findings


                                             2012/4/20          2011/4/10         2010/4/15          2009/4/18         Reference(or Normal)
Age                                              47                 46                45                 44
Physical           Height(cm)                  171.8              171.9             171.8              171.8
Examination        Weight(kg)                   65.5               66.7              65.2               60.1
                   BMI                          22.2               22.6              22.1               20.4
                   Waist Circumference          72.4               72.8              71.3               70.5
Eye sight          Without glasses(R/L)           -                  -                 -                  -
                   With glasses(R/L)          0.9¥1.0            0.8/0.7           0.9/0.9            1.0/1.0
Hearing            Right 1000Hz               normal             normal            normal             normal
                   Right 4000Hz               normal             normal            normal             normal
                   Left 1000Hz                normal            Impaired           normal             normal
                   Left 4000Hz                normal             Normal            normal            impaired
                   Method                   audiometer         audiometer        audiometer         audiometer
Chest X-ray        Findings                 no findings        no findings       no findings        no findings
                   Method                      Direct             direct            Direct             direct           FBS value is high!
                   Film No.                   No.314             No.201             No.55             No.308
Sputum examination                            normal             normal            normal             normal
                                                                                                                              (112,115)
Electrocardiogram examination                 normal             normal            normal             normal
Liver function     ASL(GOT)                      29                 33                30                 28        ≦35(U/L)
                   ALT(GPT)                      27                 42                28                 26        ≦35(U/L)
                      γ-GTP                      44                 49                42                 38        ≦55(U/L)
Serum lipid           HDL cholesterol            45                 41                43                 44        ≧40(mg/dL)
concentration          LDL cholesterol          110                113               103                 99         <120(mg/dL)
                      Neutral Fats              107                119               110                100        <150(mg/dL)
Glucose               FBS                       108              H 112               104              H 115        ≦109(mg/dL)
metabolism            HbA1c(NGSP)                5.5             H 5.9                5.2             H 6.0        ≦5.8(%)
Anemia test           RBC                       470                465               480                472        ≧400,≦539(10^4/μL)
                      Hemoglobin                15.9               16.2              14.6               16.7       ≧13,≦16.6(g/dL)
Blood pressure        SBP                       102                108               102                 98        ≦130mmHg
                      DBP                        70                 72                70                 65        ≦85mmHg
Uric acid             Glucose                  (－)              （－）                  （－）             （－）
                      Protein                  (－)              （－）                  （－）             （－）



Figure 2. Empirical distribution of clinical threshold values

                              FBS threshold (n=57)                                      HbA1c threshold (n=48)

                                                                         HbA1c=5.5     1
            FBS=100                                  26
                                                                         HbA1c=5.6                                           21

                                                                         HbA1c=5.9         2
            FBS=110                                       30
                                                                         HbA1c=6.0              7

                                                                         HbA1c=6.3                                16
            FBS=126      1
                                                                         HbA1c=6.6     1



                                                                                                                                      pg.37
Figure 3. Distribution of FBS values




Figure 4. Distribution of Covariates




Figure 5. Attrition rate




                                       pg.38
Figure 6. Effects of FBS>=110 signal on medical care utilization




Figure 7. Effects of FBS>=110 signal on health behavior




                                                                   pg.39
Figure 8. Effects of FBS>=110 signal on intermediate health outcomes




Figure 9. Effects of FBS>=110 signal on predicted risks of DM complications




                                                                              pg.40
Figure 10. Effects of FBS>=126 signal on medical care utilization




Figure 11. Effects of FBS>=126 signal on health behavior




                                                                    pg.41
Figure 12. Effects of FBS>=126 signal on intermediate health outcomes




Figure 13. Effects of FBS>=126 signal on predicted risks of DM complications




                                                                               pg.42
Figure 14. Longer-run effects of additional DM care on intermediate health outcomes (FBS>=110
mg/dl, 3 years after a checkup)




Figure 15. Longer-run effects of additional DM care on predicted risks and complications
(FBS>=110 mg/dl, 3 years after a checkup)




                                                                                            pg.43
Figure A1. Longer-run effects of additional DM care on intermediate health outcomes (FBS>=110
mg/dl, 5 years after a checkup)




Figure A2. Longer-run effects of additional DM care on predicted risks of DM complications
(FBS>=110 mg/dl, 5 years after a checkup)




                                                                                             pg.44
Figure A3. Effects of “borderline type” signal on medical care utilization (for those who did not
exceed the threshold in the previous year)




Figure A4. Effects of “borderline type” signal on selected health outcomes (for those who did not
exceed the threshold in the previous year)




                                                                                                    pg.45
Figure A5. Effects of “borderline type” and “diabetic type” signals on WHO risk




                                                                                  pg.46
Table 1. Summary statistics
                               N         mean        sd
【Explanatory variables】
age                            1695412        45           8.26
FEMALE(0/1)                    1695412      0.36           0.48
FBS                            1695412        93          14.16
【health behavior】
SMOKING 1 year later(0/1)      1116472      0.30           0.46
EATAFTDN 1 year later(0/1)      923000      0.18           0.39
ALCHLFRQ 1 year later(0/1)     1045576      0.27           0.44
EXER_WALK 1 year later(0/1)     950440      0.44           0.50
SMOKING 3 years later(0/1)      473226      0.29           0.45
EATAFTDN 3 years later(0/1)     397252      0.19           0.39
ALCHLFRQ 3 years later(0/1)     444334      0.27           0.44
EXER_WALK 3 years later(0/1)    400492      0.44           0.50
SMOKING 5 years later(0/1)      134999      0.27           0.45
EATAFTDN 5 years later(0/1)     112409      0.20           0.40
ALCHLFRQ 5 years later(0/1)     127530      0.27           0.44
EXER_WALK 5 years later(0/1)    110795      0.51           0.50
【medical utilization】
DMDX(0/1)                      1695412       0.06       0.24
DMDAY                          1695412       0.24       1.81
GTTEXAM                        1695412       0.00       0.02
DMOUTEXP                       1695412      2621    25654.89
【health outcomes】
FBS 1 year later               1116568        93          14.03
HbA1c 1 year later              986728      5.46           0.49
SBP 1 year later               1178393       120          15.47
BMI 1 year later               1178514      22.8           3.43
CHD_R 1 year later              486752      0.02           0.02
STROKE_R 1 year later           486752      0.02           0.03
NonCV_R 1 year later            486752      0.01           0.01
whorisk 1 year later            704229      0.03           0.24
FBS 3 years later               444914        94          14.40
HbA1c 3 years later             393387      5.51           0.52
SBP 3 years later               481284       121          15.39
BMI 3 years later               481385      22.9           3.44
CHD_R 3 years later             217487      0.02           0.02
STROKE_R 3 years later          217487      0.03           0.03
NonCV_R 3 years later           217487      0.01           0.01
whorisk 3 years later           325040      0.03           0.23
FBS 5 years later               120206        96          15.34
HbA1c 5 years later             102694      5.58           0.55
SBP 5 years later               135803       122          15.15
BMI 5 years later               135807      23.0           3.46
CHD_R 5 years later              59579      0.02           0.02
STROKE_R 5 years later           59579      0.03           0.03
NonCV_R 5 years later            59579      0.01           0.01
whorisk 5 years later           100794      0.03           0.23

                                                                  pg.47
Table 2. Results from first-stage regressions
                          Window=5 mg/dl                                Window=10 mg/dl
                          Linear   Quad        Dep.var. mean Obs.       Linear  Quad         Dep.var. mean Obs.
Panel A: FBS>=110 mg/dl
Dependent variable
 DM visits                0.191*** 0.182***        0.336      116,725   0.154*** 0.185***        0.271     287,594
                           (0.027)  (0.042)                              (0.020)  (0.028)
 DM outpatient spending   1,968*** 1,601***        3573       116,725   1,249*** 1,902***        2857      287,594
                            (340)    (534)                                (263)    (346)

Panel B: FBS>=126 mg/dl
Dependent variable
 DM visits                  0.230    (0.150)       1.146      18,463     0.232**    0.222        0.981      42,292
                            0.046    (0.256)                             (0.103)   (0.157)
 DM outpatient spending     1,022     2,295        11436      18,463      1,492      906         9684       42,292
                           (1,251)   (2,246)                              (926)    (1,415)

Note: This table shows the results from Equation (1). Only the coefficients for the FBS>=110 mg/dl
and 126 mg/dl thresholds are reported. Standard errors, corrected for clustering at the person level,
are in parentheses. DM outpatient spending includes expenditures on DM drugs. “Dependent
variable mean” reports the mean of dependent variable below the threshold.
***: 1 % confidence level, **: 5 % confidence level, *: 10 % confidence level.




                                                                                                                  pg.48
Table 3 Results from second-stage regressions
                                 Window=5 mg/dl                       Window=10 mg/dl
FBS>=110 mg/dl                   Linear    Quad     Obs.              Linear  Quad            Obs.
Panel A: Endogeneous variable = DM_visits
Dependent variables
 FBS (next year)                    0.798   4.016**  77,755              1.271       0.963     191,992
                                   (0.870)  (1.878)                     (0.774)     (0.930)
 HbA1c (next year)                 -0.011     0.000  71,185              0.015      -0.031     170,223
                                   (0.034)  (0.062)                     (0.027)     (0.038)
 BMI (next year)                   -0.173     0.004  82,446             -0.101      -0.201     203,189
                                   (0.240)  (0.414)                     (0.200)     (0.256)
 SBP (next year)                    1.064    -0.351  82,428              0.663       0.326     203,161
                                   (1.001)  (1.744)                     (0.835)     (1.063)
 Risk for stroke (next year)       -0.001    -0.003  54,157             -0.001      -0.001     130,207
                                   (0.002)  (0.006)                     (0.002)     (0.003)
 Risk for CHD (next year)          -0.001    -0.003  54,157              0.000      -0.001     130,207
                                   (0.001)  (0.003)                     (0.001)     (0.001)
 Non-CV mortality (next year)       0.000    -0.000  54,157             -0.000      -0.001     130,207
                                   (0.001)  (0.002)                     (0.001)     (0.001)

Panel B: Endogeneous variable = DM_spending
Dependent variables
 FBS (next year)                   0.065        0.390**      77,755      0.123       0.077     191,992
                                  (0.071)       (0.195)                 (0.076)     (0.075)
 HbA1c (next year)                -0.001          0.000      71,185      0.001      -0.003     170,223
                                  (0.003)       (0.006)                 (0.003)     (0.003)
 BMI (next year)                  -0.015          0.000      82,446     -0.010      -0.018     203,189
                                  (0.021)       (0.041)                 (0.020)     (0.022)
 SBP (next year)                   0.095         -0.035      82,428      0.067       0.029     203,161
                                  (0.090)       (0.175)                 (0.085)     (0.093)
 Risk for stroke (next year)      -0.000         -0.000      54,157     -0.000      -0.000     130,207
                                  (0.000)       (0.000)                 (0.000)     (0.000)
 Risk for CHD (next year)         -0.000         -0.000      54,157      0.000      -0.000     130,207
                                  (0.000)       (0.000)                 (0.000)     (0.000)
 Non-CV mortality (next year)      0.000         -0.000      54,157     -0.000      -0.000     130,207
                                  (0.000)       (0.000)                 (0.000)     (0.000)
Note: This table shows the results from Equation (2). Only the coefficients for the endogenous
explanatory variables are reported. Standard errors, corrected for clustering at the person level, are in
parentheses.
***: 1 % confidence level, **: 5 % confidence level, *: 10 % confidence level.




                                                                                                     pg.49
Table 4. Effects of health signals on health behaviors
                                   Window=5 mg/dl                  Window=10 mg/dl
     FBS>=110 mg/dl                Linear   Quad         Obs.      Linear  Quad         Obs.

       Exercise or walk              0.005      0.007     64,751    0.008**    0.004     160,850
                                    (0.006)    (0.010)              (0.004)   (0.006)
       Smoking                      -0.005     -0.011     77,857     0.000    -0.009     192,176
                                    (0.007)    (0.012)              (0.005)   (0.007)
       Drink everyday               -0.010      0.008     72,511    -0.010*   -0.008     179,275
                                    (0.007)    (0.013)              (0.005)   (0.008)
       Eat after dinner              0.002      0.003     63,476     0.000     0.002     157,121
                                    (0.006)    (0.011)              (0.004)   (0.006)
Note: This table shows the results from Equation (1). Only the coefficients for the FBS>=110 mg/dl
and 126 mg/dl thresholds are reported. Standard errors, corrected for clustering at the person level,
are in parentheses.
***: 1 % confidence level, **: 5 % confidence level, *: 10 % confidence level.




                                                                                                   pg.50
Table 5: Heterogeneous responses to health signals
                       (1)      (2)       (3)       (4)       (5)       (6)       (7)       (8)
                    Quadratic Quadratic Quadratic Quadratic Quadratic Quadratic Quadratic Quadratic
                    Window= Window= Window= Window= Window= Window= Window= Window=
VARIABLES            5mg/dl   10mg/dl    5mg/dl   10mg/dl    5mg/dl   10mg/dl    5mg/dl   10mg/dl

FBS110               0.056*** 0.054*** 0.047*** 0.047*** 0.057***         0.055*** 0.068***     0.065***
                      (0.008)   (0.005)   (0.007)   (0.004)   (0.008)      (0.005)   (0.008)     (0.006)
BADEAT                -0.004    -0.001                                               -0.003      -0.000
                      (0.002)   (0.001)                                              (0.002)     (0.001)
BADEAT*FBS110       -0.016*** -0.015***                                            -0.014***   -0.012***
                      (0.005)   (0.004)                                              (0.005)     (0.004)
SMOKE                                    -0.005** -0.005***                          -0.004    -0.005***
                                          (0.002)   (0.001)                          (0.003)     (0.001)
SMOKE*FBS110                            -0.013*** -0.013***                         -0.009*     -0.008**
                                          (0.005)   (0.004)                          (0.005)     (0.004)
DRINK                                                       -0.012***    -0.013*** -0.013***   -0.014***
                                                              (0.003)      (0.001)   (0.003)     (0.001)
DRINK*FBS110                                                -0.018***    -0.015*** -0.015***   -0.014***
                                                              (0.005)      (0.004)   (0.005)     (0.004)
Constant            -0.150*** -0.059** -0.169*** -0.081*** -0.177***     -0.056*** -0.102***    -0.062**
                      (0.039)   (0.024)   (0.031)   (0.019)   (0.035)      (0.017)   (0.031)     (0.024)

Observations          94,011    232,871   104,674    258,492    98,304    243,111    93,462    231,479
R-squared              0.018     0.025     0.017      0.024      0.018     0.025      0.019     0.026


Note: This table shows the results from Equation (1). The dependent variable is “DM diagnosis.”
Only the coefficients for the FBS threshold dummy variable, individual characteristics, and their
interaction term (our main interest) are reported. Standard errors, corrected for clustering at the
person level, are in parentheses.
***: 1 % confidence level, **: 5 % confidence level, *: 10 % confidence level.




                                                                                                  pg.51
