NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

POLICY UNCERTAINTY IN JAPAN
Elif C. Arbatli
Steven J. Davis
Arata Ito
Naoko Miake
Working Paper 23411
http://www.nber.org/papers/w23411

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
May 2017, Revised September 2019

We would like to thank Luc Everaert, Divya Kirti, Sigari Kitao, Masayuki Morikawa, Carlos
Mulas-Granados, Atsushi Nakajima, Todd Schneider, Yasushi Sugayama, Katsiaryna
Svirydzenka, Vlodomyr Tulin, Francis Vitek and Sungwook Yoon for very useful comments and
suggestions and Yihan Liu for excellent research assistance. We are especially grateful to Ikuo
Saito, who was a coauthor on an earlier draft. Steven J. Davis gratefully acknowledges financial
support from the U.S. National Science Foundation and the Booth School of Business at the
University of Chicago. The views expressed in this paper are those of the author(s) and do not
necessarily represent the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.
© 2017 by Elif C. Arbatli, Steven J. Davis, Arata Ito, and Naoko Miake. All rights reserved.
Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit
permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Policy Uncertainty In Japan
Elif C. Arbatli, Steven J. Davis, Arata Ito, and Naoko Miake
NBER Working Paper No. 23411
May 2017, Revised September 2019
JEL No. D80,E2,E52,E62,F13
ABSTRACT
We develop new economic policy uncertainty (EPU) indices for Japan from January 1987
onwards, building on the approach of Baker, Bloom and Davis (2016). Each index reflects the
frequency of newspaper articles that contain certain terms pertaining to the economy, policy
matters, and uncertainty. Our overall EPU index co-varies positively with implied volatilities for
Japanese equities, exchange rates and interest rates and with a survey-based measure of political
uncertainty. The EPU index rises around contested national elections and major leadership
transitions in Japan, during the Asian financial crisis and in reaction to the Lehman Brothers
failure, U.S. debt downgrade in 2011, Brexit referendum, and Japan’s deferral of a consumption
tax hike. Our uncertainty indices for fiscal, monetary, trade, and exchange rate policy co-vary
positively but also display distinct dynamics. For example, our trade policy uncertainty (TPU)
index rocketed upwards when the U.S. withdrew from the Trans-Pacific Partnership in January
2017. VAR models imply that upward EPU innovations foreshadow deteriorations in Japan’s
macroeconomic performance, as reflected by impulse response functions for investment,
employment and output. Our study adds to evidence that credible policy plans and strong policy
frameworks can favorably influence macroeconomic performance by, in part, reducing policy
uncertainty.
Elif C. Arbatli
Asia and Pacific Department
International Monetary Fund
Washington, D.C., USA
elif.arbatli@norges-bank.no

Naoko Miake
Asia and Pacific Department
International Monetary Fund
Washington, D.C., USA
nmiake@imf.org

Steven J. Davis
Booth School of Business
The University of Chicago
5807 South Woodlawn Avenue
Chicago, IL 60637
and NBER
Steven.Davis@ChicagoBooth.edu

Arata Ito
Research Institute of Economy, Trade and
Industry
Ministry of Economy, Trade and Industry
(METI)
11th floor, Annex
1-3-1 Kasumigaseki, Chiyoda-ku,
Tokyo 100-8901
Japan
ito-arata@rieti.go.jp

Program and Data files are available at http:/www.nber.org/data-appendix/w23411

I. INTRODUCTION
Reinvigorating Japan’s economy has proved challenging. Despite significant policy
accommodation, growth over the past two decades has been weak, the share of non-regular
employment has increased, wages have stagnated, and inflation expectations remain below the
Bank of Japan’s inflation target. Observers cite demographic headwinds, other structural
factors, the zero lower bound, external shocks, and policy mistakes as reasons for Japan’s
chronically weak economic performance. We focus on another, overlapping factor: uncertainty
about policy and its effects.
Previous studies and policymaker remarks suggest that uncertainty about U.S. and European
policies contributed to a steep economic decline in 2008-09 and slow recoveries thereafter.2
Policy uncertainty has returned to the forefront amid concerns over the European immigration
crisis, the Brexit saga, a failed coup in Turkey, the 2016 U.S. election outcome, tighter capital
controls in China, presidential removals in Brazil and South Korea, a barrage of tariff hikes and
threats, and populist political forces in several countries.3 According to an aggregation of
newspaper-based indices for 21 countries in Davis (2016), global economic policy uncertainty
since the fourth quarter of 2018 exceeds even the high levels reached in 2008 Q4 and 2009 Q1.4
In Japan, an unsustainable fiscal trajectory, constraints on monetary policy, and weak growth
present major challenges that intensify policy uncertainty. Shinzo Abe’s election as Prime
Minister in December 2012 and his economic reform initiatives (“Abenomics”) marked an
important milestone and a clearer policy direction after six prime ministers in six years. The
economy grew during this period, and there was some progress in boosting inflation and
structural reforms. But maintaining confidence in Abenomics has proved difficult. Fiscal policy
targets are no longer seen as credible, contributing to policy uncertainty. A consumption tax
hike initially scheduled for 2015 was postponed twice, first to April 2017 and then to October
2019. Frequent use of supplementary budgets adds to uncertainty about the near-term fiscal
stance. New monetary easing measures and technical changes to the monetary policy
framework also contributed to uncertainty. Structural reforms related to labor markets,
immigration and trade policy could improve growth prospects, but whether and how Japan will
achieve these reforms is highly uncertain.5 Uncertainty around trade policies rose sharply when
the U.S. withdrew from the Trans-Pacific Partnership in January 2017 and as U.S.-China trade
policy tensions ratcheted upwards in 2018 and 2019.
Against this backdrop, we take up three questions: How has policy uncertainty moved over
time in Japan? Which policy areas account for the largest share of policy uncertainty and its
2

Examples include the minutes of the Federal Open Market Committee meeting on 15-16 December
2009, the International Monetary Fund (2012, pages xv-xvi and 49-53, and 2013, pages 70-76), Baker et
al., (2012, 2016), and Stock and Watson (2012).
3
For example, see “Global Political Uncertainty Weighs on Growth Outlook,” Ian Talley, Wall Street
Journal, 10 October 2016.
4
Updates of the Global Economic Policy Uncertainty Index are available at
www.PolicyUncertainty.com/global_monthly.html.
5
A survey of 3,438 Japanese firms in 2015 finds (a) firms perceive policies related to the social security
system, taxes, government spending, and international trade to be highly uncertain, and (b) uncertainty
about tax policy, labor market regulations, the social security system, and environmental regulations had
the largest effects on firms’ decisions about investment and hiring (Morikawa, 2013, 2016).

2
movements? What do changes in policy-related uncertainty portend for Japan’s economic
performance? To address these questions, we construct several newspaper-based policy
uncertainty measures for Japan following the methods in Baker et al. (2016). We interpret these
measures as proxies for policy-related uncertainty, as perceived by households and businesses.
We relate our measures to other uncertainty measures, examine their behavior over time, and
consider their dynamic relationship to aggregate economic performance.
Our measures aim to capture uncertainty about who will make economically relevant policy
decisions, what policy actions will be undertaken and when, and the economic effects of policy
actions (or inaction). To construct our overall measure of economic policy uncertainty (EPU),
we count articles in four major Japanese newspapers (Yomiuri, Asahi, Mainichi and Nikkei)
that contain at least one term in each of three categories: (E) ‘economic’ or ‘economy’; (P)
‘tax,’ ‘government spending’, ‘regulation,’ ‘central bank’ or certain other policy-related terms;
and (U) ‘uncertain’ or ‘uncertainty’. We scale the EPU counts by the number of articles in the
same newspaper and month, standardize each paper’s series of scaled counts to the same
variability over time, adjust for seasonality, and then average across papers by month to obtain
our EPU index. We also construct uncertainty indices for monetary policy, fiscal policy, trade
policy and exchange rate policy. To do so, we specify additional criteria for those articles that
contain our triple of terms about the economy, policy and uncertainty. Our measures are
monthly from 1987, with updates at www.PolicyUncertainty.com/japan_monthly.html.
Our overall EPU index co-varies positively with implied volatilities for Japanese equities,
exchange rates and interest rates and with Ito’s (2016) survey-based measure of political
uncertainty in Japan. The index peaks during the Asian financial crisis and in reaction to the
failure of Lehman Brothers, the U.S. debt-ceiling fight in 2011, the Brexit referendum and the
recent deferral of a hike in Japan’s consumption tax rate. The index also shows a clear tendency
to rise around contested national elections and major leadership transitions. It displays
moderately countercyclical fluctuations,6 perhaps because policymakers are more inclined to
experiment with new policies in bad times (Pastor and Veronesi, 2013).
Uncertainty indices for fiscal, monetary, trade and exchange rate policy correlate positively
with one another, while also displaying distinct and sensible dynamics. For example, implied
interest rate volatility correlates more highly with our monetary policy uncertainty index than
our fiscal policy uncertainty index. In contrast, Ito’s (2016) measure of political uncertainty,
which weighs the approval ratings of ruling and opposition parties, correlates more highly with
fiscal policy uncertainty. Among all articles that satisfy our E, P and U criteria, 56 percent
reference fiscal policy matters, 24 percent reference monetary policy, 9 percent reference trade
policy, and only 2 percent reference exchange rate policy. This finding strongly suggests that
fiscal matters are the most important source of policy uncertainty in Japan, at least in the
perception of journalists and their editors and, presumably, typical newspaper readers as well.
Since May 2018, trade policy matters have become the second most cited source of economic
policy uncertainty in Japanese newspapers.
Our EPU measures have predictive power for Japan’s economic performance conditional on
standard measures of economic activity and uncertainty. In particular, vector autoregressive
6

In line with evidence for other national and global EPU indices in Baker et al. (2016) and Davis (2016)
and a broader tendency for uncertainty measures to fluctuate counter cyclically (Bloom, 2014).

3
(VAR) specifications imply that upward EPU innovations foreshadow deteriorations in Japan’s
macroeconomic performance, as reflected in impulse response functions for investment,
employment and output. We also find a significant effect of global policy uncertainty on
Japan’s economic performance. These results do not prove a causal effect of policy uncertainty
on economic performance, but they show that our EPU index contains useful information not
captured by other forward-looking indicators. Upward innovations to our EPU index for Japan
also foreshadow a larger decline in macroeconomic aggregates than innovations to the Japan
EPU index in Baker et al. (2016), suggesting that our efforts to improve the index deliver a
better measure and stronger results in downstream econometric work.

II. RELATED LITERATURE
Compared to the Japan EPU index in Baker et al. (2016), we expand coverage from two to four
major newspapers, and we deploy a better term set that reflects our auditing efforts and our
expertise in Japanese economic policy. We also develop new indices for several policy
categories, which we see as helpful in diagnosing the proximate sources of policy uncertainty
and as potentially quite useful in analyzing policy uncertainty effects on industry- and firmlevel outcomes. Alexopoulos and Cohen (2015), Hlatshwayo and Saxegaard (2016), Azzimonti
(2018), Caldara and Iacoviello (2018), Hassan et al. (2019), Husted, Rogers and Sun (2019)
and Baker et al. (2019), among others, also use text analysis to quantify policy uncertainty and
related concepts. Other approaches to quantification of policy uncertainty include Ito’s (2016)
survey-based measure for Japan, the country-level volatility of government consumption
shocks in Fátas and Mihov (2013), the use of multivariate GARCH models in Grier and Perry
(2000) and Vitek (2002), and time-varying measures of fiscal policy uncertainty derived from
an estimated New Keynesian model in Fernandez-Villaverde et al. (2015).
Theoretical work identifies several channels through which uncertainty can affect economic
outcomes. First, heightened uncertainty provides an incentive to delay or forego investments
that are costly to reverse (Bernanke, 1983, McDonald and Siegel, 1986, Dixit and Pindyck,
1994, and Bloom, 2009). High uncertainty also encourages households to postpone costly-toreverse purchases of durable goods (Eberly, 1994). Second, when there are search frictions in
labor markets or fixed costs of hiring and firing, uncertainty can retard hiring or induce firms to
adjust on flexible margins such as part-time employment (Schaal, 2015, and Valetta and
Bengali, 2013). Leduc and Liu (2016) show how nominal rigidities can interact with labor
market search frictions to amplify the negative effects of uncertainty in DSGE models. Related
to these channels, uncertainty can slow the growth of productivity and output by discouraging
the reallocation of capital and labor inputs (Bloom et al., 2012). Third, uncertainty can depress
investment by raising risk premiums, as stressed by several models with financial frictions
(Christiano et al., 2014, Gilchrist et al., 2014, and Arellano et al., 2016). Fourth, greater
uncertainty raises precautionary savings by households, which can reduce output in the
presence of nominal rigidities, especially under constraints on monetary policy (Johansen,
2014, and Fernandez-Villaverde et al., 2015). Fiscal policy uncertainty also reduces output by
intensifying monopoly pricing distortions in the model of Fernandez-Villaverde et al. Fifth,
uncertainty can stimulate investment by increasing the value of growth options (Paddock et al.,

4
1988, and Bar-Ilan and Strange, 1996). See Bloom (2014) for a fuller discussion of how
uncertainty affects economic activity.7
Several recent empirical studies investigate the effects of policy uncertainty on economic
outcomes in Japan and elsewhere. Ito (2016) finds negative effects of policy uncertainty on
employment and expenditures for consumer durables. Morikawa (2013, 2016) provides surveybased evidence of how Japanese companies perceive the relevance of policy uncertainty.
Morikawa (2010), Ono and Sullivan (2013) and Matsuura (2013) find a greater use of nonregular workers at firms with greater sales growth volatility. Beyond the Japanese context,
Durnev (2012), Julio and Yook (2012, 2016), Giavazzi and McMahon (2012) and Kelly, Pastor
and Veronesi (2016) investigate the effects of election-related uncertainty on corporate
investment, international capital flows, precautionary savings, and stock price volatility.
Handley and Limao (2015) develop evidence that lower uncertainty about trade policy
stimulates investment in export capacity. Gulen and Ion (2016) find negative effects of policy
uncertainty on corporate investment using the Baker et al. (2016) EPU measure for the United
States. Similarly, Baker et al. (2016) find larger negative effects of their newspaper-based EPU
measures on investment rates and employment growth, and larger positive effects on stock
price volatility, for firms with greater exposure to policy risks. Using the EPU index for India
in Baker et al., Anand and Tulin (2014) find negative effects of policy uncertainty on firm-level
investment flows, with stronger effects on new projects than ongoing ones.
Another branch of the literature investigates the dynamic relationship of policy uncertainty, or
economic uncertainty more broadly, to macroeconomic performance. Examples include Stock
and Watson (2012), Colombo (2013), International Monetary Fund (2013), Jurado et al. (2015),
Ludvigson et al. (2015), Baker et al. (2016), Leduc and Liu (2016) and Ghirelli et al. (2019.
These studies find that higher (policy) uncertainty foreshadows a deterioration in
macroeconomic performance, broadly in line with our evidence for Japan. Romer (1990)
marshals evidence that the 1929 stock market crash triggered a sharp rise in income uncertainty
that led households to forego purchases of consumer durables, accentuating the collapse of
aggregate demand at the onset of the U.S. Great Depression. Evidence in Constantinescu et al.
(2017) suggests that high policy uncertainty depresses international trade in goods and services.
Survey data in Altig et al. (2019) and econometric evidence in Caldara et al. (2019) indicate
that higher trade policy uncertainty since 2017 has dampened U.S. business investment.
In summary, a variety of studies find evidence that high (policy) uncertainty undermines
economic performance by leading firms to forego investments and new hires, by slowing
productivity-enhancing factor reallocation, and by depressing expenditures on consumer
durables. This evidence points to a positive payoff in the form of stronger macroeconomic
performance if policymakers can deliver greater predictability in the policy environment. For
Japan, possibilities in this regard include a concrete and credible medium-term fiscal plan, clear
follow through on structural reform plans, and a stronger communications framework at the
Bank of Japan. A smaller literature finds that greater uncertainty causes households and firms
to become less responsive on the margin to cuts in interest rates and taxes, in line with
predictions of real options theory. See Bertola et al. (2005), Bloom et al. (2007), Bloom (2009),
7

A smaller literature examines the welfare consequences of policy uncertainty. Kitao (2018), for
example, quantifies the welfare effects of uncertainty about the timing and nature of social security
reform in Japan using a calibrated general equilibrium life-cycle model.

5
Aastveit et al. (2013) and Vavra (2014). These studies suggest that a stronger policy framework
also increases the potency of countercyclical stabilization policies.

III. MEASURING ECONOMIC POLICY UNCERTAINTY IN JAPAN
Following Baker et al. (2016), we use frequency counts of newspaper articles to construct our
EPU indices. As a first step, we obtain raw monthly EPU article counts for Yomiuri, Asahi,
Mainichi and Nikkei from January 1987 onwards. Our primary data sources are Kikuzo II,
MAISAKU, Nikkei Telecom, and Yomidas Rekishikan. To meet our EPU criteria, an article
must contain at least one term in the “economy” (E), “policy” (P) and “uncertainty” (U)
categories listed in Table 1. The E and U categories are straightforward. For the P category, we
sought to cover major policymaking institutions (e.g., “lower” and “upper house,” “Diet,”
“central bank” and “Prime Minister”) and major policy areas (e.g., “taxes,” “government
deficit,” “government debt,” “(de)regulation” and “structural reform”). We conducted a series
of small-scale audits and other investigations to help select and refine the E, P and U term sets,
as detailed in the appendix.
In a second step, we scale the raw EPU counts by the total number of articles in the same
newspaper and month to obtain a relative EPU frequency count. Scaling in this manner adjusts
for differences in article volume across newspapers and volume changes over time. Third, we
standardize each newspaper’s relative EPU counts to unit standard deviation from 1987 to
2015. Fourth, we seasonally adjust the resulting newspaper-level series in view of the
pronounced and distinctive seasonal pattern at certain papers. The appendix provides more
information about seasonality and explains how we perform the adjustment. Fifth, after the
scaling, standardization and seasonal adjustment steps, we average the resulting series across
the four papers by month to obtain our overall monthly Japan EPU index. The third, fourth and
fifth steps ensure that each newspaper receives (roughly) equal weight in determining the
behavior of the overall index, despite differences across papers in the share and variability of
articles about business and economics. Finally, we multiplicatively normalize the four-paper
average EPU series to a mean of 100 from 1987 to 2015.
To accurately mirror variation in policy-related uncertainty over time, our EPU index must
satisfy two requirements. First, the E, P and U criteria must yield counts that move in line with
actual newspaper coverage of economic policy uncertainty. We relied on several small-scale
audits to evaluate and refine our choice of terms, with an eye towards minimizing classification
errors. See the appendix for details. Second, newspaper coverage must reflect movements in
policy uncertainty. To address this requirement, we compared our newspaper-based EPU
measures to other measures of economic and political uncertainty for Japan. We also conducted
a descriptive assessment of the key economic and policy developments associated with
heightened levels of policy uncertainty according to our index. We report the results of these
investigations below.

6
Table 1. Term Sets for the Overall Japan EPU Index

The Japan Economic Policy Uncertainty Index
Figure 1 plots our overall EPU index for Japan from January 1987 to June 2019. The index
peaks during the Asian and global financial crises and the U.S. debt-ceiling crisis in the
summer of 2011. It also spikes in reaction to the “Twisted Diet” election outcome in 1998, 8 the
introduction of Quantitative Easing in 2001, the Takenaka Plan for tackling longstanding
problems with non-performing loans at Japanese banks, the Greek Crisis and Twisted Diet
election outcome in 2010, the introduction of negative interest rates in early 2016, and the
consumption tax hike delay a few months later.

8

“Twisted Diet” means that no single party controls both the upper and lower houses of Japan’s
parliament and no party has a super majority (two-thirds) in the Lower House.

7
The Japan EPU index is somewhat countercyclical, but it also displays many strong movements
not tied directly to cyclical conditions. In April 2001, Junichiro Koizumi became Prime
Minister, a position he held until 2006, making him one of the longest serving Prime Ministers
in Japan’s history. The EPU index drifts down during this period of political continuity and
reaches some of its lowest values in our sample period. The index also exhibits a period of
gradual decline starting in 2013, coinciding with the launch of Abenomics and an improvement
in confidence indicators.9 Since 2015, policy uncertainty has risen again amid concerns about
developments in China, a new negative interest rate policy, the Brexit referendum,
consumption tax hike delays, and intensifying trade policy tensions in 2018 and 2019.
Figure A.1 compares our overall Japan EPU index to the one in Baker et al. (2016). The two
indices are highly correlated, as expected given the overlap in newspapers and term sets, but
there are differences. For example, the Baker et al. index displays higher volatility during the
late 1980s and early 1990s. Our Japan EPU index shows a more persistent rise during the Asian
financial crisis. It also shows larger spikes in reaction to the Lehman Brothers failure and the
U.S. debt downgrade. As mentioned earlier, our index reflects articles in four rather than two
Japanese newspapers – including the Nikkei, which specializes in business and economics.
Doubling the number of papers lets us average out more of the idiosyncratic, newspaper-level
noise. Unlike Baker et al. (2016), we adjust for seasonality. Finally, our expanded and refined
set of terms also leads to differences between the two indices.
Uncertainty Indices for Policy Categories
We also constructed uncertainty indices for fiscal, monetary, trade and exchange rate policy. To
obtain raw frequency counts for these indices, we flagged articles that meet the E, P and U
criteria, as before, and that contain one or more of the terms listed in Table 2. We then
followed the same sequence of steps as for the overall EPU index. Here as well, we relied on
informal audits and other investigations to inform our choice of term sets in Table 2. See the
appendix for details.
Figures 2 and 3 display our Japan uncertainty indices for fiscal and monetary policy.10 Their
movements broadly conform to our priors – rising around major economic and political events
and policy announcements. The two indices correlate at 0.67. Both indices exhibit large jumps
during the Asian financial crisis and in reaction to the Brexit referendum.11

9

The Bank of Japan Tankan index (business confidence indicator) bottomed out in December 2012 and
peaked in March 2014. The Opinion Survey conducted by the Bank of Japan also showed a similar
improvement during this period.
10
The Bank of Japan is responsible for financial stability, and it played a prominent role during the
banking crisis of the 1990s. It also has a role in exchange rate policy through foreign exchange
intervention on behalf of the Ministry of Finance. These multiple, overlapping responsibilities make it
hard to construct a pure measure of monetary policy uncertainty for Japan.
11
Table A.1 reports pairwise correlations between policy category uncertainty indices. Husted, Rogers
and Sun (2016) construct another newspaper-based index of monetary policy uncertainty for Japan.
Figure A.2 compares their index to ours; the correlation is 0.22 and 0.32 at monthly and quarterly
frequencies, respectively. While both indices are news-based, we use Japanese newspapers, while they

(continued…)

8
Figure 1. Japan Economic Policy Uncertainty Index (1987M1-2019M6)

A, October 1987: Black Monday. Takeshita becomes LDP President. Budget conflicts between
President Reagan and Congress. FX intervention. B, March 1995: Bailout plans for two Shinkin banks
in Tokyo face objection at metropolitan congress. Yen surges despite FX intervention. Debate about
policy rate cut. C, November-December 1997: Asian financial crisis, successive failures of banks and
securities firms, and policy debates about fiscal consolidation. D, July-August 1998: LDP’s defeat in
Upper House election yields Twisted Diet. Russian crisis. E, June 2000: Lower House election. F,
February-March 2001: Political confusion over PM Mori’s resignation. Introduction of Quantitative
Easing. G, July 2001: Upper House election. H, October 2002: Takenaka plan to tackle nonperforming bank loans. Introduction of Financial Revitalization Program. Stimulus debate. Expansion
of QE. I, March 2008: DPJ rejects BOJ Governor nominations. J, September-October 2008: Lehman
Brothers failure. BOJ cuts policy rate. Stimulus debate. K, February 2009: Concerns over delay in
passing U.S. stimulus package. “Buy American” provisions in Congress. L, May-June 2010: Greek
crisis. PM Hatoyama resigns. PM Kan takes office installs and new cabinet. M, August 2011: U.S.
debt-ceiling crisis. Concerns over European debt crisis. Further monetary easing. Japan FX
intervention. PM Kan resigns. N, June 2012: Greek elections. Concerns over Spain’s financial
system. Tri-party agreement on taxes and social security. O, January-February 2016: Introduction of
negative interest rates. P, May-June 2016: Consumption tax hike delay. Brexit referendum. Q,
November 2016-January 2017: U.S. Presidential election and withdrawal from the TPP. R, August
2018: U.S. threatens more tariff hikes on Chinese imports. S, December 2018: U.S.-China trade
tensions intensify before Presidents Trump and Xi Jinping agree to a 90-day truce. T, June 2019:
U.S.-China trade tensions worsen.
Note: Shaded areas indicate recession periods.

They also display distinct movements. For example, the fiscal policy uncertainty index
responds (more) to contested elections, Twisted Diet episodes, political confusion surrounding
use three major international and American papers (Financial Times, New York Times, Wall Street
Journal). Another difference is that our index relies on a broader term set that includes "quantitative
easing," "negative interest rate" and "inflation target.”

9
Prime Minister Mori’s resignation, debates over stimulus packages in 2002 and 2008, and the
ruling DPJ party’s talks with the opposition LDP and Komeito parties in 2012 about social
security and tax bills. The fiscal policy uncertainty index also picks up major external
developments such as the U.S. government debt downgrade and the European debt crisis. In
contrast, the monetary policy uncertainty index spikes around the introduction of Quantitative
Easing (QE) in 2001, uncertainty over its expansion in 2001-02 and 2010-11, and the
introduction of negative rates in 2016. It also peaks in March 2008 amid concerns surrounding
a vacancy in the Bank of Japan’s Governor position, which arose because the ruling parties
could not secure Diet approval for the proposed appointee.
Table 2. Term Sets for Policy Category Uncertainty Indices

10

11

Figures 4 and 5 compare our fiscal and monetary policy uncertainty indices with their U.S.
counterparts in Baker et al. (2016).12 They correlate at about 0.3 for both fiscal and monetary
policy. Fiscal policy uncertainty was higher and more volatile in the U.S. during the late 1980s
and early 1990s. The reverse pattern held during the Asian financial crisis. In recent years, U.S.
fiscal policy uncertainty fell to low levels after 2013 and stayed low until Donald Trump’s
election. Fiscal policy uncertainty in Japan rose sharply in mid 2016 as the government
contemplated and then announced a delay in plans for a hike in consumption taxes. Monetary
policy uncertainty indices rose for both countries around the stock market crash of 1987, the
Asian financial crisis, and in the early 2000s. They fell for both during the mid-to-late 2000s,
then rose again during the global financial crisis. U.S. monetary policy uncertainty is modest in
recent years, but the June 2016 Brexit referendum leaves a clear mark, as do rising trade policy
tensions and slowdown fears since late 2018. The Japan monetary policy uncertainty index
surged upwards in 2016, first in reaction to the introduction of negative interest rates in late
January and again several months later when the yen appreciated sharply, triggering a debate
12

The U.S. fiscal policy uncertainty index in Baker et al. reflects terms for taxes, government spending,
government debt and deficits, fiscal stimulus, debt ceilings, and the like.

12
over foreign exchange intervention. See Cecchetti and Schoenholtz (2016), Nagle and Yates
(2017) and Shirai (2018) for fuller discussions of recent policy shifts by the Bank of Japan.
Figure 2. Fiscal Policy Uncertainty Index (1987M1-2019M6)

A, October 1987: Black Monday. Takeshita becomes next LDP President. Budget conflicts
between President Reagan and Congress. B, November-December 1997: Asian financial crisis
and policy debates about fiscal consolidation. C, July 1998: LDP’s defeat in Upper House election
yields Twisted Diet. D, May 1999: Political conflict over pension reform and long-term care
insurance system. E, June 2000: Lower House election. F, February-March 2001: Political
confusion over PM Mori’s resignation. G, July 2001: Upper House Election. H, October 2002:
Debate over economic stimulus package. I, August 2005: Political conflict over the postal
privatization bills. PM Koizumi dissolves the lower house. J, January 2008: Stimulus package
conflicts between President Bush and Congress. Political conflict regarding extension of provisional
gasoline and other taxes in the Diet. K, October 2008: Lehman Brothers failure and stimulus
debate. L, August 2009: Lower House election, DPJ takes office. M, May-June 2010: Greek crisis.
PM Hatoyama resigns. PM Kan takes office and installs new cabinet. N, August 2011: U.S. debtceiling crisis and concerns about European debt crisis. PM Kan resignation and DPJ leadership
election. O, June 2012: Sovereign debt problems in Greece and Spain. Tri-party agreement on tax
and social security reform. P, May-June 2016: Consumption tax hike delay. Brexit referendum.
Note: Shaded areas indicate recession periods.

13
Figure 3. Monetary Policy Uncertainty Index (1987M1-2019M6)

A, October 1987: Black Monday. FX intervention. B, July 1992: BOJ cuts policy rate. C, March
1995: Japan banking crisis. Coordinated FX intervention. Debate about policy rate cut. D,
November 1997: Asian financial crisis. Special BOJ loans to stabilize financial system after
bankruptc of Hokkaido Takushoku Bank and Yamaichi Securities. E, March 1998: BOJ Governor
Matsushita resigns. F, October 1998: Debate on further monetary easing amid mounting concern
over the financial system. G, March 2001: Introduction of QE. H, February 2002: Debate on
expansion of QE. I, September-October 2002: Debate on expansion of QE. J, May 2003: Concerns
about SARS epidemic. Expansion of QE. BOJ’s provision of special loans to Resona Bank. K,
August 2007: Disarray in global financial markets with outbreak of U.S. subprime loan crisis.
Injection of liquidity by central banks. Debate about policy rate cut in Japan and the U.S. L, March
2008: Concerns over vacancy of BOJ Governor. M, October 2008: Lehman Brothers failure. BOJ
cuts policy rate. N, August 2010: Debate on QE enhancement amid sharp yen appreciation. O,
August 2011: QE enhancement and the BOJ’s FX intervention. P, June 2013: Concerns over FED
QE tapering. Q, November 2014: Debate on the BOJ’s QE program under PM Abe’s decision to
delay the consumption tax hike planned for October 2015. R, January-February 2016: Introduction
of negative interest rates. S, May-July 2016: Debate on FX intervention amid surge in yen. Brexit
referendum. Further monetary easing.
Note: Shaded areas indicate recession periods.

Figure 6 shows our Japan trade policy uncertainty index. It spikes in late 1993 amidst GATT
deliberations and a relaxation of Japan’s import barriers on rice and beef. Trade tensions with
the U.S. leave clear marks on the index in 1987, 1988 and 1994. The index has fluctuated at
much higher levels since 2010, often in reaction to developments related to the Trans Pacific
Partnership (TPP) agreement: whether Japan would join the TPP talks, whether an agreement
could be reached with all parties, and whether the agreement would be ratified. More recently,
the June 2016 Brexit referendum and the 2016 U.S. elections brought a wave of uncertainty
about Japan’s future trade arrangements. President Trump’s decision to withdraw the U.S. from
the TPP in January 2017 pushed the index to nearly 700 – seven times its average level from

14
1987 to 2015. Intensifying trade tensions between the U.S. and its major trading partners –
especially China, but including Japan – have again pushed our trade policy uncertainty index to
extraordinarily high levels in 2018 and 2019.
Figure 7 shows our uncertainty index for exchange rate policy. Unlike our other indices, it
displays no persistent swings. Instead, there are short-lived spikes near Ministry of Finance
interventions in foreign exchange (FX) markets and during periods of high concern about large
swings in the value of the yen. Notable episodes include the Asian financial crisis – when the
yen depreciated sharply against the U.S. dollar, prompting both countries to intervene – a
strong yen appreciation in 2010 that triggered intervention, and yen appreciation in August
2011 amidst uncertainty surrounding the U.S. debt-ceiling crisis. The index captures heightened
uncertainty about exchange rate policy even when no FX intervention materialized. A good
example is uncertainty related to sharp yen appreciation in 2016 and speculation about the
possibilities for FX intervention.
Relationship to Other Economic Uncertainty Measures
As seen in Table 3, our overall Japan EPU index correlates at 0.49 with option-implied
volatilities for the Japanese stock market and 0.55 with the yen-dollar exchange rate. Figure 8
reveals notable similarities between the EPU index and implied equity market volatility,
especially during the global financial crisis. Each measure exhibits distinct dynamics as well.
For example, implied equity market volatility falls rapidly after the global financial crisis, but
the Japan EPU index does not. The EPU index reacts much more strongly to the Asian financial
crisis and is also more highly elevated since 2015. The Japan EPU index also rises from
December 2018 with the worsening of the U.S.-China trade relations, while the implied equity
volatility measure does not.
Our Japan EPU indices also correlate positively with policy and economic uncertainty
measures for other advanced economies and regions. This pattern points to common forces
behind uncertainty movements in Japan and other major economies. The cross-country
correlations are higher since the global financial crisis. For example, the correlation of our
Japan EPU index and EPU indices for the U.S. and Europe are about 0.3 in the pre-2007 period
and 0.6 for the 2007-2016 period.
Figure 9 compares our fiscal policy uncertainty index with Ito’s measure of political
uncertainty for Japan. The two measures reflect some of the same underlying developments.
For example, both rose during 1997-98, peaking with the LDP’s defeat in July 1998 and the
resulting Twisted Diet. They rose again in the 2007-12 period characterized by frequent
turnover of the Prime Minister. The two indices correlate at 0.33 in monthly data and about
0.47 at the annual frequency. In contrast, Ito’s political uncertainty index correlates at only 0.08
with our uncertainty index for monetary policy. These results reassure us that our monetary and
fiscal policy indices capture some distinct sources of uncertainty.

15
Figure 4. Fiscal Policy Uncertainty Indices for Japan and the United States
(1987M1-2019M6)

Figure 5. Monetary Policy Uncertainty Indices for Japan and the United States
(1987M1-2019M6)

16
Figure 6. Trade Policy Uncertainty Index (1987M1-2019M6)

A, March 1987: U.S. sanctions on Japanese semi-conductors. B, January 1988: Deliberation on
Omnibus trade bill in U.S. Congress. C, December 1993: GATT Uruguay Round of multilateral
trade talks. Partial opening of rice market and tariff cut on imported beef. D, March 1994: Revival of
Super 301 provision in U.S. Omnibus Trade Act of 1988. E, September 1997: Asian financial crisis.
F, February 2009: Deliberation on “Buy American” provision in U.S. Congress. G, November 2010:
PM Kan announces, after political tensions, that Japan will begin consultations on participating in
TPP talks. H, January 2011: PM Kan statement on TPP. Cabinet reshuffling. I, November 2011:
Ongoing political conflicts over Japan’s participation in TPP talks. J, November-December 2012:
Uncertainty over Japan’s participation in TPP talks. PM Noda decides not to announce participation
and dissolves the Lower House. LDP returns to power, intensifying uncertainty around Japan’s
participation in TPP. K, March 2013: PM Abe announces Japan’s participation in TPP talks. L, July
2013: Upper House election. M, October 2013: TPP summit ends without broad agreement. N,
April 2014: Uncertainty about whether Japan and the U.S. would reach agreement on TPP, and
concerns whether U.S. Congress would grant President Obama trade promotion authority. O,
October 2015: Uncertainty over TPP ratification in Japan, Canada and the U.S. despite broad
agreement at ministerial meeting. P, January 2016: Uncertainty over TPP ratification by U.S. amid
upcoming presidential elections. Resignation of Minister Amari in charge of TPP negotiations due
to corruption allegations. Q, June 2016: Brexit referendum. R, November 2016: U.S. Presidential
election. S, January 2017: U.S. withdraws from TPP. T, March-April 2018: U.S. hikes tariffs on
steel and aluminum imports, and China retaliates. U, July 2018: U.S. raises tariff rates to 25
percent on USD 50 billion of Chinese imports, and China retaliates. V, December 2018: After rising
tensions, Presidents Trump and Xi Jinping agree to a 90-day truce on further tariff hikes. W, June
2019: U.S.-China trade tensions worsen.
Note: Shaded areas indicate recession periods.

17
Figure 7. Exchange Rate Policy Uncertainty Index (1987M1-2019M6)

A, October 1987: Black Monday. Sharp yen appreciation against U.S. dollar and FX intervention. B,
December 1987: FX intervention with the U.S. and Europe to stem yen appreciation. C, September
1992: European currency crisis with temporary suspension of ERM, and continued yen
appreciation against the U.S. dollar amid uncertainty around U.S. presidential election. D, April
1993: Rapid yen appreciation, intervention by Japan and the U.S. E, August 1993: Continued yen
appreciation, FX intervention, uncertainty about coordinated intervention with the U.S. F, June
1994: Excessive yen appreciation, Japan intervenes in the FX market, joint intervention together
with the U.S. and Europe. G, March 1995: Japan, U.S. and Europe again intervene in effort to stem
yen appreciation. H, August 1995: Japan, U.S. and Europe conduct joint dollar-buying intervention
to support U.S. dollar. I, June 1998: Concerns about rapid yen depreciation and mounting concerns
over the financial system, severe downturn in Japan and Asian financial crisis. Japan and U.S.
intervene to support yen. J, September 1999: Rapid yen appreciation against U.S. dollar prompts
intervention. K, September 2000: Large Euro depreciation triggers debate and uncertainty about
coordinated intervention, L, September 2001: 9/11 attacks. M, June 2002: Yen appreciation and
intervention. N, January 2003-March 2004: Large, sustained FX intervention through 2003. O,
August-September 2010: Debate over yen appreciation and coordinated intervention. P, March
2011: Great East Japan earthquake triggers sharp yen appreciation and coordinated intervention
with U.S. and Europe. Q, August 2011: Sharp yen appreciation, FX intervention, and U.S. debtceiling crisis. R, June 2012: European sovereign debt crisis and yen appreciation. S, May-June
2016: Rapid yen appreciation. Uncertainty over Brexit and FX intervention.
Note: Shaded areas indicate recession periods.

18
Table 3. Correlation of Japan EPU Indices with Other Uncertainty Measures

Note: Equity market volatility is the Nikkei Stock Average Volatility Index over one month calculated
from Nikkei 225 futures and options. Exchange rate volatility is the option implied volatility over the
next month for the USD-Japanese yen exchange rate. Interest rate volatility is the option-implied
volatility over the next three months based on Japanese government bonds with 1-year tenor. The
political uncertainty measure from Ito (2016) reflects the relative approval ratings of ruling and
opposition parties. The Global EPU index from Davis (2016) is the GDP-weighted average of
newspaper-based EPU indices for 21 countries. The EPU indices for the U.S., Japan and Europe are
from Baker et al. (2016).

Proximate Sources of Economic Policy Uncertainty in Japan
Figure 10 provides information about the proximate sources of policy uncertainty, and how
those sources vary through time. On average, 56 percent of EPU articles contain one or more of
the fiscal policy terms in Table 2, 24 percent contain monetary policy terms, 9 percent contain
trade policy terms, and only 2 percent refer to exchange rate policy terms.13 These results
strongly point to fiscal matters as the leading source of policy uncertainty in Japan. The fiscal
policy share of EPU articles fell to relatively low levels in the early1990s and again in the
2006-07 period, before rising to high levels during and after the global financial crisis. The
monetary policy share fluctuates around an upward drift and reaches its highest levels of about
33 percent in mid 2016. EPU articles that discuss currency and trade policy matters are
relatively infrequent, but the trade policy account for a growing share of EPU articles since
2011. Since May 2018, trade policy matters have eclipsed monetary policy as a share of policy
uncertainty discussions in Japanese newspapers. In June 2019, trade policy matters receive
attention in 28 percent of Japan EPU articles, its highest share in the history of our sample.

13

An article that meets our E, P and U criteria may contain terms from zero, one or more of the
category-specific term sets listed in Table 2. Thus, the shares displayed in Figure 10 can sum to more or
less than 100 percent of all EPU articles in the month.

19
Figure 8. Japan EPU Index and Option-Implied Volatility of Nikkei Equity Index
(1987M1-2019M6)

Figure 9. Our Fiscal Policy Uncertainty Index Compared to Ito’s Political
Uncertainty Index (1987M1-2019M6)

20
Figure 10. Proximate Sources of Economic Policy Uncertainty
(Percent of Overall EPU Index, 12-month centered MA)

IV. THE INTERPLAY BETWEEN POLICY UNCERTAINTY AND ECONOMIC PERFORMANCE
Political decision-making is often messy and fraught with uncertainty about outcomes and
consequences. Recent examples include the U.S. debt-ceiling crisis in 2011, Brexit and its
irresolution, and the sharp escalation of U.S.-China trade policy tensions since 2018. These
examples illustrate the role of governments and political processes as sources of uncertainty.14
That uncertainty weighs negatively on economic performance. At least in a proximate sense,
causality run from policy uncertainty (or political processes) to aggregate economic
performance in these examples.
In contrast, the global financial crisis (GFC) of 2007-09 arose from the workings of the
economy. It confronted policymakers with extraordinary and complex challenges, especially in
the immediate wake of the financial panic in September 2008. There was great uncertainty
about how policymakers should and would respond, and what would be the economic
consequences. In short, the crisis drove a rise in policy uncertainty. In turn, high policy
uncertainty contributed to the severity of the crisis and the weakness of the ensuing recovery.
There is also evidence to support the proposition that major financial crises lead to higher
levels of policy uncertainty for many years. Funke, Schularick and Trebesch (2016) draw on
data for many countries over 140 years to document a pattern of rising political polarization in
the years following systemic financial crises, contributing to higher levels of policy uncertainty.
Mian, Sufi and Trebbi (2014) also find evidence that financial crises breed political
polarization, which sometimes results in political gridlock and policy uncertainty.
14

Davis (2016) highlights several other recent examples, drawn from countries around the world.

21
The potential for negative shocks to raise policy uncertainty depends on the underlying
environment, which is partly shaped by past policy decisions.15 Consider again the GFC. It was
precipitated by a collapse in U.S. housing prices and mortgage-backed security values (Mian
and Sufi, 2015). The shock was large, and many banks were highly exposed to it. The shock led
to a systemic financial crisis, because banks were poorly capitalized and heavily dependent on
flight-prone forms of debt to fund their investments. If policymakers had required banks to rely
more heavily on run-proof funding, the crisis would have been less severe – or perhaps avoided
altogether. In this and other respects, the pre-crisis regulatory regime set the stage for a major
financial crisis (Admati and Hellwig, 2013 and Duffie, 2019) and the ensuing uncertainty.
As another example, there is less need for discretionary fiscal stimulus in response to negative
shocks when robust automatic fiscal stabilizers are in place. In this way, automatic fiscal
stabilizers lessen the political conflicts, decision delays, implementation lags and policy
uncertainty that comes with efforts to deploy discretionary fiscal tools.
Policy uncertainty can also co-move with other hard-to-measure factors that influence, or are
influenced by, economic performance. These factors include confidence about future economic
performance, political polarization, and governance quality in the public sector.
The complex interplay between policy uncertainty and economic performance is evident in the
behavior of our indices for Japan. Contested elections, major political transitions and Twisted
Diet outcomes are often associated with higher levels of overall policy uncertainty and fiscal
policy uncertainty (Figures 1 and 2). Prime Minister Abe’s election at the end of 2012 brought
greater political stability, a clearer policy direction, and several years of declining or low policy
uncertainty (Figure 1). In turn, low and declining policy uncertainty contributed to a positive
outlook and a favorable economic performance. A similar circle of reinforcing positive effects
held during the long tenure of Prime Minister Koizumi (Figure 1). Political stability during
these periods moderated policy uncertainty, which helped support an optimistic outlook and
good economic performance.
Leadership transitions and policy shifts at the Bank of Japan sometimes brought spikes in
monetary policy uncertainty (Figure 3). While leadership changes are inevitable and major
developments may require policy shifts, their impact on economic uncertainty depends on
previously established institutions and policy frameworks. Clear communications about the
objectives of monetary policy, backed by strong analytical and empirical underpinnings, are
likely to bring more continuity in the conduct of monetary policy, less anxiety and uncertainty
about its future direction, and greater confidence about economic performance.
To appreciate how the past conduct of monetary policy shapes the current policy environment –
and the scope for negative shocks to trigger a rise in policy uncertainty – consider recent
proposals to raise the target rate of inflation (e.g., Blanchard et al., 2010 and Ball, 2014). The
logic behind these proposals is straightforward: Raising the underlying rate of inflation reduces
the likelihood that monetary policy becomes constrained by the zero lower bound on nominal
interest rates during future downturns. In this way, a higher target rate enlarges the scope for
using traditional monetary policy tools to stabilize economic activity and lessens the need for
15

The effects of policy uncertainty also depend on the environment. For example, Basu and Bundick
(2017) and Nakata (2017) examine uncertainty shocks in New Keynesian models. Both papers conclude
that higher uncertainty has a larger negative effect on output when the monetary authority’s policy rate
is closer to the zero bound. Caggiano et al. (2017) find empirical support for this prediction.

22
quantitative easing, forward guidance, direct credit market interventions and discretionary
fiscal stimulus. Because less is known about the impact of unconventional policy tools, their
use involves greater uncertainty about effects. Heavy reliance on unconventional tools may also
erode political support for the central bank, undermining sound monetary policy in the future.
Several episodes in recent decades illustrate the potential for negative economic shocks to
create high levels of economic uncertainty. Examples include the Asian financial crisis, the
downturn of 2001-02 and the global financial crisis of 2008-09, all of which led to spikes in our
measures of fiscal and monetary policy uncertainty (Figures 2 and 3). Experiences during the
Asian financial crisis also illustrate how past policy decisions shape the current response of
policy uncertainty to negative shocks. The build-up of financial excesses in the 1990s, funded
through large dollar-denominated debts in the banking system and the private sector, made
some Asian economies highly vulnerable to exchange rate adjustments. This vulnerability
accentuated policy uncertainty during the Asian financial crisis. In contrast, stronger policy
frameworks, better financial supervision and larger reserve buffers helped many Asian
economies weather the global financial crisis under much better terms. See Davis (2017) for a
broader discussion of how sound regulatory design can temper policy uncertainty.
V. POLICY UNCERTAINTY AND AGGREGATE ECONOMIC PERFORMANCE
We now consider VAR models that yield output, employment, consumption, and investment
responses to Cholesky-identified EPU innovations. Our baseline monthly VAR model contains
our Japan EPU index, log employment, log industrial production index, and a linear trend. We
also consider alternative monthly specifications that replace industrial production with various
indicators of consumption and investment activity (one at a time). Our baseline quarterly VAR
model contains our Japan EPU index, the log Nikkei stock price index, log GDP, log gross
private capital formation, and a linear trend. Our sample runs from 1987M1 to 2019M5 for
monthly data and from 1987Q1 to 2019Q1 for quarterly data. We selected lag lengths based on
the Akaike and Schwarz information criteria, which yielded four lags in our monthly model and
two in our quarterly model. We rely on standard Cholesky decompositions to identify shocks,
with Japan EPU ordered first unless noted otherwise.16
We report impulse responses to a 50-point upward innovation in the Japan EPU index, which is
the same size as the actual EPU change from its average 2014 value to its average 2016 value.
Recall from Figure 1 that the Japan EPU index reached a local trough in June 2014 and rose
rapidly in 2016 following the introduction of negative interest rates by the Bank of Japan,
Prime Minister Abe’s decision to postpone a consumption tax hike, the June 2016 Brexit
referendum, and the U.S. Presidential election in November 2016.
According to our baseline monthly results in Figure 11, an upward EPU innovation
foreshadows statistically significant declines in output, employment and industrial production.
The dashed lines show 95% confidence intervals. A 50-point upward EPU innovation yields a
peak estimated fall in industrial production of 2 percent after about one year. The employment
response is smaller, more delayed, and highly persistent.

16

Granger causality tests fail to reject the hypothesis that economic indicators such as real GDP and
industrial production have zero predictive power for our EPU index. The reverse is not true.

23
Figure 12 shows impulse response functions for various indicators of investment and
consumption activity when we insert them into our baseline monthly VAR specification in
place of log industrial production. As expected, the EPU innovations have larger effects on
investment activity than on consumption activity. Depending on the measure, investment
activity falls by 1.0 to 3.9 percent in response to a 50-point Japan EPU innovation. We find
larger estimated industrial production responses in sectors that produce investment goods as
compared to those that produce consumption goods.
Figure 13 displays estimated industrial production responses to EPU innovations for alternative
specifications. The basic pattern whereby upward EPU innovations foreshadow future activity
declines is robust to alternative Cholesky orderings, the inclusion of a range of control
variables such as the equity price index, option-implied equity price volatility, the VIX, the
Global EPU index from Davis (2016), and alternative lag and time trend specifications. These
modifications to the VAR model and identification assumptions lead to roughly similar
responses of industrial production to a Japan EPU innovation. When we include the VIX index
in the VAR system and order it first, we find a smaller 1.3 percent peak fall in industrial
production that remain statistically significant at the 95 percent confidence level.
Figure 14 shows the impulse responses under our baseline specification for different sample
periods. Discarding data after 2006 yields somewhat smaller responses. If we instead restrict
attention to the post-1995 period when the BOJ was up against the zero lower bound, we obtain
slightly larger responses, consistent with our priors and theoretical predictions.
The quarterly VAR results in Figure 15 also show that upward EPU innovations foreshadow
weaker aggregate performance. Specifically, a 50-point upward EPU innovation foreshadows a
peak fall in real GDP of about 0.75 percent after one year. The investment response peaks at an
estimated 3 percent. Figure 16 shows the historical contribution of EPU shocks to fluctuations
in real GDP and investment. EPU shocks account for sizable movements in both variables—
with peak investment and GDP swings of about 12 and 3 percent, respectively. EPU-induced
movements are most pronounced in 1997-1999, 2001-2002, 2008-2012 and 2016-2018.
Broadly speaking, we see three ways to interpret our VAR-based evidence. Under the first
interpretation, an upward EPU innovation corresponds to an unforeseen policy uncertainty
shock that causes the worsening of macroeconomic performance through real options effects,
cost-of-capital effects or other mechanisms. Under the second interpretation, an upward EPU
innovation captures bad news about the economic outlook that is not (fully) captured by the
other variables in the VAR system, and that bad news triggers a rise in EPU that has harmful
effects on the economy. Under this interpretation, EPU amplifies and propagates a causal
impulse that originates elsewhere. Third, EPU has no role as either an impulse or a propagation
mechanism; instead, it simply acts as a useful summary statistic for information missing from
the other variables in our system. This third interpretation is hard to fully reconcile with the
evidence of policy uncertainty effects in studies that use micro data, which allows for more
compelling identification strategies. See, for example, Handley and Limao (2015), Baker et al.
(2016), Gulen and Ion (2016), and Hassan et al. (2019).

24
Figure 11. Impulse Responses to an increase in Japan EPU Index, Monthly Data

Response of Log Industrial Production Index
1.0
0.5
0.0
0

12

24

36

48

60

48

60

percent

-0.5
-1.0
-1.5
-2.0
-2.5
-3.0
-3.5

months

Response of Log Employment
0.1

0.0
0

12

24

36

percent

-0.1

-0.2

-0.3

-0.4

-0.5

-0.6

months

25
Figure 12. Impulse Responses to an increase in Japan EPU Index, Monthly Data
Response of Indicators Related to Investment Activity

1
0.5
0
-0.5

0

12

24

36

48

60

percent

-1
-1.5
Index of building and civil engineering work
by private sector
Index of private non-housing construction
investment
Building starts

-2
-2.5
-3

Machinery orders by private sector

-3.5

Index of private housing construction
investment
Housing starts

-4
-4.5

months

Industrial production, investment goods

Response of Indicators Related to Consumption

0.5

0
0

12

24

36

48

60

percent

-0.5
Industrial Production-Consumption Goods
-1

-1.5

Industrial Production-Durable Consumption Goods
Industrial Production-Non-Durable Consumption
Goods
Tertiary activity index
Synthetic consumption index
Real consumption activity

-2

Real services
months

26
Figure 13. Impulse Responses to an increase in Japan EPU Index, Alternative
specifications, Monthly Data
Response of Log Industrial Production Index

0.5

0
0

12

24

36

48

60

percent

-0.5

-1

With Nikkei Index
With implied equity volatility

-1.5

With Global EPU and ordered first
A large VAR model

-2

Baseline model estimated without time trend
Baseline

-2.5

months
Response of Log Industrial Production Index

0.5

0
0

12

24

36

48

60

percent

-0.5

-1

With VIX Index and ordered first
Baseline model estimated using 12 Lags

-1.5

With industrial production ordered first
With index of building work by public sector

-2

With relative price of oil
Baseline

-2.5

months

27
Figure 14. Impulse Responses to an increase in Japan EPU Index, Alternative
samples, Monthly Data
Response of Log Industrial Production Index-Pre-2007 Sample

2

1

0
percent

0

12

24

36

48

60

-1

-2

-3

-4

months
Response of Log Industrial Production Index-Post-1995 Sample
2

1

0
percent

0

12

24

36

-1

-2

-3

-4

months

48

60

28
Figure 15. Impulse Responses to an increase in Japan EPU Index,
Quarterly Data
Response of Log GDP

0.6
0.4
0.2
0
0

percent

-0.2

1

2

3

4

5

6

7

8

9

10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20

-0.4
-0.6
-0.8
-1
-1.2
-1.4
-1.6

quarters
Response of Log Fixed Capital Formation

1

0
0

1

2

3

4

5

6

7

8

9

10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20

percent

-1

-2

-3

-4

-5

-6

quarters

29

Figure 16. Historical Contribution of Japan EPU Shocks to GDP and Investment
Fluctuations, Quarterly Data
6

6

4

4

2

2

0

0

-2

-2

-4

-4

-6

GDP

Investment

-6
-8

-10

-10
1987
1988
1989
1990
1991
1992
1993
1994
1995
1996
1997
1998
1999
2000
2001
2002
2003
2004
2005
2006
2007
2008
2009
2010
2011
2012
2013
2014
2015
2016
2017
2018

-8

VI. CONCLUDING REMARKS
We construct several new measures of economic policy uncertainty for Japan. Our measures
reflect frequency counts of articles in major Japanese newspapers that contain specific terms
related to the economy, policy matters and uncertainty.
Our overall EPU index co-varies positively with implied volatilities for Japanese equities,
exchange rates and interest rates, and with a survey-based measure of political uncertainty. Our
Japan EPU index rises around contested national elections and major leadership transitions. It
peaks during the Asian financial crisis and in reaction to the Lehman Brothers failure, U.S.
debt-ceiling fight in 2011, Brexit referendum, and Japan’s recent consumption tax-hike
deferral. Terms related to fiscal policy appear in about 56 percent of all articles that meet our
EPU criteria. Terms related to monetary policy appear in about 24 percent, while terms related
to trade and exchange rate policy appear less often. These results point to fiscal policy concerns
as the most important proximate source of policy uncertainty in Japan. From mid-2018, trade
policy matters became the second-most mentioned source, reaching 28 percent of all EPU
articles in our Japanese newspapers as of June 2019.
In VAR investigations, upward EPU innovations foreshadow declines in aggregate
employment, output, consumption and investment. Investment responds much more than

30
consumption expenditures, and output responds more in sectors that produce capital goods.
These results survive when we include option-implied equity price volatility in the VAR
system. When we include a Global EPU measure, both Japan EPU and Global EPU shocks
yield material, statistically significant output and investment responses. This result suggests the
effects of policy uncertainty shocks spill across national borders, in line with other evidence in
Colombo (2013), International Monetary Fund (2013), Klössner and Sekkel (2014), Julio and
Yook (2016), and Costantinescu (2017).
While it is hard to establish causal effects, we see our results as favoring the view that high
policy uncertainty undermines macroeconomic performance. It may do so by acting as an
impulse behind fluctuations, as a mechanism for amplifying and propagating causal impulses
that originate elsewhere, or both. We also stress that past policy decisions and institutions shape
the policy uncertainty response to contemporaneous economic shocks. In particular, welldesigned policy institutions and rules can limit the scope for negative shocks to trigger large
jumps in policy uncertainty.
Our evidence and discussion suggest that credible policy plans and strong policy frameworks
can favorably influence macroeconomic performance by, in part, reducing policy uncertainty.
In the Japanese context, credible plans to follow through on trade reforms would promote
trade-creating investments. Credible medium-term budget plans would foster confidence about
Japan’s fiscal trajectory. Further efforts to improve the BOJ’s communications framework
would lessen uncertainty about the direction of monetary policy.

31
REFERENCES
Aastveit, K. A., G. J. Natvik and S. Sola, 2013. “Economic Uncertainty and the Influence of
Monetary Policy,” Journal of International Money and Finance, 76 (September), 50-67.
Admati, A. and M. Hellwig, 2013. The Bankers’ New Clothing: What’s Wrong with Banking,
and What to Do about It. Princeton: Princeton University Press.
Alexopoulos, M. and J. Cohen, 2015. “The Power of Print: Uncertainty Shocks, Markets, and
the Economy,” International Review of Economics and Finance, 40, 8-28.
Altig, D., N. Bloom, S.J. Davis, B. Meyer, and N. Parker, 2019. “Tariff Worries and U.S.
Business Investment, Take Two.” Technical report, Federal Reserve Bank of Atlanta.
Anand, R. and V. Tulin, 2014. “Disentangling India’s Investment Slowdown,” IMF Working
Paper 14/47.
Arellano, C., Y. Bai, and P. Kehoe, 2016. “Financial Frictions and Fluctuations in Volatility,”
NBER Working Paper No. 22990. Forthcoming in the Journal of Political Economy.
Azzimonti, M., 2018. “Partisan Conflict and Private Investment,” Journal of Monetary
Economics, 93 (January), 114-131.
Baker, S. R., N. Bloom, and S. J. Davis, 2012. “Has Economic Policy Uncertainty Hampered
the Recovery,” in Lee Ohanian, John B. Taylor and Ian Wright, editors, Government
Policies and the Delayed Economic Recovery, Hoover Institution Press.
Baker, S. R., N. Bloom, and S. J. Davis, 2016. “Measuring Economic Policy Uncertainty,”
Quarterly Journal of Economics, 131, no. 4 (November), 1593-1636.
Baker, S. R., N. Bloom, S. J. Davis, and K. Kost, 2019. “Policy News and Stock Market
Volatility,” NBER Working Paper No. 25720.
Basu, S. and B. Bundick, 2017. “Uncertainty Shocks in a Model of Effective Demand,”
Econometrica, 85, no. 3 (May), 937-958.
Ball, L., 2014. “The Case for a Long-Run Inflation Target of Four Percent,” IMF Working
Paper 14/92.
Bar-Ilan, A. and W. Strange, 1996. “Investment lags,” American Economic Review, 86, no. 3,
610-622.
Bernanke, B. S. 1983. “Irreversibility, Uncertainty, and Cyclical Investment.” Quarterly
Journal of Economics, 98(1): 85 –106.
Bertola, G., L. Guiso and L. Pistaferri, 2005. “Uncertainty and Consumer Durables
Adjustment,” Review of Economic Studies,72, no. 4, 973-1007.
Blachard, O., G. Dell’Arriccia and P. Mauro, 2010. “Rethinking Macroeconomic Policy,” IMF
Staff Position Note SPN/10/03, 2010.
Bloom, N., 2009. “The Impact of Uncertainty Shocks,” Econometrica, 77 no. 3 (May), 623685.
Bloom, N., 2014. “Fluctuations in Uncertainty,” Journal of Economic Perspectives, Volume
28, No: 2, Spring 2014, p. 153-176.
Bloom, N., S. Bond, and J. van Reenen, 2007. “Uncertainty and Investment Dynamics,” Review
of Economic Studies, 74, 391-415.
Bloom, N., M. Floetotto, N. Jaimovich, I. Saporta-Eksten, and S. J. Terry. 2018. “Really
Uncertain Business Cycles,” Econometrica, 86, no. 3 (May), 1031-1065.
Caggiano, G., E. Castelnuovo, and G. Pellegrino, 2017. “Estimating the Real Effects of
Uncertainty at the Zero Lower Bound,” European Economic Review, 100 (November),
257-272.
Caldara, D. and M. Iacoviello, 2018. “Measuring Geopolitical Risk,” Board of Governors of
the Federal Reserve System, working paper.

32
Caldara, D., M. Iacoviello, P. Molligo, A Prestipino and A. Raffo, 2019. “The Economic
Effects of Trade Policy Uncertainty,” working paper, Board of Governors of the Federal
Reserve System.
Cecchetti, S. and K. Schoenholtz, 2016. “The Bank of Japan at the Policy Frontier,” VoxEU, 7
December.
Colombo, V., 2013. “Economic policy uncertainty in the U.S.: Does it matter for the Euro
area?” Economics Letters, 121(1): 39-42.
Christiano, L. J., R. Motto, and M. Rostagno, 2014. “Risk Shocks.” American Economic
Review 104(1): 27–65.
Constantinescu, C., Aaditya M., and M. Ruta, 2017. Trade Developments in 2016: Policy
Uncertainty Weighs on World Trade. World Bank Global Trade Watch.
Davis, S.J., 2016. “An Index of Global Economic Policy Uncertainty.” Macroeconomic
Review, October. Also available as NBER Working Paper No. 22740.
Davis, S.J., 2017. “Regulatory Complexity and Policy Uncertainty: Headwinds of Our Own
Making,” Becker Friedman Institute for Research in Economics, Working Paper.
Dixit, A.K. and R.S. Pindyck, 1994. Investment Under Uncertainty. Princeton: Princeton
University Press.
Duffie, Darrell, 2019. “Prone to Fail: The Pre-Crisis Financial System,” Journal of Economic
Perspectives, 33, no. 1 (Winter), 81-106.
Durnev, A. 2012. “The Real Effects of Political Uncertainty: Elections and Investment
Sensitivity to Stock Prices,” working paper.
Eberly, J., 1994. “Adjustment of Consumers’ Durables Stocks: Evidence from Automobile
Purchases,” Journal of Political Economy, 102, no. 3, 403-436.
Fátas, A. and I. Mihov, 2013. “Policy Volatility, Institutions, and Economic Growth,” Review
of Economics and Statistics, May 2013, Vol. 95, No. 2, p. 362-376.
Fernandez-Villaverde, J., P. Guerron-Quintana, K. Kuester, and J. Rubio-Ramirez, 2015.
“Fiscal volatility shocks and economic activity,” American Economic Review, 105, No.
11 (November).
Funke, M, M. Schularick, and C. Trebesch, 2016. “Going to Extremes: Politics after Financial
Crises, 1870-2014,” European Economic Review, 88 (September), 227-260.
Ghirelli, C., J.J. Perez, and A. Urtasun, 2019. “A New Economic Policy Uncertainty Index for
Spain,” Bank of Spain,WorkingPaper No., 1906.
Giavazzi, F. and M. McMahon, 2012. “Policy Uncertainty and Household Savings” Review of
Economics and Statistics 94(2), 517-531.
Gilchrist, S., J. Sim, and E. Zakrajs"ek, 2014. “Uncertainty, Financial Frictions, and Investment
Dynamics,” Working paper, Finance and Economics Discussion Series, Divisions of
Research & Statistics and Monetary Affairs Federal Reserve Board, Washington, D.C.
2014-69.
Grier, K. and M. Perry, 2000. “The Effects of Real and Nominal Uncertainty on Inflation and
Output Growth: Some GARCH-M Evidence,” Journal of Applied Econometrics, 17, 4558.
Gulen, H. and M. Ion, 2016. “Policy uncertainty and corporate investment,” Review of
Financial Studies, 29, no. 3 (March), 523-56.

33
Handley, K. and N. Limao, 2015. “Trade and Investment under Policy Uncertainty: Theory and
Firm Evidence,” American Economic Journal: Policy, 7, no. 4, 189-222.
Hassan, Tarek, Stephan Hollander, Laurence van Lent and Ahmed Tahoun, 2019. “Aggregate
and Idiosyncratic Political Risk: Measurement and Effects,” working paper, September.
Hlatshwayo, S. and M. Saxegaard 2016. “The Consequences of Policy Uncertainty:
Disconnects and Dilutions in the South African Real Effective Exchange Rate-Export
Relationship,” IMF Working Paper No: 16/113.
Husted, L., J. Rogers, and B. Sun, 2016, “Measuring Cross Country Monetary Policy
Uncertainty," IFDP Notes, Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System,
November 23.
Husted, L., J. Rogers, and B. Sun, 2019, “Monetary Policy Uncertainty,” Journal of Monetary
Economics, forthcoming.
International Monetary Fund, 2012. “World Economic Outlook: Coping with High Debt and
Sluggish Growth,” IMF Press, October 2012.
International Monetary Fund, 2013. “World Economic Outlook: Hopes, Realities, Risks,” IMF
Press, April 2013.
Ito, A., 2016. “Government Policy Uncertainty and Economic Activities,” RIETI Discussion
Paper Series, 16-J-016.
Johannsen, B., 2014. “When are the Effects of Fiscal Policy Uncertainty Large?,” Finance and
Economics Discussion Series 2014-40, Federal Reserve Board, Washington DC.
Julio, B. and Y. Yook, 2012. “Political Uncertainty and Corporate Investment Cycles,” Journal
of Finance, 67, no. 1 (February), p. 45-83.
Julio, B. and Y. Yook, 2016. “Policy Uncertainty, Irreversibility, and Cross-Border Flows of
Capital,” Journal of International Economics, 103, 13-26.
Jurado, K. S. C. Ludvigson and S. Ng, 2015, “Measuring Uncertainty,” American Economic
Review, 105, No. 3 (March), p. 1177-1216.
Kelly, B., L. Pastor and P. Veronesi, 2016. “The Price of Political Uncertainty: Theory and
Evidence from the Option Market,” Journal of Finance, 71, no. 5 (October), 2417-2480.
Kitao, S., 2018. “Policy Uncertainty and the Cost of Delaying Reform: A case of aging Japan,”
Review of Economic Dynamics, 27 (January), 81-100.
Klössner, S. and R. Sekkel, 2014. “International Spillovers of Policy Uncertainty,” Economics
Letters, 124, no. 3, 508-512.
Leduc, S. and Z. Liu, 2016. “Uncertainty Shocks Are Aggregate Demand Shocks,” Journal of
Monetary Economics, 82 (September), 20-35.
Ludvigson, S. C., S. Ma and S. Ng, 2015. “Uncertainty and Business Cycles: Exogenous
Impulse or Endogenous Response?,” NBER Working Paper No. 21803, December
2015.
Matsuura, T., 2013. “Why Did Manufacturing Firms Increase the Number of Non-regular
Workers in the 2000s? Does International Trade Matter?” RIETI Discussion Paper, 13E-036.

34
McDonald, R. and D. Siegel, 1986. “The Value of Waiting to Invest,” Quarterly Journal of
Economics 101(4): 707–728.
Mian, A. and A. Sufi, 2015. How They (and You) Caused the Great Recession, and How We
Can Prevent It from Happening Again. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
Mian, A., A. Sufi and F. Trebbi, 2014. “Resolving Debt Overhand: Political Constraints in the
Aftermath of Financial Crises,” American Economic Journal: Macroeconomics, 6, no.
2, 1-28.
Morikawa, M., 2010. “Volatility, Nonstandard Employment, and Productivity: An Emprical
Analysis Using Firm-Level Data,” RIETI Discussion Paper, 10-E-025.
Morikawa, M., 2013. “What Type of Policy Uncertainty Matters for Business?” RIETI
Discussion Paper Series 13-E-076.
Morikawa, M., 2016. "How Uncertain Are Economic Policies? Evidence from a survey on
Japanese firms." RIETI Policy Discussion Paper Series 16-P-008.
Nakata, T., 2017. “Uncertainty at the Zero Lower Bound,” American Economic Journal:
Macroeconomics, 9, no. 3 (July), 186-221.
Nangle, T. and A. Yates, 2017. “Quantifying the Effect of the Bank of Japan’s Equity
Purchases,” VoxEU, 12 October.
Ono, Y. and D. Sullivan, 2013. “Manufacturing Plants' Use of Temporary Workers: An
Analysis Using Census Microdata,” Industrial Relations, Vol. 52, No. 2, pp. 419-443.
Paddock, J.L., D.R. Siegel and J.L. Smith, 1988. “Option Valuation of Claims in Real Assets:
The Case of Offshore Petroleum Leases,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 103, no. 3
(August), 479-508.
Pastor, L. and P. Veronesi, 2013. “Political Uncertainty and Risk Premia,” Journal of Financial
Economics, December 2013, 110, 3, p. 520-545.
Romer, C., 1990. “The Great Crash and the Onset of the Great Depression,” Quarterly Journal
of Economics, August 1990, Vol. 105, No. 3, p. 597-624.
Schaal, E., 2017. “Uncertainty and Unemployment,” Econometrica, 85, no. 6 (November),
1675-1721.
Shirai, Sayuri, 2018. Mission Incomplete: Reflating Japan’s Economy, second edition. Asian
Development Bank Institute.
Stock, J. H. and M. W. Watson, 2012. “Disentangling the Channels of the 2007-09 Recession,”
Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, Spring 2012, p. 81-156.
Vavra, Joseph, 2014. “Inflation Dynamics and Time-Varying Volatility: New Evidence and an
Ss Interpretation,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 129, no. 1, 215-258.
Valletta, R. and L. Bengali, 2013. “What’s Behind the Increase in Part-time Work?” San
Francisco Federal Reserve Bank Economic Letter, August 26.
Vitek, F., 2002. “An Empirical Analysis of Dynamic Interrelationships Among Inflation,
Inflation Uncertainty, Relative Price Dispersion, and Output Growth,” Bank of Canada
Working Paper, 39.

35

APPENDIX
Additional Information about Our Japan Economic Policy Uncertainty Indices
We used Nikkei Telecom17 as the main interface to access the archives of the four Japaneselanguage newspapers. We used Kikuzo II to obtain data on the total number of newspaper
articles and the number of articles meeting the E, P, and U criteria each month for the Asahi
Shimbun. We also used MAISAKU for the Mainichi Shimbun and Yomidas Rekishikan for the
Yomiuri Shimbun. As the first step in constructing the EPU index, we conducted an extensive
analysis of the archives for the four newspapers to ensure that potential changes in their
coverage do not distort our results, and to ensure consistent uncertainty measures over time. For
example, the inclusion of a new section on arts and fashion can lead to a spurious index
movement by raising the total number of articles used to scale the number of EPU articles. For
each newspaper, we identified the reasons behind large movements in total article counts and
potential changes in seasonality. Based on our investigations, we decided to exclude local
editions of national papers, because they had little content related to policy and economic
matters at the national level and their inclusion raised the volatility of total article counts.
Archive availability and coverage dictated the start of our sample and our choice of papers.
We identified our term sets in several steps using small-scale audits. We first used the Englishlanguage versions of the newspapers to search for articles that contain the keywords for
economic uncertainty in Baker et al. (2016).18 We then randomly selected articles every year
and went to the Japanese version of the same article to make a list of potential keywords in
Japanese. We identified two keywords, “経済” and “景気,” as Japanese terms for “economy”
or “economic” and six keywords, “不透明,” “不安,” “微妙,” “不確実,” “不安定,” and “不確
定” for “uncertainty” or “uncertain.” We then conducted a small-scale audit to narrow down
our set of “uncertainty” or “uncertain” terms, drawing randomly selected articles in Japanese
that contain both “経済” and one of the six keywords. For each keyword, we determined
whether the context was indeed related to “uncertainty” or “uncertain.” This exercise led us to
narrow down our keywords for “uncertainty” or “uncertain” to four words in Japanese, “不透
明,” “不安,” “不確実” and “不確定.”
As a check on our “economic” and “uncertainty” keywords, we constructed an “economic
uncertainty” index and confirmed that it had the expected correlation with the economic cycle
and other measures of economic uncertainty (such as stock market volatility indices). As
expected, the economic uncertainty and economic policy uncertainty indices are highly
correlated. About 65 percent of articles that contain the “economy” and “uncertainty” keywords
also contain one of our “policy” terms. There is, however, meaningful variation over time in
this ratio—with a minimum of 0.45 and a maximum of 0.8.
We identified the “policy” keywords using a similar approach. We started with a broad group
of potential keywords informed by our priors, reading through numerous articles and similar
newspaper-based indices constructed for the U.S. and Japan in Baker et al. (2016). Using this
initial set of terms, we conducted another round of audits using the English versions of Nikkei
17
18

Nikkei Telecom covers leading Japanese newspapers, magazines and journals.
These are “uncertain” or “uncertainty” and “economic” or “economy.”

36
and Yomiuri to identify the Japanese words that best capture the corresponding Englishlanguage words. In choosing the keywords for different policy categories (Table 2), we started
with a comprehensive set of potential words informed by our priors and our reading of
newspaper articles and the government’s Annual Report on the Japanese Economy and Public
Finance (Economic and Fiscal Policy Whitepaper) since 1987. At the second stage, we
eliminated terms likely to trigger many false positives such as “interest rate” for monetary
policy or “public works” for fiscal policy.19
Description of Seasonal Adjustment
We use the X-11 seasonal adjustment module in X-13ARIMA-SEATS to obtain seasonally
adjusted series for each newspaper’s relative frequency count of EPU articles. Some
newspapers exhibit different seasonality patterns for the monthly count of all articles over the
post-January 1987 sample period. For these papers, we divide the period into sub-samples and
then adjust for seasonality in each sub-sample period. Seasonal adjustment is re-calculated
every month when the latest data becomes available.
The sub-sample periods for conducting seasonal adjustment for each newspaper are as follows:
-- Asahi: January 1987 onwards.
-- Mainichi: January 1987 to April 2006 and from May 2006 onwards.
-- Nikkei: January 1987 to September 2000 and from October 2000 onwards.
-- Yomiuri: January 1987 to July 1996 and from August 1996 onwards.
Detailed Description of Episodes with Heightened Economic Policy Uncertainty
In this section, we provide more details about episodes when our EPU index either reached
high levels or increased significantly in any given month, both defined as movements
exceeding 1.64 standard deviations from their average levels. We review these episodes in
chronological order below.
October 1987: Several events were associated with heightened policy uncertainty during this
period. On October 20th, Prime Minister Nakasone officially announced his nomination of
Noboru Takeshita as the next LDP President. PM Nakasone held the position for two
consecutive terms and could not run a third time. Other candidates were Shintaro Abe and
Kiichi Miyazawa. Second, on the 19th of October, stock markets around the world collapsed—
an event also known as Black Monday. Asian markets including the Nikkei tumbled with the
opening of markets on Tuesday. Heightened volatility in the Tokyo Stock Exchange led the
BOJ to inject liquidity. Yen appreciated sharply and was followed by FX intervention by the
Ministry of Finance.
March 1995: With the bursting of the asset price boom in early 1990s, Japan’s financial
institutions had faced considerable pressure resulting in the failure of several credit institutions.
19

Baker et al. (2016) conduct an extensive human audit of articles to assess their U.S. EPU index and to
optimize their choice of policy terms. Our interface for accessing the digital archives of Japanese papers
does not allow automated searches. Since we cannot conduct automated searches, we cannot optimize
over tens of thousands of possible term set combinations in the same manner as Baker et al. (2016).

37
In March, the failures of two credit cooperatives, Toyo Kyowa and Anzen, were handled by
establishing a new bank, Tokyo Kyodo Bank. The new bank received an infusion of capital
contributions from the BOJ. This rescue plan was heavily criticized and received opposition in
the metropolitan congress given that the management of the bank had been involved in
fraudulent activity. The use of government funds to rescue an institution that had failed because
of fraud was questioned, even though management was purged and prosecuted. At the same
time the Japanese yen surged reflecting interest rate differentials, despite coordinated FX
intervention with Germany and the U.S.
November-December 1997: This period coincides with the intensification of the Asian
financial crisis. In November 1997, Korea was struck with a currency and banking crisis. On
the domestic front, PM Hashimoto's fiscal consolidation plan faced headwinds due to
bankruptcy of financial institutions. Policy debate intensified whether to interrupt the fiscal
consolidation process due to the economic downturn. PM Hashimoto decided to provide a tax
break of JPY 2 trillion (financed by JGB issuance) but to continue with fiscal consolidation.
July-August 1998: Mr. Obuchi replaced Mr. Hashimoto as PM on July 30 as their ruling party
lost many seats in the Upper House elections on July 12. The resulting Twisted Diet heightened
political uncertainty when restoring the health of the financial sector was still a priority. PM
Obuchi submitted Finance Revitalization Bill—a legislation that overhauled financial
regulation in Japan, establishing the Financial Reconstruction Commission to manage and
dispose nationalized assets—but faced objections at the Twisted Diet (the Bill passed in
October 1998). Ruling and opposition parties clashed on the public bailout of Long-Term
Credit Bank (LTCB was nationalized in October 1998). On the international front, the Russian
financial crisis erupted in August, raising uncertainty and weakening the global economic
outlook.
June 2000: The ruling parties took a big loss at the Lower House elections (reduction in their
share from 66 to 56 percent; the LDP lost the majority) due to PM Mori’s unpopularity, but
they maintained the government.
February-March 2001: The BOJ cut the policy rate by 10 bps from 0.25 to 0.15 percent on
February 28. Discussion intensified on quantitative easing as the policy rate neared the zero
lower bound. On March 19, the BOJ introduced QE (switching the monetary policy target
from the overnight call rate to the current account balance). PM Mori's approval rate had been
on the decline and went below 10 percent partly because he mishandled a maritime accident in
February. He was reported in March to resign soon (Mr. Koizumi replaced him after winning
the LDP presidency in April).
July 2001: PM Koizumi won the Upper House election. PM Koizumi's administrative reform
triggered debate between fiscal consolidation and fiscal expansion. PM Koizumi was
transforming traditional decision-making process. One key pillar was his heavy usage of the
Council on Economic and Fiscal Policy (CEFP) to discuss big-picture policy issues. The CEFP
produced its first annual report, Honebuto-no-Hoshin (big-boned principles), on June 26.
October 2002: Conflict intensified between Koizumi administration and LDP regarding NPL
issues. PM Koizumi dismissed the Minister of State for Financial Services, Hakuo Yanagisawa,
and appointed Heizo Takenaka. Minister Takenaka submitted the Financial Revitalization Plan

38
(known as the Takenaka Plan), which forced banks to apply a stricter approach for asset
evaluation, to raise banks reserves and to compress deferred tax assets. If banks were evaluated
as insolvent, public money was injected (e.g. Resona Bank and Ashikaga Bank). This plan was
regarded as a hard landing scenario for the financial sector, and was opposed by LDP and the
banking industry. The BOJ eased monetary policy by increasing the current account balances
from JPY 10-15 trillion to 15-20 trillion, and by raising long-term JGB purchases from JPY 1
trillion to 1.2 trillion per month.
March 2008: The Twisted Diet produced two large uncertainties. First, the government was
trying to pass a tax law on gasoline before the end of the fiscal year (March), but eventually
failed. Second, the nomination of the BOJ Governor was rejected a few times. Deputy
Governor Masaaki Shirakawa became Acting Governor on March 20 and then Governor on
April 9.
September-October 2008: The global financial crisis “started” with the bankruptcy of the
Lehman Brothers in September 2008. The Japanese economy shrank by 12.4 and 15.4 percent
(saar) in the fourth quarter of 2008 and the first quarter of 2009, respectively. The Nikkei
plummeted to below 7,000 from around 12,000 before the bankruptcy; the yen appreciated
from around 120 in 2007 to 93 per dollar by end-2009. The global economy collectively and
individually responded: the first G20 Summit took place in November 2008 in Washington,
D.C. The Japanese government formulated two supplementary budgets in October 2008 and
January 2009. The BOJ reduced the policy rate twice in October and December 2008.
February 2009: The government published its estimate of growth of the fourth quarter of 2008
at negative 12.4 percent, the largest decline in about 35 years. The yen depreciated by around
10 percent. The U.S. formulated a stimulus package, the American Recovery and Reinvestment
Act of 2009, after long discussions in the Congress. The rise in uncertainty seems to reflect
concerns over the delay in the passage of the stimulus package in the U.S.
May-June 2010: The European sovereign debt crisis, which had been brewed since the fiscal
deficit of Greece was found much larger than previously published, accelerated in May 2010,
when the first plan to rescue Greece was announced. The Nikkei lost more than 10 percent in
May. The yen-dollar rate briefly went below 90. Also domestically, PM Hatoyama resigned in
June less than a year after his party took power for the first time. Anticipation of a Twisted
Diet as a result of the July Upper House elections seems to have contributed to the rise in
economic policy uncertainty.
August 2011: A law to allow deficit-financing bonds, which was always passed by the end of
the previous fiscal year, finally got the Diet’s approval for fiscal year 2011 (starting in April) in
August posing risk of a Japanese “fiscal cliff.” The delay was due to a Twisted Diet caused by
the ruling parties’ loss of the majority in the Upper House in the July 2010 election. In Europe,
in addition to Greece, Ireland and Portugal had started receiving financial support from the
troika, but interest rates on their debt were on the rise leading to the intensification of the
European debt crisis. The yen had been below 80 against the dollar since mid-July. S&P
announced in July that it was putting U.S. sovereign debt rating on negative watch which was
later followed up with a downgrade in August. The U.S. debt ceiling conflict was only recently
resolved (at the end of July) but the solution to the conflict did not raise confidence in the
future course of U.S. fiscal policy and left open the possibility of the use of the debt ceiling in

39
future budgetary conflicts. Responding to appreciation which resumed after the March 2011
earthquake, the Japanese government intervened in the foreign exchange market.
June 2012: The three major parties including the ruling DPJ and the largest opposition party,
LDP, accelerated discussions on a comprehensive reform of tax and social security systems in
June. They reached an agreement on the 21st, which included a two-step consumption tax
increase in April 2014 and October 2015. Leading up to the agreement, policy uncertainty was
elevated reflecting conflicts within DPJ on tax and social security reform.
January-February 2016: The BOJ announced negative interest rates on 29 January . Leading
up to the announcement, there was much speculation about the BOJ’s next policy move amid
declining inflation, rising risks from emerging markets and yen appreciation. The decision
came as a surprise to market participants, because Governor Kuroda had ruled out negative
rates earlier. The negative rate decision lowered the yield curve and initially led to yen
depreciation. However, the exchange rate effect was short-lived and inflation expectations
continued to decline. There were concerns about the implications of negative rates on the
banking sector, which also contributed to the perception of limited policy space and
effectiveness. The policy move was highly unpopular within the general public and led to
concerns about the implications for returns earned on bank deposits.
May-June 2016: During May-June 2016 there were rising concerns globally and in Japan
about a potential exit of Great Britain from the EU. The yen appreciated substantially as a
result. The Brexit referendum outcome on June 23rd shocked markets, and the yen appreciated
further. The BOJ noted the heightened global economic uncertainty in its July meeting and
doubled its purchase of ETFs and expanded its U.S. dollar lending program to ensure smooth
funding conditions. There was also rising uncertainty about whether PM Abe would postpone
the consumption tax hike scheduled for April 2017. There were mixed reports and speculation
leading up to the decision on June 1st. On the one hand, there was significant pressure to
reinforce fiscal sustainability and credibility. With the consumption tax hike being delayed
earlier in 2015 and the 2017 tax hike legislated to take place without explicit escape clauses,
the political hurdle to postpone the tax hike was perceived as high. On the other hand,
upcoming Upper House elections and a weak economic outlook were seen as reasons for
delaying the tax hike. PM Abe had earlier said that they would go ahead with the tax hike,
unless there was a shock comparable to the 2008 global financial crisis or the 2011 Great East
Japan Earthquake. While the postponement of the tax hike was received well by the public, it
also led to significant uncertainty about the feasibility of achieving the government’s primary
budget balance goal by 2020.
November 2016-January 2017: Leading up to the elections in the U.S. in November, policy
uncertainty picked up reflecting the significant role of the U.S. as a major trading partner and
the potential implications of the election for the ratification of TPP. The election of Donald
Trump came as a surprise and generated further uncertainty about the U.S. fiscal, trade and
other policies. President Trump pulled the U.S. out of TPP on January 23rd, 2017.
January 2018: The Trump administration starts raising tariffs on Chinese products, including
with imported solar cells and certain washing machines.

40
March 2018: The U.S. authorizes tariff rates of 25 percent on steel and 10 percent on
aluminum imports.
April 2018: China retaliates against the metal tariffs on about USD 3 billion U.S. imports.
China files WTO dispute against the U.S. solar panel tariffs.
June-July 2018: The U.S. announces a 25 percent tariff on USD 50 billion imports from
China, and President trump cites “China’s theft of intellectual property and technology and its
other unfair trade practices.” China retaliates with tariff on USD 50 billion US products.
September 2018: The U.S. announces 10 percent tariffs on USD 200 billion in Chinese goods,
with a plan to hike the rate to 25 percent at the start of 2019. President Trump threatens
additional tariffs on USD 267 billion if China retaliates. China raises tariffs on USD 60 billion
in U.S. products.
December 2018: Presidents Trump and Xi Jinping agree to a 90-day truce at the G-20 Summit
in Argentina.
May 2019: After failed trade talks and rising U.S.-China tensions, the U.S. announces plans to
ban Huawei products and raises tariffs from 10 percent to 25 percent on USD 200 billion of
Chinese goods. President Trump delays a decision on auto tariff hikes.
June 2019: China raises tariff rate on US exports, covering USD 36 billion of the USD 60
billion list issued in September 2018. After failed trade talks and tensions increase on the
planned sales ban on Huawei products, the U.S. raises tariff rate tariffs from 10 percent to 25
percent on USD 200 billion of Chinese goods.

41
Table A.1. Correlation Between EPU Indices (1987M1-2019M6)

Table A.2. Data Sources and Macroeconomic Variable Definitions

42
Figure A.1. Our Japan EPU Index Compared to the One in Baker et al. (2016)
300
New Japan EPU Index

Baker et. al. (2016)

250
200

150
100
50

0
1987 1989 1991 1993 1995 1997 1999 2001 2003 2005 2007 2009 2011 2013 2015 2017

Sources: Baker et al. (2016) and authors' calculations.
Note: Shaded areas indicate recession periods.

Figure A.2. Our Japan Monetary Policy Uncertainty Index Compared
to the One in Husted, Rogers and Sun (2019)
600
500

Our Monetary Policy Uncertainty Index for
Japan
Japan Monetary Policy Uncertainty Index
Husted, Rogers and Sun (2016b)

400
300
200
100
0
1987 1989 1991 1993 1995 1997 1999 2001 2003 2005 2007 2009 2011 2013 2015

Sources: Husted, Rogers and Sun (2016b) and authors' calculations.

43
Figure A.3. EPU Innovations in Baseline VAR Specifications
Standardized Residuals from the EPU Equation, Baseline Monthly VAR Specification

6

4

2

0

-2

-4
1987 1989 1991 1993 1995 1997 1999 2001 2003 2005 2007 2009 2011 2013 2015 2017 2019
Standardized Residuals from the EPU Equation, Baseline Quarterly VAR Specification
5

4
3
2
1
0
-1
-2
-3
1987 1989 1991 1993 1995 1997 1999 2001 2003 2005 2007 2009 2011 2013 2015 2017 2019

