NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

SURVEY MEASUREMENT OF PROBABILISTIC MACROECONOMIC EXPECTATIONS:
PROGRESS AND PROMISE
Charles F. Manski
Working Paper 23418
http://www.nber.org/papers/w23418

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
May 2017

This research was supported in part by National Science Foundation grant SES-1129475. I am
grateful for comments on earlier drafts from Nicholas Bloom, Martin Eichenbaum, Pamela
Giustinelli, Lawrence Hazelrigg, Jonathan Parker, Wilbert van der Klaauw, and Joachim Winter.
The views expressed herein are those of the author and do not necessarily reflect the views of the
National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.
© 2017 by Charles F. Manski. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two
paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including ©
notice, is given to the source.

Survey Measurement of Probabilistic Macroeconomic Expectations: Progress and Promise
Charles F. Manski
NBER Working Paper No. 23418
May 2017
JEL No. D84,E03,E66
ABSTRACT
Economists commonly suppose that persons have probabilistic expectations for uncertain events,
yet empirical research measuring expectations was long rare. The inhibition against collection of
expectations data has gradually lessened, generating a substantial body of recent evidence on the
expectations of broad populations. This paper first summarizes the history leading to
development of the modern literature and overviews its main concerns. I then describe research
on three subjects that should be of direct concern to macroeconomists: expectations of equity
returns, inflation expectations, and professional macroeconomic forecasters. I also describe work
that questions the assumption that persons have well-defined probabilistic expectations and
communicate them accurately in surveys. Finally, I consider the evolution of thinking about
expectations formation in macroeconomic policy analysis. I favorably observe the increasing
willingness of theorists to study alternatives to rational expectations assumptions, but I express
concern that models of expectations formation will proliferate in the absence of empirical
research to discipline thinking. To make progress, I urge measurement and analysis of the
revisions to expectations that agents make following occurrence of unanticipated shocks.

Charles F. Manski
Department of Economics
Northwestern University
2001 Sheridan Road
Evanston, IL 60208
and NBER
cfmanski@northwestern.edu

Contents
1. Introduction
2. Development of Research Measuring Probabilistic Expectations
2.1. Economic Research on Choice under Uncertainty, without Expectations Data
2.1.1. Assumptions on Income Expectations
2.1.2. The Credibility of Rational Expectations Assumptions
2.2. Survey Measurement of Expectations
2.2.1. Attitudinal Research
2.2.2. Consumer Confidence Surveys
2.2.3. Measurement of Probabilistic Expectations in Cognitive Psychology
2.2.4. Measurement of Probabilistic Expectations in Economics
3. Concerns of the Modern Microeconomic Literature
3.1. Descriptive Analysis of the Data
3.1.1. Measuring Perceptions of Job Insecurity
3.2. Analysis of the Accuracy of Elicited Expectations
3.3. Using Choice Expectations to Predict Choice Behavior
3.4. Using Expectations and Choice Data to Estimate Econometric Decision Models
3.5. Analysis of Expectations Formation
4. Expectations of Equity Returns
4.1. Competing Perspectives on Heterogeneity of Expectations
4.2. Elicitation of Probabilistic Expectations
4.3. Expectations and Stock Holdings
5. Inflation Expectations
5.1. Measurement of Inflation Expectations in the Survey of Consumer Expectations
5.1.1. Asking about "Inflation" or about "Prices in General"
5.1.2. Probability Elicitation in the SCE
6. Expectations of Professional Macroeconomic Forecasters
6.1. Point Predictions Derived from Probabilistic Forecasts
6.2. Empirical Research on Probabilistic Expectations
6.3. Communicating Uncertainty and Disagreement in the Macroeconomic Forecasts of Central Banks
7. Probabilistic Thinking and Communication
7.1. Rounding
7.2. Ambiguity
7.3. Confounding Beliefs and Preferences
7.3.1. Evidence in Research Measuring Probabilistic Expectations
8. Looking Ahead: Studying Expectations Formation to Inform Macro Policy Analysis
8.1. The Dynamics of Macroeconomic Perspectives on Expectations Formation
8.2. The Potential Contribution of Expectations Measurement

1

1. Introduction

Economists commonly suppose that persons have probabilistic expectations for uncertain events.
There are good reasons to think that expectations may vary across persons. Persons forecasting micro
events may face different idiosyncratic circumstances. Persons forecasting macroeconomic events may
have different knowledge of the state of the economy or different beliefs about how the economy functions.
One might anticipate that economists would regularly use surveys to measure heterogeneous
probabilistic expectations. However, collection of expectations data was long rare. Economists have
tended to be skeptical of subjective statements. Students have been taught that a good economist believes
what people do, not what they say. This perspective inhibited collection of data on expectations. Lacking
data, economists have assumed that persons hold particular expectations or have sought to infer
expectations from observed choice behavior.
Since about 1990, the historical inhibition of economists against collection of expectations data has
progressively lessened, generating a substantial body of modern empirical evidence on the probabilistic
expectations of broad populations. Collection and analysis of these data has been performed mainly by
microeconomists and has consequentially been motivated primarily by a desire to inform microeconomic
research. An early review article by Manski (2004) described the emergence of this field of empirical study
and summarized a range of initial applications. More recent review articles by Hurd (2009), Armantier et
al. (2013), Delavande (2014), and Schotter and Trevino (2014) have respectively focused on work
measuring expectations of older persons, inflation, populations in developing countries, and subjects
making decisions under uncertainty in lab experiments.
The present article begins by describing the history leading to development of the modern literature
measuring the probabilistic expectations of broad populations (Section 2). I first recall the longstanding
economic practice of revealed preference analysis, which has studied choice under uncertainty using

2

assumptions about the expectations that persons hold, rather than expectations data. I particularly critique
conventional assumptions asserting that persons have rational expectations (RE). I then summarize
multiple literatures that have collected various types of expectations data. These include the use of
questions seeking verbal responses in attitudinal research and consumer confidence surveys and
measurement of probabilistic expectations in cognitive psychology and, more recently, in economics.
Section 3 overviews the main concerns of the modern economic literature collecting and analyzing
data measuring probabilistic expectations.

The research of the 1990s and early 2000s performed

considerable descriptive data analysis, aiming to evaluate how persons respond to the questions posed and
to assess the accuracy of elicited expectations. More recent work has increasingly used expectations data
to predict choice behavior and to replace expectations assumptions when estimating microeconometric
models of decision making under uncertainty. There also has been research aiming to understand processes
of expectations formation.
I then describe research on three subjects that should be of direct concern to macroeconomists:
expectations of equity returns (Section 4), inflation expectations (Section 5), and professional
macroeconomic forecasters (Section 6). On the first subject, I first review competing perspectives in
finance theory on the existence and importance of heterogeneity of expectations. I then discuss a body of
work that elicits probabilistic expectations of equity returns, describes heterogeneity in expectations, and
attempts to draw inferences about processes of expectations formation. Some of this work relates elicited
expectations to household decisions to include stocks in their portfolios.
Considering inflation expectations, I first mention efforts to measure such expectations nonprobabilistically and then focus attention on the measurement of probabilistic expectations in the recently
initiated Survey of Consumer Expectations. I contrast the probabilistic question format used in this survey
with the one seeking a point prediction in the venerable Michigan Survey of Consumers. Beyond its specific
concern with inflation expectations, this section illustrates the general importance of careful attention to

3

question wording when designing survey questions on expectations and analyzing the responses.
Section 6 turns from the expectations of broad populations to those of professional macroeconomic
forecasters. I first critique the traditional practice of asking forecasters to make point predictions of future
macroeconomic events. While the discussion focuses on macroeconomic forecasting, the cautions I express
about interpretation of point predictions apply when asking persons to forecast any uncertain event. I next
describe empirical research analyzing the probabilistic expectations data collected in the Survey of
Professional Forecasters. Finally, I discuss the practice of central banks in communicating uncertainty and
disagreement in their macroeconomic forecasts.
Sections 3 through 6 maintain the assumption that persons have well-defined probabilistic
expectations and communicate them accurately in surveys. Section 7 questions this assumption in various
ways. I first call attention to the prevalence of rounding of probabilistic expectations responses and I
summarize research aiming to characterize the extent to which different persons round. I then discuss
empirical research on ambiguity (aka Knightian uncertainty) that seeks to elicit expectations that do not
have the full structure of precise probability distributions. I also consider the possibility that persons may
confound beliefs and preferences, in contrast to the standard assumption of decision theory that beliefs and
preferences are distinct concepts.
Section 8 offers my thoughts on the evolution of thinking about expectations formation in
macroeconomic policy analysis. I strongly endorse the attention called to expectations formation by Lucas
(1976), but not the Lucas assertion that researchers should always assume agents have rational expectations.
I favorably observe the increasing willingness of macroeconomic theorists to pose and study alternatives to
the RE assumption, but I worry that models of expectations formation will proliferate endlessly in the
absence of empirical research to discipline thinking. I caution that little about expectations formation can
be learned from empirical research analyzing choice data alone. To make progress, I urge measurement
and analysis of the revisions to expectations that agents make following occurrence of unanticipated shocks.

4

I hope that this paper will be useful to readers of two types. One type are persons who are already
undertaking or contemplating initiation of empirical research on expectations. I expect that such persons
will want to read the paper more or less in order from beginning to end. A second type are persons who
have not yet thought about performing their own empirical research but who are concerned about the
assumptions on expectations formation used in macroeconomic policy analysis. Some such persons may
want to first do a light read of Section 2 through 7, next focus on Section 8, and then reread parts of Sections
2 through 7 in more depth as it suits them.

2. Development of Research Measuring Probabilistic Expectations

2.1. Economic Research on Choice under Uncertainty, without Expectations Data

Motivation for economists to measure expectations stems from the longstanding objective of the
profession to understand and predict choice under uncertainty. When economists study choice under
uncertainty, it has been standard to suppose that utility functions express preferences over outcomes,
probabilistic expectations express beliefs about uncertain events, and persons choose actions to maximize
expected utility. It has been standard to seek to infer preferences and beliefs from data on observed choices.
Empirical research of this type is called revealed-preference analysis, the name given by Samuelson (1938,
1948) in his pioneering work studying choice in deterministic settings.
When considering choice under uncertainty, the actual task of revealed-preference analysis is to
learn both preferences and beliefs, not preferences alone. Researchers often confront a severe identification
problem: an observed choice made by an agent maximizing expected utility may be consistent with many
plausible utility functions and subjective probability distributions. To achieve identification, economists

5

commonly combine choice data with strong assumptions about expectations formation and the structure of
preferences.

2.1.1. Assumptions on Income Expectations
To illustrate, consider the assumptions made about personal income expectations in studies of
precautionary savings.

Economists have regularly assumed that persons have rational expectations

regarding future income. That is, they know the actual stochastic process generating their income streams
conditional on available private information.
Economists often assume that persons use knowledge of their own past incomes to forecast their
future incomes. Perhaps so, but how do persons form expectations of future income conditional on past
income? The practice has been to specify the income process up to some parameters and use available data
on income realizations to estimate the parameters. Yet researchers differ in their specifications of the
stochastic process presumed to generate income. The literature has generated competing models, with no
clear way of distinguishing among them in the absence of data measuring expectations. See, for example,
Hall and Mishkin (1982), Skinner (1988), Zeldes (1989), Caballero (1990), and Carroll (1992).

2.1.2. The Credibility of Rational Expectations Assumptions
Whether considering income or other expectations, it has been standard practice for economists to
assume that decision makers have specified expectations and to suppose that these expectations are
Arational@ in the sense of being objectively correct conditional on specified information. Imposing such
assumptions is enticing, because it reduces the task of empirical analysis of choice data to inference on
preferences alone. Researchers may also find it self-gratifying to specify their own visions of how the
economy works and to assume that the persons who populate the economy share their vision.
Unfortunately, the RE assumptions made in economic research may have little credibility. Early

6

on, Friedman and Savage (1948) argued for the realism of RE by invoking the metaphor of an expert pool
player who is able to accurately predict the direction of travel of a billiard ball without knowledge of the
relevant physics. However, a pool player operates in a stable environment with ample opportunity for
learning-by-doing. RE is far less plausible in realistic economic settings that lack this stability and
possibility to learn. Pesaran (1987) phrased the issue well thirty years ago, writing that the RE hypothesis
(page 2) Ais based on extreme assumptions and cannot be maintained outside the tranquility of a long-period
steady state.@ More recent discussions appear in Manski (2004) and Gennaioli, Ma, and Schleifer (2016).
For my part, I have repeatedly stressed that economists and ordinary persons face similar inferential
problemsCidentification and induction from finite samplesCwhen they attempt to make sense of the world.
Whoever one is, consumer or firm or empirical economist, the inferences that one can logically draw are
determined by the available data and the assumptions that one brings to bear. Empirical economists seldom
are able to completely learn objective probability distributions of interest, and they often cannot learn much
at all. I therefore find it hopelessly optimistic to suppose that, as a rule, the expectations of ordinary persons
are even approximately rational.
To illustrate, consider schooling choice, which lacks the stable environment and opportunity for
learning-by-doing of the pool game. In Manski (1993), I observed that youth forming personal expectations
for the returns to schooling confront inferential problems similar to those that labor economists face when
they study the returns to schooling. The research literature in labor economics exhibits much debate on the
credibility of assumptions and many disagreements about findings. If experts disagree on the returns to
schooling, is it plausible that youth have rational expectations? I think not.
I stressed that decision makers and empirical economists alike must contend with the logical
unobservability of counterfactual outcomes. Much as economists attempt to infer the returns to schooling
from data on realized schooling choices and outcomes, youth may attempt to learn through observation of
the experiences of family, friends, and others who have made their own past schooling decisions. However,

7

youth cannot observe the outcomes that these people would have experienced had they made other
decisions.
I used a simple human capital model to show that how youth forecast counterfactual outcomes is
consequential. I showed specifically that interpretation of data on schooling choices can depend critically
on how youth use ability information to form expectations of the returns to schooling. A particularly
striking finding was that, if youth do not possess private information on their ability, a researcher who
assumes that they condition expectations on ability may mistakenly conclude from observed choices that
youth are unconcerned with the returns to schooling.
I would caution readers who are fond of RE assumptions against thinking that schooling choice is
an unusual case. To the contrary, it is the pool game that is atypical of the environments that economic
agents face.

2.2. Survey Elicitation of Expectations

Concern with the credibility of the expectations assumptions made in economic research motivates
the idea of asking persons about their expectations. Elicitation of expectations in surveys has a long history
in the social sciences, predating measurement of probabilistic expectations by economists. In this section
I first briefly describe this precedent research, critiquing the verbal questions posed in attitudinal research
and discussing elicitation of probabilistic expectations in cognitive psychology.

I then turn to the

development of the economic literature.

2.2.1. Attitudinal Research
Attitudinal researchers, primarily sociologists and social psychologists, have long used verbal
questions to measure expectations. Respondents may be asked to report whether they Athink@ or Aexpect@

8

that a specified event will occur. Sometimes they are asked to report the strength of this belief by reporting
whether it is Avery likely,@ Afairly likely,@ Anot too likely,@ or Anot at all likely@ that the event will occur. A
prominent example is this question on job loss in the General Social Survey, a pivotal sociological survey
in the United States (Davis and Smith, 1994):

General Social Survey Job-Loss Question: "Thinking about the next twelve months, how likely do you
think it is that you will lose your job or be laid off?
very likely, fairly likely, not too likely, or not at all likely?"

This question illustrates a persistent problem that researchers face in interpreting verbal
expectations dataCassessment of the interpersonal comparability of responses. Do different respondents to
the General Social Survey interpret the phrases Avery likely, fairly likely, not too likely, or not at all likely@
in the same way? Cognitive research does not give reason to think that responses should be or are
comparable. Indeed, the available empirical evidence indicates that interpretation of verbal expectations
questions varies substantially between persons (Lichtenstein and Newman, 1967; Beyth-Marom, 1982;
Wallsten et al., 1986). One may also question whether responses are intra-personally comparable; that is,
a given respondent may interpret verbal phrases in different ways when asked about different events.
A second persistent problem is that the coarseness of the response options limits the information
contained in the responses to traditional attitudinal questions. Consider, for example, the fertility question
asked female respondents in the annual June Supplement to the Current Population Survey (U. S. Census
Bureau, 1988):

Current Population Survey Fertility Question: "Looking ahead, do you expect to have any (more) children?
Yes

No

Uncertain"

The three response options do not enable respondents to express the degree of uncertainty they perceive

9

about their future childbearing.

2.2.2. Consumer Confidence Surveys
A form of attitudinal research long familiar to macroeconomists is the periodic measurement of
consumer confidence (or sentiment) in surveys. The monthly Michigan Index of Consumer Sentiment
(ICS) is reported regularly in the media, along with commentary on its significance for the economy. So is
another measure, the Consumer Confidence Index issued monthly by the Conference Board. The ICS was
developed in the late 1940s by George Katona and colleagues at the Survey Research Center of the
University of Michigan (Curtin, 1982). The Conference Board index has been issued since 1967 (Linden,
1982).
Both indices aggregate responses to verbal expectations questions. The ICS is partially based on
the coded responses to these questions:

"Now turning to business conditions in the country as a whole--do you think that during the next 12 months
we'll have good times financially, or bad times, or what?
Good times; Good with qualifications; Pro-con; Bad with qualifications; Bad times"

"Now looking ahead--do you think that a year from now you (and your family living there) will be better
off financially, or worse off, or just about the same as now?
Will be better off; Same; Will be worse off"

These questions exemplify the problem that researchers face in interpreting verbal expectations data. How
do respondents to the Michigan survey interpret the phrases Abusiness conditions@ and Agood times
financially?@ How do respondents answer the questions when they are not certain what will happen in the
year ahead?

10

The idea underlying development of the ICS was that the responses to these and other questions
may be useful as "leading indicators" in predicting aggregate consumption and other macroeconomic
variables. This proposition was controversial, and the Federal Reserve Board, which funded the Michigan
data collection, appointed a committee to assess the value of the SRC data. The Federal Reserve Consultant
Committee on Consumer Survey Statistics (1955) issued findings that questioned the predictive power of
the Michigan data. The negative findings of the Committee were challenged by Michigan researchers,
notably Katona (1957). A contentious conference followed (National Bureau of Economic Research,
1960). Then Juster (1964) reported an intensive study, drawing largely negative conclusions, on the
predictive usefulness of verbal approaches to elicitation of consumer expectations. By the mid-1960s,
opinion among mainstream economists was firmly negative. However, Michigan continued to perform its
consumer survey and to publish aggregated findings in its ICS. Moreover, the Conference Board initiated
its own survey and index.
For many years, analyses of the Michigan and Conference Board data mainly examined the time
series of aggregate summary statistics, such as the ICS. More recently, some researchers have examined
and sought to interpret the underlying microdata. See, for example, Souleles (2004), Piazzesi and Schneider
(2009), and Armantier et al. (2013).

2.2.3. Measurement of Probabilistic Expectations in Cognitive Psychology
If persons can express their expectations in probabilistic form, elicitation of subjective probability
distributions should have compelling advantages relative to verbal questioning. Perhaps the most basic
attraction is that probability provides a well-defined absolute numerical scale for responses; hence, there is
reason to think that responses may be interpersonally and intrapersonally comparable. Another attraction
is that empirical assessment of the internal consistency of respondents= expectations is possible. A
researcher can use the algebra of probability (Bayes Theorem, the Law of Total Probability, etc.) to examine

11

the internal consistency of a respondent=s expectations about different events.
When probability has a frequentist interpretation, a researcher can compare elicited subjective
probabilities with known event frequencies and reach conclusions about the correspondence between
subjective beliefs and frequentist realities. Such calibration studies have a long history in cognitive
psychology. Lichtenstein, Fischhoff, and Phillips (1982) review findings from 1906 on, and McClelland
and Bolger (1994) update the review with findings from 1980 through 1994. Whereas the older studies
mostly examined the accuracy of experts (e. g., weather forecasters= reported probabilities of precipitation),
much recent research analyzes the expectations of non-experts, especially students in a cognitive laboratory.
Within cognitive psychology, there has been controversy about the way in which humans internally
represent their beliefs, and their ability and willingness to express their beliefs as numerical probabilities.
Koriat, Lichtenstein, and Fischhoff (1980) and Ferrell and McGoey (1980) posed models in which
individuals may have some difficulty expressing beliefs as numerical probabilities, but nevertheless
concluded that elicitation of numerical subjective probabilities is feasible. However, Zimmer (1983, 1984)
argued that humans process information using verbal rather than numerical modes of thinking, and he
concluded that expectations should be elicited in verbal rather than numerical forms.
Erev and Cohen (1990) and Wallsten et al. (1993) have reported that a majority of respondents
prefer to communicate their own beliefs verbally and to receive the beliefs of others in the form of numerical
probabilities. This asymmetry is intriguing but only marginally relevant to the design of expectations
questions. The relevant question is not what communication mode respondents prefer to use, but rather
what modes they are willing and able to use. Wallsten et al. (1993) report that virtually all of their
respondents were willing to communicate their beliefs numerically, should the situation warrant it.
Another controversy concerns how persons process objective probabilistic information. In an
influential article, Tversky and Kahneman (1974) summarized some experiments in which subjects were
presented with statistics of various forms and were asked for probabilistic predictions of specified events.

12

They interpreted the findings as showing that persons tend to use certain heuristic rules to process data,
rather than Bayes Theorem.
To the extent that the Tversky and Kahneman experiments shed light on expectations formation in
real life, they cast doubt on the assumption of rational expectations, not on the representation of expectations
through subjective probability distributions. Indeed, Tversky and Kahneman argued for the psychological
realism of subjective probabilities. Considering the propensity of axiomatic decision theorists to view
subjective probabilities as constructs that may be inferred from choices, they wrote (p.1130):

AIt should perhaps be noted that, while subjective probabilities can sometimes be inferred from preferences
among bets, they are normally not formed in this fashion. A person bets on team A rather than on team B
because he believes that team A is more likely to win; he does not infer this belief from his betting
preferences. Thus, in reality, subjective probabilities determine preferences among bets and are not derived
from them, as in the axiomatic theory of rational decision.@

The controversy about the Tversky-Kahneman experiments concerns the degree to which they do
shed light on subjects= use of Bayes Theorem to process data. Gigerenzer (1991) argued that the reported
empirical regularities result not from respondents= use of heuristics but from the manner in which statistical
information was presented to them. Here and elsewhere (e.g., Hoffrage et al., 2000), Gigerenzer and his
colleagues have reported experimental evidence indicating that respondents perform much better in
applying probability theory when statistics are presented in the form of natural frequencies rather than
objective probabilities (e. g., A30 out of 10,000 cases,@ rather than A0.3 percent of cases.@)

2.2.4. Measurement of Probabilistic Expectations in Economics
Among economists, the idea that survey measurement of probabilistic expectations might improve
on the verbal approaches of attitudinal research appears to have originated with Juster (1966). Considering
the case in which the behavior of interest is a binary purchase decision (buy or not buy), Juster considered

13

how responses to traditional yes/no buying intentions questions should properly be interpreted. He wrote
(Juster, 1966, page 664): AConsumers reporting that they >intend to buy A within X months= can be thought
of as saying that the probability of their purchasing A within X months is high enough so that some form
of >yes= answer is more accurate than a >no= answer.@
Thus, Juster hypothesized that a consumer facing a yes/no intentions question responds as would a
decision maker asked to make a best point prediction of a future random event. Working from this
hypothesis, he concluded that it would be more informative to ask consumers for their purchase
probabilities than for their buying intentions. In particular, he proposed questions that associate verbal
expressions of likelihood with numerical probabilities to elicit purchase expectations for automobiles and
other household appliances:

Juster Purchase Probability Questions: "Taking everything into account, what are the prospects that some
member of your family will buy a ___ sometime during the next ___ months, between now and __ ?
Certainly, Practically Certain (99 in 100); Almost Sure (9 in 10); Very Probably (8 in 10); Probably
(7 in 10); Good Possibility (6 in 10); Fairly Good Possibility (5 in 10); Fair Possibility (4 in 10);
Some Possibility (3 in 10); Slight Possibility (2 in 10); Very Slight Possibility (1 in 10); No Chance,
Almost No Chance (1 in 100)."

He went on to collect data and concluded that elicited purchase probabilities are better predictors of
subsequent individual purchase behavior than are yes/no intentions data.
Market researchers were attracted to Juster=s proposal (e. g., Morrison, 1979). The idea that
expectations might be elicited probabilistically from survey respondents did not, however, draw the
immediate attention of economists. When Juster=s article was published, economists were preaching that
empirical research on decision making should be based on choice data alone. A quarter century passed
before economists began to systematically collect and analyze probabilistic expectations data in broad
populations.

14

The conventional economic wisdom finally unraveled in the 1990s. Numerous large-scale surveys
now use probabilistic formats to elicit expectations, and a new field of empirical research has emerged.
Subjects that have drawn attention include expectations of risks that a person faces (job loss, crime
victimization, mortality), future personal income (including returns to schooling and pensions), choices that
persons make (durable purchases, voting choices), and macroeconomic events (equity returns, inflation).
The modern economic literature measuring probabilistic expectations has developed mainly in isolation
from the body of related research in psychology, but there have been occasional notable collaborations of
economists and psychologists; see Bruine de Bruin and Fischhoff (2017).
The standard question format has been to seek a response on a [0, 100] percent-chance scale. Thus,
the typical question inquiring about a binary event has the structure "What do you think is the percentchance that (a specified event) will occur?"
When inquiring about a continuous random variable, the same format is used to elicit points on the
distribution function or the probability that the event will lie in some interval. Thus, a question may have
the form "What do you think is the percent chance that (a specified random variable) will have a value less
than or equal to (X)" or "What do you think is the percent chance that (a specified random variable) will
have a value between (X0) and (X1)?" It is common to ask multiple such questions, varying the threshold
X or the interval (X0, X1).

The resulting data on the subjective distribution may be analyzed

nonparametrically or a specified parametric distribution may be fit to the data. See, for example, Dominitz
and Manski (1997a) and Engelberg, Manski, and Williams (2009).
Major repeated surveys in the United States with modules eliciting probabilistic expectations
include the Health and Retirement Study (HRS) since 1992 (Juster and Suzman, 1995; Hurd and McGarry,
1995; Hurd, 2009), the Survey of Economic Expectations (SEE) from 1993 to 2002 (Dominitz and Manski,
1997a, 1997b), the 1997 cohort of the National Longitudinal Survey of Youth (NLSY97) since 1997
(Fischhoff et al., 2000; Dominitz, Manski, and Fischhoff, 2001), the American Life Panel (ALP) since 2006

15

(Gutsche et al., 2014), and the Survey of Consumer Expectations (SCE) since 2013 (Armantier et al., 2013,
2016). Further major repeated surveys worldwide include the Bank of Italy Survey of Household Income
and Wealth since 1989 (Guiso, Jappelli, and Terlizzese, 1992; Guiso, Jappelli, and Pistaferri, 2002), analogs
of the HRS in many nations, and an analog of the SCE in Canada (Gosselin and Kahn, 2015). There also
have been many one-time surveys undertaken to provide data for particular research projects.
While there has been an explosion of survey research measuring the probabilistic expectations of
households, there exists no similarly large body of research measuring and analyzing the expectations of
firms.

An early survey that did collect such data was the 1993 Italian Survey of Investment in

Manufacturing; see Guiso and Parigi (1999). However, surveys of firm expectations have in the past and
mainly continue to pose questions seeking verbal responses or point predictions; see Bachman and Elstner
(2015) and the literature cited there.
Regular collection of data on probabilistic expectations of firms is beginning to occur. Two
examples are the recent fielding by the Federal Reserve Bank of Atlanta and the U.S. Census Bureau of
periodic surveys asking senior managers in firms to provide probabilistic expectations on topics including
future product shipments, capital expenditures, employment, and expenditures on materials; see Federal
Reserve Bank of Atlanta (2017) and U.S. Census Bureau (2016). I have been made aware that similar
survey efforts are now in progress in the United States and elsewhere (personal communication from
Nicholas Bloom.)

3. Concerns of the Modern Microeconomic Literature

The objective of the modern economic literature measuring probabilistic expectations is to shed
light on the beliefs that persons hold regarding future events and thereby to help understand and predict

16

their choice behavior. To achieve this, the economists who design survey questions and analyze responses
also perform research that aims to learn how respondents interpret the questions posed and to improve
question design, so as to enhance the usefulness of the data. In this section I describe the types of research
that have been performed.

3.1. Descriptive Analysis of the Data

Much of the research undertaken in the 1990s and early 2000s sought to answer basic empirical
questions, including these:

(a) Are respondents willing and able to reply to questions seeking probabilistic responses? When I began
to collect expectations data in the SEE in the early 1990s, I encountered considerable skepticism from
researchers who asserted that probabilistic questioning would not Awork.@ A common assertion was that
respondents would either refuse to answer the questions or would only give the responses 0, 50, and 100
percent. It eventually became clear as data accumulated that this assertion was largely incorrect. Response
rates to probabilistic expectations questions tend to be as high or higher than those to traditional attitudinal
research questions. Respondents use the full expanse of the 0B100 percent-chance scale, typically rounding
to multiples of 5 or 10.1 See Section 7 for discussion of empirical evidence on rounding.

1

To encourage full use of the percent-chance scale, it helps to familiarize respondents with the scale before
commencing substantive questioning. For example, SEE used this introductory statement and opening
question about the weather:
"Now I will ask you some questions about future, uncertain outcomes. In each case, try to think about the
whole range of possible outcomes and think about how likely they are to occur during the next 12 months.
In some of the questions, I will ask you about the percent chance of something happening. The percent
chance must be a number from 0 to 100. Numbers like 2 or 5 percent may be >almost no chance,= 20 percent
or so may mean >not much chance,= a 45 or 55 percent chance may be a >pretty even chance,= 80 percent or
so may mean a >very good chance,= and a 95 or 98 percent chance may be >almost certain.= The percent
chance can also be thought of as the number of chances out of 100.

17

(b) In the absence of incentives for honest revelation, do responses reveal the expectations that persons
truly hold?2 Survey researchers cannot directly observe cognition, so this assertion is not answerable
definitively. Nevertheless, it is possible to judge the degree to which persons give internally consistent and
sensible responses to the questions posed, a criterion called face validity. It has been found that responses
usually have high face validity when respondents are questioned about well-defined events relevant to their
lives. See, for example, Dominitz and Manski (1997a, 1997b) and Bruine de Bruin et al. (2011). There
are, however, occasional exceptions. A notable case was that teenagers interviewed in the NLSY97 were
found to give highly inaccurate and sometimes logically inconsistent responses when asked to predict their
chance of dying in the next year or the next several years; see Fischhoff et al. (2000).
One can also judge the degree to which elicited expectations relate sensibly to observed individual
choices. Considerable evidence of this type has accumulated and it has mainly been positive. See the
references cited below in Sections 3.3 and 3.4.

(c) What expectations do persons hold for their futures? Measurement of respondents= risk perceptions,
income and employment expectations, and beliefs about other events has been substantively interesting to

Let's start with the weather where you live. What do you think is the percent chance (what are the
chances out of 100) that it will rain tomorrow?"
2

An absence of incentives is a common feature of all survey research, not a specific attribute of expectations
questions. The literature on proper scoring rules develops incentive mechanisms for honest revelation of
expectations concerning observable events (e.g., Shuford, Albert, and Massengill, 1966; Savage, 1971).
These mechanisms usually aim to encourage honest revelation under the assumption that respondents
maximize expected utility and are risk neutral. Proper scoring rules are regularly used in lab experiments
eliciting probabilistic expectations (e. g., Nyarko and Schotter, 2002; Schotter and Trevino, 2014) but not
in survey research. Application of a scoring rule requires the researcher to verify what events do and do
not occur. Verification typically is not possible in survey settings. However, Amentier et al. (2015)
analyzed whether inflation expectations collected in a survey are informative of decisions the same
respondents subsequently make in an incentivized investment experiment.

18

economists who heretofore have only been able to speculate about the expectations that people hold.
Section 3.1.1 provides an illustration.

3.1.1. Measuring Perceptions of Job Insecurity
Research measuring worker perceptions of job insecurity illustrates the substantive contribution of
descriptive analysis. Perceptions of job insecurity have been hypothesized to be determinants of economic
outcomes ranging from wages and employment to consumption and savings. Meaningful empirical
conclusions about the effects of job insecurity can be drawn only if the concept is defined clearly and
measured appropriately. Writers often use the expression job insecurity without formal definition, but
usage indicates that the expression is commonly intended to convey the chance that a worker will lose his
present job and subsequently not obtain a position of comparable value.
To measure job insecurity, SEE posed these questions eliciting probabilistic expectations of job
loss and job-search outcomes:

SEE Job-Loss Question: "I would like you to think about your employment prospects over the next 12
months. What do you think is the percent chance that you will lose your job during the next 12 months?"

SEE Search-Outcome Question: "If you were to lose your job during the next 12 months, what is the percent
chance that the job you eventually find and accept would be at least as good as your current job, in terms
of wages and benefits?"

Manski and Straub (2000) examined 3561 responses to these questions obtained from 1994 through
early 1998.

The distribution of responses to the job-loss question was highly skewed, with most

respondents perceiving little or no chance of job loss in the year ahead, but some viewing themselves as
facing a moderate to high risk. The distribution of responses to the search-outcome question had a very
different shape, being approximately symmetric and quite dispersed.

19

The shape of the empirical distribution of search-outcome responses has an interesting
interpretation in terms of the theory of job search. Standard models of job search with time-invariant
reservation wages imply that the responses to the search-outcome question should be distributed uniformly
on [0, 1]. The empirical distribution of responses was reasonably close to uniform.
The responses to the job-loss and search-outcome questions can be combined to yield a composite
measure of job insecurity. Let L denote the response to the job-loss question and S the response to the
question on search outcome conditional on job loss. Then L H (100 − S)/100 gives the percent chance that
a worker will lose his job in the year ahead and subsequently not obtain a position of comparable economic
value.
Examination of the cross-sectional and time-series variation across respondents in their perceptions
of job insecurity yielded several interesting findings: (a) Expectations of job loss tended to decrease
markedly with age, but so did expectations of a good outcome should job search become necessary. The
net result was that the measure of composite job insecurity tended not to vary at all with age. (b) Subjective
probabilities of job loss tended to decrease with schooling, and probabilities of good search outcomes
tended to increase with schooling. Hence composite job insecurity tended to decrease with schooling. (c)
Perceptions of job insecurity varied little by sex but substantially by race. The main differences were in
expectations of job loss, with the subjective probabilities of blacks tending to be nearly double those of
whites.

3.2. Analysis of the Accuracy of Elicited Expectations

Researchers have many reasons to be interested in the correspondence between subjective
expectations and objective realities. Economists invoking RE assumptions should want to know how well
such assumptions describe real decision makers. Social planners contemplating provision of information

20

to the public on the risks associated with detrimental behaviors (e.g., smoking, drug use, school dropout)
should want to know how accurately persons perceive such risks.
Perhaps the most direct way to evaluate the accuracy of elicited expectations is to follow
respondents over time and compare the events that they experience with the expectations elicited from
them. Research of this type has a long history in calibration studies of cognitive psychologists, discussed
in Section 2.2.2. Within economics, the Federal Reserve Consultant Committee on Consumer Survey
Statistics (1955) evaluation of the Michigan consumer confidence data argued that Areinterviews provide
the only satisfactory way to test the usefulness or relevance of statistics on expectations and intentions.@
Subsequently, Juster (1966) used data on individual expectations and realizations to evaluate the predictive
power of consumer purchase expectations. In the modern literature on probabilistic elicitation, Dominitz
(1998) used a one-year follow-up to a preliminary 1993 version of SEE to evaluate the accuracy of
respondents= expectations of their weekly earnings. Hurd and McGarry (2002) used mortality realizations
to evaluate expectations of survival to ages 75 and 85 elicited from respondents to the HRS in 1992.
Often the longitudinal data necessary to compare expectations with realizations is not available.
Then less direct forms of analysis may be informative. When data are collected in repeated cross-sectional
surveys, one may compare the expectations elicited from respondents in one wave of the survey with the
events realized by respondents in a later wave. Dominitz and Manski (1997b) evaluated the one-year-ahead
expectations of SEE respondents interviewed in 1994 in this way, comparing their expectations with the
realizations reported by the new sample of respondents interviewed in 1995.A more common way to
evaluate accuracy has been to compare mean expectations with historical realizations. Such comparisons
assume that successive cohorts of persons have the same distribution of realizations for the event of interest.
In an early study, Hamermesh (1985) used historical mortality data to assess the accuracy of
expectations of survival to ages 60 and 80. Hurd and McGarry (1995) used life-table data to evaluate
expectations of survival to ages 75 and 85 elicited from HRS respondents of age 51 to 61 in 1992. The

21

NLSY97 elicited the expectations adolescents for survival one-year-ahead and to age 20. In this case, the
expectations were wildly pessimistic relative to the life table evidence; see Fischhoff et al. (2000).
A further type of analysis considers situations in which persons are asked about future macro events
for which it is reasonable to suppose that they have no private information. In these situations, the RE
hypothesis predicts that persons should have the same probabilistic expectations. However, expectations
have been found to be highly heterogeneous in practice. Research of this type includes Dominitz and
Manski (2003, 2004, 2007, 2011) on expectations of equity returns, Delavande and Manski (2012) on
expectations of election outcomes, and Armantier et al. (2013) on inflation expectations. See Sections 4
and 5 for further discussion.

3.3. Using Choice Expectations to Predict Choice Behavior

A long term objective of economists engaged in research on expectations is to improve our ability
to predict choice behavior. Expectations data may be used to predict behavior in two ways. Persons may
be questioned about the choices that they would make in specified scenarios, and the responses used directly
to predict their behavior. Or persons may be asked to report their expectations for uncertain states of nature,
and these data may be combined with choice data to estimate econometric decision models. I discuss the
former approach here and the latter in the next sub-section.
A common practice in market research and psychology, and an occasional one in economics, has
been to pose choice scenarios and ask respondents to state deterministically what actions they would choose
if they were to face these scenarios. However, Manski (1999) cautioned that stated choices may differ from
actual ones if researchers provide respondents with different information than they would have when facing
actual choice problems. The norm has been to pose incomplete scenarios, ones in which respondents are
given only a subset of the information they would have in actual choice settings. When scenarios are

22

incomplete, stated choices are point predictions of uncertain actual choices.
Elicitation of probabilistic choice expectations permits respondents to express uncertainty about
their choice behavior in incomplete scenarios. The original Juster (1966) proposal was to elicit consumer
subjective probabilities for future purchases and use the responses to predict actual purchases. Hurd and
Smith (2002) used probabilistic expectations of bequests provided by HRS respondents to predict the
bequests that these persons will make. Probabilistic polling questions have been used to elicit voting
probabilities and to predict actual voting behavior; see Delavande and Manski (2010) and Gutsche et al.
(2014).
Use of choice expectations to predict actual choice behavior has two noteworthy features, one
advantageous and the other disadvantageous. The advantageous feature is that the approach does not
require the researcher to know anything about the decision rules that persons use. The disadvantageous
feature is that if this approach is to yield accurate predictions, persons should have rational (or at least
unbiased) choice expectations and realized choices should be statistically independent (or at least not
strongly dependent) across the population; see Manski (1999).

3.4. Using Expectations and Choice Data to Estimate Econometric Decision Models

Researchers who employ econometric decision models to predict choice behavior envision using
expectations data to relax assumptions about expectations for states of nature. Consider, for example, the
situation of labor economists studying schooling behavior. Researchers who observe only the choices that
youth make confront a severe identification problem as they seek to infer both preferences and beliefs from
data on observed choices. Observation of youths= expectations of the returns to schooling mitigates this
problem. Elicitation of entire subjective distributions of life-cycle earnings may be impractical, but a
researcher may use whatever expectations data as are available to lessen the dependence of inference on

23

assumptions about expectations.
The advantages and disadvantages of this use of expectations data reverse those of the approach
discussed in Section 3.3. The advantageous feature is that persons need not have rational expectations; it
is enough to assume that elicited expectations faithfully describe persons= perceptions of their environments.
The disadvantageous feature is that, given expectations and choice data, econometric modeling still requires
assumptions about the distribution of preferences in the population of interest.
Research using probabilistic expectations data in econometric analysis of choice behavior has
steadily accumulated over time. Early on, Nyarko and Schotter (2002) used a proper scoring rule to elicit
expectations of opponent behavior from experimental subjects playing a two-person game and used the
expectations to inform their analysis of decision making by subjects. A large experimental literature
performing research of this type has developed subsequently. See the review article of Schotter and Trevino
(2014).
A similarly large literature has developed using survey data on expectations in econometric choice
analysis. Early on, Hurd, Smith, and Zissimopoulos (2004) investigated how the subjective survival
probabilities elicited from HRS respondents affect the times when they choose to retire and to begin
collecting Social Security benefits. Lochner (2007) combined NLSY97 data on arrest expectations and
crime commission to estimate a random utility model of criminal behavior. Van der Klaauw and Wolpin
(2008) used HRS data on survival, retirement, and bequest expectations to help estimate a stochastic
dynamic model of savings and retirement behavior. Delavande (2008) surveyed young women regarding
their contraceptive choices and elicited expectations for the effectiveness and side effects of alternative
methods. She combined expectations and choice data to estimate a random utility model of contraception
behavior.
More recently, van der Klaauw (2012) used data on student expectations regarding future
occupations to estimate a dynamic model of decisions to have careers in teaching. Zafar (2013) and Wiswall

24

and Zafar (2015) surveyed college students regarding their choice of major, elicited expectations for the
monetary and non-monetary returns to alternative majors, and combined the expectations and choice date
to estimate random utility models of choice of major. Giustinelli (2016) surveyed teenagers completing
middle school and their parents regarding choice among alternative types of high school and their
expectations for successful performance in each type of school and their outcomes therafter. She used these
data to estimate random utility models of choice of high school, recognizing that families may use varying
internal household decision processes.
Whereas structural econometric analysis has usually sought to interpret actual choice behavior,
researchers have occasionally posed hypothetical choice scenarios, asked respondents to state what actions
they would choose in these scenarios, and used the responses as if they are actual choices. As mentioned
earlier, stated choices may differ from actual ones if researchers provide respondents with incomplete
descriptions of the information that they would have when facing actual choice problems. Given this,
Manski (1999) proposed elicitation of choice probabilities rather than deterministic stated choices and
showed how the elicited choice probabilities may be used to estimate random utility models. This idea has
subsequently been applied by Blass, Lach, and Manski (2010), who analyze consumer willingness to pay
for alternative electricity options with differing prices and reliability of supply. It has also been applied by
Delavande and Manski (2015), who specified hypothetical election scenarios, elicited subjective
probabilities that respondents would choose to vote in these scenarios, and used the expectations data to
estimate a random utility of the decision to vote.

3.5. Analysis of Expectations Formation

Econometric models of decision processes often are used to predict behavior following policy
interventions or other events that may alter expectations. When this is so, prediction of behavior requires

25

an understanding of expectations formation. Macroeconomists have long been sensitive to this requirement,
it being a central feature of the Lucas (1976) critique of macroeconomic policy evaluation.
Experimental psychologists and economists have studied how persons update objective
probabilities following receipt of sample data in highly structured settings like those presented in textbook
statistics exercises. A concern has been to test adherence to and characterize departures from application
of Bayes Theorem; see, for example, Tversky and Kahneman (1974) and El-Gamal and Grether (1995). It
is, however, difficult to draw lessons from this work for expectations formation in real life, where the
information that persons receive rarely maps cleanly into a textbook exercise in probability updating.
Bayesian updating, which expresses new information through the likelihood function, presumes that data
are generated by a well-defined sampling process. Expectations formation in real life requires persons to
assimilate government announcements, media reports, personal observations, and other forms of
information that may be generated in obscure ways.
One can learn something about updating in real life by eliciting expectations repeatedly from
persons, observing how they change over time, and seeking to interpret the observed changes as responses
to accumulation of new information. Dominitz (1998) elicited earning expectations at six-month intervals
from a spring 1993 cohort of SEE respondents who were re-interviewed in fall 1993. He examined the
association between revisions to expectations and the earnings that respondents realized between
interviews. Zafar (2011) elicited expectations of the returns to alternative college majors from a cohort of
college sophomores who were re-interviewed a year later. He examined how expectations were updated in
light of student course experiences during the sophomore year. Dominitz and Manski (2011) elicited
expectations of equity returns at six-month intervals from respondents to the Michigan Survey of
Consumers. Their analysis of the data suggests that the population may be composed of a mixture of
expectations types, each updating expectations in a stable but different way; see Section 4.2 for further

26

discussion of this work. Such research can in principle be performed with other surveys that elicit
expectations repeatedly.
One can also learn from information experiments embedded in surveys, which elicit expectations
before and after provision of specified information. Delavande (2008b) explored how women revise their
expectations about contraceptive effectiveness following receipt of new information. As part of her survey
studying contraceptive expectations and choices, Delavande introduced a hypothetical new contraceptive
to her respondents, elicited prior expectations for its effectiveness, and then elicited posterior expectations
after providing various forms of further information. To analyze the prior and posterior expectations data,
she developed the creative idea of an “equivalent random sample,” this being the random sample evidence
that would lead a Bayesian statistician to make the same revision to expectations as a given respondent was
observed to make.
Wiswall and Zafar (2015) designed and executed a survey of college undergraduates that first
elicited expectations about their major choices and the returns to alternative majors. They next provided
information to respondents on the empirical distribution of earnings of students who had graduated with
different majors. They then again elicited expectations following provision of this information. They used
the data on prior and posterior expectations to analyze expectations updating by the respondents.
Armantier et al. (2016) first elicited respondent expectations of inflation in the year ahead. They
then conducted an information experiment in which they randomly provided some respondents with
information about past-year average food price inflation, some with professional economists’ median
forecast of year-ahead inflation, and others with no information. They subsequently asked all respondents
for their expectations of inflation in the year ahead. Their experiment generated an informative panel data
set that enabled them to examine how provision of new information induces respondents to update their
inflation expectations.

27

Similarly, Armona, Fuster, and Zafar (2016) used a survey information experiment to examine how
consumers revise expectations for home prices. They first elicited respondents’ beliefs about past and
future local home price changes. They then presented a random subset of the respondents with factual
information about past changes and re-elicited expectations.

4. Expectations of Equity Returns

Having summarized the development and concerns of the literature measuring probabilistic
expectations in broad populations, I now discuss in more detail work that collects and analyzes data on
expectations for macroeconomic events. Two subjects have drawn particular attention, expectations of
equity returns and inflation expectations. I address the former here and the latter in Section 5.

4.1. Competing Perspectives on Heterogeneity of Expectations

Expectations of equity returns are thought to be central determinants of investment in equities and
other assets. A motivation for microeconomists to collect data on personal expectations of equity returns
has been to assess how expectations vary across the population and how heterogeneity in expectations
affects individual portfolio decisions.
In the absence of data on expectations, there long has been disagreement about the extent and nature
of heterogeneity in beliefs about returns. Much of the theoretical literature in finance has regarded
heterogeneity in beliefs as either non-existent or unimportant. However, some researchers have argued that
heterogeneity in expectations is critical to the functioning of asset markets.
The original formulation of the capital asset pricing model assumed that all investors hold the same

28

expectations for asset returns (Sharpe, 1964; Lintner, 1965).

Subsequent discussions asserted that

heterogeneity would not affect the basic CAPM conclusions (Lintner, 1969; Sharpe, 1970). Adherents of
the efficient markets hypothesis contended that prices reveal all privately held information and concluded
that expectations must be homogeneous ex post, even if they are heterogeneous ex ante (Fama, 1970).
In contrast to the above, theoretical research arguing that heterogeneity of expectations exists and
matters includes Keynes (1937), Williams (1938), Miller (1977), Mayshar (1983), Harris and Raviv (1993),
Kandel and Pearson (1995), and Morris (1995). These researchers reject the core tenet of the efficient
market hypothesis that persons begin with common prior beliefs and develop heterogeneous beliefs only
because they receive private signals. They stress that persons may hold divergent opinions even when all
information is public. They reason that persons may hold disparate beliefs about how asset markets operates
and, hence, they may interpret publicly available information differently. Heterogeneity in interpretation
of common knowledge has also been a theme of research in behavioral finance; see Daniel, Hirshleifer, and
Teoh (2002).
Theoretical argument alone cannot determine whether and how heterogeneity of expectations
affects the operation of asset markets. Nor can a traditional form of empirical research that attempts to
infer expectations from asset prices. To accomplish this, researchers often pose representative-agent
models, which assume away heterogeneity of expectations.
Even when models of investment behavior permit heterogeneity in expectations, asset prices
generally do not reveal the distribution of expectations within the population of investors. My simple study
interpreting prices in prediction markets is illustrative (Manski, 2006). Prediction markets often ask persons
to bet on the occurrence of some event; that is, to take positions on Arrow securities. Various researchers
have asserted, without proof, that the observed price on a prediction market is the mean subjective
probability of the investors, sometimes called the "market probability" of the event. See, for example,
Forsythe et al. (1992) and Wolfers and Zitzewitz (2004). Assuming a population of risk-neutral investors

29

who each bet the same amount, I found that the equilibrium price is not the mean subjective probability but
rather is a certain quantile of the cross-sectional distribution of expectations. It was subsequently found by
Gjerstad (2005) and Wolfers and Zitzewitz (2006) that price equals the mean subjective probability only if
investors are risk-averse with utility equal to log(income). In any case, the price on a prediction market
does not reveal the degree to which expectations are heterogeneous.

4.2. Elicitation of Probabilistic Expectations

To provide an empirical basis for study of heterogeneous expectations of equity returns, Jeff
Dominitz and I designed survey questions measuring in probabilistic terms the beliefs that Americans hold
about equity returns in the year ahead. We first posed a series of questions on SEE in 1999B2001 and later
placed one of these on the Michigan Survey of Consumers in 2002B2004. Similar questions have appeared
since 2002 in the bi-annual administration of the HRS and in some European surveys. Research reporting
analysis of these data include Dominitz and Manski (2003, 2004, 2007, 2011), Hurd, van Rooij, and Winter
(2011), Hudomiet, Kezdi, and Willis (2011), and Gouret and Hollard (2011). See Ben-David, Graham, and
Harvey (2013) for analysis of another panel survey that queried corporate financial executives rather than
a general population, eliciting 0.10 and 0.90 quantiles of respondents’ subjective distributions of equity
returns.
Measurement of probabilistic expectations of equity returns differs sharply from traditional
attitudinal surveys that qualitatively classify respondents as “bullish” or “bearish” about the stock market;
see, for example, Fisher and Statman (2000). Other surveys have elicited point expectations of equity
returns from various samples of respondents. See Vissing-Jorgenson (2004) and Greenwood and Shleifer
(2014) for analyses of these data. I will discuss general problems in interpreting point predictions of
uncertain events in Section 6.1.

30

Cochrane (2011) has called attention to the difficulty of interpreting responses to questions that use
imprecise verbal phrases when asking for point predictions of equity returns, writing (p. 1068): “It does not
take long in teaching MBAs to realize that the colloquial meanings of ‘expect’ and ‘risk’ are entirely
different from conditional mean and variance.” Cochrane also conjectured that confounding of beliefs and
preferences may occur when surveys elicit point predictions of financial outcomes. He speculated that
persons may report so-called risk-neutral expectations rather than pure beliefs, writing (p. 1068):

“If people report the risk-neutral expectation, then many surveys make sense. An ‘optimistic’ cashflow
growth forecast is the same as a “rational” forecast, discounted at a lower rate, and leads to the correct
decision, to invest more. And the risk-neutral expectation—the expectation weighted by marginal utility—
is the right sufficient statistic for many decisions. Treat painful outcomes as if they were more probable
than they are in fact.”

Cochrane’s definition of risk-neutral expectations as “the expectation weighted by marginal utility” posits
a specific form of confounding of beliefs and preferences. As far as I am aware, there does not yet exist
empirical research seeking to determine whether persons respond to expectations questions on financial
risk in this manner. See Section 7.3 for discussion of possible confounding of beliefs and preferences in
other contexts.
The basic question in the surveys eliciting probabilistic expectations asks respondents to state the
percent chance that a diversified mutual fund will have a positive nominal return in the year ahead. The
wording in the Michigan survey was as follows.

"The next question is about investing in the stock market. Please think about the type of mutual fund known
as a diversified stock fund. This type of mutual fund holds stock in many different companies engaged in
a wide variety of business activities. Suppose that tomorrow someone were to invest one thousand dollars
in such a mutual fund. Please think about how much money this investment would be worth one year from
now. What do you think is the percent chance that this one-thousand-dollar investment will increase in

31

value in the year ahead, so that it is worth more than one thousand dollars one year from now?"

SEE and HRS pose further questions seeking the percent chance that the investment will change in value
by more than specified amounts.
The basic descriptive findings are: (a) expectations of a positive nominal return vary substantially
across persons and systematically with sex, age, and schooling; (b) the patterns of variation are similar
within the Michigan, SEE, and HRS samples; and (c) individual beliefs exhibit considerable stability over
time.
Tables 1 and 2 show some of the evidence underlying findings (a) and (b). Table 1, taken from
Dominitz and Manski (2011, Table 3), provides summary statistics on the Michigan survey data collected
from 2002 to 2004 and the SEE data collected from 1999 to 2001. Table 2, taken form Dominitz and
Manski (2007, Table 1), gives statistics on the HRS survey data collected in 2004. Finding (c) emerged
from analysis of the longitudinal feature of the Michigan survey, which provides two interviews for most
respondents, spaced six months apart.
[INSERT TABLE 1 AND TABLE 2 HERE]

These descriptive findings suggest that individuals use interpersonally variable but intrapersonally
stable processes to form their expectations. We proposed (Dominitz and Manski, 2011) that the population
may be composed of a mixture of expectations types, each forming expectations in a stable but different
way. We presented an exploratory analysis that uses the Michigan and SEE data to learn about the
prevalence of different types, focusing on three types suggested by thinking in orthodox and behavioral
finance. These are a random-walk (RW) type, who believes that returns are independent and identically
distributed over time, a persistence (P) type, who believes that recent stock market performance will persist
into the near future, and a mean-reversion (MR) type, who believes that recent market performance will be
reversed in the near future. Using the time series of the S&P 500 to measure recent market performance,

32

we concluded that processes of expectations formation are very heterogeneous. Applying an ordinal
criterion to classify types, we found that the fractions of Michigan respondents who express expectations
consistent with the RW, P, and MR types are 0.27, 0.41, and 0.32 respectively.
Whether or not one finds persuasive our classification of persons into (RW, P, MR) types, the
observed interpersonal heterogeneity of expectations and intrapersonal stability of expectations provides
strong empirical evidence against the hypothesis that persons have rational expectations of equity returns.
Ordinary persons may have access to substantial common information about the functioning of equity
markets but they rarely have much private information. In the absence of private information, the RE
hypothesis predicts that expectations should not vary across persons. Yet respondents to the Michigan,
SEE, and HRS surveys expressed large differences in their expectations, which vary systematically across
demographic groups and are intrapersonally stable.

4.3. Expectations and Stock Holdings

Going beyond measurement of expectations of equity returns, an economist would naturally want
to relate expectations to portfolio decisions. Dominitz and Manski (2007) used HRS data to perform an
exploratory analysis.
Given some assumptions, a person should hold stocks if his subjective probability of a positive
nominal return exceeds his risk-free rate of return. We studied how the fraction of HRS respondents who
hold stocks varies with expectations. We found a consistent pattern across groups defined by gender and
marital status. In each case, the probability of holding stocks increases substantially as the reported chance
of a positive return increases from 0% to roughly 90%. We also found that the fraction holding stocks
declines slightly as the reported chance of a positive return increases further from 90 to 100%. We had no
ready explanation for this mildly anomalous behavior at the upper tail.

33

Although our analysis was hardly definitive, we think it suggests that research on portfolio choice
would benefit by eliciting expectations of equity returns. Indeed, doing so may help to resolve the famous
"equity premium puzzle" that many households hold no risky assets. This behavior is puzzling only to the
extent that respondents perceive an equity premium to exist.
Haliassos and Bertaut (1995) dismissed the notion that subjective expectations explain the low rate
of stockholding, writing (p. 1114): "Heterogeneity of opinions is not promising [as the explanation], since
what is required is the perception that a premium exists, not that it is of a particular magnitude." As more
promising explanations, they cited inertia and departures from expected-utility maximization.

Our

empirical evidence suggests that economic theory can generate the observed phenomenon once we reject
the practice of making unwarranted assumptions on expectations and bring to bear expectations data
instead.
Our findings from the HRS data are consistent with, but do not prove, the following causal claims:
(1) investment portfolios become more conservative as households age because households tend to become
less optimistic about equity returns, (2) men invest more aggressively than women because they tend to be
more optimistic about equity returns, and (3) many households hold no risky assets because they are not as
convinced as economists are about the existence of an equity premium.

5. Inflation Expectations

Macroeconomists have considered inflation expectations to be a driver of private economic
decisions and, hence, to be relevant to formation of monetary policy (e.g., Gali 2008, Sims 2009). A
standard way to measure inflation expectations has been to infer them from the observed difference in yields
between nominal and real government debt; see, for example, Haubrich et al. (2012). However, the

34

difference in yields is easily interpretable only in the context of a representative agent model with strong
maintained assumptions about investor risk preferences. Even then it may only provide information on the
central tendency of inflation expectations, not about investor uncertainty.
Consumer confidence surveys have long sought to measure inflation expectations within the
general population. However, the questions posed have not allowed respondents to express uncertainty.
The Michigan Survey of Consumers asks:

"During the next 12 months, do you think that prices in general will go up, or go down, or stay where they
are now?"

Those who respond "go up" or "go down" are then asked to give a specific percent.

5.1. Measurement of Inflation Expectations in the Survey of Consumer Expectations

With the above background, the Federal Reserve Bank of New York in 2006 initiated a major
project developing its new Survey of Consumer Expectations (SCE), which since 2013 has elicited a
substantial set of probabilistic expectations from its national sample of respondents. The SCE has a
rotating-panel design, measuring respondent expectations monthly for up to twelve consecutive months.
Improved measurement of inflation expectations was a major motivation for the SCE. Armantier et al.
(2013, 2016) discuss the developmental process yielding the SCE and the specifics of the survey design.
Rather than summarize substantive findings obtained to date with the SCE, I call attention here to
the differences between the SCE questions eliciting inflation expectations and the questions asked in the
Michigan survey. The reason I do so is to emphasize the importance of careful attention to question wording
when eliciting expectations.
The team of New York Fed researchers who designed the SCE used an exemplary process to

35

evaluate how persons respond to the Michigan questions and then to formulate the SCE questions. They
first used small-scale cognitive interviews to learn how respondents interpret and respond to alternative
question wordings. They then scaled up their exploration of respondent behavior by posing alternative
questions to respondents of the national American Life Panel and analyzing the responses. Only after this
and further cognitive interviewing did they finalize the SCE questions.
The SCE elicits both point and probabilistic predictions of inflation, with randomized ordering of
these formats. The survey uses a two-stage format to obtain point predictions. Respondents are first asked:

AOver the next 12 months, do you think that there will be inflation or deflation? (Note: deflation is the
opposite of inflation).@

Depending on their response, they are next asked for a point estimate:

AWhat do you expect the rate of [inflation/deflation] to be over the next 12 months? Please give your best
guess.@

The question format seeking a probabilistic prediction is as follows:

"In your view, what would you say is the percent chance that, over the next 12 months,
the rate of inflation will be 12% or higher

percent chance

the rate of inflation will be between 8% and 12%

percent chance

the rate of inflation will be between 4% and 8%

percent chance

the rate of inflation will be between 2% and 4%

percent chance

the rate of inflation will be between 0% and 2%

percent chance

the rate of deflation (opposite of inflation) will be between 0% and 2%

percent chance

the rate of deflation (opposite of inflation) will be between 2% and 4%

percent chance

the rate of deflation (opposite of inflation) will be between 4% and 8%

percent chance

the rate of deflation (opposite of inflation) will be between 8% and 12%

percent chance

36

the rate of deflation (opposite of inflation) will be 12% or higher

percent chance

Total

As respondents enter their answers, they can see what the total sums to. Those who give answers that do
not add up to 100 percent receive the notice APlease change the numbers in the table so they add up to 100.@
The SCE questions differ from those of the Michigan survey in various ways. I discuss two
important differences here.

5.1.1. Asking about "Inflation" or about "Prices in General"
Prior to the SCE, surveys seeking consumer expectations of inflation posed questions that avoid
use of the word "inflation," the presumption being that ordinary persons may not understand the
professional economic use of the term. Instead the Michigan and other surveys have asked about expected
changes in "prices in general." The NY Fed researchers were concerned that the term "prices in general"
is vague.

They were aware of research arguing that respondents may interpret this vague term

heterogeneously, each thinking about the prices of products that are important to his or her own
consumption pattern. See Armantier et al. (2013).
Given this concern, the NY Fed team performed empirical research aiming to understand how
respondents interpret the term Aprices in general.@ As recounted in Armantier et al. (2013), they first
conducted cognitive interviews with a small sample to identify potential interpretations of the question.
After reading the Michigan question out loud, interviewees were instructed to think out loud while
generating their answers. They found that some interviewees recognized the question as asking about
inflation, whereas others interpreted it as asking about their personal price experiences.
The team then conducted an internet survey with a larger sample recruited through the ALP, thus
obtaining sufficient statistical power to examine the association of question interpretations with responses.
Respondents first received the Michigan Survey question about "prices in general" and subsequently rated

37

how much they were thinking of different question interpretations taken directly from the cognitive
interviews, including Athe prices of things you spend money on@ and Ainflation.@
They found that respondents who focused on their personal consumption patterns tended to report
higher expectation for the future increase in "prices in general" than did those who thought about overall
inflation. They conjectured that certain psychological theories may explain the observed systematic
difference in response. These theories predict that consumers pay more attention to price increases than to
price decreases, especially if they are large and frequently experienced. When the NY Fed team probed
survey respondents about their understanding of changes to "prices in general," they found that a significant
fraction believed the intent of the question was to inquire about the prices they recently paid themselves,
particularly prices that had increased or decreased markedly, such as those for food or gasoline. They also
found that this tendency to think more about prominent price changes in respondents' own price experiences
was particularly common among respondents with lower financial literacy.
By contrast, the team found that when they posed questions asking for expectations for the rate of
inflation rather than about "prices in general," respondents tended to think less about a few salient price
changes specific to their own experience and more about price changes across a broader set of items or
about changes in the general cost of living, concepts that align more closely to economists= definition of
inflation. They concluded that asking about the rate of inflation directly produces answers more consistent
with the concept of inflation expectations of interest to central banks. Based on this experience, the NY
Fed team decided that the SCE should inquire directly about "inflation" rather than about "prices in general."

5.1.2. Probability Elicitation in the SCE
A second important difference between the Michigan Survey and the SCE is that the former only
asks for point predictions while the latter asks for both point and probabilistic predictions. The probabilistic
question format used in the SCE is like that used in the Bank of Italy Survey of Household Income and

38

Wealth and in the Survey of Professional Forecasters, posing a set of intervals and asking respondents to
report their subjective probability that inflation will lie in each interval.
When analyzing the respondent-specific data, the NY Fed team has adopted the parametric density
estimate that Engelberg, Manski, and Williams (2009, 2011) proposed and utilized in their studies of
predictions made by the Survey of Professional Forecasters, which will be discussed in Section 6. When a
respondent assigns a positive probability to three or more bins, this estimate assumes an underlying
generalized beta distribution, which has four parameters, two to determine its support and two to determine
its shape. When a respondent assigns a positive probability to only one or two bins, the underlying
distribution is assumed to have the shape of an isosceles triangle.
Armantier et al. (2013) describe the process used by the NY Fed team to explore the properties of
the probabilistic question before they finalized its format. They first fielded the question in a special internet
survey and then in an experimental panel survey of consumers that preceded initiation of the SCE. They
found that response rates were close to 100% in both surveys. Only about 1% of respondents provided
assessments that did not add up to 100%.
They found that, when given the opportunity, most respondents chose to express uncertainty in
their probabilistic predictions. The proportion of respondents who put positive probability mass in more
than one interval was very high: 96%in the special internet survey and 89% in the panel surveys. The
average number of intervals with positive probability was also high: 4.8 for the special internet survey and
3.8 for the panel surveys. The fraction of respondents who put positive mass in noncontiguous intervals
was very low, ranging from 1.3% in the special survey to 1.6% in the panel surveys. They found that the
probabilistic predictions can be approximated reasonably well by the parametric density estimate, which
assumes probabilistic beliefs to be unimodal. They also found that respondent point predictions were highly
correlated with the means and medians of the parametric density estimates based on the probabilistic
predictions. These and other findings are detailed in Armantier et al. (2013).

39

6. Expectations of Professional Macroeconomic Forecasters

I now turn from measuring the expectations of broad populations to those of professional
macroeconomic forecasters. I begin with the prevailing practice of eliciting point predictions from such
forecasters and then discuss probabilistic measurement of their expectations.

6.1. Problems in Interpreting Point Predictions

Professional forecasters regularly give point predictions of uncertain future events. For example,
panel members in the Survey of Professional Forecasters (SPF) give quarterly point predictions of GDP
growth and inflation. These point predictions cannot reveal anything about the uncertainty that forecasters
perceive. They at most convey some notion of the central tendency of beliefs.
Suppose that forecasters hold subjective probability distributions for future events.

Point

predictions should somehow be related to the probabilistic expectations that forecasters hold, but how?
Forecasters may report the means of their probability distributions for uncertain events or they may report
medians or modes. However, forecasters typically are not asked to report means, medians, or modes. They
are simply asked to "predict" or "forecast" the outcome. In the absence of explicit guidance, forecasters
may report different distributional features as their point predictions. Research calling attention to and
analyzing the potential heterogeneity of response practices include Elliott, Komunjer, and Timmermann
(2005, 2008), Engelberg, Manski, and Williams (2009), and Clements (2009).
Heterogeneous reporting practices can be consequential for the interpretation of point predictions.
Forecasters who hold identical probabilistic beliefs may provide different point predictions, and forecasters

40

with dissimilar beliefs may provide identical point predictions. If so, comparison of point predictions across
forecasters is problematic. Variation in predictions need not imply disagreement among forecasters, and
homogeneity in predictions need not imply agreement.
Macroeconomic researchers have sometimes interpreted cross-forecaster dispersion in point
predictions to indicate disagreement in their beliefs. See, for example, Diether, Malloy, and Scherbina
(2002), Mankiw, Reis, and Wolfers (2004), Patton and Timmermann (2010), and Coibion and
Gorodnichenko (2012). If forecasters vary in the way they transform probability distributions into point
predictions, this interpretation confounds variation in forecaster beliefs with variation in the manner that
forecasters make point predictions.
A distinct, and more severe, interpretative problem is the longstanding use of cross-sectional
dispersion in macroeconomic point predictions to measure forecaster uncertainty about future outcomes.
See, for example, Cukierman and Wachtel (1979), Levi and Makin (1979, 1980), Makin (1982), Brenner
and Landskroner (1983), Hahm and Steigerwald (1999), Hayford (2000), Giordani and Söderlind (2003),
Johnson (2004), Barron, Stanford, and Yu (2009), Güntay and Hackbarth (2010), and Bachmann, Elstner,
and Sims (2013). This research practice is illogical even if all forecasters make their point predictions in
the same way. Even in the best of circumstances, point predictions provide no information about the
uncertainty that forecasters perceive. This point was made forcefully thirty years ago by Zarnowitz and
Lambros (1987). Nevertheless, researchers have continued to use the dispersion in point predictions to
measure forecaster uncertainty.
Yet another issue is the common practice of aggregating point predictions into a combined forecast.
Empirical researchers have long reported that the cross-sectional mean or median of a set of point
predictions is more accurate than the individual predictions used to form the mean or median. In a review
of this practice in macroeconomic forecasting, Clemen (1989) states (p. 559):

41

"The results have been virtually unanimous: combining multiple forecasts leads to increased forecast
accuracy. This has been the result whether the forecasts are judgmental or statistical, econometric or
extrapolation. Furthermore, in many cases one can make dramatic performance improvements by simply
averaging the forecasts."
This phenomenon is sometimes colloquially called the "wisdom of crowds." It has only occasionally been
recognized that these regularities have algebraic foundations, which do not imply that a combined forecast
has any absolute degree of accuracy. The regularity concerning mean predictions holds whenever a convex
loss function (or concave welfare function) is used to measure prediction accuracy, by Jensen’s inequality.
The one concerning median predictions holds whenever a unimodal loss or welfare function is used to
measure accuracy. See Manski (2011a, 2016) for discussion of the literature and for analysis.

6.2. Empirical Research on Probabilistic Expectations

The above suggests that it would be more informative to elicit probabilistic predictions from
professional forecasters. Indeed, the SPF asks its panel members to provide both point and probabilistic
forecasts of inflation and GDP growth (www.phil.frb.org/econ/spf/). The probabilistic forecasts are
subjective probabilities that the outcome will lie in each of ten intervals. An important feature of the SPF
is that the survey has a longitudinal component, with many forecasters providing multiple predictions over
the course of several years.3

3

Another panel survey has collected partial probabilistic expectations from professionals. A Duke University survey
of senior finance executives at American firms has asked respondents to predict the return to the S&P 500 in the year
ahead. The Duke survey used this question format:
“Over the next year, I expect the annual S&P 500 return will be:
- There is a 1-in-10 chance the actual return will be less than ___%
- I expect the return to be: ___%
- There is a 1-in-10 chance the actual return will be greater than ___%”
See Ben-David, Graham, and Harvey (2013) for analysis of these data. The Duke survey also collects point predictions
of outcomes in respondents’ firms, but not probabilistic predictions. See Gennaioli, Ma, and Schleifer (2016) for
analyses of these data.

42

To shed empirical light on the reporting practices of professional forecasters, Engelberg, Manski,
and Williams (2009) used data from the SPF to compare point predictions of GDP growth and inflation
with the subjective probability distributions held by forecasters. We found that the deviations between
point predictions and the central tendencies of forecasters= subjective distributions tend to be asymmetric,
with SPF forecasters tending to report point predictions that give a more favorable view of the economy
than do their subjective means/medians/modes. We concluded that organizations commissioning forecasts
should not ask for point predictions. Instead, they should elicit probabilistic expectations and derive
measures of central tendency and uncertainty.
In subsequent research, Engelberg, Manski, and Williams (2011) showed the value of probabilistic
expectations data when one seeks to characterize the temporal variation of macroeconomic forecasts. It has
been common to aggregate the point predictions reported by SPF panel members at each administration of
the survey into a "consensus prediction" and analyze the time series of this aggregate. Summary reports of
SPF findings traditionally take this form.
We observed that interpretation of the temporal variation in aggregated predictions can be
problematic for multiple reasons: (a) Aggregate predictions reveal nothing about the uncertainty that
forecasters perceive. (b) They reveal nothing about possible disagreement across the panel of forecasters.
(c) Aggregate predictions ignore the fact that the composition of panels of forecasters often change
substantially over time. Examining the data on expectations of inflation and GDP growth obtained by the
SPF in the period 1992!2006, we concluded that the interpretative problem is always serious in principle
and often in practice.
To replace analysis of aggregated predictions, we recommended study of the time series of the
probabilistic forecasts made by individual forecasters. Considering each forecaster separately, one may
compute parameters that measure the central tendency and spread of elicited subjective probability
distributions; we suggested use of the subjective median and interquartile range. This done, a plot showing

43

the subjective (median, IQR) of each forecaster clearly portrays the heterogeneity of forecasts at a point in
time. To describe the evolution of expectations across the quarterly administrations of the survey, we
recommended enhancing the plot with arrows to indicate how each forecaster changes his beliefs from one
quarter to the next.
Figures from our article, reproduced here, illustrate. The top panel of Figure 1 displays the
subjective medians and IQRs for 2001 GDP growth elicited from forecasters who participated in the SPF
in 3Q2001 and 4Q2001. Thus, the figure shows GDP growth expectations before and after the terrorist
attacks of September 11, 2001. Each forecaster is depicted by an arrow whose tail is his 3Q2001 prediction
and whose tip is his 4Q2001 prediction. The figure shows that nearly all forecasters revised their subjective
medians downward between 3Q2001 and 4Q2001. However, forecasters varied in the direction of revisions
to their subjective IQRs, some becoming more certain about output growth and others less certain.
The bottom panel of the figure displays the subjective medians and IQRs for 2006 inflation elicited
from forecasters who participated in the SPF in both 3Q2005 and 4Q2005. Thus, the figure shows inflation
expectations before and after Ben Bernanke's nomination to be Chair of the Board of Governors of the
Federal Reserve System on October 24, 2005. The figure shows that most forecasters revised their
subjective medians upwards but they varied considerably in the magnitude of the revision. Revisions to
subjective IQRs were heterogeneous in both direction and magnitude.
[INSERT FIGURE 1 HERE]

6.3. Communicating Uncertainty and Disagreement in the Macroeconomic Forecasts of Central Banks

I find it intriguing to compare the forecasting practice of the Bank of England with that of the U.S.
Federal Reserve System. The Bank of England uses fan charts to visually portray the probabilistic forecasts
of inflation and GDP growth made by the Bank's Monetary Policy Committee (MPC) in its quarterly

44

Inflation Report. The Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve periodically releases a Summary of
Economic Projections summarizing forecasts made by the participants in the deliberations of the Federal
Open Market Committee (FOMC). Each participant is asked to make point predictions of GDP growth,
inflation, and the unemployment rate in each of several future years. The Summary of Economic
Projections describes the distribution of the point predictions across the FOMC participants.
The MPC and the FOMC both present forecasts as distributions. One may think that these
distributions are conceptually similar, but they are apples and oranges. A fan chart gives a consensus MPC
expression of forecast uncertainty, suppressing possible disagreements among the MPC members. A
distribution presented in the Summary of Economic Projections describes the diversity of point forecasts
made by participants in FOMC deliberations, suppressing whatever uncertainty each person may feel.
To illustrate, suppose that the MPC and the FOMC both forecast that inflation in a future year will
lie in the range one to three percent. The MPC forecast means that the consensus judgment of MPC
members is that there is zero probability that the inflation rate will be less than one percent or more than
three percent. The FOMC forecast means that no FOMC member made a point forecast of the inflation
rate that was less than one percent or more than three percent.
The SPF and similar European panels have demonstrated the feasibility and usefulness of eliciting
probabilistic predictions from panels of macroeconomic forecasters. The members of the MPC and FOMC
should similarly be capable of providing informative probabilistic predictions. The MPC and the FOMC
could obtain such forecasts and communicate the findings regularly to the public.

7. Probabilistic Thinking and Communication

There is by now extensive empirical evidence that survey respondents are willing and able to report

45

expectations in probabilistic form. Given this, empirical economic research analyzing data on probabilistic
expectations has increasingly sought to achieve substantive objectives. Researchers usually presume that
elicited expectations accurately express the beliefs that persons hold regarding future events. Maintaining
this assumption, they aim to learn what expectations persons hold and they use expectations data to help
understand and predict choice behavior. Thus, collection and analysis of probabilistic expectations data
has become part of normal economic science.
There has, nevertheless, been awareness that the willingness and ability of respondents to report
probabilistic expectations does not imply that persons regularly think probabilistically and use subjective
probability distributions to make decisions. It has long been known that survey respondents are willing and
able to respond to questions seeking point predictions of uncertain events or verbal assessments of
likelihood. Yet persons need not use point predictions or verbal assessments of likelihood to make
decisions. What the evidence does show is that, however they think and act, people are willing and able to
report their beliefs in multiple formsBBas point predictions, verbal assessments of likelihood, or
probabilistic expectations. See Wallsten et al. (1986, 1993) for analysis of this phenomenon.
This section discusses research that aims to interpret elicited probabilistic expectations, seeking to
shed light on how persons respond to the questions posed and how to improve question design, so as to
enhance the usefulness of expectations data. Section 7.1 considers the common practice of rounding by
survey respondents. Section 7.2 addresses the possibility that persons may perceive ambiguity (aka
Knightian uncertainty) when contemplating uncertain future events. Section 7.3 considers the possibility
that persons may confound beliefs and preferences.

7.1. Rounding

Rounding is the familiar practice of reporting one value whenever a real number lies in an interval.

46

Consider meteorological reports of wind direction. Reports issued to the public commonly delineate 8
directions (e.g., north, northeast, east). Those to aircraft pilots delineate 36 directions (e. g., 10, 20, 30
degrees).
Whereas the extent of rounding is common knowledge in standardized communications such as
weather reports, recipients of rounded data may be unsure of the extent of rounding in other settings.
Uncertainty about the extent of rounding is common when researchers analyze survey responses to
numerical questions. Questionnaires do not request that respondents round to a specified degree. There
are no firm conventions for rounding responses. Hence, researchers cannot be sure how much rounding
there may be in survey data.
Rounding of responses to questions eliciting probabilistic expectations is common and sometimes
is substantial enough to warrant attention. Dominitz and Manski (1997b) observed that respondents to SEE
tended to report values at one-percent intervals at the extremes (i.e., 0, 1, 2 and 98, 99, 100) and at five or
ten-percent intervals elsewhere (i.e., 5,10, . . , 90, 95), with responses more bunched at 50 percent than at
adjacent round values (40, 45, 55, 60). These findings have been corroborated repeatedly in other surveys.
It is evident that respondents round their responses to subjective probability questions, but to what
extent? When someone states "3 percent," one might reasonably infer that the person is rounding to the
nearest one percent. However, when someone states "30 percent," one might be uncertain whether the
person is rounding to the nearest one, five, or ten percent. Even more uncertain is how to interpret responses
of 0, 50, and 100 percent. These may sometimes be sharp expressions of beliefs, but some respondents
may engage in gross rounding, using 0 to express any relatively small chance of an event, 50 to represent
any intermediate chance, and 100 for any relatively large chance.
Moreover, survey data do not reveal why sample members give rounded expectations responses.
Some persons may hold precise subjective probabilities for future events but round their responses to
simplify communication. Others may perceive the future as partially ambiguous and, hence, not feel able

47

to place precise probabilities on events. Thus, a response of "30 percent" could mean that a respondent
believes that the percent chance of the event is in the range [20, 40] but feels incapable of providing finer
resolution.
Considering extreme cases of ambiguity, Fischhoff and Bruine de Bruin (1999) and Bruine de Bruin
et al. (2000) suggested that when respondents feel unable to assign any subjective probability to an event,
they may report the value 50 to signal epistemic uncertainty, as in the loose statement ‘It's a fifty-fifty
chance.’ This idea is formally interpretable as the grossest possible form of rounding, where 50 means that
the percent chance lies in the interval [0, 100]. Lillard and Willis (2001) offered an alternative interpretation
of rounding for communication, in which respondents first form full subjective distributions for the
probability of an event and then report whichever of the three values (0, 50, 100) is closest to the mode of
this subjective distribution.
Although survey data do not directly reveal the extent or reasons for rounding in observed
responses, analysis of patterns of responses across questions and respondents can be informative. Manski
and Molinari (2010) performed such analysis, focusing on the expectations module in the 2006
administration of the HRS. We found that, for each question posed, the great preponderance of the responses
are multiples of five, most responses are multiples of ten, and a moderate minority are multiples of 50.
Examining the module as a whole, we found that sample members vary considerably in their response
tendencies. A small fraction used only the values (0, 50, 100) throughout the module. Most respondents
made fuller use of the 0-100 percent chance scale. About 0.26 at least once used a multiple of ten that is
not one of the values (0, 50, 100), about 0.51 at least once used a multiple of five that is not a multiple of
ten, and about 0.12 at least once used a value that is not a multiple of five. We proposed use of a person=s
response pattern across questions to infer the person=s rounding practice, the result being interpretation of
reported numerical values as interval data.
Further analysis of rounding and related reporting behavior in the HRS has been performed by

48

Kleinjans and Van Soest (2014). They develop a panel data model of reporting behavior and estimate it
using responses to the HRS from 1994 through 2010. See also Ruud, Schunk, and Winter (2014), who use
experimental evidence to conclude that increasing uncertainty makes respondents more likely to round.

7.2. Ambiguity

Among economists and decision theorists, perhaps the most compelling alternatives to the
hypothesis of probabilistic expectations have been put forward in research on decisions under ambiguity.
Studies of ambiguity maintain that beliefs have some but not all the structure of a probability distribution.
The beginning of modern study of decision making under ambiguity is usually associated with Ellsberg
(1961). Early discussions appear in Keynes (1921) and Knight (1921).
A particularly common idea has been that a person may hold a set of subjective distributions for
an unknown event, not a single distribution. This idea is a primitive of research on robust Bayes analysis
(e.g., Berger, 1985), which supposes that persons hold multiple subjective distributions prior to observing
data, and it is a conclusion of some work in axiomatic decision theory (e. g., Gilboa and Schmeidler, 1989).
It is also a conclusion of my research on partial identification of probability distributions, which shows that
combining available data with credible assumptions may enable a decision maker to partially but not fully
identify an objective probability distribution (e.g., Manski, 2000, 2011b). Walley (1991) and Camerer and
Weber (1992) review parts of the literature.
Suppose that beliefs take the form of sets of subjective distributions. Then the single distributions
that we now elicit from survey respondents are probabilistic summaries of ambiguity, much as point
predictions are deterministic summaries of uncertainty. To enable persons to express ambiguity, survey
researchers could elicit ranges of probabilities rather than precise probabilities for events of interest. This
is straightforward in the case of binary events, for which one can pose questions such as

49

What do think is the percent chance that event A will occur? Please respond with a particular value or a
range of values, as you see fit.

This format enables respondents to express whatever uncertainty or ambiguity they may feel. A respondent
can express complete ignorance by reporting “0 to 100 percent,” bounded ambiguity by reporting “30 to 70
percent,” uncertainty by reporting “60 percent,” or certainty by reporting “100 percent.”
Wallsten, Forsyth, and Budescu (1983) and Manski and Molinari (2010) have reported exploratory
research on responses to questions of this type. The objective of the latter work was to probe beneath the
evidence of rounding and try to distinguish between rounding for communication and rounding as an
expression of ambiguity. I explain here.
We posed a sequence of expectations questions to 552 respondents to the American Life Panel.
The first asked an often-studied HRS question about survival expectations, seeking the percent-chance that
the respondent gives to living to age 75. We then followed up with these questions:

Q1. When you said [X percent] just now, did you mean this as an exact number or were you rounding or
approximating?

If a person answered "rounding or approximating," we then asked

Q2. What number or range of numbers did you have in mind when you said [X percent]?

When the response to Q1 is "an exact number," one can reasonably conclude that rounding was minimal.
When the response is "rounding or approximating," one can use the response to Q2 to interpret the data. If
a person responds with an exact (non-rounded) number, we think it reasonable to conclude that he was

50

rounding for communication. If he responds with a range, he was rounding to express ambiguity.
All of the respondents answered question Q1. Of the 552 respondents, 264 reported that their
response to the survival question was an exact answer and the remaining 288 reported that they had rounded
or approximated. Within the group of 288 persons who were asked Q2, all but two responded. Among
them, 70 persons reported that they had an exact number in mind and 248 that they had a range in mind.
These numbers sum to more than 288 because 31 persons reported that they had both an exact number and
a range in mind. Among the 248 who reported a range in response to Q2, the average width of the reported
interval was 17.6 percent.
The results of this exploratory work were encouraging. Respondents to the ALP showed no
resistance to being probed about the interpretation of their reported survival probabilities. If questions Q1
and Q2 had been placed on the 2006 HRS, it would have been possible to use the responses to infer rounding
rather than the less direct approach we used to assign intervals based on response patterns to standard
probabilistic questions.

7.3. Confounding Beliefs and Preferences

Research on decision making under ambiguity weakens the traditional economic assumption that
persons place precise subjective probability distributions on future events, but it maintains the traditional
assumption that persons separate their beliefs and preferences. The distinction between beliefs and
preferences is expressed in decision theory by supposing that a person choosing an action from a choice set
C specifies a state space S that lists all possible states of nature and a state-dependent utility function U(c,
s) that values each action c ∊ C in each state s ∊ S. The utility function expresses preferences. The state
space expresses a basic form of belief, differentiating between those states that can possibly occur and those
that cannot. Placing a precise or a partial subjective distribution on the state space may strengthen the

51

specification of beliefs.
Although separation of beliefs and preferences remains a standard assumption of applied economic
analysis, economists have increasingly been willing to theorize about choice behavior with modes of
decision making that confound beliefs and preferences. See, for example, Ackerlof and Dickens (1982),
Caplin and Leahy (2001), Brunnermeier and Parker (2005), Gollier and Muermann (2010), Cochrane
(2011), and Bénabou and Tirole (2016).

7.3.1. Evidence in Research Measuring Probabilistic Expectations
Measuring expectations in a survey is a well-defined task if persons separate their beliefs and
preferences. It is less clear how to interpret expectations data if persons confound beliefs and preferences.
There has long been concern that the verbal questions used in attitudinal research may be
susceptible to confounding. For example, if one asks a person to state whether it is “likely” or “unlikely”
that an event will occur, the concern has been that the person’s interpretation of these words may depend
on the nature of the event. One of the most basic arguments for elicitation of probabilistic rather than verbal
expectations has been that probability provides a well-defined absolute numerical scale for responses.
Hence, there is reason to think that responses may be comparable across persons and events.
Accepting the traditional decision theoretic separation of beliefs and preferences, modern research
eliciting probabilistic expectations has generally assumed that responses measure beliefs alone, not beliefs
confounded with preferences. The empirical evidence has broadly seemed consistent with this assumption.
As discussed earlier, survey responses usually have high face validity (Section 3.1). They often are
reasonably accurate when compared with objective frequencies, even if not so much as to warrant being
called rational expectations (Section 3.2). Moreover, there has been considerable success (in the sense of
obtaining sensible findings) using elicited probabilistic expectations to replace expectations assumptions
when estimating econometric models of expected utility maximization (Section 3.4).

52

The above generalizations notwithstanding, there have been occasional settings in which elicited
probabilistic expectations may confound beliefs and preferences. In Section 3.1, I noted that teenagers
interviewed in the NLSY97 often gave highly inaccurate responses when asked to predict their chance of
dying in the next year or the next several years. Their responses tended to wildly overstate the chance of
dying, relative to the empirical evidence in life tables; see Fischhoff et al. (2000). One might speculate that
their responses conflated the risk of dying with the severity of the event. On the other hand, analysis of
HRS data on the expectations of older adults to survive to age 75 has shown these expectations to be
reasonably accurate when compared to life tables; see Hurd and McGarry (1995, 2002). It may be that
older adults can think separately about the risk of death and its finality, but teenagers are not able to do so.
Measurement of risk of crime victimization may be another setting in which persons confound
beliefs with preferences. The attitudinal research literature has long been concerned with confounding of
responses to verbal questions in this domain. Numerous surveys ask respondents about their fear of crime
(see Warr, 1994). Ferraro and LaGrange (1987) argue that such questions confound two concepts—the
perceived risk of crime and the emotional response to crime—that need not be strongly associated. In fact,
they argue that the empirical evidence suggests these two phenomena are not strongly positively related
and, for some criminal activities, may be negatively related.
Dominitz and Manski (1997b) analyzed probabilistic expectations of burglary elicited in the SEE
in 1994. We found a pervasive tendency of respondents to overpredict the risk of burglary in the year
ahead. Among men, the mean subjective probability of burglary was 0.16, whereas the realized rate at
which SEE respondents had been victims of burglary in the previous year was 0.05. Among women, the
mean subjective probability was 0.17 and the realized fraction burglarized was 0.03. Our findings on beliefs
about risk victimization corroborate the conventional wisdom that Americans perceive crime to be far more
prevalent than it actually is (see Bursik and Grasmick 1993, chap. 4). We could not, however, offer a
compelling rationale for the phenomenon. In personal communications, some researchers suggested to us

53

that persons tend to be pessimistic about the likelihood of traumatic events. Yet we found no tendency
towards pessimism regarding other adverse events—job loss and absence of health insurance—that
arguably are as traumatic as burglary.
It is not clear whether confounding of beliefs and preferences explains teenager overstatement of
the risk of mortality and adult overstatement of the risk of crime victimization. If confounding does explain
these empirical phenomena, one must ask why researchers have not found analogous overstatements when
eliciting probabilistic expectations of other personal risks.

8. Looking Ahead: Studying Expectations Formation to Inform Macro Policy Analysis

Economists were long hostile to measurement of expectations. In my earlier review of the modern
literature (Manski, 2004), I wrote that caution is prudent but hostility is not warranted. By the early 2000s,
we had already learned enough that I felt able to recommend that economists should abandon their antipathy
to measurement of expectations. I felt comfortable asserting that persons usually respond informatively to
questions eliciting probabilistic expectations for personally significant events.

I observed that the

unattractive alternative to measurement of expectations is to make unsubstantiated assumptions.
Writing now, I can easily reinforce what I wrote then. We have since the early 2000s amassed a
very substantial new body of longitudinal data on the probabilistic expectations of the American population
through additions to the HRS and through initiation of the ALP and SCE. We have, moreover, learned
much through collection of data in special surveys undertaken in many countries to provide data for
particular research projects. These new data and the analyses they have enabled strongly corroborate my
earlier belief that researchers should measure expectations routinely and use the data to improve our
understanding of important features of economic behavior under uncertainty.

54

While the modern literature has developed mainly with a concern for applications to
microeconomics, I see enormous potential for use of probabilistic expectations data in macroeconomics as
well.

I expect that macroeconomists should find informative much of the data and analysis discussed in

this article, particularly the knowledge accumulated of expectations of equity returns (Section 4), inflation
expectations (Section 5), and the expectations of macroeconomic forecasters (Section 6). Moreover,
macroeconomists who plan to design and analyze new expectations questions should be able to draw useful
lessons about the need for careful attention to question wording (Sections 2.2 and 5.1) and how persons
respond to probabilistic expectations questions (Section 7).
I concluded my earlier review article with a call for study of expectations formation, writing
(Manski, 2004, p. 1371):

“Looking beyond measurement, I see a critical need for basic research on expectations formation.
Understanding how persons revise their expectations with receipt of new information often is a prerequisite
for credible use of econometric decision models to predict behavior.”

Several studies have been performed subsequently (see Sections 3.5 and 4.2), but there remains a critical
need for sustained research on expectations formation. Indeed, understanding expectations formation is
even more essential to macroeconomics than it is to microeconomics.
Consider, for example, research on the operation of equity markets. A microeconomist may want
to learn the distribution of risk and time preferences in a population of potential investors. To achieve this
objective, he may obtain a random sample of the population, measure their expectations of returns to
equities and other assets, observe their portfolio choices, and use the data to estimate a structural
econometric model that assumes each member of the population makes a choice that maximizes expected
utility. A macroeconomist may want to use the estimated structural model to predict the dynamics of equity
prices that would occur after announcement of an unanticipated change in fiscal or monetary policy. To

55

achieve this objective, one needs to do more than measure the current expectations of equity returns in the
population of investors.

One needs also to forecast how investors update their expectations after

announcement of the policy change and as they observe the subsequent market dynamics.
Similarly, consider research on labor markets. A microeconomist may want to learn the distribution
of labor-leisure preferences in a population of potential workers. To achieve this objective, he may obtain
a random sample of the population, measure their expectations of life-cycle after-tax earnings under
alternative labor-supply choices, observe their actual choices, and use the data to estimate a structural model
that assumes each person chooses labor supply to maximize expected utility. A macroeconomist may want
to use the estimated structural model to predict the dynamics of market wages and aggregate employment
after announcement of an unanticipated policy change, such as a change in the income tax schedule. To
achieve this objective, one needs to do more than measure current expectations of life-cycle earnings in the
population. One needs to forecast how persons would update their expectations after they learn of the new
policy and as they observe the subsequent dynamics of the labor market.

8.1. The Dynamics of Macroeconomic Perspectives on Expectations Formation

Over forty years ago Lucas (1976) powerfully called attention to the importance of understanding
expectations formation when one attempts to predict the outcomes of new macroeconomic policies. Lucas
pointed out that optimizing individuals and firms may update their expectations following receipt of new
information and revise decisions accordingly. He observed that the econometric models used in the 1970s
to predict macro policy outcomes lacked microfoundations. He specifically criticized the failure of these
models to distinguish anticipated policy changes, whose enactment should not affect expectations, from
unanticipated changes, whose enactment may affect expectations.
Given his critique of the then-prevalent econometric practice, Lucas might have recommended that

56

economists initiate empirical research on expectations formation in order to improve macroeconomic policy
analysis. However, he made no such recommendation. Instead, he advocated that macroeconomists should
assume that economic agents have rational expectations.
Early in his article, considering Friedman’s permanent income model of consumption, Lucas wrote
(p. 27) that the model “lacks content” if expectations are viewed as subjective and becomes meaningful
only if rational expectations are assumed. Later, considering forecasting in generality, he asserted that
assuming rational expectations is a prerequisite for predicting agent behavior, writing (p. 41):

“It is perhaps necessary to emphasize that this point of view towards conditional forecasting, due originally
to Knight and, in modern form, to Muth, does not attribute to agents unnatural powers of instantly divining
the true structure of policies affecting them. More modestly, it asserts that agents' responses become
predictable to outside observers only when there can be some confidence that agents and observers share a
common view of the nature of the shocks which must be forecast by both.”

Lucas did not explain why he believed that the permanent income model “lacks content” without
an RE assumption. Nor did he prove that prediction of agent behavior is possible “only” when rational
expectations is assumed. He made these assertions as if they are self-evident. I see no logical reason why
RE should be a necessary assumption in macroeconomic analysis. As far as I am aware, neither Lucas nor
other macroeconomists have ever provided a logical argument for the necessity of assuming that agents
have rational expectations.
Even if the assumption of rational expectations is not necessary for macro policy analysis, it is
analytically appealing and has been used because it enables researchers to close their models in a succinct
and tidy manner. Woodford (2013) put it this way (p. 304):

“The dominant approach for the past several decades of course has made use of the hypothesis of modelconsistent or rational expectations (RE): the assumption that people have probability beliefs that coincide

57

with the probabilities predicted by one’s model. The RE benchmark is a natural one to consider, and its use
has allowed a tremendous increase in the sophistication of the analysis of dynamics in the theoretical
literature in macroeconomics.”

Yet Woodford and other macroeconomists have increasingly questioned the credibility of the assumption
and have entertained alternatives to it. Continuing the passage quoted above, Woodford (2013) wrote (p.
304):

“Nonetheless, the assumption is a strong one, and one may wonder if it should be relaxed, especially when
considering relatively short-run responses to disturbances, or the consequences of newly adopted policies
that have not been followed in the past—both of which are precisely the types of situations that
macroeconomic analysis frequently seeks to address.”

Given this motivation, Woodford proceeded to contrast the assumptions and implications of several
different ways of relaxing the assumption of rational expectations. Not surprisingly, he showed that the
manner in which a model of expectations formation deviates from RE is consequential for prediction of
macro outcomes following policy changes.
The large recent literature cited by Woodford makes plain that macroeconomists have increasingly
been willing to pose and study models of expectations formation that do not assume RE. See also Sims
(2003), Burnside, Eichenbaum, and Rebelo (2016), Eusepi and Preston (2016), and the literatures cited
there. However, the new literature being almost entirely theoretical, models of expectations formation have
proliferated without evidence on their realism. Woodford (2013) called attention to this in his conclusion,
writing (p. 343):

“It may be asked how macroeconomic analysis can be possible with such a wide range of candidate
assumptions. One answer would be that empirical studies should be undertaken to determine which of these
possible specifications of subjective expectations best describe observed behavior. A few studies of that
kind already exist, but the empirical literature remains at a fairly early stage.”

58

Woodford’s call for empirical research on expectations formation is welcome. However, I doubt
that the theoretical literature developed thus far will provide a satisfactory foundation for empirical
research. A potentially large problem is that theorists have typically assumed everyone forms expectations
in the same way. For example, Eusepi and Preston (2016) write (p. 11): “agents are assumed to have
identical beliefs, though they do not understand this to be true as they have no knowledge of the tastes and
beliefs of other agents.” Near the end of their review article, they briefly suggest moving away from this
assumption as a direction for future research, writing (p. 47): “The second dimension where the literature
could and should expand is to abandon the assumption of homogeneous expectations.”
Assuming homogeneous expectations can greatly simplify theoretical analysis, but this paper has
called attention to considerable empirical evidence of substantial heterogeneity in the expectations of
households and professional forecasters. Given this, I think it essential to question the robustness of
forecasts made with models that assume homogeneous expectations. Where such forecasts are not
sufficiently robust, I anticipate that macroeconomists will find it necessary to give up the simplicity of
homogeneous expectations and strive to develop tractable models of economies in which agents have
flexibly heterogeneous expectations.
When macroeconomists undertake empirical research, I do not expect that it will be possible to
learn very much about expectations formation if only data on observed behavior are studied. The problem,
as I emphasized in Section 2.1, is that revealed-preference analysis of choice under uncertainty requires the
researcher to infer from observed behavior both preferences and beliefs, not preferences alone. To reiterate,
empirical analysis confronts a severe identification problem: an observed choice made by an agent
maximizing expected utility may be consistent with many plausible utility functions and subjective
probability distributions.

59

8.2. The Potential Contribution of Expectations Measurement

As described in this paper, measurement of expectations can enable more fruitful study of
expectations formation.

To make progress, I urge measurement and analysis of the revisions to

expectations that agents make following occurrence of unanticipated shocks. Sections 3.5 and 4.2 described
some studies that have performed two types of such research. Both types first measure expectations at a
specified point in time and then measure revised expectations after provision of new information. They
differ in how the new information is provided and when revised expectations are measured.
Some studies re-interview persons at later points in time and examine the revisions to expectations
that they make following the occurrence of actual new events. Other studies provide information within
the survey and then elicit posterior expectations immediately. Studies of the former type are appealing
because they examine real-time revisions to expectations in response to actual informational shocks, but
they have the disadvantage that the researcher does not know what new information respondents obtained.
Studies of the latter type have opposing advantages and disadvantages: the researcher controls provision of
new information, but the setting is artificial.
To give a small sense of what may be learned with data of the first type, consider the expectations
of professional macroeconomic forecasters depicted graphically in the top panel of Figure 1. The panel
displays the subjective medians and IQRs for 2001 GDP growth elicited from thirteen forecasters who
participated in the SPF in both 3Q2001 and 4Q2001. Thus, the figure shows GDP growth expectations
before and after the terrorist attacks of September 11, 2001. Each forecaster is depicted by an arrow whose
tail is his 3Q2001 prediction and whose tip is his 4Q2001 prediction.
Examination of the 3Q2001 predictions shows moderate heterogeneity in GDP growth expectations
prior to the attacks. Across the SPF panel, the subjective median forecast varied from 0.011 to 0.018 and
the subjective IQR varied from 0.005 to 0.013. The terrorist attacks and the policy response that followed

60

provide a classic case of an unanticipated shock. The figure shows that nearly all forecasters revised their
median forecast downward between 3Q2001 and 4Q2001, but the magnitude of the revision varied greatly
across forecasters. The median forecast of four forecasters remained essentially unchanged. Eight
forecasters reduced their median growth forecast moderately (by about 0.025 to 0.01). One reduced his
median forecast substantially, lowering it from 0.015 to -0.005. Forecasters also varied in the direction of
revisions to their subjective IQRs, with some becoming more certain about output growth and others
becoming less certain.
The evident heterogeneity across forecasters in GDP growth predictions is hard to reconcile with
the assumption of rational expectations. It is similarly hard to reconcile with the RE assumption the
heterogeneity of forecasts in the bottom panel of Figure 1, which shows 3Q2005 inflation predictions and
the revisions that forecasters made to these predictions in 4Q2005, after Bernanke's nomination to be Chair
of the Fed Board. An RE assumption is plainly inconsistent with the observed heterogeneity in the
expectations of the SPF panel if forecasters have common knowledge of the state of the economy. To
rescue the RE assumption would require that SPF members possess differential private information that
makes their prior predictions and revisions to expectations vary as shown in the figure.
I expect that study of revisions to expectations such as in Figure 1 will enable macroeconomists to
make progress learning about expectations formation. However, I do not think that measurement of
revisions to expectations per se will suffice to guide macroeconomic policy analysis. To develop credible
models of expectations formation, it will be important to study how persons obtain and interpret new
information over time.
To reiterate a point made in Section 3.5, economists have generally modeled revision to
expectations as a process of Bayesian updating, which expresses new information through the likelihood
function. This presumes that data are generated by a well-defined sampling process. However, revision of

61

macroeconomic expectations in real life requires persons to assimilate government announcements, media
reports, personal observations, and other forms of information that may be generated in obscure ways.
Introspecting about how I revise my own macroeconomic expectations after receipt of new
information, I often find it difficult to conjecture an explicit sampling process. Hence, I am unable to
consciously update in the Bayesian manner. Yet I somehow do revise my expectations and find that I can
express a posterior subjective probability distribution. If my experience is typical, it will be a challenge to
develop realistic models of expectations formation by individuals and firms.

62

References

Akerlof, G. and W. Dickens (1982), “The Economic Consequences of Cognitive Dissonance,” American
Economic Review, 72, 307-319.
Armantier, O., W. Bruine de Bruin, S. Potter, G. Topa, W. Van der Klaauw, and B. Zafar (2013),
AMeasuring Inflation Expectations,@ Annual Review of Economics, 5, 273-301.
Armantier, O., W. Bruine de Bruin, G. Topa, W. Van der Klaauw, and B. Zafar (2015), “Inflation
Expectations and Behavior: Do Survey Respondents Act on Their Beliefs?” International Economic
Review, 56, 505-536.
Armantier, O., S. Nelson, G. Topa, W. Van der Klaauw, and B. Zafar (2016), AThe Price is Right: Updating
of Inflation Expectations in a Randomized Price Information Experiment,@ Review of Economics and
Statistics, 98, 503-523.
Armantier, O., W. G. Topa, W. Van der Klaauw, and B. Zafar (2016), "An Overview of the Survey of
Consumer Expectations," Staff Report No. 800, Federal Reserve Bank of New York.
Armona, L. A. Fuster, and B. Zafar (2016), “Home Price Expectations and Behavior: Evidence from a
Randomized Information Experiment,” Staff Report No. 798, Federal Reserve Bank of New York.
Bachmann, R. and S. Elstner (2015): “Firm optimism and pessimism.” European Economic Review, 79,
297-325.
Bachmann, R., S. Elstner, and E. Sims (2013), “Uncertainty and Economic Activity: Evidence from
Business Survey Data,” American Economic Journal: Macroeconomics, 5, 217- 249.
Barron, O., M. Stanford, and Y. Yu (2009), "Further evidence on the Relation between Analysts= Forecast
Dispersion and Stock Returns," Contemporary Accounting Research, 26, 329-357.
Bénabou, R. and J. Tirole (2016), “Mindful Economics: The Production, Consumption, and Value of
Beliefs,” Journal of Economic Perspectives, 30, 141-164.
Ben-David, I., J. Graham, and C. Harvey (2013), “Managerial Miscalibration,” Quarterly Journal of
Economics, 128, 1547-1584.
Berger, J. (1985), Statistical Decision Theory and Bayesian Analysis, New York: Springer-Verlag.
Beyth-Marom, R. (1982), AHow Probable is Probable? A Numerical Translation of Verbal Probability
Expressions,@ Journal of Forecasting, 1, 257-269.
Brenner, M. and Y. Landskroner (1983), "Inflation Uncertainties and Returns on Bonds," Economica, 50,
463-468.
Blass, A., S. Lach, and C. Manski (2010), "Using Elicited Choice Probabilities to Estimate Random Utility
Models: Preferences for Electricity Reliability," International Economic Review, 51, 421-440.

63

Bruine de Bruin, W. and B. Fischhoff (2017): “Eliciting Probabilistic Expectations: Collaborations
Between Psychologists and Economists,” Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, forthcoming.
Bruine de Bruin, W., B. Fischhoff, B. Halpern-Felsher, and S. Millstein (2000), AExpressing Epistemic
Uncertainty: It=s a Fifty-Fifty Chance,@ Organizational Behavior and Human Decision Processes, 81, 115131.
Bruine de Bruin, W., C. Manski, G. Topa, and W. van der Klaauw (2011), AMeasuring Consumer
Uncertainty about Future Inflation,@ Journal of Applied Econometrics, 26, 454-78.
Brunnermeier, M. and J. Parker (2005), “Optimal Expectations,” American Economic Review, 95, 10921118.
Burnside, C., M. Eichenbaum, and S. Rebelo (2016), “Understanding Booms and Busts in Housing
Markets,” Journal of Political Economy, 124, 1088-1147.
Bursik, R. and H. Grasmick (1993), Neighborhoods and Crime, New York: MacMillan.
Caballero, R. (1990), AConsumption Puzzles and Precautionary Savings,@ Journal of Monetary Economics,
25, 113-136.
Camerer, C. and M. Weber (1992), “Recent Developments in Modeling Preferences: Uncertainty and
Ambiguity,” Journal of Risk and Uncertainty, 5, 325-370.
Caplin, A.and J. Leahy (2001), “Psychological Expected Utility Theory and Anticipatory Feelings,”
Quarterly Journal of Economics, 116, 55-80.
Carroll, C. (1992), "The Buffer-Stock Theory of Saving: Some Macroeconomic Evidence," Brookings
Papers on Economic Activity, 2, 61-156.
Clemen, R. (1989), "Combining Forecasts: A Review and Annotated Bibliography," International Journal
of Forecasting, 5, 559-583.
Clements, M. (2009), ">Internal Consistency of Survey Respondents= Forecasts: Evidence Based on the
Survey of Professional Forecasters," in The Methodology and Practice of Econometrics, J. Castle and N.
Shephard (editors), Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Cochrane, J. (2011), "Presidential Address: Discount Rates," Journal of Finance, 66, 1047-1108.
Coibion, O. and Y. Gorodnichenko (2012), “What Can Survey Forecasts Tell Us about Informational
Rigidities?” Journal of Political Economy, 120, 116-159.
Cukierman, A. and P. Wachtel (1979), "Differential Inflationary Expectations and the Variability of the
Rate of Inflation: Theory and Evidence," American Economic Review, 69, 595-609.
Curtin, R. (1982), AIndicators of Consumer Behavior: The University of Michigan Surveys of Consumers,@
Public Opinion Quarterly, 46, 340-352.

64

Daniel, K., D. Hirshleifer, and S. Teoh (2002), "Investor Psychology in Capital Markets: Evidence and
Policy Implications," Journal of Monetary Economics, 49, 139-209.
Delavande, A. (2008a), "Pill, Patch, or Shot? Subjective Expectations and Birth Control Choice,"
International Economic Review, 49, 999-1042.
Delavande, A. (2008b), AMeasuring Revisions to Subjective Expectations,@ Journal of Risk and
Uncertainty, 36, 43-82.
Delavande, A. (2014), "Probabilistic Expectations in Developing Countries," Annual Review of Economics,
6, 1-20.
Delavande, A. and C. Manski (2010), "Probabilistic Polling and Voting in the 2008 Presidential Election:
Evidence from the American Life Panel," Public Opinion Quarterly, 74, 433-459.
Delavande, A. and C. Manski (2012), ACandidate Preferences and Expectations of Election Outcomes,@
Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, 109, 3711-3715.
Delavande, A. and C. Manski (2015), "Using Elicited Choice Probabilities in Hypothetical Elections to
Study Decisions to Vote," Electoral Studies, 38, 28B37.
Diether, K., C. Malloy, and A. Scherbina (2002), "Differences of Opinion and the Cross Section of Stock
Returns," Journal of Finance, 57, 2113-2141.
Dominitz, J. (1998), AEarnings Expectations, Revisions, and Realizations,@ Review of Economics and
Statistics, 80, 374-388.
Dominitz, J. and C. Manski (1997a), AUsing Expectations Data to Study Subjective Income Expectations,@
Journal of the American Statistical Association, 92, 855-867.
Dominitz, J. and C. Manski (1997b), APerceptions of Economic Insecurity: Evidence from the Survey of
Economic Expectations,@ Public Opinion Quarterly, 61, 261-287.
Dominitz, J. And C. Manski (2003), AHow Should We Measure Consumer Confidence (Sentiment)?
Evidence from the Michigan Survey of Consumers,@ National Bureau of Economic Research Working
Paper 9926.
Dominitz, J. and C. Manski (2004), AHow Should We Measure Consumer Confidence?@ Journal of
Economic Perspectives, 18, 51-66.
Dominitz, J. and C. Manski (2007), "Expected Equity Returns and Portfolio Choice: Evidence from the
Health and Retirement Study," Journal of the European Economic Association, 5, 369-379.
Dominitz, J. and C. Manski (2011), AMeasuring and Interpreting Expectations of Equity Returns,@ Journal
of Applied Econometrics, 26, 352-370.
Dominitz, J, C. Manski, and B. Fischhoff (2001), AWho are Youth At-Risk?: Expectations Evidence in the

65
NLSY-97,@ in R. Michael (editor), Social Awakenings: Adolescents= Behavior as Adulthood Approaches,
New York: Russell Sage Foundation, 230-257.
El-Gamal, M. and D. Grether (1995), AAre People Bayesian? Uncovering Behavioral Strategies,@ Journal
of the American Statistical Association,@ 90, 1137-1145.
Elliott, G., I. Komunjer, and A. Timmermann (2005), "Estimation and Testing of Forecast Rationality under
Flexible Loss," Review of Economic Studies, 72, 1107-1125.
Elliott, G., I. Komunjer, and A. Timmermann (2008), "Biases in Macroeconomic Forecasts: Irrationality or
Asymmetric Loss?" Journal of European Economic Association, 6, 122-157.
Ellsberg, D. (1961), ARisk, Ambiguity, and the Savage Axioms,@ Quarterly Journal of Economics, 75, 643669.
Engelberg, J. C. Manski, and J. Williams (2009), "Comparing the Point Predictions and Subjective
Probability Distributions of Professional Forecasters," Journal of Business and Economic Statistics, 27, 3041.
Engelberg, J., C. Manski, and J. Williams (2011), "Assessing the Temporal Variation of Macroeconomic
Forecasts by a Panel of Changing Composition," Journal of Applied Econometrics, 26, 1059-1078.
Erev, I. and B. Cohen (1990), AVerbal versus Numerical Probabilities: Efficiency, Biases, and the
Preference Paradox,@ Organizational Behavior and Human Decision Processes, 45, 1-18.
Eusepi, S. and B. Preston (2016), “The Science of Monetary Policy: An Imperfect Knowledge Perspective,”
Journal of Economic Literature, forthcoming.
Fama, E. (1970), "Efficient Capital Markets: A Review of Theory and Empirical Work," Journal of
Finance, 25, 383-417.
Federal Reserve Bank of Atlanta (2017), Decision Maker Survey,

https://www.frbatlanta.org/research/surveys/decision-maker/?panel=1, accessed February 23, 2017.
Federal Reserve Consultant Committee on Consumer Survey Statistics (1955), Smithies Committee report
in Reports of the Federal Reserve Consultant Committees on Economic Statistics. Hearings of the
Subcommittee on Economic Statistics of the Joint Committee on the Economic Report, 84th U.S. Congress.
Ferraro, K. and R. LaGrange (1987), ‘‘The Measurement of Fear of Crime,’’ Sociological Inquiry, 57, 70–
101.
Ferrell, W. and P. McGoey (1980), AA Model of Calibration for Subjective Probabilities,@ Organizational
Behavior and Human Performance, 26, 32-53.
Fischhoff, B . and W. Bruine de Bruin (1999), AFifty-Fifty = 50%?@ Journal of Behavioral Decision
Making, 12, 149-163.
Fischhoff, B., A. Parker, W. Bruine de Bruin, J. Downs, C. Palmgren, R. Dawes, and C. Manski (2000),

66
ATeen Expectations for Significant Life Events,@ Public Opinion Quarterly, 64, 189-205.
Fisher, K. and M. Statman (2000), “Investor Sentiment and Stock Returns,” Financial Analysts Journal,
56, 16-23.
Forsythe, R., F. Nelson, G. Neumann, and J. Wright (1992), AAnatomy of an Experimental Political Stock
Market,@ American Economic Review, 82, 1142-1161.
Friedman, M. and L. Savage (1948), AThe Utility Analysis of Choices Involving Risk,@ Journal of Political
Economy, 56, 279-304.
Gali J. (2008), Monetary Policy, Inflation and the Business Cycle: An Introduction to the New Keynesian
Framework, Princeton: Princeton University Press.
Gennaioli, N., Y, Ma, and A. Schleifer (2016), “Expectations and Investment,” NBER Macroeconomics
Annual 2015, Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
Gjerstad, S. (2005), "Risk Aversion, Beliefs, and Prediction Market Equilibrium," Economic Science
Laboratory, University of Arizona.
Gigerenzer, G. (1991), AHow to Make Cognitive Illusions Disappear: Beyond Heuristics and Biases,@
European Review of Social Psychology, 2, 83-115.
Gilboa, I. and D. Schmeidler (1989), “Maxmin Expected Utility with Non-Unique Prior,” Journal of
Mathematical Economics, 18, 141-153.
Giordani, P. and P. Söderlind (2003), "Inflation Forecast Uncertainty," European Economic Review, 47,
1037-1059.
Giustinelli, P. (2016), "Group Decision Making With Uncertain Outcomes: Unpacking Child-Parent Choice
of the High School Track," International Economic Review, 57, 573-602.
Gollier C. and A. Muermann (2010), “Optimal Choice and Beliefs with Ex Ante Savoring and Ex Post
Disappointment,” Management Science, 56, 1272–1284.
Gosselin, M. and M. Kahn (2015), “A Survey of Consumer Expectations for Canada,” Bank of Canada
Review, Autumn, 14-23.
Gouret F. and G. Hollard (2011), "When Kahneman meets Manski: Using Dual Systems of Reasoning to
Interpret Subjective Expectations of Equity Returns," Journal of Applied Econometrics, 26, 371-392.
Greenwood, R. and A. Schleifer (2014), “Expectations of Returns and Expected Returns,” Review of
Financial Studies, 27, 714-746.
Guiso, L., T. Jappelli, and D. Terlizzese (1992), AEarnings Uncertainty and Precautionary Saving,@ Journal
of Monetary Economics, 30, 307-337.

67
Guiso, L., T. Jappelli, and L. Pistaferri (2002), AAn Empirical Analysis of Earnings and Employment Risk,@
Journal of Business and Economic Statistics, 20, 241-253.
Guiso, L. and G. Parigi (1999), “Investment and Demand Uncertainty,” Quarterly Journal of Economics,
114, 185-227.
Güntay, L. and D. Hackbarth (2010), "Corporate Bond Credit Spreads and Forecast Dispersion," Journal
of Banking & Finance, 34, 2328-2345.
Gutsche, T., A. Kapteyn, E. Meijer, and B. Weerman (2014), "The RAND Continuous 2012 Presidential
Election Poll," Public Opinion Quarterly, 78, S233-S254.
Hahm, J. and D. Steigerwald (1999), "Consumption Adjustment under Time-Varying Income Uncertainty,"
Review of Economics and Statistics, 81, 32-40.
Haliassos, Michael, and Carol C. Bertaut (1995), AWhy Do So Few Hold Stocks?@ Economic Journal, 105,
1110-1129.
Hall, R., and F. Mishkin (1982), "The Sensitivity of Consumption to Transitory Income: Estimates from
Panel Data on Households," Econometrica, 50, 461-477.
Hamermesh, D. (1985), AExpectations, Life Expectancy, and Economic Behavior,@ Quarterly Journal of
Economics, 100, 389-408.
Harris, M. and A. Raviv (1993), "Differences of Opinion Make a Horse Race," Review of Financial Studies,
6, 473-506.
Haubrich, J, G. Pennachi, and P. Ritchken (2012), “Inflation Expectations, Real Rates, and Risk Premia:
Evidence from Inflation Swaps,” Review of Financial Studies, 25, 1588-1629.
Hayford, M. (2000), "Inflation Uncertainty, Unemployment Uncertainty, and Economic Activity," Journal
of Macroeconomics, 22, 315-329.
Hoffrage, U., S. Lindsey, R. Hertwig, and G. Gigerenzer (2000), ACommunicating Statistical Information,@
Science, 290, 2261-2262.
Hudomiet, P., G. Kezdi, and R. Willis (2011), "Stock Market Crash and Expectations of American
Households," Journal of Applied Econometrics, 26, 393-415.
Hurd, M. (2009), "Subjective Probabilities in Household Surveys," Annual Review of Economics, 1, 543564.
Hurd, M. and K. McGarry (1995), AEvaluation of the Subjective Probabilities of Survival in the Health and
Retirement Study,@ Journal of Human Resources, 30, S268-S292.
Hurd, M. and K. McGarry (2002), AThe Predictive Validity of Subjective Probabilities of Survival,@ The
Economic Journal, 112, 966-985.

68

Hurd, M. and J. Smith (2002), "Expected Bequests and Their Distribution," NBER Working Paper 9142.
Hurd, M., J. Smith, and J. Zissimopoulos (2004), AThe Effects of Subjective Survival on Retirement and
Social Security Claiming,@ Journal of Applied Econometrics, 19, 761-775.
Hurd, M., M. van Rooij, and J. Winter (2011), "Stock Market Expectations of Dutch Households," Journal
of Applied Econometrics, 26, 416-436.
Johnson, T. (2004), "Forecast dispersion and the cross section of expected returns," Journal of Finance, 59,
1957-1978.
Juster,T. (1964), Anticipations and Purchases, Princeton: Princeton University Press.
Juster, T. (1966), "Consumer Buying Intentions and Purchase Probability: An Experiment in Survey
Design," Journal of the American Statistical Association, 61, 658-696.
Juster, T. and R. Suzman (1995), AAn Overview of the Health and Retirement Study,@ Journal of Human
Resources, 30, S7-S56.
Kandel, E. and N. Pearson (1995), "Differential Interpretation of Public Signals and Trade in Speculative
Markets," Journal of Political Economy, 103, 831-872.
Katona, G. (1957), AFederal Reserve Board Committee Reports on Consumer Expectations and Savings
Statistics," Review of Economics and Statistics, 39, 40-46.
Keynes J. (1921), A Treatise on Probability. London: MacMillan.
Keynes, J. (1937), "The General Theory of Employment," Quarterly Journal of Economics, 51, 209-223.
Kleinjans, K. and A. Van Soest (2014), “Rounding, Focal Point Answers and Nonresponse to Subjective
Probability Questions,” Journal of Applied Econometrics, 29, 567-585.
Knight F. (1921), Risk, Uncertainty, and Profit. Boston: Houghton-Mifflin.
Koriat, A., S. Lichtenstein, and B. Fischhoff (1980), AReasons for Confidence,@ Journal of Experimental
Psychology: Human Learning and Memory, 6, 107-118.
Levi, M. and J. Makin (1979), "Fisher, Phillips, Friedman and the Measured Impact of Inflation on Interest,"
Journal of Finance, 34, 35-52.
Levi, M. and J. Makin (1980), "Inflation Uncertainty and the Phillips Curve: Some Empirical Evidence,"
American Economic Review, 70, 1022-1027.
Lichtenstein, S., B. Fischoff, and L. Phillips (1982), "Calibration of Probabilities: The State of the Art to
1980," in Kahneman D, Slovic P, Tversky A (eds.) Judgment Under Uncertainty: Heuristics and Biases,
New York: Cambridge University Press.
Lichtenstein, S. and R. Newman (1967), AEmpirical Scaling of Common Verbal Phrases Associated With

69

Numerical Probabilities,@ Psychonomic Science, 9, 563-564.
Lillard, L. and R. Willis (2001), ACognition and Wealth: The Importance of Probabilistic Thinking,@
Michigan Retirement Research Working Paper MRRC WP UM00-04, University of Michigan.
Linden, F. (1982), AThe Consumer as Forecaster,@ Public Opinion Quarterly, 46, 353-360.
Lintner, J. (1965), "The Valuation of Risk Assets and the Selection of Risky Investments in Stock Portfolios
and Capital Budgets," Review of Economics and Statistics, 47, 13-37.
Lintner, J. (1969), "The Aggregation of Investors= Diverse Judgements and Preferences in Purely
Competitive Markets," Journal of Financial and Quantitative Analysis, 4, 347-400.
Lochner, L. (2007), AIndividual Perceptions of the Criminal Justice System,@ American Economic Review,
97, 444-460.
Lucas, R. (1976), “Econometric Policy Evaluation: A Critique,” Carnegie-Rochester Conference Series on
Public Policy, 1, 19-46.
Makin, J. (1982), "Anticipated Money, Inflation Uncertainty, and Real Economic Activity," Review of
Economics and Statistics, 64, 126-134.
Mankiw, G. R. Reis, and J. Wolfers (2003), "Disagreement about Inflation Expectations," NBER
Macroeconomics Annual 2002, Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 209-248.
Manski, C. (1993), AAdolescent Econometricians: How Do Youth Infer the Returns to Schooling?@ in C.
Clotfelter and M. Rothschild (editors), Studies of Supply and Demand in Higher Education, Chicago:
University of Chicago Press, 43-57.
Manski, C. (1999), AAnalysis of Choice Expectations in Incomplete Scenarios,@ Journal of Risk and
Uncertainty, 19, 49-66.
Manski, C. (2000), “Identification Problems and Decisions Under Ambiguity: Empirical Analysis of
Treatment Response and Normative Analysis of Treatment Choice,” Journal of Econometrics, 95, 415-442.
Manski C. (2004), "Measuring Expectations," Econometrica, 72, 1329-1376.
Manski, C. (2006), "Interpreting the Predictions of Prediction Markets," Economic Letters, 91, 425-429.
Manski, C. (2011a), "Interpreting and Combining Heterogeneous Survey Forecasts," in M. Clements and
D. Hendry (editors), Oxford Handbook on Economic Forecasting, Oxford: Oxford University Press, 457472.
Manski, C. (2011b), “Choosing Treatment Policies under Ambiguity,” Annual Review of Economics, 3, 2549.
Manski, C. (2016), "Interpreting Point Predictions: Some Logical Issues," Foundations and Trends in
Accounting, 10, 238-261.

70

Manski, C. and F. Molinari (2010), "Rounding Probabilistic Expectations in Surveys," Journal of Business
and Economic Statistics, 28, 219-231.
Manski, C. and J. Straub (2000), AWorker Perceptions of Job Insecurity in the Mid-1990s: Evidence from
the Survey of Economic Expectations,@ Journal of Human Resources 35, 447-479.
Mayshar, J. (1983), "On Divergence of Opinion and Imperfections in Capital Markets," American
Economic Review, 73, 114-128.
McClelland, A. and F. Bolger (1994), AThe Calibration of Subjective Probabilities: Theories and Models
1980-94,@ in G. Wright and P. Ayton (editors), Subjective Probability, New York: Wiley.
Miller, E. (1977), "Risk, Uncertainty, and Divergence of Opinion," Journal of Finance, 32, 1151-1168.
Morris, S. (1995), "The Common Prior Assumption in Economic Theory," Economics and Philosophy, 11,
227-253.
Morrison, D. (1979), APurchase Intentions and Purchase Behavior,@ Journal of Marketing, 43, 65-74.
National Bureau of Economic Research (1960), The Quality and Economic Significance of Anticipations
Data, Princeton: Princeton University Press.
Nyarko, Y. and A. Schotter (2002), AAn Experimental Study of Belief Learning Using Elicited Beliefs,@
Econometrica, 70, 971-1005.
Patton, A. and A. Timmermann (2010), “Why Do Forecasters Disagree? Lessons from the Term Structure
of Cross-Sectional Dispersion,” Journal of Monetary Economics, 57, 83-120.
Pesaran, H. (1987), The Limits to Rational Expectations, Oxford: Blackwell.
Piazzesi, M. and M. Schneider (2009), “Momentum Traders in the Housing Market: Survey Evidence and
a Search Model,” American Economic Review, 99, 406-11.
Ruud, P., D. Schunk, and J. Winter (2014): “Uncertainty Causes Rounding: an Experimental Study,”
Experimental Economics, 17, 391-413.
Samuelson, P. (1938), AA Note on the Pure Theory of Consumer Behavior,@ Economica, 5, 61-71.
Samuelson, P. (1948), AConsumption Theory in Terms of Revealed Preferences,@ Economica, 15, 243-253.
Savage, L. (1971), AElicitation of Personal Probabilities and Expectations,@ Journal of the American
Statistical Association, 66, 783-801.
Schotter, A. and I. Trevino (2014), "Belief Elicitation in the Laboratory," Annual Review of Economics, 6,
103-128.
Sharpe W. (1964), "Capital Asset Prices: A Theory of Market Equilibrium under Conditions of Risk,"

71

Journal of Finance, 19, 452-442.
Sharpe W. (1970), Portfolio Theory and Capital Markets, New York: McGraw-Hill.
Shuford, E., A. Albert, and H. Massengill (1966), AAdmissible Probability Measurement Procedures,@
Psychometrika, 31, 125-145.
Sims, C.A. (2003), "Implications of Rational Inattention," Journal of Monetary Economics, 50, 665-690.
Sims C. (2009), "Inflation Expectations, Uncertainty and Monetary Policy," Working Paper 275, Bank for
International Settlements, Basel, Switzerland.
Skinner, J. (1988), "Risky Income, Life Cycle Consumption and Precautionary Savings," Journal of
Monetary Economics, 22, 237-255.
Souleles, N. (2004), “Expectations, Heterogeneous Forecast Errors, and Consumption: Micro Evidence
from the Michigan Consumer Sentiment Surveys," Journal of Money, Credit, and Banking, 36, 39-72.
Tversky, A. and D. Kahneman (1974), AJudgement Under Uncertainty: Heuristics and Biases,@ Science,
185, 1124B1131.
U.S. Census Bureau (1988), Current Population Reports, Series P-20, No. 427, Fertility of American
Women: June, 1987, Washington, D.C.: U.S. Government Printing Office.
U. S. Census Bureau (2016), 2015 Management and
https://www.census.gov/mcd/mops/, accessed February 23, 2017.

Organizational

Practices

Survey,

van der Klaauw, W. (2012), AOn the Use of Expectations Data in Estimating Structural Dynamic Models,@
Journal of Labor Economics, 30, 521-554.
van der Klaauw, W. and K. Wolpin (2008), ASocial Security and the Retirement and Savings Behavior of
Low-Income Households,@ Journal of Econometrics, 145, 21-42.
Vissing-Jorgenson, A. (2004), “Perspectives on Behavioral Finance: Does ‘Irrationality’ Disappear with
Wealth? Evidence from Expectations and Actions,” NBER Macroeconomics Annual 2003, Cambridge:
MIT Press.
Walley, P. (1991), Statistical Reasoning with Imprecise Probabilities, London: Chapman & Hall.
Wallsten, T., B. Forsythe, and D. Budescu (1983), "Stability and Coherence of Health Experts' Upper and
Lower Subjective Probabilities about DoseCresponse Functions," Organizational Behavior and Human
Performance, 31, 227-302.
Wallsten, T., D. Budescu, A. Rapoport, R. Zwick, and B. Forsyth (1986), AMeasuring the Vague Meanings
of Probability Terms,@ Journal of Experimental Psychology: General, 115, 348-365.
Wallsten T., D. Budescu, R. Zwick, and S. Kemp (1993), APreferences and Reasons for Communicating
Probabilistic Information in Verbal or Numerical Terms,@ Bulletin of the Psychonomic Society, 31, 135-

72

138.
Warr, M. (1994), ‘‘Public Perceptions and Reactions to Violent Offending and Victimization,’’ in
Understanding and Preventing Violence, ed. A. Reiss and J. Roth. Vol. 4. Washington, DC: National
Academy Press.
Williams J. (1938), The Theory of Investment Value, Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.
Wiswall, M. and B. Zafar (2015), ADeterminants of College Major Choice: Identification using an
Information Experiment,@ Review of Economic Studies, 82, 791-824.
Wolfers, J. and E. Zitzewitz (2004), APrediction Markets,@ Journal of Economic Perspectives, 18, 107-126.
Wolfers, J. and E. Zitzewitz (2006), AInterpreting Prediction Market Prices as Probabilities,@ NBER
Working Paper 12200.
Woodford, M. (2013), “Macroeconomic Analysis without the Rational Expectations Hypothesis,” Annual
Review of Economics, 5, 303-346.
Zafar, B. (2011), “How do College Students Form Expectations,” Journal of Labor Economics, 29, 301348.
Zafar, B. (2013), ACollege Major Choice and the Gender Gap,@ Journal of Human Resources, 48, 545-595.
Zarnowitz, V. and L. Lambros (1987), "Consensus and Uncertainty in Economic Prediction," Journal of
Political Economy, 95, 591-621.
Zeldes, S. (1989), "Optimal Consumption with Stochastic Income: Deviations from Certainty Equivalence,"
Quarterly Journal of Economics, 104, 275-298.
Zimmer, A. (1983), AVerbal vs. Numerical Processing of Subjective Probabilities,@ in R. Scholz (editor)
Decision Making Under Uncertainty, North-Holland, Amsterdam.
Zimmer, A. (1984), AA Model for the Interpretation of Verbal Predictions,@ International Journal of ManMachine Studies, 20, 121-134.

73

Table 1: Expectations of Positive Nominal Equity Return (by attribute)
Source: Dominitz and Manski (2011, Table 3).

attribute

Michigan Data
sample size
mean
total
nonresponse

std dev

SEE Data
sample size
mean
total
nonresponse

std dev

all persons

7411

(609)

46.4

29.4

1212

(439)

68.0

27.5

male
female

3363

(175)

50.2

30.0

625

(149)

4048

(434)

43.2

28.5

587

(290)

68.7
67.3

26.9
28.1

non-Hisp. white

5833

(426)

47.3

29.3

993

(348)

68.8

26.8

non-Hisp. black

610

(76)

41.6

28.9

85

(33)

64.7

30.8

Hispanic

547

(64)

44.9

29.9

-

-

-

-

American Indian

70

(4)

36.4

28.3

10

(9)

58.5

36.1

Asian

160

(11)

45.4

31.7

29

(6)

60.8

29.7

age 18-34

1804

(82)

51.0

26.7

361

(91)

68.9

25.3

age 35-49

2520

(132)

48.4

28.4

411

(98)

70.0

26.9

age 50-64

1863

(125)

45.9

30.9

265

(114)

67.8

27.6

age 65+

1178

(261)

36.1

30.2

152

(122)

62.3

31.8

schooling 0-12

2494

(375)

40.1

28.6

151

(140)

59.1

31.6

schooling 13-15

2116

(126)

46.9

29.0

382

(139)

68.8

27.8

schooling 16+

2745

(92)

51.6

29.2

607

(129)

70.5

25.0

74

Table 2. Expectations of Positive Nominal Return (PNR), By Attribute
2004 Health and Retirement
Study
Source: Dominitz and Manski (2007, Table 1)
Male

Female

Rate of Number of
Rate of
Response
Respondents
Response
Standard
Quantile
Standard
Quantile
Mean Deviation 0.25 0.50 0.75 to PNR
to PNR
Mean Deviation 0.25 0.50 0.75 to PNR

Attribute

Number of
Respondents
to PNR

All Respondents

5683

53.7

27.0

40

50

75

0.92

7247

46.0

25.7

25

50

60

0.83

Married or Living
with a Partner
No
Yes

1080
4603

49.6
54.6

28.0
26.7

30
40

50
50

75
75

0.87
0.93

2691
4556

43.7
47.3

26.4
25.3

20
30

50
50

60
60

0.79
0.86

Age
50-59
60-69
70-80

1745
2241
1697

55.2
54.2
51.4

25.8
27.0
28.2

40
40
30

50
50
50

75
75
75

0.93
0.92
0.90

2401
2889
1957

48.1
46.8
42.1

25.1
25.7
26.2

30
25
20

50
50
50

65
60
50

0.88
0.84
0.78

3590
2093

50.0
60.0

27.9
24.3

30
50

50
60

70
80

0.89
0.97

4759
2488

43.1
51.6

25.9
24.4

20
40

50
50

60
70

0.79
0.94

Holds Stocks or
Mutual Funds No
Yes

75

Figure 1: Change in Expectations around Events
Source: Englelberg, Manski, and Williams (2011, Figure 2)

GDP: Before/After 911
0.016
0.014
0.012

IQR

0.01
0.008
0.006
0.004
0.002
0
•0.01

•0.005

0

0.005

0.01

0.015

0.02

Median

Inflation: Before/After Bernanke Nomination
0.018
0.016
0.014
0.012

IQR 0.01
0.008
0.006
0.004
0.002
0
0

0.01

0.02

0.03

Median

0.04

0.05

0.06

