NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

IMPERFECT FINANCIAL MARKETS AND SHAREHOLDER INCENTIVES IN
PARTIAL AND GENERAL EQUILIBRIUM
Elias Albagli
Christian Hellwig
Aleh Tsyvinski
Working Paper 23419
http://www.nber.org/papers/w23419

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
May 2017

We thank Effi Benmelech, Bruno Biais, John Campbell, V.V. Chari, Amil Dasgupta, Kinda
Hachem, Zhiguo He, Ulrich Hege, Peter Kondor, Guido Lorenzoni, Markus Brunnermeier,
Stephen Morris, Jeremy Stein, Jean Tirole, Michael Song, Vasiliki Skreta, and Pietro Veronesi
and numerous seminar and conference audiences for comments. Section 5.4 of this draft
subsumes results from our earlier paper titled “Information aggregation, investment and
managerial incentives” (Albagli, Hellwig and Tsyvinski, 2011a). Hellwig gratefully
acknowledges financial support from the European Research Council (starting grant agreement
263790). The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the
views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
At least one co-author has disclosed a financial relationship of potential relevance for this
research. Further information is available online at http://www.nber.org/papers/w23419.ack
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.
© 2017 by Elias Albagli, Christian Hellwig, and Aleh Tsyvinski. All rights reserved. Short
sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission
provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Imperfect Financial Markets and Shareholder Incentives in Partial and General Equilibrium
Elias Albagli, Christian Hellwig, and Aleh Tsyvinski
NBER Working Paper No. 23419
May 2017
JEL No. D21,E22,G1,G18
ABSTRACT
We analyze the firm-level and aggregate consequences of equity market imperfections in the
form of noisy information aggregation for corporate risk-taking and investment. Market
imperfections cause controlling shareholders to invest too much in upside risks and too little in
downside risks in an attempt to capture market rents. In partial equilibrium, these inefficiencies
are particularly severe if upside risks are coupled with near constant returns to scale. In general
equilibrium, the shareholders’ collective attempts to boost shareholder value of individual firms
leads to a novel pecuniary externality that amplifies investment distortions with downside risks
but offsets distortions with upside risks, thereby overturning the results from the partial
equilibrium analysis. We consider policy interventions to correct the distortions, and show that in
general equilibrium such interventions disrupt the financial market’s allocational role. We
analyze extensions of our model to excess leverage, agency conflicts between shareholders and
managers, negative welfare effects of transparency, excess sensitivity of investment to stock
prices, and dynamically inconsistent firm behavior.
Elias Albagli
Central Bank of Chile
Research Department
ealbagli@gmail.com
Christian Hellwig
Toulouse School of Economics
Manufacture de Tabacs,
21 Allées de Brienne,
31000 Toulouse
christian.hellwig@tse-fr.eu

Aleh Tsyvinski
Department of Economics
Yale University
Box 208268
New Haven, CT 06520-8268
and NBER
a.tsyvinski@yale.edu

1

Introduction

Over the last 30 years, shareholder value maximization has been the guiding principle for decisionmaking in shareholder-owned companies. In a context of efficient financial markets, share prices
fully internalize the value of a firm’s activities. In the absence of externalities or market power,
maximizing shareholder value thus results in rational, time-consistent planning by firms and socially
efficient risk-taking and investment without any need for monitoring or regulation. In the aggregate,
efficient markets then channel financial resources to their most productive uses with no need to
interfere with market allocations. A strong case for laissez-faire emerges, as policy interventions
are at best inconsequential, and at worst harmful to economic activity.
In practice, financial markets and firms are not quite as rational and efficient as their model
counterparts. Arbitrage is a risky and costly activity. Equity prices and returns feature anomalies
that seem difficult to reconcile with fundamental values. Firm decisions are often dictated more
by internal and external conflicts of interest or short-term biases than by the adherence to a timeconsistent optimal plan. And imperfections in financial markets and seemingly irrational investment
behavior can have important aggregate consequences.
In this paper, we analyze the consequences of financial market imperfections for corporate risktaking and investment. We argue that equity market imperfections cause shareholders to distort
investment decisions in an attempt to capture market rents. Their rational response to market
imperfections results in firm-level and aggregate outcomes that are socially inefficient and that
contradict the view of the firm as a rational, time-consistent planner. We show that even small
market imperfections can have severe consequence for investment and aggregate welfare. Our results
suggest a new rationale for regulating financial risk-taking by firms that applies even without the
standard justification of externalities or market power.
In sections 2 and 3, we develop a partial equilibrium model of a single firm whose incumbent
shareholders make an investment decision prior to selling a fraction of their shares in a financial
market populated by informed and noise traders. The share price then emerges as a noisy signal
aggregating dispersed investor information about the firm’s value.
In our model, the market-clearing share price must partially absorb shocks to demand and
supply of securities, since informed traders are not willing or able to perfectly arbitrage perceived
gaps between prices and expected fundamental values. This amplifies price fluctuations relative
to the information about dividends that is aggregated through the market. The share price is
therefore not just a noisy but also a biased estimate of the firm’s dividends.

1

This bias has two important properties: (i) it inherits any asymmetries in underlying cash flow
risks, and (ii) it scales with the firm’s initial investment decision. Together these two properties
result in an endogenous rent-seeking motive for shareholders that distorts investment decisions.
Property (i) implies that expected share prices are generally not an unbiased estimate of expected dividends: if cash flow risks are concentrated on the upside, the excess price fluctuations are
primarily on the upside and lead to an upwards bias in average share prices relative to expected
dividends. If instead the cash flow risk is concentrated on the downside, the downside price fluctuations dominate, resulting in a downwards bias of expected share prices. This wedge between the
expected market value and the expected dividend value of a firm’s equity is a transfer from final to
initial shareholders (or vice versa), in other terms, a rent accruing to incumbent shareholders.
Property (ii) then implies that incumbent shareholders can influence the magnitude of this rent
through their investment decision. As our main result in this section, we show that rent-seeking
incentives and investment distortions depend on two characteristics: risk asymmetries and returns
to scale of investments. Firms with upside risks over-invest, while firms with downside risk underinvest. The returns to scale determine how flexibly a firm can adjust its investment to the gap
between expected fundamentals and market returns. With near constant returns, the surplus from
investing is small, but the scope for rent-seeking is particularly large. If near constant returns
are coupled with upside risk, even small market frictions can induce incumbent shareholders to
take excessively large risks purely to capture rents from selling their shares, while the firm in fact
generates negative expected surplus. With downside risks, there can be severe under-investment,
but surplus always remains positive.
These investment distortions offer a new rationale for corrective policy interventions. We characterize how regulatory oversight, transaction taxes or direct market interventions can restore
efficiency either by directly controlling firm decisions or indirectly by altering the incumbent shareholder’s perception of upside risk. The optimal intervention policy has the property of leaning
against return asymmetries as a counterweight to the market imperfections.
In section 4, we embed the single-firm, partial equilibrium model in an aggregate model with
a continuum of heterogeneous firms, each subject to idiosyncratic investment risk. The general
equilibrium formulation achieves several objectives.
First, we provide a micro-foundation for expected or aggregate dividends as our main welfare
criterion. The model adds an intertemporal substitution margin for representative incumbent and
final shareholders which as we show aligns their aggregate valuations while still allowing for firmlevel mispricing. Any increase in aggregate dividends is then passed onto incumbent shareholders

2

through the aggregate value of equity shares.
Second, as our main result in this section, we show that equity market imperfections lead to
a new pecuniary externality which amplifies investment distortions in the case of downside risk,
but mitigates them in the case of upside risk. The conclusions drawn from our general equilibrium
model are thus the exact opposite of the partial equilibrium results.
The interaction between aggregate share prices and firm-level investment operates through
two channels. First, when individual equity prices are subject to market frictions but the aggregate value of equity is determined from shareholders’ intertemporal marginal rates of substitution,
shareholders in any given firm do not internalize that by collectively distorting investment to boost
their own share prices, they end up with lower aggregate dividends, lower aggregate market values
of equity shares and lower welfare. Second, the market imperfection drives a wedge between the
shareholders’ aggregate intertemporal marginal rate of substitution, and the rate of return at which
shareholders in an individual firm discount future dividends, which in turn influences the weight
incumbent shareholders assign to maximizing future dividends vs. inflating current share prices.
With downside risk, this wedge reinforces the shareholders’ desire to inflate share prices, which amplifies under-investment and welfare losses. With upside risk, it instead reduces the shareholders’
desire to inflate market prices, which limits overinvestment and partially restores efficiency. This
explains the striking contrast between partial and general equilibrium results.1
Third, we show how policy interventions generate a tradeoff between the role of equity markets for firm-level incentives and intertemporal trade: policies that improve investment incentives
perturb or disrupt the allocational role of stock markets. This tradeoff is particularly severe in
the case of downside risk and near constant returns to scale, where any policy intervention that
improves investment incentives either causes equity markets to completely shut down, or leads to
significant intertemporal distortions and excess demand for shares caused by implicit subsidies to
final shareholders. In the case of upside risk, regulatory interventions curb over-investment without
disrupting intertemporal trade through equity markets.
In section 5, we discuss several extensions of our baseline model to illustrate how equity market
imperfections influence shareholder incentives. Two recurring themes emerge. First, policies that
are beneficial for shareholders and society when markets are efficient now risk being mis-used
1

We think of the contrast between partial and general equilibrium results as follows: The partial equilibrium

results suggest that in a given cross-section of firms with heterogeneous risk characteristics and investment returns,
firms that are characterized by upside risk are most likely to engage in rent-seeking behavior. The general equilibrium
results suggest that aggregate investment distortions are likely to be most severe in times when most firms are exposed
to significant downside risks.

3

for rent-seeking by shareholders, and may thus be socially harmful, though still advantageous to
incumbent shareholders. Second, rent-seeking incentives by incumbent shareholders lead to conflicts
of interest between successive or concurrent shareholder generations and result in departures from
the view of shareholder value maximization as an optimal, time-consistent plan.
First, we add external borrowing with costly state verification (Townsend, 1979; Gale and
Hellwig, 1985) to our model of investment. We show that incumbent shareholders seek to take on
excessive leverage, as this tilts the distribution of equity returns towards the upside, inflating the
market value of equity shares, and at the same time allows them to scale up the investment to
increase shareholder rents. If informational frictions are sufficiently important, shareholders may
even borrow to invest in projects with negative expected returns, just to gain from the distortion
in equity prices. Equity market imperfections thus dilute the discipline imposed by credit spreads.
Next, we argue that our analysis is robust to the inclusion of agency conflicts between shareholders and managers. Rent-seeking by incumbent shareholders is caused by market imperfections
and hence not affected by agency conflicts inside the firm. Shareholder discretion to design CEO
incentives instead facilitates rent-seeking, and contracts such as stock options that serve to provide
optimal risk-taking incentives in efficient markets now serve to extract shareholder rents. Restrictions on executive compensation contracts then offer an additional margin for welfare-improving
policy interventions. In some cases, agency costs may even have social value if they reduce the
shareholders’ ability to extract rents.
Third, we show that public information about the firms’ investment returns may be socially
harmful, when rent-seeking motives are sufficiently severe. While better public information is
always desirable in efficient markets, here it enables the incumbent shareholders to fine-tune their
rent-seeking activities. This result mirrors Morris and Shin’s (2002) finding on the social value of
public information in beauty contest games, but is based on a different model in which inefficiency
results from rent-seeking incentives that are based on financial market imperfections.
Fourth, we show that information feedback from stock prices to investment decisions leads
to excess sensitivity of investment to share prices and a negative co-movement of investment with
future returns. Information feedback causes shareholders to cater to market expectations of returns.
Depending on the realization of fundamentals and liquidity shocks, markets can be overly optimistic
or pessimistic about the firm’s return prospects, resulting in excessive investment when share prices
are high, and foregone opportunities when share prices are low. Polk and Sapienza (2009) offer
direct empirical support for these model predictions.
Fifth, we allow for sequential decisions by successive shareholder generations and show that

4

market imperfections and shareholder rent-seeking lead to dynamically inconsistent, Pareto-inferior
firm decisions. When interpreting the firm as a unitary decision-maker, its behavior can no longer be
rationalized as the outcome of a time-consistent optimal plan, but instead display clear symptoms
of bounded rationality: if our static investment model has similarities to a consumer problem with
limited self-control (e.g. Gul and Pesendorfer, 2001), our dynamic model shows how rent-seeking
by incumbent shareholders leads to endogenous preference reversals, time-inconsistency, and lack of
commitment in firm behavior (e.g. Gul and Pesendorfer, 2005). Our model thus offers a foundation
- based on financial market imperfections rather than psychological factors - of behavioral biases in
corporate decision-making. Similar conflicts of interest arise between concurrent shareholders with
different investment horizons and differential access to information.
Related Literature. Our paper builds on ideas from several distinct fields. To our knowledge,
they have not been brought together within a single unified framework.
The stylized facts (see second paragraph) that motivate our analysis are well documented: Pontiff (1996), D’Avolio (2002) and Wurgler and Zhuravskaya (2002) among others provide evidence
on the costs and risks of arbitrage. Schwert (2003) and Nagel (2013) survey asset pricing anomalies
such as cross-sectional predictability (such as size or value premium) or time-series predictability
(i.e. momentum, reversals, announcement effects), including evidence linking returns to skewness,
belief dispersion and investor sentiment. Tirole (2006) surveys the corporate finance literature that
documents and analyzes conflicts of interest associated with delegation of decisions to managers.
Becht, Bolton and Roell (2003) survey the corporate governance literature that emphasizes collective action problems and conflicts of interest among heterogeneous groups of shareholders with
diverging objectives. Baker and Wurgler (2013) discuss the behavioral literature which analyzes
how firm decisions may be influenced by investors’ or managers’ psychological biases. Finally, the
2007-2009 great recession offers ample prima facie evidence on the link between financial booms
and busts, corporate risk-taking and investment, and aggregate activity and welfare.
Our model of the financial market builds on models of noisy information aggregation (Grossman
and Stiglitz, 1980, Hellwig, 1980, Diamond and Verrecchia, 1981), or more specifically the formulation in Albagli, Hellwig and Tsyvinski (2011b) which characterizes returns for arbitrary securities
in a non-linear noisy rational expectations equilibrium model and argues that such a model can
account for cross-sectional asset pricing puzzles.2 We depart from Albagli, Hellwig and Tsyvinski
2

The noisy information aggregation model, in particular our formulation in Albagli, Hellwig and Tsyvinski (2011b),

is similar to common value auctions following Milgrom (1981). Our discussion of market value versus dividends
mirrors the comparison between efficiency and revenue maximization in auction theory. However, auction theory

5

(2011b) in two important aspects. First, we endogenize security cash flows as the outcome of firm
decisions. Second, we embed the firms in a general equilibrium environment. Endogenizing investment and cash flows is challenging even in partial equilibrium because of the interaction between
how information aggregation affects investment incentives, and how investment in turn feeds into
asset prices, payoffs and information aggregation. These challenges are compounded by the general
equilibrium feedback from aggregate share prices to firm level incentives.
More generally, the market micro structure literature explores the effects of frictions in price
formation for given security payoffs (see, e.g. Biais, Glosten and Spatt, 2005). We propose a
parsimonious model to analyze how such micro structure frictions influence not just asset prices
but also firm behavior and aggregate outcomes. Existing models often rely on functional form or
distributional assumptions that limit the scope for analyzing such feedbacks.
Our treatment of general equilibrium effects relates to the growing literature on pecuniary externalities. In our model, a pecuniary externality results from market imperfections, when individual
and aggregate share prices directly enter incumbent shareholder preferences. This is different from
the pecuniary externalities commonly identified in the literature on financial constraints, where
share prices indirectly affect investment incentives by relaxing or tightening collateral constraints
(Lorenzoni 2008) or incentive constraints (Farhi, Golosov, Tsyvinski 2009).3 With downside risk,
our pecuniary externality has the potential to generate significantly larger aggregate distortions
because (i) it affects all firms, rather than a subset of financially constrained firms, and (ii) rather
than being the primary source of inefficiency, it amplifies distortions caused by market imperfections. The interaction of trading frictions with pecuniary externalities also appears in Asriyan
(2016), but in a context where frictions in debt markets amplify balance sheet effects.
Holmstrom and Tirole (1993) emphasize the social value of tying managerial incentives to market
prices to resolve agency conflicts, under the background hypothesis that financial markets are
efficient. Our analysis instead suggests that market-based incentives may do more harm than good
when there are market imperfections. This is similar to Bolton, Scheinkman, and Xiong (2006),
who argue that shareholders may want to distort investments in order to boost short-term share
prices that contain a speculative component due to heterogeneous priors. By modeling market
imperfections and shareholder rent-seeking parsimoniously through noisy information aggregation,
we can fully develop the positive and normative implications of this premise.4
takes securities as given to focus on market design, while we take the market as given and endogenize asset returns.
3
See also Greenwald and Stiglitz (1986), Geanakoplos and Polemarchakis (1986), and Dávila and Korinek (forthcoming), among many other papers.
4
In Stein (1988, 1989) and Benmelech, Kandel and Veronesi (2010), market-based incentives exacerbate agency

6

Our model of shareholder incentives is related to market-timing or catering theories which discuss how firm behavior responds to market anomalies (Stein, 1996; Baker and Wurgler, 2013).
However there are some important distinctions. First, whereas existing catering theories analyze
firm incentives and behavior when faced with some exogenously given form of “market irrationality”,
we offer a parsimonious microfoundation for such behavior by endogenizing - via noisy information
aggregation - the origins of departures from market efficiency. These micro-foundations impose
structure on the relation between equity prices and firm behavior that can emerge and therefore
enrich the testable implications of our model. Second, by embedding firm-level distortions in a
general equilibrium model, we can analyze to what extent catering or rent-seeking incentives have
harmful aggregate effects, and how they can be regulated through policy interventions. Third,
throughout most of our analysis, investment decisions are taken prior to equity trading, and therefore incumbent shareholders cater to expected, not realized market outcomes. Catering to current
market sentiment arises only in section 5.4, where we allow for information feedback from equity
prices to investment.
Finally, the behavioral corporate finance literature argues that firm decisions may be influenced
by investors’ or managers’ psychological biases (Baker and Wurgler, 2013). Our model reinterprets
such behavior as the rational response by controlling shareholders to underlying market imperfections. In particular, we highlight the link between catering incentives and corporate short-termism
or lack of time consistency (see Derrien et al. 2013 for direct evidence on this link).

2

Baseline model: partial equilibrium

Our model has three stages. In the first stage, incumbent shareholders in a firm decide on an
observable investment decision k ≥ 0. In the second stage, they sell a fraction α ∈ (0, 1] of the
shares to outside investors. At the final stage, the firm’s cash flow Π (θ, k) ≡ R (θ) k − C (k) is a
function of the investment k and a stochastic fundamental θ ∈ R, and paid to the final shareholders.
The fundamental θ is distributed according to θ ∼ N (0, λ−1 ). The return R (·) on the investment
is a positive, increasing function of the firm’s fundamental, C (k) = k 1+χ / (1 + χ) denotes the cost
of investment, and χ the firm’s returns to scale.
Throughout the paper, we equate efficiency and welfare to the maximization of expected dividends E (Π (θ, k)), and ask whether market prices align shareholder incentives with this measure
conflicts between shareholders and managers, when the latter can manipulate the information contained in stock
prices but not systematically fool shareholders. Our analysis instead emphasizes the role of shareholder incentives
rather than agency conflicts and information manipulation.

7

of aggregate welfare. The ex ante efficient investment k ∗ maximizes E (Π (θ, k)). Our general equilibrium model in section 4 provides microfoundations for this welfare criterion in an economy with
a continuum of heterogeneous firms and representative sets of incumbent and final shareholders.

2.1

Stage 2: Description of the Market Environment.

There are two types of outside investors: a unit measure of risk-neutral informed traders, who are
indexed by i, and noise traders.
Informed traders observe a private signal xi ∼ N (θ, β −1 ), which is i.i.d. across traders (conditional on θ). After observing xi , an informed trader submits a price-contingent demand schedule
di (·) : R →[0, α], to maximize expected wealth wi = di · (Π (θ, k) − P ). That is, informed traders
cannot short-sell, and can buy at most α units of the shares. An informed trader’s strategy is then
a function d (xi , P ) ∈ [0, α] of the private signal and the price.
Noise traders place an order to purchase a random quantity αΦ (u) of shares, where u ∼
N (0, δ −1 ) is independent of θ, and δ −1 is a measure of demand noise.
R
√
√
The aggregate demand for shares is D(θ, P ) = d(x, P )dΦ( β(x−θ))+αΦ (u), where Φ( β(x−
θ)) represents the cross-sectional distribution of private signals xi conditional on θ, and Φ(·) denotes
the cdf of a standard normal distribution. The orders submitted by informed and noise traders are
executed at a market-clearing price P such that D(θ, P ) = α.
Let H (·|x, P ) denote the traders’ posterior cdf of θ, conditional on observing a private signal
x, and a market-clearing price P . A noisy Rational Expectations Equilibrium at stage 2 consists of
a demand function d(x, P ), a price function P (θ, u; k), and posterior beliefs H (·|x, P ), such that
d(x, P ) is optimal given the shareholder’s beliefs H (·|x, P ); P (θ, u; k) clears the market for all
(θ, u) and k; and H (·|x, P ) satisfies Bayes’ Rule whenever applicable.

2.2

Stage 2: Equilibrium Characterization.

For a given k, our first result characterizes the equilibrium share price in the unique noisy Rational Expectations Equilibrium, in which demand schedules are non-increasing in P . Monotonicity
restrictions arise naturally if trading takes place through limit orders.
Proposition 1 Equilibrium Characterization and Uniqueness
√
Define z ≡ θ + 1/ β · u. In the unique equilibrium in which the informed traders’ demand
d(x, P ) is non-increasing in P , the market-clearing price function is
P (z, k) = E (Π (θ, k) |x = z, z) .
8

(1)

The variable z is a sufficient statistic for the information conveyed through the share price.
Conditional on θ, z is distributed according to z ∼ N (θ, (βδ)−1 ), while its unconditional distribution
−1
−1 + (βδ)−1 . The characterization of P (z, k) gains its significance
is z ∼ N (0, λ−1
z ), where λz = λ

from the comparison with the share’s expected dividend value V (z, k) ≡ E (Π (θ, k) |z).
The equilibrium share price differs systematically from the expected dividend value: Both are
characterized as expected dividends conditional on the information contained in z. However, the
share price treats the signal z as if it had precision β + βδ (equal to the sum of the private and the
price signal precision), when in reality its precision is only equal to βδ. Hence, the market price
is based on an expectation of the marginal return to the investment level k that conditions places
a higher weight on the market signal z, relative to its objective information content. Therefore,
when z conveys sufficiently positive news about fundamentals, the price is upwards-biased, while if
z conveys sufficiently negative news the price is biased downwards.
The overweighting of the market signal in the price is fully consistent with Bayesian updating
based on private and public information. In the equilibrium representation, the sufficient statistic
z represents the private signal of the trader who must be just indifferent between buying or not
buying the stock if the market clears, which summarizes the demand for equity shares through
noise traders (u) and informed traders (θ). The identity of this trader shifts in a systematic way
with demand conditions: if informed traders become on average more optimistic (higher θ) or noise
trader demand increases (higher u), the marginal informed traders’ private signal must also increase
to keep the market in equilibrium. To keep this marginal trader indifferent, the market price must
increase with z and reveal z publicly to all market participants or outside observers. The expression
for P (z, k) compounds this second informational effect of z with the market-clearing effect, whereas
the expected dividend V (z, k) only contains the informational response to z.5

2.3

Stage 1: Investment Decision

At the first stage, incumbent shareholders choose k to maximize the expected value of their equity:
max E {αP (z; k) + (1 − α) Π (θ, k)} ,
k≥0

(2)

where P (z; k) is characterized by (1). The incumbent shareholder’s objective differs from expected
dividends by the term αE (P (z; k) − Π (θ, k)), which can be interpreted as a pure transfer, i.e. a
5

We extensively discussed properties of this wedge between P (z, k) and V (z, k) in Albagli, Hellwig and Tsyvin-

ski (2011b). The closed form characterization extends to a general model with risk-neutral traders and arbitrary
distributions and position limits. The functional form assumptions are convenient for comparative statics, but not
otherwise crucial for our analysis.

9

rent that acrues to incumbent shareholders. Incumbent shareholders can influence the expected
size of this transfer through the choice of k. Noisy information aggregation thus introduces a
rent-seeking motive into incumbent shareholder preferences.
This rent-seeking motive arises because incumbent shareholders sell a fraction of their equity
share at a price that differs in expectation from the shares’ expected dividends. In the limit
where the incumbent shareholders keep all their shares (i.e. α → 0), or in an efficient market (i.e.
if P (z; k) = V (z; k)), the rent-seeking motive disappears, and incumbent and final shareholder
incentives are aligned on maximizing E (Π (θ, k)).6
Two properties of noisy information aggregation are key for generating a rent-seeking motive and
conflict of interest between incumbent and final shareholders. First, noisy information aggregation
adds not just noise to stock prices, which would average out from an ex ante perspective, but
also a bias. In other words, P (z; k) − V (z; k) responds systematically to the price realization (i.e.
Π − P and P are not orthogonal to each other). Second, incumbent shareholders have the means
to influence the magnitude of this wedge through the investment decision taken at the first stage.

3

Investment distortions from market frictions

In this section, we explore investment distortions due to noisy information aggregation in partial
equilibrium, and discuss possible policy interventions designed to restore efficiency.

3.1

Equilibrium investment distortions

In our model, the efficient investment k ∗ sets C 0 (k ∗ ) = E (R (θ)). The initial shareholders instead
choose k̂ to equate the marginal cost of investment to a weighted average of expected market return
E (E (R (θ) |x = z, z)) and expected dividend return E (R (θ)):
 
C 0 k̂ = αE (E (R (θ) |x = z, z)) + (1 − α) E (R (θ)) .

(3)

It then follows that k̂ T k ∗ if and only if E (E (R (θ) |x = z, z)) T E (R (θ)). Whenever the
expected market return to investment exceeds the expected fundamental return, the initial shareholders find it optimal to over-invest to enhance the over-valuation of their shares. When instead
the expected wedge is negative, the initial shareholders want to under-invest in order to limit the
6

P (z, k) = V (z, k) could result for example with free entry of uninformed arbitrageurs as in Kyle (1985), or when

there is a public signal z, but no private information, and no heterogeneity among informed traders, so that they
must be indifferent about buying at equilibrium. This also corresponds to the limiting case of our model with β → 0.

10

under-valuation of their shares. The return ratio E (E (R (θ) |x = z, z)) /E (R (θ)) determines the
impact of market frictions on expected investment returns.
We first relate the return ratio and hence the sign of the investment distortion to asymmetry
between upside and downside risks. A return R (·) is symmetric if R (θ) − R (0) = R (0) − R (−θ)
for all θ > 0. R (·) is dominated by upside risk, if R (θ) − R (0) ≥ R (0) − R (−θ) for all θ > 0,
and dominated by downside risk if R (θ) − R (0) ≤ R (0) − R (−θ) for all θ > 0. This classification
compares gains and losses at fixed distances from the prior median to determine whether risks are
concentrated on the upside or on the downside.
Standard arguments of compounding normal distributions imply that E (E (R (θ) |x = z, z)) =
√
−1
−1
−∞ R (θ) dΦ( λP θ), for some λP > λ , i.e. from an ex ante perspective the market attributes

R∞

too much weight to tail realizations of θ. The parameter λ−1
P depends on β, δ, and λ and summarizes
the severity of market frictions. By Theorem 2 in Albagli, Hellwig and Tsyvinski (2011b), if R (·)
is symmetric, E (E (R (θ) |x = z, z)) = E (R (θ)) and investment is undistorted (k̂ = k ∗ ). If R (·) is
dominated by upside risk then E (E (R (θ) |x = z, z)) > E (R (θ)) and the firm over-invests (k̂ > k ∗ ).
If R (·) is dominated by downside risk then E (E (R (θ) |x = z, z)) < E (R (θ)) and the firm underinvests (k̂ < k ∗ ).7
When returns to investment are asymmetrically distributed, the bias in share prices that is due
to the over-weighting of the market signal z results in upside bias (in the case of upside risk) or
downside bias (in the case of downside risk) of the expected market return to investment. Shares
are over-priced in expectation when z is high and under-priced when z is low, and the extent of overor under-pricing depends on the conditional uncertainty about dividends, given z. With symmetric
returns, posterior uncertainty is symmetric w.r.t. the realization of z and over- and under-pricing
just offset each other. But in the case of upside (downside) risk, this uncertainty is higher (lower)
on the upside so that on average the market over-values (under-values) investment returns.
We next relate the magnitude of investment distortions and efficiency losses to the return ratio
E (E (R (θ) |x = z, z)) /E (R (θ)), the elasticity of marginal costs χ, and the fraction of shares sold
α. Investment distortions are defined as |k̂/k ∗ − 1|. The efficiency loss ∆ = 1 − V /V ∗ is the loss in
 
expected dividends V = E (R (θ))·k̂−C k̂ , relative to the efficient level V ∗ = E (R (θ))·k ∗ −C (k ∗ ).
If ∆ > 1, efficiency losses are so large that expected dividends are negative.
Proposition 2 : Comparative statics of investment distortions and efficiency losses.
7

Furthermore, for upside risks, the return ratio E (E (R (θ) |x = z, z)) /E (R (θ)) is strictly increasing in λ−1
P , while

for downside risks the return ratio is strictly decreasing in λ−1
P .

11

Figure 1: Investment distortions and efficiency losses
 1

 1

a) Underinvestment (downside risk)
  R   

  R   

   R   | x  z, z ) 

   R   | x  z, z ) 

mg. cost

mg. cost


k̂ k

k

k̂

k

k

b) Overinvestment (upside risk)
   R   | x  z, z ) 

   R   | x  z, z ) 
  R   

  R   

mg. cost

mg. cost

k  k̂

k

k

k̂

k

(i) Comparative Statics: |k̂/k ∗ − 1| = ∆ = 0 only if E (E (R (θ) |x = z, z)) = E (R (θ)),
χ → ∞, or α → 0. |k̂/k ∗ − 1| and ∆ are increasing in α and |E (E (R (θ) |x = z, z)) /E (R (θ)) − 1|
and decreasing in χ.
(ii) Bounded Distortions on the Downside: If E (E (R (θ) |x = z, z)) < E (R (θ)), then
limχ→0 k̂/k ∗ = 0 and limχ→0 ∆ = 1.
(iii) Unbounded Distortions on the Upside: |k̂/k ∗ − 1| and ∆ become infinitely large, if
either E (E (R (θ) |x = z, z)) /E (R (θ)) → ∞, or χ → 0 and E (E (R (θ) |x = z, z)) > E (R (θ)).
(iv) Negative Expected Dividends: Expected dividends are negative (∆ > 1), whenever


E (E (R (θ) |x = z, z))
− 1 > χ.
(4)
α
E (R (θ))
The return ratio determines the initial shareholders’ incentive to distort their investment, while
the returns to scale parameter χ determines their ability to do so. With close to constant returns
(low χ), optimal investment is easily scaleable and thus very sensitive to expected market returns,
and the scope for investment distortions and efficiency losses can become very large. At the other
extreme, if marginal costs are very sensitive to k (high χ), investment is not easily scaleable, and
investment distortions and welfare losses are small.
Figure 1 illustrates the comparative statics described by proposition 2. We plot marginal costs
and expected market and fundamental returns, for high and low values of χ, and for the case with
over- and under-investment respectively. In all cases, the black triangular area corresponds to the

12

welfare loss, relative to the efficient investment level k ∗ . The upper panels consider the case with
under-investment: the grey area corresponds to the realized social surplus V , while the maximal
surplus V ∗ corresponds to the combined gray and black areas. The lower two panels consider the
case with over-investment: the striped area corresponds to V ∗ , the welfare loss corresponds to the
black area, and the realized surplus V to the difference between the striped and the black areas.
In both cases, a lower value of χ leads to a larger impact of frictions on investment and welfare.
In extreme cases, welfare losses exceed 100% of the first-best welfare level, i.e. the firm generates
negative expected cash flows. This occurs, whenever the elasticity of marginal costs χ is less than
the return distortion, which is given by the distance of the return ratio from 1, multiplied by the
fraction of shares sold. Even a small departure from the efficient markets benchmark (in terms of
E (E (R (θ) |x = z, z)) /E (R (θ))) can have very large efficiency consequences for firms that operate
near constant returns, and with investments that are characterized by upside risk. On the other
hand, with under-investment the firm’s expected dividends always remain positive.8
To summarize, frictions in equity markets can distort shareholder incentives to invest and
take risks. The direction and magnitude of the resulting investment distortions and efficiency
losses depend on the firms’ returns to scale and on whether returns are characterized by upside
or downside risks. If near constant returns are coupled with upside risks, even small frictions
in financial markets can have very large efficiency consequences – so large in fact that the firm
generates negative expected surplus.

3.2

Policy interventions

Our model offers a new rationale for corrective policy measures that offset the distortive effects of
equity market frictions on risk-taking incentives. If financial markets were efficient, such interventions could only reduce welfare.
Direct Regulatory Oversight: Investment Caps or Floors. A simple way to regulate the
firm’s incentives is to restrict shareholder discretion by introducing a cap on investment to eliminate
over-investment or a floor to eliminate under-investment. The optimal regulation imposes a cap or
floor equal to k ∗ .
Financial Transaction Tax. Taxes on financial transactions or dividends can also be used to
8

Further distortions emerge if the firm can choose between different return profiles. While a social planner wants

the firm to maximize the fundamental return E (R (θ)), the initial shareholders have a preference for maximizing
expected market returns E (E (R (θ) |x = z, z)). This skews decisions in favor of upside risks.

13

influence firm incentives. But such taxes must be state-contingent in order to be effective.9 Consider
a contingent transaction tax τ (z) that conditions on the market price. Such a tax modifies the
incumbent shareholder’s objective function to αE ((1 − τ (z)) P (z, k)) + (1 − α) E (Π (θ, k)). The
tax function τ (z) implements k ∗ if and only if E {(1 − τ (z)) Pk (z, k ∗ )} = 0.
Proposition 3 Contingent transaction taxes must lean against return asymmetries.
For any τ (z), let τ̂ (z) = (τ (z) − E (τ (z))) / (1 − E (τ (z))). A tax policy τ (·) implements k ∗ ,
if and only if
E (E (R (θ) |x = z, z)) − E (R (θ)) = cov (τ̂ (z) , E (R (θ) |x = z, z)) .

(5)

The optimal tax policy reduces the asymmetry in shareholders’ investment returns: If the
tax function is increasing, then returns are taxed more heavily on the upside. The shareholders’
returns are then less dominated by upside risk, which dampens investment incentives. This reduces
distortions if the gross investment returns were dominated by upside risk. If instead the tax function
is decreasing, then it shifts the shareholder’s expected returns to the upside, which strengthens
investment incentives. This policy improves efficiency when returns are dominated by downside
risk. Equation (5) spells out how the tax policy on the RHS alters expected shareholder returns
until the change in shareholder returns corresponds to the level needed to implement k ∗ (on the
LHS). Taxes and tax revenues do not have to be strictly positive on average, since incentives are
shifted by the relative size of taxes on the upside vs. the downside.
Market Interventions. Market interventions are another channel through which a policy
maker can influence investment incentives. Like the optimal tax policy, they are based on the idea
of “leaning against return asymmetries”.
Suppose that a policy maker commits to buy shares at a guaranteed support price P̄ > 0. For
a given k, and for any z such that P (z, k) ≡ E (R (θ) |x = z, z) k − C (k) > P̄ , this intervention has
no effect on the market. However, if P (z, k) < P̄ , the policy maker buys a positive level of shares.
This occurs whenever z falls below some threshold ẑ. The initial shareholders’ objective is then


to maximize αE max P̄ , P (z, k) + (1 − α) E (Π (θ, k)). The implemented investment k̂ satisfies
the following first order condition:
  α R ∞ E (R (θ) |x = z, z) dΦ √λ z  + (1 − α) E (R (θ))
z
ẑ

√
C 0 k̂ =
1 − α + α 1 − Φ λz ẑ
9

(6)

With an uncontingent tax on share sales, the shareholders maximize E ((1 − τ ) αP (z; k) + (1 − α) V (z, k)), re-

ducing the relative weight on the share price from α to α (1 − τ ) / (1 − ατ ). This reduces the distortion, but the tax
has to be completely confiscatory (τ = 1) if it is to fully restore efficiency. Likewise, an uncontingent dividend tax is
fully passed into share prices with no effect on incentives.

14

This condition uniquely defines k̂ as a function of ẑ, and the associated value of P̄ then satisfies
 
P̄ = E (R (θ) |x = ẑ, ẑ) k̂ − C k̂ .10 This intervention increases investment and therefore improves
efficiency only if the equilibrium without intervention resulted in under-investment.11
Proposition 4 When E (E (R (θ) |x = z, z)) < E (R (θ)), support prices improve efficiency.
(i) Define z ∗ by E (R (θ)) = E (E (R (θ) |x = z, z) |z ≥ z ∗ ). A market intervention with a support
price P̄ implements k ∗ , if and only if P̄ = E (R (θ) |x = z ∗ , z ∗ ) k ∗ − C (k ∗ ).
(ii) Market interventions generate negative expected revenues.
With a support price, the expected market return from investment is E (E (R (θ) |x = z, z) |z ≥ ẑ).
Just like the tax policy, the efficient market intervention aligns the expected market return with
E (R (θ)) with a support price that equates the intervention threshold ẑ to z ∗ .
However, such market interventions are not revenue-neutral. Although the policy maker buys
shares at prices below fundamental values, he is also exposed to a winner’s curse problem and will
buy a larger share when fundamentals are worse. Because of the winner’s curse problem, the policy
maker’s expected revenue is negative.
The focus on efficiency masks the fact that policy interventions have re-destributive effects. In
partial equilibrium, there is a natural conflict of interest between incumbent shareholders and final
shareholders over shareholder rents and policies that seek to curb rent-seeking incentives. Incumbent shareholders dislike policies that reduce the rents they can capture without a compensating
subsidy, and favor policies that provide incentives through explicit or implicit subsidies. Final
shareholders and the social planner benefit only if expected dividends increase by more than rents
and subsidies going to initial shareholders. Thus direct regulatory interference that does not involve transfers or subsidies is clearly preferred by final shareholders but resisted by incumbent
shareholder who would rather favor market interventions or direct subsidies.

4

General equilibrium: micro-foundations, welfare and policy

In this section, we achieve three objectives. First, we provide a rationale for equating welfare to
expected dividends in the context of a general equilibrium economy with heterogeneous firms. We
measure welfare from the perspective of representative incumbent and final shareholders who invest
10

While P̄ and k̂ are uniquely determined for a threshold signal ẑ, the reverse need not be true: The relation

between P̄ and ẑ is not necessary monotonic, resulting in the possibility of multiple equilibria for the investment level
and market outcome, for a given price support P̄ .
11
With over-investment, the policy maker would have to short-sell equity at a pre-set price to limit upside gains.

15

in a broad cross-section of firms with firm-specific fundamentals, signals and noise-trading shocks,
and no aggregate uncertainty. Second, we discuss how individual firms’ investment decisions interact
in general equilibrium and identify a novel pecuniary externality that amplifies partial equilibrium
investment distortions with downside risk, but dampens them with upside risk, thus resulting in the
opposite conclusions of the partial equilibrium model. Third, we describe the general equilibrium
effects of policy interventions.

4.1

Micro-Foundations

There is a unit measure of firms, indexed by i and characterized by a firm-specific fundamental θi
which is iid across firms and distributed according to θi ∼ N (0, λ−1 ). These firms are owned and
controlled by incumbent shareholders who in a first stage control investment decisions ki by each
of these firms. Afterwards, incumbent shareholders sell a fraction α of shares to a new generation
of “final shareholders”.
Our general equilibrium model combines three decision layers: the aggregate stock market
endogenously determines α along with the aggregate market value of equity. The microstructure
of equity markets determines individual firms’ share prices. The incumbent shareholders’ stage 1
decision determines investment in each firm. We describe each of these layers in turn.
R
1. Preferences and aggregate market values: Let T = Pi di denote the aggregate market value
R
of firms, and V = Πi di the aggregate dividends. The incumbent shareholders’ preferences over


stage 1 consumption C1I = αT and stage 2 consumption C2I = (1 − α) V is vI C1I + uI C2I .
The final shareholders’ preferences over stage 1 consumption C1F = −αT and stage 2 consumption

C2F = αV is C1F + uF C2F , where the functions uI , vI and uF satisfy standard Inada conditions.
For a given value of V , T and α, the incumbent and final shareholders consumption levels satisfy
C1I = αT = −C1F , C2I = (1 − α) V , and C2F = αV , and the equilibrium values of α and T are
uniquely determined from the incumbent and final shareholders’ first-order conditions
u0 ((1 − α) V )
T
= Q̂−1 = I 0
= u0F (αV ) .
V
vI (αT )

(7)

Therefore, in the aggregate the financial market aligns the intertemporal marginal rates of substitution of incumbent and final shareholders. The aggregate market value of firms T = V u0F (αV )
is equal to aggregate dividends discounted at the shareholders’ intertemporal MRS Q̂−1 . An increase in V strictly increases final shareholder welfare. If in addition −C ·u00F (C) /u0F (C) ≤ 1 for all
C, then these welfare gains are passed on to incumbent shareholders through the aggregate market
value of firms (i.e. at equilibrium, αT and V (1 − α) are increasing functions of V ). This justifies
16

aggregate dividends as a measure of social welfare.
The endogenous choice of the fraction of shares α that are acquired by final shareholders aligns
incumbent and final shareholders’ marginal valuations in the aggregate, resulting in no mis-pricing
of aggregate dividends. This result holds independently of how the shares of individual firms are
traded. The absence of aggregate mis-pricing however does not preclude the possibility of mispricing of shares at the firm level.
2. Microstructure of equity markets: We assume that neither final nor incumbent shareholders
have inside information in the firms, and the incumbent shareholders thus sell a fixed fraction α
of each firm. Final shareholders do not actively manage their investments but invest through two
types of funds, mutual funds and hedge funds. As the owner of all hedge funds and mutual funds,
the final shareholders indirectly purchases the aggregate market portfolio of firms.
Mutual funds receive a stochastic inflow of funds and their investment strategies are strictly
regulated: they invest by purchasing an equal number of equity shares in a fixed set of firms.
The fraction of shares in firm i that are purchased by mutual funds is given by αΦ (ui ), where
ui ∼ N (0, δ −1 ) denotes a random, firm-specific liquidity shock that is iid across firms. Hedge
funds on the other hand acquire noisy private information about the different firms’ fundamentals
and then take positions in specific firms that are deemed sufficiently promising. There is a unit
measure of such funds, who each obtain idiosyncratic private signals xi ∼ N (θi , β −1 ) about each
firms’ fundamental, after which (s)he decides in which firm to invest. To limit exposure to the
risks associated with any individual firm, the hedge fund’s positions are limited to no more than α
shares per firm.12
The funds αT = αE (Pi ) invested by final shareholders are split such that in the aggregate,
E (αΦ (ui ) Pi ) are invested by mutual funds who purchase a random fraction αΦ (ui ) of the shares
in firm i. The remainder is allocated to hedge funds. Each hedge fund in turn either invests its
funds directly in firms by buying up to α units of equity, by lending to other hedge funds at a
market rate Q.13 Hence a hedge fund will invest in firm i if and only if its expectations about that
firms’ dividend satisfy E (Π (θi , ki ) |x, Pi ) ≥ QPi , resulting in a characterization of an indifference
threshold z that is a monotone function of the price Pi . As in section 2, the equilibrium price is
√
represented as a function of a sufficient statistic zi = θi + 1/ βui and satisfies
Pi (zi , ki ) =
12

1
· E (Π (θi , ki ) |x = zi , zi ) .
Q

(8)

Here we assume that the representative final shareholders’ equity purchases through hedge funds and mutual

funds scale with their aggregate demand for shares.
13
This assumptions guarantees that all hedge funds have the same threshold return Q.

17

Taking expectations and combining with E (Pi ) = T = V Q̂−1 , the equilibrium value of Q is
Q = Q̂

E {E (Π (θi , ki ) |x = z, z)}
.
V

(9)

Relative to the incumbent and final shareholders’ inter-temporal MRS, the hedge funds’ marginal
return is distorted by a factor E {E (Π (θi , ki ) |x = z, z)} /V that corresponds to the ratio between
the expected market value and the dividend value of firms.
3. Incumbent shareholders’ decision problem: Incumbent shareholders of any given firm i maximize expected cash flow from equity sale in stage 1 and dividends in stage 2, weighted by their
respective marginal utilities and taking the aggregate market values, α, V and Q as given:
n
o
max E αQ̂Pi (zi , ki ) + (1 − α) Π (θi , ki ) .
ki ≥0

Substituting (8) into (10), this optimization problem takes the form
(
)
Q̂
max α E {E (Π (θi , ki ) |x = zi , zi )} + (1 − α) E {Π (θi , ki )} .
ki ≥0
Q

(10)

(11)

Hence, as in our partial equilibrium model, the incumbent shareholders maximize a weighted
average of share price and dividend value. However, the relative weight on these two objectives
depends not just on the fraction of shares sold α, but also on the distortion between the hedge
funds marginal return and their own inter-temporal marginal rate of substitution. This is because
the market price Pi (zi , ki ) discounts future dividends at the hedge funds’ marginal return which
are not aligned at equilibrium with shareholders.
General equilibrium allocations are then fully characterized by values for α, Q, and k that solve
the intertemporal equilibrium condition (7), the first-order condition for the firm’s investment choice
in (11), and the characterization of Q in (9).
These micro-foundations rationalize the main assumptions of our partial equilibrium model in
the context of a heterogeneous firm economy with no aggregate uncertainty by assuming that all
shocks are firm-specific. Because final shareholders hold a representative portfolio of firms, their
welfare is measured by aggregate dividends, and because the no-arbitrage principle still applies at
the aggregate level, the value of aggregate dividends is passed on to incumbent shareholders through
the aggregate market value of firms. Aggregation thus offers a justification for risk-neutrality w.r.t.
the realized dividends from any given firm.14
14

Our formulation also overcomes the recurrent critique that welfare discussions are incomplete without a proper

specification of noise trader welfare. Here such concerns do not apply because (i) our model with delegated investment

18

Within this aggregate model, we have then invoked a stylized view of delegated portfolio management, along with trading restrictions that limit exposures to specific firms, to justify our specific
model of noisy information aggregation with portfolio constraints. While a full micro-foundation of
such limits would take us too far afield, such restrictions may indeed be part of optimal delegation
of decisions (Alonso and Matouschek, 2008, Amador and Bagwell, 2013).

4.2

Investment distortions in general equilibrium: a pecuniary externality

Next, we discuss how the decisions of shareholders in different firms interact with each other
through the hedge funds’ marginal return Q. If financial markets were efficient (in the sense that
Pi (zi , ki ) = Q−1 ·E (Π (θi , ki ) |zi )), the same aggregation arguments as above imply that Q = Q̂, i.e.
hedge fund and incumbent shareholders’ intertemporal marginal rates of substitution are aligned,
and incumbent shareholders have an incentive to maximize expected dividends, i.e. k = k ∗ .
We can contrast this efficient market allocation with the equilibrium that results with market
imperfections. To simplify the characterization, suppose that incumbent shareholder preferences


are given by vI C1I + uI C2I = α0 lnC1I + (1 − α0 ) lnC2I with α0 ∈ (0, 1), so that their supply of
equity shares is inelastic at α = α0 .
Consider the limiting case in which χ → 0. Let V ∗ denote the first-best dividends, let VP E
denote the level of dividends in partial equilibrium with Q = Q̂ (characterized as V in section 3),
and VGE and kGE the general equilibrium level of dividends and investment.
Proposition 5 Investment distortions in general equilibrium
(i) Bounded distortions with upside risk: If E (E (R (θ) |x = z, z)) > E (R (θ)), then for small χ,
C 0 (kGE ) ≈ E (R (θ)) (1 + α0 χ), VGE /V ∗ ≈ (1 − α0 ) eα0 < 1, and Q/Q̂ → ∞.
(ii) Unbounded distortions with downside risk: If E (E (R (θ) |x = z, z)) < E (R (θ)), then for
small χ, C 0 (kGE ) ≈ E (E (R (θ) |x = z, z)) (1 + (1 − α0 ) χ), VGE /VP E → 0, and Q/Q̂ → 0.
This proposition shows how general equilibrium effects operating through the hedge funds’
marginal return Q interact with firm-level investment distortions. The result is based on two key
observations. First, investment choices in individual firms exert a pecuniary externality on each
other through their effect on Q. Second, the equilibrium value of Q feeds back into the firm
interprets such shocks as resulting from random perturbations in mutual fund inflows, and (ii) from the perspective
of the representative shareholder, noise trader losses are exactly offset by informed trader gains, both of which accrue
to final shareholders, thus netting out from any welfare calculation.

19

incentives, amplifying rent-seeking incentives in the case of downside risk, and dampening them in
the case of upside risk.
To understand the origin of the pecuniary externality, we substitute (9) into (8). If we let k̂
denote the aggregate investment level, we find the following expression for the share price of firm
i and the interaction between ki and k̂:
Pi (zi , ki ) =

 

E (Π (θ , k ) |x = zi , zi )
n  i i 
o · Q̂−1 · E Π θi , k̂
E E Π θi , k̂ |x = z, z

(12)

This characterization of the equilibrium price highlights how the rent-seeking objective of incumbent
shareholders introduces a negative pecuniary externality: for a given aggregate market value of
firms, incumbent shareholders in a specific firm gain from distorting investment to increase the
market value of their own shares, but they do not internalize that if all firms engage in this behavior,
then aggregate dividends will be lower, which lowers the aggregate market value of firms and hence
their own aggregate welfare. The shareholders’ rent-seeking incentives at the micro level turn out
to be self-defeating in the aggregate. This feedback is similar to the collateral channel in Lorenzoni
(2008) or the private trades channel of Farhi, Golosov and Tsyvinski (2009). But the origin of the
pecuniary externality is different, as it emerges from market imperfections rather than incentive
problems. In addition, the share price directly enters the firms’ objective thereby affecting incentives
to invest, rather than affecting investment indirectly through incentive or financial constraints.
Second, the pecuniary externality feeds back into the incumbent shareholders objective via
the intertemporal investment wedge Q/Q̂ that influences the relative weight associated with the
share price. Without an intertemporal distortion, i.e. if Q = Q̂, firms set marginal costs equal to
C 0 (k) = α0 E {E (R (θ) |x = z, z)} + (1 − α0 ) E (R (θ)).
With upside risk, there is an upwards distortion in hedge fund interest rates, relative to the
shareholders’ intertemporal MRS, i.e. Q > Q̂. This induces incumbent shareholders to place more
weight on maximizing expected dividends, reduces the rent-seeking motive relative to the partial
equilibrium analysis, and dampens investment distortions. Moreover (7) implies that expected
dividends and share prices must be positive in general equilibrium, and that therefore the extent
of over-investment cannot become too large. In other words, marginal costs C 0 (k) cannot stray
too far from E (R (θ)), and in the limit as χ → 0, C 0 (k) must converge to E (R (θ)). In this limit,
the intertemporal wedge becomes large (Q/Q̂ → ∞), dividends remain positive, yet strictly lower
than at the first best, and investment remains distorted up by a factor eα0 in the limit. Hence the
general equilibrium effects offset a large part of the partial equilibrium investment distortion, but
do not restore efficiency entirely. Depending on the fraction of shares traded in equilibrium, the
20

welfare loss relative to first-best can still be very substantial.15
With downside risk, the distortion in hedge fund interest rates is downwards, Q < Q̂. This
pushes incumbent shareholders to shift even more weight on expected share prices, which reinforces
the rent-seeking motive, and the associated pecuniary externality. In the limit as χ → 0, marginal
costs C 0 (k) must converge to E (E (R (θ) |x = z, z)). The amplification thus becomes so strong that
it pushes shareholders to invest as if all their shares were sold in the market. Expected dividends
vanish even relative to the partial equilibrium benchmark.16 The general equilibrium effects thus
vastly amplify the partial equilibrium distortion.
To summarize, in general equilibrium, shareholder rent-seeking generates a pecuniary externality and an intertemporal investment distortion. The intertemporal distortion partly offsets the
pecuniary externality in the case of upside risk, but reinforces it in the case of downside risk. Interestingly, and in contrast to the partial equilibrium analysis, the welfare consequences of market
frictions are now more severe with downside risk, but limited with upside risk. And once again,
returns to scale determine the severity of investment distortions and pecuniary externalities. The
limiting results with χ → 0 illustrate that even small imperfections in equity markets can have very
dramatic consequences for incentives, investment and welfare.

4.3

Policy implications: general equilibrium

General equilibrium forces align incumbent and final shareholder welfare with expected dividends:
the conflicts of interests that arise over rent-seeking incentives in partial equilibrium disappear
in the aggregate as welfare gains by final shareholders are passed on to incumbent shareholders
through the aggregate market value of equity. At the same time, investment remains inefficient,
and distortions may be amplified through a pecuniary externality.
Here, we discuss the general equilibrium effects associated with the policy interventions analyzed
in section 3.2. We show that policies that improve shareholder incentives at the firm level may
impair the financial market’s role for intertemporal allocation of resources. This tradeoff becomes
particularly salient in the case of downside risk.
For technical reasons, we assume that hedge funds, incumbent and final shareholders can store
resources from stage 1 to stage 2 at a small, positive riskfree return Q̄ > 0. This assumption insures
that the hedge funds’ lending rate Q cannot fall below Q̄, and that therefore the market and shareRecall that as χ → 0, VP E /V ∗ → −∞ and k̂/k∗ → ∞. Negative dividends are not possible in general equilibrium.
16
Recall that V /V ∗ → 0 as χ → 0. It is straight-forward to construct examples in which V ∗ → ∞ as χ → 0, but
15

VGE → 0, i.e. first-best dividends grow infinitely large, yet the realized surplus completely vanishes.

21

holder discount rates always remain well defined. At the laissez-faire benchmark, this constraint is
binding only in the case with downside risk and small χ, where it limits the downwards adjustment
of Q that is needed to align aggregate market returns of equity with incumbent and final shareholders’ intertemporal MRS. This pushes the market into a situation of excess demand for shares,
as final shareholders become eager to buy the aggregate portfolio, but incumbent shareholders are
unwilling to sell at depressed prices. Storage by incumbent and final shareholders implies that

Q̂ = 1/u0F CF2 ≥ Q̄, for otherwise final shareholders would strictly prefer storage over equity as a
means to transfer wealth across time, but for small Q̄, this constraint is never binding.

For a given value of V , an aggregate consumption allocation CI1 , CI2 ; CF1 , CF2 for initial and final
shareholders is feasible if it satisfies aggregate resource constraints CI1 + CF1 ≤ 0 and CI2 + CF2 ≤ V ,
and it satisfies intertemporal efficiency if no other feasible allocation yields strictly higher utility for
both initial and final shareholders. Intertemporally efficient allocations must satisfy the resource
constraints with equality, and equate initial and final shareholders’ intertemporal marginal rates



of substitution: Q̂ = vI0 CI1 /u0I CI2 = 1/u0F CF2 . The equilibrium characterized in section 4.1
satisfies intertemporal efficiency.
For any policy intervention, let (TI , VI ) and (TF , VF ) denote the aggregate market value and final
dividends associated with equity sales and purchases from the incumbents’ and final shareholders’
perspective, respectively. Their first-order conditions w.r.t. α imply that an equilibrium allocation
is intertemporally efficient if and only if VI /T I = VF /TF , i.e. the incumbent and final shareholders
perceive the same ratio of market value at stage 1 to dividend value at stage 2.
Policy interventions affect market allocations in two ways. First, they may drive a wedge
between incumbent and final shareholders’ market returns VI /T I and VF /TF , and hence between
their intertemporal marginal rates of substitution.
Second, they may cause the market to enter situations of excess demand or excess supply of
equity shares, or even to break down completely if one side finds it optimal not to trade equity.
These situations arise if there exists no Q ≥ Q̄, at which the firm-level valuation of equity shares is
consistent with the incumbent and final shareholders’ aggregate first-order conditions. Specifically,
if TI is too low relative to VI /Q̂, then incumbent shareholders strictly prefer to hold on to their
shares, although final shareholders may want to buy a positive amount. If VF is low relative to

TF /u0F CF2 , final shareholders may prefer to stay out of the market and incumbent shareholders

are unable to sell. Finally, if TF is low relative to VF u0F CF2 , the demand by final shareholders
may exceed the amount of shares supplied by incumbent shareholders. In all these cases, the micro
trading frictions prevent full adjustment of aggregate share prices.

22

In a market breakdown, incumbent shareholders remain the final owners of the firms and therefore take efficient investment decisions. Market breakdown does not automatically cause intertemporal distortions, if resources can be re-allocated through other means, for example lump sum taxes
and transfers. But efficiency in this case is not a market outcome and thus very different from the
efficient markets benchmark.
The following proposition summarizes how the policies introduced in section 3.2 affect market
outcomes in general equilibrium, when χ is small.
Proposition 6 Policy interventions impair intertemporal trade
(i)Regulatory policies: Regulatory policies that curb overinvestment in the case of upside risk
(E (E (R (θ) |x = z, z)) > E (R (θ))) improve efficiency without causing intertemporal distortions or
market breakdowns. Regulatory policies that aim to reduce under-investment in the case of downside
risk (E (E (R (θ) |x = z, z)) < E (R (θ))) cause a market breakdown when χ is small (TI ≤ 0).
(ii) Transaction taxes with upside risk: Transaction taxes and subsidies that curb (but
do not eliminate) over-investment have no first-order effect on investment when χ is sufficiently
small. Transaction taxes and subsidies that eliminate over-investment without causing intertemporal
distortions require extreme transaction subsidies for some equity transactions.
(iii) Transaction taxes with downside risk: Transaction taxes and subsidies that seek to
reduce under-investment must subsidize equity purchases, causing intertemporal distortions and an
excess demand for shares by final shareholders (TF ≤ 0) when χ is sufficiently small.
(iv) Market interventions with downside risk: For small χ, equity purchases at a preset price that seek to curb underinvestment cause a market breakdown if they are not aggressive
enough (TI ≤ 0), or if they are too aggressive (VF ≤ 0). For a middle range of intervention levels,
the intervention causes over-investment, intertemporal distortions, and excess demand of shares
(VF /TF → ∞), but the market remains in operation.
Regulatory policies do not interfere with market values, and therefore cannot cause intertemporal distortions (i.e. TI = TF = T and VI = VF = V ). In the case of upside risk they curb excess
investment without disrupting equity markets. In the case of downside risk, however, they push
firms to take investment decisions that are penalized by the stock market, i.e. the market prices in
the additional investment cost, but not the full dividend return. When χ → 0, this causes aggregate
stock prices to drop to zero, at which point incumbent shareholders withdraw from the market,
whenever average investment costs exceed market returns: C (k) /k ≥ E (E (R (θ) |x = z, z)).
With tax interventions, as long as VI = VF , i.e. net of tax dividends are the same for incumbent
23

and final shareholders, intertemporal efficiency holds if and only if the aggregate transaction tax
revenue TF − TI is zero. In the case of upside risk, general equilibrium forces already curb overinvestment to a large extent if χ is small. Thus, any attempt to influence investment incentives
through tax policies is met one-for-one by an offsetting reduction in the corresponding general
equilibrium adjustment.17 This is no longer the case if the tax policy targets the efficient level
exactly, but such policies are only feasible with infinitely large subsidies on some equity trades.18
With tax interventions and downside risk, it is impossible to improve investment incentives
without subsidizing equity purchases, when χ is sufficiently small. Moreover, the aggregate market
value of equity (net of subsidies) can be smaller than the subsidy itself, so the pre-subsidy value
of equity is negative. In effect the policy maker “bribes” final shareholders into purchasing the
equity in order to enhance investment incentives for incumbent shareholders. At these prices and
subsidies, the stock market becomes a free lunch for final shareholders who wish to purchase as
much equity as they can get, but are limited to the quantity offered by incumbent shareholders. In
the limit as χ → 0, we have TI − TF ≈ (C 0 (k) − E (E (R (θ) |x = z, z))) k, so the policy is equivalent
to directly subsidizing investment.
With market interventions, we characterize (QTI , VI ) and (QTF , VF ) as a function of the intervention threshold ẑ and show that the intervention inevitably causes incumbent shareholders to
withdraw from the market whenever ẑ is less than some threshold z1 > z ∗ . It therefore becomes
impossible to restore investment efficiency while relying on the stock market for intertemporal efficiency. It may seem paradoxical that an intervention meant to curb under-pricing at the level of
individual firms actually exacerbates under-pricing in the aggregate. The reason this happens is
due to the feedback from the intervention to investment and share prices: a market intervention
that limits the most severe under-pricing also induces incumbent shareholder to invest more. For
realizations of z > ẑ, the market prices in the higher investment cost without fully pricing in its
returns, thus resulting in lower share prices. In the aggregate, when χ is small, this indirect effect
dominates the direct effect of the intervention, lowering aggregate market values to the point that
the market eventually breaks down.
An intervention with threshold ẑ > z1 no longer causes incumbent shareholders to withdraw, but
instead transforms the investment into an upside risk from the incumbent shareholders’ perspective.
There are now two possibilities depending on how the intervention influences equity returns to final
17

This result follows from the fact that with upside risk and small χ, C 0 (kGE ) ≈ E (R (θ)) (1 + α0 χ), i.e. investment

no longer responds to market returns.
18
If the tax policy went so far as to under-shoot the efficient investment level, then general equilibrium forces will
take over and amplify the resulting under-investment.

24

shareholders. For very high intervention levels (i.e. when ẑ exceeds some threshold z2 > z1 ), the
intervention drives up share prices and lowers equity returns for final shareholders causing them
to withdraw from the market (VF ≤ 0) – once again the market breaks down. For intermediate
intervention levels, i.e. whenever ẑ ∈ (z1 , z2 ), instead drives up final shareholder returns on equity
since the effect of the policy on final shareholder dividends dominates the effect on market values,
to the point where equity (almost) becomes a free lunch again (VF /TF → ∞). Aggregate demand
for shares then inevitably exceeds supply by incumbent shareholders. In this case, the intervention
leads to over-investment and intertemporal distortions, but general equilibrium forces once again
take over to limit how much over-investment the market intervention can cause: when χ is small,
the intervention threshold ẑ ∈ (z1 , z2 ) does not affect investment to a first order.19
To summarize, with upside risk, regulatory interventions are well suited to curb over-investment,
but general equilibrium forces mute the effectiveness of market-based interventions. With downside
risks, attempts to enhance investment without fully compensating shareholders for the marginal
investment cost depress aggregate share prices and cause incumbent shareholders to withdraw from
the market. Attempts to enhance investment incentives while compensating incumbent shareholders
(directly through transaction taxes or indirectly through market interventions) require subsidies
that turn equity into a free lunch for final shareholders: equity demand then far exceeds available
supply. Finally, extreme market interventions may completely crowd out final shareholders from
equity markets, once again resulting in a market breakdown. The scope for policy makers to
intervene without disrupting intertemporal trade is therefore extremely limited when χ is sufficiently
low. Perhaps the only good way to reconcile investment incentives and intertemporal efficiency may
be to directly subsidize firms for their investment without intervening in financial markets.

5

Extensions

In this section, we develop several extensions of our baseline partial equilibrium model to illustrate
how shareholder rent-seeking incentives can shed light on important aspects of firm behavior. Unless
19

The argument for how how market interventions cause intertemporal distortions is particularly easy to see when

χ is bounded away from zero and limθ→−∞ R (θ) > E (R (θ)) / (1 + χ), in which case equity prices are always strictly
positive and the market does not break down. Since the policy generates negative expected revenues we have
Q (TI − TF ) > VI − VF . Moreover, for downside risks, we have QTI > VI for any intervention such that ẑ ≤ z ∗ . Since
the intervention must occur at a positive price we also have TI > TF , and from these three inequalities it follows
immediately that VI /T I < VF /TF . The policy effectively subsidizes incumbent shareholders, inducing them to sell a
larger part of their equity share than would be efficient intertemporally.

25

otherwise noted, final dividends are the same as in section 3, and we set α = 1, i.e. incumbent
shareholders care only about the market value of their equity share.

5.1

Leverage and Risk-Taking

We first consider a version of our model, in which investment is funded by borrowing. As our
primary result we show how frictions in equity markets dilute the disciplining effects of credit
spreads. In fact, leverage turns out to be a tool of choice for shareholders to both scale up investment
and shift equity returns to the upside, thus inflating its market value.
At the first stage the firm has cash reserves w, and chooses to invest k ≥ 0 in a project to obtain
a stochastic cash flow R (θ) k at the final stage. Throughout this section, we assume that R (·) =
R̄·R0 (·) where R0 (·) has symmetric risks with support [0, 2] and R̄ > 0, so that E (R (θ)) = R (0) =
R̄/2, and without borrowing, frictions in equity markets do not distort shareholder incentives. If
k > w, the difference k − w must be funded by borrowing from external lenders. The loan contract
is subject to costly state verification: lenders incur a cost εR (θ) k to verify the firm’s realized
cash flows ex post. The loan contract (b, B) specifies an initial loan size b ≥ k − w and a promised
repayment B. Such a contract determines a leverage ratio w/k = w/ (w + b) and a default threshold
 
θ̂, such that B = R θ̂ k. Whenever θ ≥ θ̂, the lender is repaid in full while the borrower earns
dividends R (θ) k − B. Whenever θ < θ̂, the borrower defaults and earns 0, and the lender monitors
the borrower and recovers the cash flows net of monitoring costs, (1 − ε) R (θ) k.
We assume that lenders and borrowers (shareholders) do not discount between the initial and
final stages. the lender breaks even whenever
Z θ̂
 
√
√ 
b
≤ (1 − ε)
R (θ) dΦ( λθ) + R θ̂ 1 − Φ( λθ̂) .
k
−∞

(13)

Combined with the constraint on the initial loan size, this yields the following restriction on the
firm’s leverage ratio w/k:
w
≥ 1 − E (R (θ)) + ε
k

Z

√

θ̂

Z

R (θ) dΦ( λθ) +
−∞

∞

 
√
R (θ) − R θ̂ dΦ( λθ)

(14)

θ̂

Suppose that the RHS of this inequality is strictly positive everywhere, so that there exists no loan
contract at which the project is completely self-funding.
Borrowing without market frictions: In the benchmark without market frictions, the bor 
√
R∞
rower/shareholders’ expected dividend is k θ̂ R (θ) − R θ̂ dΦ( λθ), and the expected return
on cash reserves w is




Z

ρ w/k, θ̂ = (k/w) ·

∞

 
√
R (θ) − R θ̂ dΦ( λθ).

θ̂

26

(15)

Figure 2: Optimal Lending with Costly State Verification

𝑅>2

w/k

𝑅≤2
w/k

𝑅/2
1

1

𝑅/2
Leverage ratio
constraint

Optimal
Leverage

Optimal
Default
Threshold

Leverage ratio
constraint

𝑅(𝜃)

𝑅(𝜃)



The optimal contract from the shareholders’ perspective maximizes ρ w/k, θ̂ subject to (14),
and determines an optimal leverage ratio or investment level k ∗ and default threshold θ∗ . The firm
borrows and invests if and only only if ρ (w/k ∗ , θ∗ ) > 1. We recall the following standard results:
(i) Credit restrictions: If R̄ > 2, the loan size is endogenously restricted (relative to an infinite
investment level at first-best), due to the leverage ratio constraint.
(ii) Investment in projects with positive excess returns: If R̄ ≤ 2, the firm does not invest and
prefers to hold cash.
(iii) Disciplining effect of credit spreads: The optimal loan contract achieves the second-best,
i.e. θ∗ and k ∗ maximize social surplus by optimally trading off loan size against bankruptcy costs.
Figure 2 illustrates the optimal lending contract. We represent contracts as pairs of leverage
 
ratio w/k and repayment promise R̂ ≡ R θ̂ . A lender breaks even only with contracts that lie
on or above the leverage ratio constraint, which is represented by the grey curve. The borrower
only accepts contracts that lie on or below the solid black line, at which the shareholder’s expected
returns on internal funds equal 1. In the left panel, when R̄ > 2, the grey and black curves intersect,
so there exist loan contracts that allow the borrower to earn excess returns and the lender to break
even. The borrowers’ indifference curves over different contracts with different return levels ρ
simply scale the solid black line by ρ−1 , The borrowers’ return on internal funds is maximized at
the tangency point between the grey and the dashed black line. In the right panel, R̄ ≤ 2, and
there exists no contract to which the two parties would ever agree.
If after the contracting stage debt and equity claims are traded in financial markets at prices

27

Figure 3: Lending with information aggregation frictions in equity markets

𝑅>2

𝑅≤2

w/k

w/k

𝑅/2
1

1

𝑅/2

Leverage ratio
constraint

Optimal
Leverage

Leverage ratio
constraint

Leverage
with info
friction

Leverage
with info
friction
Optimal
𝑅/2
Default
Default
Threshold Threshold
with info
friction

𝑅(𝜃)

Default
𝑅/2
Threshold
with info
friction

𝑅(𝜃)

equal to conditional expectations of their corresponding cash flows, such markets do not alter the
original lenders’ break-even constraint, the borrowers’ incentives, or the optimal loan contract.
Efficient financial markets thus impose market discipline on borrowers and lenders to agree on a
loan contract that maximizes the social surplus from the firm’s investment.
Borrowing with equity market frictions. Suppose now that the initial borrowers sell their
equity share in a market with information aggregation frictions. The lenders on the other hand hold
their claim to maturity, so their break-even constraint is unchanged. Following proposition 1, the

n
  o

equity claim is priced at P (k, z) = k · E max R (θ) − R θ̂ , 0 |x = z, z , and the expected mar 
R∞
√
−1 parametrizes information
ket value of equity is k θ̂ R (θ) − R θ̂ dΦ( λP θ), where λ−1
P >λ
frictions in the equity market as in section 3.1. We then obtain the following proposition:
Proposition 7 Equity market frictions cause excessive leverage.
(i) Excessive leverage If R̄ > 2 , then k̂ > k ∗ and θ̂ > θ∗ and k̂ and θ̂ are increasing in λ−1
P .
(ii) Inefficient investment: There exists a bound R̃ ∈ (1, 2), such that if R̄ ∈ (R̃, 2] and λ−1
P
is sufficiently large, incumbent shareholders borrow and invest k̂ > w.
Equity market frictions thus distort borrower incentives. First, shareholders seek excessive
leverage because the market friction flattens the shareholders’ tradeoff between leverage and default
risk. Second, if market frictions are sufficiently severe, shareholders choose to invest even in projects
with negative excess returns in order to chase upside gains.

28

Figure 3 illustrates the effects of financial market frictions on shareholder incentives. The thin
black line corresponds to the shareholders’ indifference curve for ρ = 1 without equity market
frictions. The thick black line plots the shareholders’ indifference curve for a return of 1 on internal
funds with market frictions. The difference between the solid thin and thick black lines corresponds
to the shareholder rents. These rents are maximized when equity only includes upside risk, i.e.


R̂ = R̄/2. The shareholders’ indifference curve in the w/k, R̂ -plane have the same intercepts as
without equity market frictions, but are flatter for R̂ < R̄/2 and steeper for R̂ > R̄/2, thus raising
expected returns on cash-holdings for any possible loan contract.
In the left panel, R̄ > 2, so it is efficient to invest. The flattening of shareholders’ indifference
curves shifts their preferred contract to the right, with a higher leverage ratio and a higher default
threshold than would be optimal otherwise. Shareholders’ expected returns increase, and they are
more willing to accept higher default risk in return for leverage because the marginal increase in
borrowing costs is partly offset by a shift towards upside risk and over-pricing of equity. Because
shareholders do not fully internalize the marginal costs of default, they opt for excessive leverage.
In the right panel, R̄ ≤ 2, returns are too low to make the investment profitable. Nevertheless
shareholders decide to borrow and invest, and even accept very high leverage and credit spreads in
order to take advantage of upside risk and extract shareholder rents. In other words, credit spreads
lose their disciplining role on borrowers. The threshold return R̃/2 < 1 above which such inefficient
investments become desirable for incumbent shareholders is a a function of the monitoring cost ε
and the shape of the return function in its lower tail, and varies between 1/2 and 1.
To summarize, leverage allows incumbent shareholders to increase their rents through two channels: it scales up risk-taking through a higher value of k̂, and it shifts equity returns to the upside
which increases expected over-pricing for a given investment level. By taking a levered bet, incumbent shareholders capture rents from final shareholders with the complicity of lenders. Equity
market frictions thus undermine market discipline imposed through credit spreads.20

5.2

Managerial Incentives and Agency Costs

The corporate finance literature identifies agency frictions between shareholders and managers
as the central source of imperfections in firm decision-making. With efficient financial markets,
shareholders should then be given full discretion to design managerial incentive contracts.
20

Information frictions in bond markets would have counter-vailing effects, as they would induce original lenders

to over-estimate the tail risk of default. See Albagli, Hellwig and Tsyvinski (2014) for bond pricing with noisy
information aggregation in a dynamic variant of this model.

29

Here, we argue that our main results about shareholder incentives are robust to the inclusion
of such agency frictions. In our model, agency costs do not alter the shareholders’ rent-seeking
incentives, since these derive from return perceptions in the market, which are independent of
interactions between shareholders and managers.
At the same time, our model offers a contrarian perspective to the laissez-faire approach to
contract design: The same contracts that are quintessential for managerial incentives in efficient
markets now serve to optimize shareholder rents, and therefore it may be desirable to regulate
executive compensation contracts. And whereas agency frictions are costly from a social planners’
perspective when markets are efficient, here they may actually improve firm performance if they
curb shareholder incentives to extract rents.
We illustrate these points with a principal-agent variant of our baseline model from section 2.
Incumbent shareholders delegate the choice of the investment scale k ≥ 0 to a risk-neutral manager.
They pay the manager a wage W (·) that is contingent on the realization of final dividends Π, but
must satisfy the manager’s participation condition E (W (Π (θ, k))) ≥ W̄ . We first assume that
incumbent shareholders can always implement their preferred action at no additional cost, and
then enrich the model to allow for managerial moral hazard.
Contract design without agency frictions. Let k and k̄ be defined by C 0 (k) = limθ→−∞ R (θ)

and C 0 k̄ = limθ→∞ R (θ). It is straight-forward to show that incumbent shareholders can use

equity, options or compensation caps to implement any k ∈ k, k̄ with an expected wage payment
that satisfies E (W (Π (θ, k))) = W̄ . A contract of the form W ∗ (Π) = ω0 +ω1 Π that is linear in final
dividends, i.e. a vested equity share that the manager cannot sell in the market, implements the
efficient investment level k ∗ . A contract of the form W (Π) = ω0 + ω1 max {Π, Π}, corresponding

to a vested stock option, induces upwards distortions in investment, implementing any k ∈ k ∗ , k̄

with different values of Π. A contract of the form W (Π) = ω0 + ω1 min Π̄, Π with a cap on total
compensation implements downwards distortions k ∈ (k, k ∗ ). In each of these cases, the choices of
ω0 and ω1 serve to equate the expected wage payment E (W (Π (θ, k))) to W̄ .
Incumbent shareholders are thus able to implement their optimal k̂ through flexible design of
the optimal compensation contract. If k̂ > k ∗ , the incumbent shareholders’ optimal contract adds
a minimal compensation level into the benchmark contract W ∗ (Π) to strengthen incentives and
increase investment above k ∗ . If instead k̂ < k ∗ , the incentives provided by W ∗ (Π) are too strong
from the incumbent shareholders’ perspective, and therefore the optimal contract includes a cap on
total compensation. With market frictions, such incentive pay schemes for managers thus become
an important tool to optimize shareholder rents.
30

Of course it is well known that these contracts serve to taylor the manager’s risk-taking incentives. But whereas an efficient markets view interprets these contracts as part of a socially efficient
incentive scheme to reign in managerial moral hazard, with market imperfections they emerge as
the tool of choice to extract excessive shareholder rents.21
If incumbent shareholders design CEO compensation to incentivize rent-seeking, then regulating
the design of executive compensation contracts offers an additional policy margin to curb investment
distortions. In fact, a regulator can implement k ∗ by restricting executive compensation to be of
the form W ∗ (Π), regardless of the risks faced by the firm. In effect, this restriction limits executive
compensation to a combination of base pay and a vested equity share, with a complete ban on
options or compensation caps that seek to distort risk-taking incentives. A restriction to linear
contracts is also quasi necessary if shareholders can always scale the compensation contract so that
expected compensation is at W̄ . Otherwise, any contract that allows a firm to even marginally
distort investment in the desired direction will be strictly preferred to W ∗ (Π).
Restricting CEO compensation to restricted equity has one important advantage over other
policy measures: it is a simple one-size-fits-all policy that allows the policy maker to implement the
efficient investment level k ∗ without any inside knowledge of firm returns, technologies or market
frictions. Regulatory interventions, transaction taxes or market interventions instead all require
that the policy maker is able to identify and target the efficient investment level k ∗ . This is an
important distinction from the other interventions we discussed, which all required far more firmspecific information about firm characteristics and market frictions that is tyically proprietary to
the firm and difficult to ellicit by an ouside regulator. This issue only gets compounded when firm
decisions become more complex and based on proprietary information that is not directly accessible
to the regulator. The need for this information arises because the intervention offsets the original
distortion with a second distortion which needs to be finely adjusted to the firm’s characteristics.
Regulation of executive compensation instead tackles the problem at its root by targeting the
CEO’s objective function and directly limiting the shareholder’s ability to incentivize rent-shifting.
By aligning CEO incentives with the social planner’s objective, the regulator no longer has to worry
about how market frictions affect incentives.
21

Since any investment level can be implemented without agency costs through a Π-contingent contract, investment

distortions do not result from an artificial restriction on the contract space. Implementation possibilities only expand
with a richer contract space, say by conditioning compensation on share prices (P -contingent contracts). For example,
the shareholders’ preferred investment level k̂ could also be implemented through a participation in the share sale
(though this requires that k is perfectly observable to make sure that prices internalize variation in k).

31

Contract design with managerial moral hazard. Suppose now that the manager can
divert the investment funds C (k) to enjoy a private benefit bC (k). The wage contract W (Π) must

therefore satisfy E (W (Π (θ, k))) ≥ max bC (k) , W̄ , and k̂ ∈ argmaxk E (W (Π (θ, k))). We will
focus on the implementation of k s.t. bC (k) ≥ W̄ .
The optimal contract design problem can be analyzed in the usual two-step procedure. First,
for each k, let w (k) denote the minimal expected wage cost that implements the choice of k, subject
to the manager’s incentive compatibility and participation constraints:
w (k) = min E (W (Π (θ, k)))

(16)

W (·)

s.t. k ∈ argmaxk0 E W Π θ, k 0



and E (W (Π (θ, k))) ≥ bC (k)

(17)


Using the same contracts as above, any k ∈ k, k̄ can be implemented with a contract that
pays in expectation w (k) = E (W (Π (θ, k))) = bC (k). Second, we determine the investment scale
k̂ that maximizes the expected share price net of the wage cost:


k̂ ∈ argmaxk0 E E (Π (θ; k) |x = z, z) − w k 0 .

(18)

 
The optimal investment k̂ satisfies the first order condition E (E (R (θ) |x = z, z)) = C 0 k̂ +
 
 
w0 k̂ = (1 + b) C 0 k̂ , and therefore modifies the marginal cost of investment by the marginal
wage cost associated with higher investment. The efficient (second-best) investment k ∗ satisfies the
first-order condition E (R (θ)) = C 0 (k ∗ ) + w0 (k ∗ ) = (1 + b) C 0 (k ∗ ). Thus investment distortions
are entirely due to distortions in the incumbent shareholders’ objective. All our previous results
are robust, once the marginal cost of investment is adjusted to include the agency cost component:
Upside risk results in over-investment, downside risk in under-investment, and the easier it is to
scale investment, the more pronounced the distortions are. Both k̂ and k ∗ are decreasing functions
of b, i.e. the agency friction increases marginal costs and thereby reduces both the chosen and the
 
efficient investment level. Expected dividends are E (R (θ)) k̂ − (1 + b) C k̂ .
If agency frictions reign in rent-seeking incentives, they may even increase firm dividends.
Proposition 8 If upside risks are easily scaleable, agency frictions increase efficiency.
Expected dividends are increasing in b, whenever E {E (R (θ, e) |x = z, z)} /E (R (θ)) > 1 + χ.
Thus, agency frictions unambiguously increase welfare if there is upside risk and χ is sufficiently small.22 The agency friction has two effects on welfare. On the one hand, it increases
22

This condition is equivalent to (4) with α = 1 in prop. 2, which determines whether overall surplus is negative.

32

 
the cost of investment, resulting in a direct welfare change −db · C k̂ < 0 for a marginal increase in agency costs db > 0. On the other hand, an increase in agency costs db > 0 also
 
 
reduces investment by dk̂ = − (1 + b)−1 · C 0 k̂ /C 00 k̂ · db < 0, which changes welfare by
dk̂ · (E (R (θ)) − E (E (R (θ) |x = z, z))). With over-investment, this second term is positive, and
it dominates if χ is sufficiently small. The opposite scenario arises with under-investment: the two
effects compound each other, and agency frictions worsen investment distortions.23
These results extend to other models with agency frictions between shareholders and managers.
The key observation is that the resulting principal-agent problem can be broken down into a first
step of minimizing the wage costs of implementing any given investment choice, and a second step
of selecting the shareholders’ optimal investment choice, given agency and market frictions. Since
market frictions only appear in the second stage problem, they do not affect the determination of
agency costs at the first stage.24
The benefits of regulating executive compensation are also robust to the presence of non-trivial
agency frictions. As long as market frictions introduce a wedge between initial shareholders’ incentives and social surplus, a social planner will gain from limiting shareholder discretion in executive
contract design. The optimal limits on discretion may however need to balance shareholder rentseeking against managerial moral hazard. In this context, the vested equity contract remains
approximately optimal when b is low, i.e. when concerns over shareholder rent-seeking outweigh
concerns over managerial moral hazard, and thus represents a useful benchmark against which to
measure the costs and benefits of shareholder discretion.

5.3

Social Value of Public Information

We now consider the impact of public information on market prices, expected market returns and
investment. At the efficient markets benchmark, better information improves firms’ investment
decisions and is unambiguously welfare improving. With frictions in equity markets, public in23

In fact, this comparative static argument extends to other comparative statics of the cost function: if investment

costs C (k, b) as a function of some reduced form parameter b satisfy Ckb (k, b) > 0, then an increase in b raises
investment costs and lowers investment incentives, which can generate welfare gains if it reduces over-investment.
The same argument thus also suggests that with over-investment, technological improvements that lower investment
costs need not be welfare-improving, if better technologies lead to more rent extraction.
24
Here we have assumed that the manager is paid by incumbent shareholders. If instead the manager is paid
by final shareholders, then dividends are Π − W , the share price is P (z; k) = E (Π − W |x = z, z), and incumbent
shareholders evaluate the cost of the managers’ wage through the lens of market expectations. The wage contract
then provides a tool for shifting upside and downside risk between shareholders and managers, but otherwise the
analysis remains unchanged.

33

formation disclosures may instead have adverse welfare effects: more accurate information enables
firms to make better investment decisions, but this information can also be mis-used as an additional margin along which incumbent shareholders optimize their rent. If the rent-seeking motive
is sufficiently important, enhanced transparency is welfare increasing only once the information is
sufficiently precise to crowd the market-generated signal z out from investor expectations.
Formally, suppose that incumbent shareholders and outside investors can condition their deci
sions on a public signal y ∼ N θ, κ−1 . Suppose also that R (·) is strictly convex, so that returns are
dominated by upside risk regardless of the realization of y. The equilibrium share prices and optimal
investment decisions k (y) are characterized as before in proposition 1 and equation 3, once beliefs
are conditioned on y as well as z.25 The share price P (y, z; k) and expected dividend value V (y, z; k)
take the form P (y, z; k) = E (R (θ) |x = z, z, y) · k − C (k) and V (y, z; k) = E (R (θ) |z, y) · k − C (k).
The price thus overweighs the market information z, but underweighs the public signal y.
The efficient investment decision k ∗ (y) maximizes E (V (y, z; k)), solving the first-order con

χ
E E (R (θ) |y)1+1/χ .
dition C 0 (k ∗ (y)) = E (R (θ) |y), and the first-best value is E (V ∗ (y)) = 1+χ


The incumbent shareholders maximize the expected market price, conditional on y: C 0 k̂(y) =


E {E (R (θ) |x = z, z, y) |y}. Expected dividend value is V (y) = E (R (θ) |y) k̂ (y) − C k̂ (y) .
Our next proposition compares expected dividend values with a public signal, E (V (y)) to
expected dividends without a public signal, V , as characterized in section 3. If χ is sufficiently low,
then the provision of the public signal results in strictly lower expected dividend.
Proposition 9 If upside risks are easily scaleable, better public information reduces
expected dividends but increases expected share prices.
For any κ > 0, there exists χ (κ) > 0 such that if χ < χ (κ), E (V (y)) < V < 0 and
 

 

E P y, z; k̂ (y) > E P z, k̂
> 0.
 
  

Moreover limχ→0 E (V (y)) /V = limχ→0 E P y, z; k̂ (y) /E P z, k̂
= ∞.
Although better information reduces the investment risk incumbent shareholders are exposed
to, and thus enables them to take better decisions, this does not guarantee an overall welfare
improvement if better information also increases rent-seeking. The proposition shows that when
there are upside risks and χ is sufficiently close to zero (so that expected dividends are negative),
then the effect of public information on rent-seeking dominates the direct efficiency gains, resulting
in lower overall welfare. In fact the social losses resulting from better information can become
25



That is, θ|y ∼ N κ/ (λ + κ) y; (λ + κ)−1 and y ∼ N 0; λ−1 + κ−1

34

arbitrarily large. Better public information is welfare-improving only once it is sufficiently precise to
crowd out the market signal z from prices and align market and fundamental returns to investment.
Scaleability is a double-edged sword in relation to transparency. On the one hand, the potential
efficiency gains from better information - if the firm were to take the efficient investment decision increase with scaleability and become very large in the limit (i.e. limχ→0 E (V ∗ (y)) /V ∗ = ∞). But
on the other hand, the potential for mis-using information for rent-seeking purposes also increases
with scaleability. Simply put, the easier it is for a decision maker to scale the risks, the more the
decision maker has to gain from incorporating additional information. But this principle applies
just as much to the social planner who maximizes expected dividends as it applies to the incumbent
shareholders who maximize the expected share price.
Proposition 9 contributes to the literature on the social value of public information. Morris
and Shin (2002) and Angeletos and Pavan (2007) show that public disclosures may be welfarereducing, if strategic complementarities distort agents’ responses to information. Although Morris
and Shin (2002) cite financial markets as a leading motivation for the reduced-form zero-sum
coordination motives embedded in the beauty contest game, coordination in financial markets was
not modeled explicitly. Amador and Weill (2010) obtain a similar result but focus on informational
externalities. Proposition 9 also features a distortion in the response to public information, but the
welfare losses arise because of the rent-seeking behavior by shareholders, not coordination motives
or informational externalities.

5.4

Stock-Price Sensitivity of Investment

A large empirical literature explores the sensitivity of firm decisions, in particular corporate investment, to share prices.26 One possible explanation for such investment sensitivity to stock prices
is information feedback: the share price contains valuable information that helps shareholders and
managers make more informed investment decisions.27 In this context, investment sensitivity to
stock prices is not a symptom of inefficiency but the result of socially efficient information processing. Here, we allow for informational feedback from the share price to investment and consider how
market frictions distort the use of information aggregated through share prices.28
We modify our benchmark model by assuming that the initial shareholders publicly commit to
26
27

See Morck et al. (1990), Baker, Stein and Wurgler (2003), and Gilchrist, Himmelberg, and Huberman (2005).
See Dow and Gorton (1997), Dow and Rahi (2003), Goldstein and Guembel (2008), Foucault and Fresard (2012),

and Goldstein, Ozdenoren, and Yuan (2013).
28
This application subsumes results from the working paper Albagli, Hellwig, and Tsyvinski (2011a).

35

a price-contingent, or equivalently z-contingent investment function k (z).29 Market participants
perfectly anticipate the investment level that will realize at a given price, and the incumbent
shareholders internalize the impact of their decision rule on the share price.30 For a given k (z), the
equilibrium share price is P (z, k (z)) = E (R (θ) |x = z, z) · k (z) − C (k (z)). The expected dividend
is V (z, k (z)) = E (R (θ) |z) · k (z) − C (k (z)).
Information Feedback. To illustrate the effect of information feedback, we compare expected
dividends and shareholder rents with an increasing investment function k (z), with a benchmark in
which investment is constant at k̂ = E (k (z)). The expected dividend takes the form
 


 
E (V (z, k (z))) = E V z, k̂ + cov (k (z) , E (R (θ) |z)) − E (C (k (z))) − C k̂
The information feedback increases expected dividends by cov (k (z) , E (R (θ) |z)) > 0 relative to
the constant investment case, and it reduces expected dividends by a term due to convexity of costs.
The covariance term measures the value of conditioning investment on z, which strictly exceeds the
second term if investment is not too volatile. Expected dividends increase because the information
feedback aligns marginal costs and investment more closely with expected returns.
Likewise, we can characterize the effect of information feedback on expected shareholder rents:
 

 

E (P (z, k (z)))−E (V (z, k (z))) = E P z, k̂ −E V z, k̂ +cov (k (z) , E (R (θ) |x = z, z) − E (R (θ) |z)) .
If R (·) is symmetric and E (R (θ) |x = z, z) ≥ E (R (θ) |z) for z ≥ 0, then this covariance is
strictly positive. Information feedback thus generates endogenous upside risk: the firm invests
more when z is high and expected market returns exceed fundamental returns.31 This reinforces
the incumbent shareholders’ rent extraction incentive and increases shareholder rents. Moreover,
29

This requires implicitly that the price function is strictly monotone in z, a condition that is not automatically

satisfied for all k (z). Alternatively one may assume that shareholders have the means to infer z through other means
than the price, or that there exists a “non-strategic” component of dividends π (θ) that is strictly increasing in θ and
guarantees an upwards-sloping price function. Here we will ignore the invertibility issue, but note that monotonicity
is satisfied via an envelope condition for the case of primary interest, where α = 1 and incumbent shareholders
maximize expected share price. See Albagli, Hellwig, and Tsyvinski (2011a) for further discussion.
30
This commitment could result from internal reporting and decision procedures that make it difficult to reverse
the initial decision ex post, or from the design of executive contracts at the initial stage. Importantly, we assume
that final shareholders are not able to renegotiate investment or incentive contracts before the investment is made,
even though they would want to do so.
31
For general return distributions, cov (k (z) , E (R (θ) |x = z, z) − E (R (θ) |z)) is non-negative and can be arbitrarily
large whenever (i) k (z) is sufficiently responsive to z, and (ii) E (R (θ) |x = z, z) > E (R (θ) |z) for sufficiently large
realizations of z.With symmetric or upside risk, information feedback generates or strengthens the upside bias in
market prices. With downside risk, information feedback mitigates or overturns downwards bias in prices.

36

shareholder rents are increasing in the sensitivity of k (·) to z. The efficient investment rule sets
k ∗ (z) such that C 0 (k ∗ (z)) = E (R (θ) |z) and incorporates the information contained in the price
according to Bayes’ Rule. As in section 5.3, returns to scale increase the potential value of information feedback, i.e. limχ→0 E (V (z, k ∗ (z))) /V ∗ = ∞, but simultaneously increases shareholder
rents, i.e. limχ→0 E (P (z, k ∗ (z)) − V (z, k ∗ (z))) = ∞. Thus even if the original returns are dominated by downside risk, incumbent shareholders in equilibrium capture arbitrarily large positive
rents if investment is sufficiently easy to scale up.
Investment Distortions with Informational Feedback. Next, we discuss how rent-seeking
by incumbent shareholders leads to excess sensitivity of investment to stock prices. Suppose that
R (·) is such that E (R (θ) |x = z, z) /E (R (θ) |z) is strictly increasing in z.


The initial shareholders choose k̂ (z) to satisfy C 0 k̂ (z) = E (R (θ) |x = z, z). Therefore, investment k̂ (z) is dictated by market expectations of investment returns: investment responds more
to z than would be justified by Bayes’ Rule. In effect, information feedback with imperfect equity
markets results in a theory of endogenous catering effects (see, e.g. Stein 1996): Capital market imperfections distort market valuations, and with information feedback, incumbent shareholders and
managers have an incentive to cater investment decisions to these distorted market expectations of
returns in an attempt to maximize shareholder rents.
We obtain a positive relation between investment and share prices: k̂ (z) = ((1 + 1/χ) P (z))1/(1+χ) .


E(R(θ)|z)
(z)
− 1 = 1+χ
−
1
, and hence decreasing in investExpected returns on equity are VP (z)
χ
E(R(θ)|x=z,z)
ment and share price. The following proposition summarizes the economic effects of information
feedback for investment and equity returns.
Proposition 10 Information feedback causes excess investment volatility


(i) Investment is increasing in share prices: cov k̂ (z) , P (z) > 0.
(ii) Excess sensitivity of investment to stock prices: k̂ (z) /k ∗ (z) is increasing in z.


(z)
(iii) Higher Investment leads to lower equity returns: cov k̂ (z) , V (z)−P
< 0.
P (z)
Our model merges the predictions of information feedback theories with models of catering
to investor sentiments. Market signals convey valuable information to shareholders. But these
signals are not unbiased and result in a catering of investment to market expectations of returns.
Information feedback thus results in excess sensitivity of investment, higher expected share prices
and shareholder rents, and lower subsequent returns. Proposition 10 summarizes these predictions.
Information feedback gives incumbent shareholders an additional margin along which to optimize their rents. Since shareholder rents are increasing in the sensitivity of investment to z, they
37

take advantage through an investment rule that caters to market expectations. This causes excess
volatility in investment: on the upside, shareholders over-invest to maximize the rents they extract
from inflated share prices. On the downside, they under-invest to limit the losses they incur from
the market price being below the fundamental value. Our model thus links investment volatility to
stock market volatility by tying investment decisions to market expectations of returns.
Several papers confirm these empirical predictions. First, there is evidence in support of information feedback: Chen, Goldstein and Jiang (2007) find that real investment is more sensitive
to share prices in firms whose shares are traded by more informed traders, as measured by PIN
(probability of informed trading – Easley et al. (1996)). Roll, Schwartz and Subrahmanayam
(2009) provide evidence that deeper options markets for a firm’s share stimulate the entry of informed traders, and that such firms have a higher sensitivity of investment to share prices. These
papers suggest that the equity market indeed conveys information about fundamentals that guide
corporate investment decisions. Second, Polk and Sapienza (2009) offer direct support for catering
effects in corporate investment by estimating the regression coefficients in proposition 10 (i) and
(iii). Using discretionary accruals as a proxy for mispricing, they find a positive relation between
share overvaluation and investment after controlling for Tobin’s Q.32 This relation is stronger for
firms with higher share turnover. Moreover, firms with high investment subsequently have low share
returns, the more so the larger is their measure of mispricing. This suggests that such investment
behavior is indeed inefficient.
The catering channel not only increases investment volatility but also weakens the connection
between investment and fundamental returns. A high price translates into a higher investment
level, but if the market is sufficiently noisy, prices may be almost exclusively driven by market noise,
and carry little information about fundamentals. Investment nevertheless responds aggressively in
order to capture rents on the upside or limit losses on the downside. In the limiting case where
investment is orthogonal to fundamentals, the feedback from prices to investment leads to large
positive shareholder rents, and large negative dividend values.

5.5

Time-inconsistent firm decisions

With efficient markets, share prices perfectly align the interests of successive shareholder generations and optimal firm decisions are time-consistent. At each date, the controlling generation of
32

Discretionary accruals measure the extent to which a firm has abnormal non-cash earnings. Firms with high

discretionary accruals typically have relatively low share returns in the future, suggesting that discretionary accruals
artificially drive up prices temporarily.

38

shareholders can thus be trusted to take decisions that also reflect the interests of the future owners
of the firm. Here we argue that market frictions can cause firm decisions to be time-inconsistent in
the short-run. Evidently the rent-seeking by incumbent shareholders has a negative effect on future
shareholders, but in turn, the anticipation of decisions taken by future shareholders also feed back
into current shareholders’ valuations and rents. The non-cooperative solution of the game between
successive shareholder generations then leads to a Pareto-inferior equilibrium.
We augment our model to include two decision stages, one controlled by incumbent shareholders
before shares have been traded, and one controlled by final shareholders after shares have been
traded. The firm’s final dividend is Π (θ; kI , kF ) = RI (θ) kI − CI (kI ) + RF (θ) kF − CF (kF ),
where kI is the initial investment decision controlled by incumbent shareholders and kF the second
investment decision controlled by final shareholders. The surplus-maximizing choice kI∗ and kF∗ (z)
satisfies CI0 (kI∗ ) = E (RI (θ)) and CF0 (kF∗ (z)) = E (RF (θ) |z). The decision rules that maximize the
 
expected market value of the firm and incumbent shareholder payoffs is instead given by CI0 k̂I =


E (E (RI (θ) |x = z, z)) and CF0 k̂F (z) = E (RF (θ) |x = z, z).
Consider now the dynamic game in which incumbent shareholders first choose e
kI as Stackelberg leaders, and final shareholders then choose e
kF (z) contingent the realization of the market
 
price (and correspondingly, z). Because the choices are additively separable, we have CI0 e
kI =


kF (z) = E (RF (θ) |z), or e
kI = k̂I and e
kF (z) = kF∗ (z). The fiE (E (RI (θ) |x = z, z)) and CI0 e
nal shareholders set k ∗ (z) at the efficient level, but incumbent shareholders distort e
kI to increase
F

shareholder rents. The following proposition shows that the equilibrium of decisions made by
successive shareholder generations lies strictly below the Pareto frontier. It can therefore not be
rationalized as an optimal time-consistent plan that maximizes a weighted average of incumbent
and final shareholder welfare.
Proposition 11 Market Frictions cause dynamically inconsistent firm behavior
Unless k̂I = k ∗ , the equilibrium choices e
kI and e
kF (z) are strictly Pareto-inferior.
I

The intuition for the result is as follows. Imagine that our incumbent and final shareholders
could get together to agree on a joint perturbation from the equilibrium in such a way that each
marginally changes their investment in the direction preferred by the other, i.e. incumbent shareholders set kI a bit closer to kI∗ and final shareholders set kF (z) a bit closer to k̂F (z). The change
in kI reduces incumbent shareholder rents associated with incumbent shareholder investment kI
but the change in kF (z) increases the shareholder rents associated with the final investment kF (z).
If k̂ I 6= kI∗ , we can calibrate the two perturbations so that they exactly offset each other, leaving
39

final shareholders with the same expected payoffs as at the equilibrium.
Now, incumbent shareholders’ payoffs are the sum of expected dividends plus expected shareholder rents. By construction the perturbations leave total shareholder rents unchanged, but
they affect expected dividends. If k̂ I 6= kI∗ , the change in kI strictly increases E (RI (θ)) k I −
CI (kI ), resulting in a first-order welfare gain. The change in kF (z) on the other hand lowers
E [E (RF (θ) |x = z, z) kF (z) − CF (kF (z))], but since the perturbation departs from kF∗ (z), the
loss is of second-order. Hence the perturbation strictly benefits incumbent shareholders.
To summarize, when rent-seeking incentives induce a conflict of interest between successive
shareholder generations, the resulting equilibrium can be inefficient and result in dynamically inconsistent firm behavior. As in the case of consumers with time-inconsistent preferences, endogenous preference reversals generate a positive value to commitment. Here, the current generation
of shareholders would like to increase the current share prices, while future shareholders would
like to increase final dividends. With market frictions these two objectives differ and with lack
of commitment, the resulting conflict of interest results in behavior that lies strictly inside the
Pareto frontier. Under these circumstances, final shareholders and the social planner would like to
influence incumbent shareholders, and we have discussed means to do so through regulatory and
policy interventions. But incumbent shareholders would also like to influence the final shareholders’ behavior to their advantage, i.e. generate commitment to future policies. Such commitment
is privately valuable to incumbent shareholders, but socially harmful, if it enforces rent-seeking
strategies that are in the interest of incumbent shareholders, but do not maximize social surplus.33

5.6

Information rents, liquidity shocks, and shareholder disagreement

So far, we have focused on the gap between P (z, k) and V (z, k) as the source of distortions and abstracted from proprietary information by incumbent shareholders, their exposure to liquidity shocks
or disagreement among incumbent shareholders. Here we argue that shareholder information or
liquidity shocks may alter the nature of rents and distortions but not their impact on firm decisions.
Furthermore, heterogeneity in exposures to liquidity shocks or access to private information leads
to heterogeneous rent-seeking incentives, generating disagreement and conflict of interests among
33

Time-inconsistency and value to commitment can arise from market friction even if the identity of the controlling

shareholder does not change. For example, suppose that all decisions are controlled by a long-lived incumbent owner
who floats a minority share α < 1/2 of the firm in the market. This incumbent owner will want to commit ex ante to
a strategy that maximizes a weighted average of the market value and fundamental value of the firm, but once the
share α is sold, he would want to re-optimize the subsequent decisions to maximize the firm’s fundamental value.

40

shareholders. Such conflicts of interest necessarily disappear with efficient financial markets.
We can decompose expected payoffs of informed traders and noise traders in our model as follows. An informed trader’s expected payoff prior to receiving her private signal, which corresponds
to the informed traders’ average payoff in the market, is
Z



I (z, k) = max 0, E Π (θ, k) |x0 , z − P (z) dF x0 |z
Z ∞



=k·
E R (θ) |x0 , z − E (R (θ) |x = z, z) dF x0 |z

(19)

z

where F (x|z) denotes the distribution of the private signal x, conditional on z.34 I (z, k) corresponds to the option value of buying on private information, is strictly positive and exceeds the exR∞
pected payoff to all buyers, V (z, k)−P (z, k) = k· −∞ (E (R (θ) |x0 , z) − E (R (θ) |x = z, z)) dF (x0 |z).
The noise traders expected payoff V (z, k) − P (z, k) − I (z, k) is unambiguously negative.
Using this decomposition of buyer payoffs we extend our analysis to alternative assumptions
about information and liquidity shocks:
1. Private information by incumbent shareholders: Suppose incumbent shareholders receive a
private signal before deciding whether to sell their equity share. Shares are bought by a random
measure of noise traders, Φ (u). In this case, the supply of shares is given by Pr (x < x̂ (P ) |θ) =

√
Φ β (x̂ (P ) − θ) , while demand is Φ (u). The equilibrium characterization remains the same,
√
with x̂ (P ) = z = θ + 1/ β · u. But the initial shareholders’ payoff is P (z, k) + I (z, k) > V (z, k),
while the buyers’ (noise traders’) payoff is V (z, k)−P (z, k)−I (z, k) < 0. In other words, the initial
shareholder rents are no longer given by the gap between expected price and dividend value, but by
the option value of selling on private information, P (z, k) − V (z, k) + I (z, k). This value is strictly
positive and scales with k, so the initial shareholders now have a strict incentive to over-invest in
order to capture a larger information rent regardless of the firm’s risk characteristics.
2. Liquidity shocks to incumbent shareholders: Suppose next that a random fraction 1−Φ (u) of
incumbent shareholders has to sell. Potential buyers of equity shares observe private signals: their

√
demand for shares is Pr (x > x̂ (P ) |θ) = 1 − Φ β (x̂ (P ) − θ) . The equilibrium characterization
√
remains the same, with x̂ (P ) = z = θ + 1/ β · u, but the initial shareholder objective changes to
V (z, k) − I (z, k), while the informed buyers earn I (z, k). In this case, the incumbent shareholders
have an incentive to under-invest to reduce information rents conceded to informed buyers.
3. Disagreement among shareholders: If shareholders differ ex ante in their investment horizons,
their access to private information, or their exposure to liquidity shocks, then this heterogeneity
leads to disagreement among shareholders about the desired investment decisions. Each incumbent
34

Note that x|z ∼ N βδ/ (λ + βδ) · z; 1/ (λ + βδ)−1 + β −1

41



shareholder will have their own preferred value of k. A voting perspective would suggest the implementation of the value of k that is preferred by the median shareholder. The departure from
efficient markets is crucial for the emergence of shareholder disagreement: Under efficient markets,
shareholder rents disappear, and hence shareholder incentives are all aligned with social surplus.
Financial market frictions therefore play an important role in shaping disagreement between concurrent shareholders of a firm.

6

Conclusion

With unlimited arbitrage, equity markets can be trusted to accurately reflect firm fundamentals,
and shareholders can then be trusted to adequately represent social welfare. This connection
provides the intellectual basis for shareholder value as a measure of social surplus, and for the
laissez-faire argument against interference with firm decisions. Its validity as a guiding principle for
regulatory policy rests on the unstated assumption that departures from market efficiency cannot
be too important, and have at best minor effects on shareholder incentives.
In this paper we question this implicit assumption by taking a different view of price formation
in asset markets that is based on limits to arbitrage and noisy information aggregation. We argue
that limits to arbitrage introduce a rent-seeking motive to shareholder value: markets no longer
fully align shareholder value with social surplus, and initial shareholders can no longer be trusted
to act in the interest of future shareholders or society. What’s more, even small departures from
market efficiency can have large aggregate consequences either through firm-level returns to scale,
or through pecuniary externalities in general equilibrium. Our theory offers a new rationale for
regulating corporate behavior or for policy interventions in the market that is not present when
financial markets are efficient, though in general equilibrium, these policies face a fine tradeoff
between enhancing investment incentives and disrupting equity markets.
While our departure from market efficiency is well grounded in empirical studies about limits
to arbitrage and asset pricing anomalies, the implications of our model for corporate behavior are
consistent with mounting evidence on how firm decisions react to market prices. In particular,
we show how rent-seeking by controlling shareholders gives rise to lack of self-control, corporate
short-termism, endogenous preference reversals, and conflicts of interests between shareholders –
elements of decision-making by firms that are well documented in reality and amply discussed in
the literature, yet difficult to rationalize in a context of efficient financial markets.
We have illustrated the implications of our theory with a few particularly stark applications

42

to excess leverage, separation of ownership and control, social value of public information or stock
price sensitivity of investment. Yet there may be many other decisions for which such distortions
may be potentially relevant, such as capital structure, dividend payout policies, or real effects of
credit distortions. We view our model as a first step towards assessing the consequences of financial
market imperfections for firm behavior and welfare, and towards designing adequate policies to
regulate shareholder incentives where necessary.

References
[1] Albagli, Elias, Christian Hellwig, and Aleh Tsyvinski (2011a). “Information Aggregation, Investment, and Managerial Incentives,” NBER Working paper No. 17330.
[2] Albagli, Elias, Christian Hellwig, and Aleh Tsyvinski (2011b). “A Theory of Asset Prices based
on Heterogeneous Information,” NBER Working paper No. 17548.
[3] Albagli, Elias, Christian Hellwig, and Aleh Tsyvinski (2014). “Dynamic Dispersed Information
and the Credit Spread Puzzle,” NBER Working paper No. 19788.
[4] Alonso, Ricardo, and Niko Matouschek (2008). “Optimal Delegation.” Review of Economic
Studies, 75(1), 259-293.
[5] Amador, Manuel, and Kyle Bagwell (2013). “The Theory of Optimal Delegation with an
Application to Tariff Caps.” Econometrica, 81(4), 1541-1599.
[6] Amador, Manuel, and Pierre-Olivier Weill (2010). “Learning from Prices: Public Communication and Welfare.” Journal of Political Economy, 118(5), 866–907.
[7] Angeletos, George-Marios, and Alessandro Pavan (2007). “Efficient Use of Information and
Social Value of Information.” Econometrica, 75(4), 1103-1142.
[8] Asriyan, Vladimir (2016). “Balance Sheet Recessions with Informational and Trading Frictions.” working paper, CREI/UPF, Barcelona.
[9] Baker, Malcolm, Jeremy Stein, and Jeffrey Wurgler (2003). “When Does the Market Matter?
Stock Prices and the Investment of Equity-Dependent Firms,” Quarterly Journal of Economics,
118(3), 969-1005.

43

[10] Baker, Malcolm, and Jeffrey Wurgler (2013). “Behavioral Corporate Finance: an Updated Survey,” in: Handbook of Economics and Finance (Constantinides, Harris, Stulz, eds.), Elsevier,
Vol. 2 A, 357-424.
[11] Becht, Marco, Patrick Bolton, and Ailsa Roell (2003). “Corporate Governance and Control,”
in: Handbook of Economics and Finance (Constantinides, Harris, Stulz, eds.), Elsevier, Vol. 1
A, 1-109.
[12] Benmelech, Efraim, Eugene Kandel, and Pietro Veronesi (2010). “Share-Based Compensation
and CEO (Dis)Incentives,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 125 (4), 1769-1820.
[13] Biais, Bruno, Larry Glosten, and Chester Spatt (2005). “Market Microstructure: A Survey of
Microfoundations, Empirical Results, and Policy Implications,” Journal of Financial Markets,
8(2), 217-264.
[14] Bolton, Patrick, Jose Scheinkman, and Wei Xiong (2006). “Executive Compensation and ShortTermist Behaviour in Speculative Markets,” Review of Economic Studies, 73(3), 577-610.
[15] Chen, Qi, Itay Goldstein, and Wei Jiang. “Price Informativeness and Investment Sensitivity
to Stock Price,” Review of Financial Studies, 20(3), 619-650.
[16] D’Avolio, Gene (2002). “The Market for Borrowing Stock,” Journal of Financial Economics,
66 (2-3), 271-306.
[17] Dávila, Eduardo, and Anton Korinek (forthcoming). “Pecuniary Externalities in Economies
with Financial Frictions,” Review of Economic Studies.
[18] Derrien, Francois, Ambrus Kecskes and David Thesmar (2013). “Investor Horizons and Corporate Policies,” Journal of Financial and Quantitative Analysis, 48(6), 1755-1780.
[19] Diamond, Douglas, and Robert Verrecchia (1981). “Information Aggregation in a Noisy Rational Expectations Economy,” Journal of Financial Economics, 9 (3), 221-235.
[20] Dow, James, and Gary Gorton (1997). “Share Market Efficiency and Economic Efficiency: Is
There a Connection?,” The Journal of Finance, 52 (3), 1087-1129.
[21] Dow, James, and Rohit Rahi (2003). “Informed Trading, Investment, and Welfare,” Journal
of Business, 76(3), 439-454.

44

[22] Easley, David, Nicholas Kiefer, Maureen O’hara, and Joseph Paperman (1996). “Liquidity,
Information, and Infrequently Traded Stocks,” Journal of Finance, 51(4), 1405-1436.
[23] Farhi, Emmanuel, Mikhail Golosov, and Aleh Tsyvinski (2009). “A Theory of Liquidity and
Regulation of Financial Intermediation,” Review of Economic Studies, 76(3), 973-992.
[24] Foucault, Thierry, and Laurent Frésard (2012). “Cross-Listing, Investment Sensitivity to Stock
Price, and the Learning Hypothesis,” Review of Financial Studies, 25(11), 3305-3350.
[25] Gale, Douglas, and Martin Hellwig (1985). “Incentive-Compatible Debt Contracts: The OnePeriod Problem,” Review of Economic Studies, 52(4), 647-663.
[26] Geanakoplos, John, and Herakles Polemarchakis (1986). “Existence, Regularity, and Constrained Suboptimality of Competitive Allocations when the Asset Market is Incomplete,” in:
Uncertainty, Information and Communication – Essays in honor of Kenneth J. Arrow, Vol. III
(Heller, Starr and Starrett, eds.), Cambridge University Press.
[27] Gilchrist, Simon, Charles P. Himmelberg, and Gur Huberman (2005). “Do Stock Price Bubbles
Influence Corporate Investment?.” Journal of Monetary Economics, 52(4), 805-827.
[28] Goldstein, Itay and Alexander Guembel (2008). “Manipulation and the Allocational Role of
Prices,” Review of Economic Studies, 75(1), 133-164.
[29] Goldstein, Itay, Emre Ozdenoren, and Kathy Yuan (2013). “Trading Frenzies and Their Impact
on Real Investment,” Journal of Financial Economics, 109(2), 566-582.
[30] Greenwald, Bruce, and Joseph Stiglitz (1986). “Externalities in Economies with Imperfect
Information and Incomplete Markets,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 101(2), 229-264.
[31] Grossman, Sanford J. and Joseph E. Stiglitz (1980). “On the Impossibility of Informationally
Efficient Markets,” American Economic Review, 70 (3), 393-408.
[32] Gul, Faruk, and Wolfgang Pesendorfer (2001). “Temptation and Self-Control.” Econometrica,
69 (6), 1403-1435.
[33] Gul, Faruk, and Wolfgang Pesendorfer (2005). “The Revealed Preference Theory of Changing
Tastes.” Review of Economic Studies, 72 (2), 429-448.
[34] Hellwig, Martin (1980). “On the Aggregation of Information in Competitive Markets,” Journal
of Economic Theory, 22, 477-498.
45

[35] Holmstrom, Bengt, and Jean Tirole (1993). “Market Liquidity and Performance Monitoring,”
Journal of Political Economy, 101(4), 678-709.
[36] Kyle, Albert S. (1985). “Continuous Auctions and Insider Trading.” Econometrica, 53(6),
1315-1335.
[37] Lorenzoni, Guido (2008). “Inefficient Credit Booms,” Review of Economic Studies, 75(3), 809833.
[38] Milgrom, Paul (1981). “Rational Expectations, Information Acquisition, and Competitive Bidding,” Econometrica, 49 (4), 921-943.
[39] Morck, Randall, Shleifer, Andrei, Vishny, Robert, Shapiro, Matthew, and James Poterba
(1990). “The Stock Market and Investment: is the Market a Sideshow?” Brookings Papers on
Economic Activity, 1990(2), 157-215.
[40] Morris, Stephen, and Hyun Song Shin (2002). “Social Value of Public Information,” American
Economic Review, 92(5), 1521-1534.
[41] Nagel, Stefan (2013). “Empirical Cross-Sectional Asset Pricing,” Annual Review of Financial
Economics, 5, 167-199.
[42] Polk, Christopher and Paola Sapienza (2009). “The Share Market and Corporate Investment:
A Test of Catering Theory,” Review of Financial Studies, 22(1), 187-217.
[43] Pontiff, Jeffrey (1996). “Costly Arbitrage: Evidence from Closed-End Funds,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 111 (4), 1135-1151.
[44] Roll, Richard, Eduardo Schwartz, and Avanidhar Subrahmanyam (2009). “Options Trading
Activity and Firm Valuation,” Journal of Financial Economics, 94(3), 345-360.
[45] Schwert, William (2003). “Anomalies and Market Efficiency,” in: Handbook of Economics and
Finance (Constantinides, Harris, Stulz, eds.), Elsevier, Vol. 1 B, 939-974.
[46] Stein, Jeremy (1988). “Takeover Threats and Managerial Myopia,” Journal of Political Economy, 96 (1), 61-80.
[47] Stein, Jeremy (1989). “Efficient Capital Markets, Inefficient Firms: A Model of Myopic Corporate Behavior,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 104 (4), 655-669.

46

[48] Stein, Jeremy (1996). “Rational Capital Budgeting in an Irrational World,” Journal of Business, 69 (4), 429-455.
[49] Tirole, Jean (2006). “Theory of Corporate Finance,” Princeton Economic Press.
[50] Townsend, Robert M. (1979). “Optimal Contracts and Competitive Markets with Costly State
Verification,” Journal of Economic Theory, 21(2), 265-293.
[51] Wurgler, Jeffrey and Ekaterina Zhuravskaya (2002). “Does Arbitrage Flatten Demand Curves
for Stocks,” Journal of Business, 75(4), 583-608.

7

Appendix: Proofs

Proof of Proposition 1:
Let x̂(P ) denote the private signal of a trader who is just indifferent between buying and not
R
buying the share at a given price P , so that P = Π (θ, k) dH (θ|x̂(P ), P ). Since R(·) is increasing
R
in θ, Π (θ, k) dH (θ|x, P ) must be monotone in x, and any trader whose private signal exceeds
x̂(P ) must strictly prefer to purchase a share, while any trader whose signal is less than x̂(P ) prefers

√
not to buy. Thus, the total demand by the informed traders is α 1 − Φ( β (x̂(P ) − θ)) . Equating
√
demand and supply, a price P clears the market in state (θ, u) if and only if x̂(P ) = θ +1/ β ·u ≡ z.
Therefore, in any equilibrium, it must be the case that x̂(P (θ, u; k)) = z, and if P is a function of z
only, then it must be invertible. But if P (·) is invertible, observing P is informationally equivalent
to observing x̂(P ) = z ∼ N (θ, (βδ)−1 ). Along the equilibrium path, the traders thus treat the
signals x̂(P ) ∼ N (θ, (βδ)−1 ) and x ∼ N (θ, β −1 ) as mutually independent normal signals and their
posterior beliefs H (·|x, P ) are given by
θ|x, P ∼ N

−1
λ̂µ + βx + βδ x̂(P ) 
, λ̂ + β + βδ
λ̂ + β + βδ

!
.

Substitute x̂(P ) = z, we restate the informed traders’ indifference condition in terms of z: P (z, k) =
E (Π (θ, k) |x = z, z). The expression for V (z, k) = E (Π (θ, k) |z) is derived analogously using only

−1
).
the information from the market signal, θ|P ∼ N ( λ̂µ+βδx̂(P ) , λ̂ + βδ
λ̂+βδ

Uniqueness. If demand is restricted to be non-increasing in P , x̂(P ) must be non-decreasing.
If x̂(P ) is strictly monotone everwhere, then it is invertible, P is informationally equivalent to
x̂(P ) = z, and we arrive at the equilibrium characterized above. Suppose therefore that x̂(P )
is flat over some range, i.e. x̂(P ) = x̂ for P ∈ (P 0 , P 00 ). Suppose further that for sufficiently low

47

ε > 0, x̂(P ) is strictly increasing over (P 0 − ε, P 0 ) and (P 00 , P 00 + ε), and hence uniquely invertible.35
But then for z ∈ (x̂(P 0 − ε), x̂) and z ∈ (x̂, x̂ (P 00 + ε)), P (z) is uniquely defined, and must be
characterized as above, from the indifference condition for x̂(P ) = z. But since the function
P (z, k) defined above is continuous and strictly monotonic in z, it must be the case that P 0 = P 00 ,
contradicting the existence of an interval for which x̂(P ) is flat. 
Proof of Proposition 2:
To simplify notation, let Υ = α (E (E (R (θ) |x = z, z)) /E (R (θ)) − 1). We begin with the results
concerning k̂/k ∗ . Since k̂/k ∗ = (1 + Υ)1/χ , it is immediate that k̂/k ∗ is increasing in Υ, equal to 1 if


and only if Υ = 0, and unbounded as Υ → ∞. Moreover, ∂ k̂/k ∗ /∂χ−1 = log (1 + Υ) (1 + Υ)1/χ ,
which is positive if and only if Υ > 0. Hence k̂/k ∗ is decreasing in χ, if Υ < 0 and increasing in χ,
if Υ > 0, which proves that investment distortions are worse, the lower is χ. Finally, if Υ > 0, then
clearly k̂/k ∗ is unbounded as χ → 0, while if Υ < 0, k̂/k ∗ ≥ (1 − α)1/χ > 0.
Next consider comparative statics for ∆ = 1 + (1 + Υ)1/χ (Υ/χ − 1): Since
11+χ
Υ
∂∆
∂∆
=
(1 + Υ)1/χ
and
= (1 + Υ)1/χ (Υ − log (1 + Υ) (1 − Υ/χ)) ,
∂Υ
χ χ
1+Υ
∂χ−1
it follows that ∆ = 0 iff Υ = 0, ∆ is increasing in Υ (and therefore positive) if Υ > 0, and ∆ is
decreasing in Υ (and therefore again positive) if Υ < 0. Furthermore,
∂∆
∂χ−1

= Υ − log (1 + Υ) (1 − Υ/χ) > Υ − Υ (1 − Υ/χ) >

Υ2 /χ

∂∆
∂χ−1

> 0 if Υ/χ ≥ 1, and

> 0 if Υ < χ. The limiting behavior,

bounds, and the result that ∆ > 1 if Υ > χ also follow immediately. 
We prove 3 and 4 for a slightly modification of our partial equilibrium model that also nests the
general equilibrium model discussed in section 4. Specifically, suppose that incumbent shareholders
n
o
select k to maximize E αQ̂P (z; k) + (1 − α) Π (θ, k) . Informed shareholders purchase whenever
E (Π (θ, k) |x, P ) ≥ QP , and the share price satisfies P (z; k) = Q−1 · E (Π (θ, k) |x = z, z). Here,
Q−1 and Q̂−1 denote a market and incumbent shareholder discount rate between cash flows at stage
1 and stage 2 respectively. Our partial equilibrium formulation is nested by setting Q = Q̂ = 1.
Proof of Proposition 3:
With the modified shareholder objective function, the implemented value of k satisfies
α
35



Q̂ 
E (1 − τ (z)) E (R (θ) |x = z, z) − C 0 (k ∗ ) + (1 − α) E (R (θ)) − C 0 (k ∗ ) = 0.
Q

It cannot be flat everywhere, because then informed demand would be completely inelastic, and there would be

no way to absorb noise trader shocks.

48

A tax policy τ (z) implements k ∗ if and only if E {(1 − τ (z)) (E (R (θ) |x = z, z) − C 0 (k ∗ ))} = 0,
or equivalently C 0 (k ∗ ) = E (R (θ)) = E {(1 − τ̂ (z)) E (R (θ) |x = z, z)}. Therefore if τ̂ (z) implements k ∗ , then by construction the same is true for any τ (z), s.t. 1 − τ (z) = b (1 − τ̂ (z)),
with b > 0. Condition (5) then follows from E (τ̂ (z)) = 0 and E {τ̂ (z) E (R (θ) |x = z, z)} =
cov (τ̂ (z) , E (R (θ) |x = z, z)). 
Proof of Proposition 4:
For a given intervention threshold ẑ, the first-order condition k̂ is
α

Q̂
Q

Z

∞

 
p


 
E (R (θ) |x = z, z) − C 0 k̂ dΦ
λz z + (1 − α) E (R (θ)) − C 0 k̂
= 0,

ẑ

which corresponds to condition (6) with Q̂ = Q = 1. The price floor at which the policy maker

 
intervenes is equal to P̄ = Q−1 E (R (θ) |x = ẑ, ẑ) k̂ − C k̂ . It then follows that k̂ = k ∗ is
implemented if and only if ẑ = z ∗ , which proves part (i) of the proposition.
 
(ii) For each share bought, the policy maker earns a dividend Π θ, k̂ , but pays a price P̄ .


√
√
Given θ and u = β (z − θ), the policy maker purchases a measure α Φ β (x̂ − θ) − Φ (u) =
α Pr (x ∈ [z, x̂] |θ) of shares, where x̂ is the informed traders’ indifference threshold when the support
  

price is active, i.e. whenever z < ẑ, which is defined by QP̄ = E Π θ, k̂ |x̂, z ≤ ẑ . Since
  

QP̄ = E Π θ, k̂ |x = ẑ, ẑ , it follows that x̂ > ẑ. The expected number of shares purchased is
equal to Pr (x ∈ [z, x̂] , z ≤ ẑ), while the expected dividend value equals
 
p

√ 
Π θ, k̂ Pr (x ∈ [z, x̂] |θ) dΦ
βδ (z − θ) dΦ
λθ
−∞ −∞
  

= E Π θ, k̂ |x ∈ [z, x̂] , z ≤ ẑ · Pr (x ∈ [z, x̂] , z ≤ ẑ) < QP̄ · Pr (x ∈ [z, x̂] , z ≤ ẑ) .

Z

∞

Z

ẑ

Hence the policy maker’s expected expenditure on equity shares P̄ · Pr (x ∈ [z, x̂] , z ≤ ẑ) strictly
exceeds expected dividends discounted at the market interest rate Q. 
Comparative statics for Equation 7:
Equation (7) follows directly from the incumbent and final shareholders’ FOCs. The final shareholder’s welfare uF (αV ) − αT = uF (αV ) − αV u0F (αV ) is increasing in αV . In addition, αT =
αV u0F (αV ) is increasing with αV , since −C · u00F (C) /u0F (C) ≤ 1 for all C. Applying the implicit
function theorem to

vI0

u0I (V −αV )
(αV u0F (αV ))

= u0F (αV ), αV and (1 − α) V must both be increasing with V ,

and therefore incumbent shareholder welfare vI (αT ) + uI ((1 − α) V ) is also increasing in V . 

49

Proof of Proposition 5:
The first-order condition for kGE is
α0



Q̂
E (E (R (θ) |x = z, z)) − C 0 (kGE ) + (1 − α0 ) E (R (θ)) − C 0 (kGE ) = 0,
Q

where Q̂ = 1/u0F (α0 VGE ) satisfies
Q̂ =

vI0 (α0 TGE )
(1 + χ) E (R (θ)) − C 0 (kGE )
VGE
=
Q.
=
u0I ((1 − α0 ) VGE )
TGE
(1 + χ) E (E (R (θ) |x = z, z)) − C 0 (kGE )

(i) Suppose that E (E (R (θ) |x = z, z)) > E (R (θ)). We write the FOC for C 0 (kGE ) as
C 0 (kGE ) − E (R (θ))
(1 + χ) E (E (R (θ) |x = z, z)) − C 0 (kGE )
α0
=
1 − α0
(1 + χ) E (R (θ)) − C 0 (kGE )
E (E (R (θ) |x = z, z)) − C 0 (kGE )
As χ → 0, the second ratio converges to 1, and therefore C 0 (kGE ) ≈ (1 + α0 χ) E (R (θ)), and
1+1/χ
χ
(1
1+χ E (R (θ))
) e α0 .

Q/Q̂ → ∞. Expected dividends are VGE ≈
VGE /V ∗ ≈ (1 − α0 ) (1 + α0 χ)1/χ → (1 − α0

− α0 ) (1 + α0 χ)1/χ and therefore

(ii) Suppose that E (E (R (θ) |x = z, z)) < E (R (θ)). We write the FOC for C 0 (kGE ) as
1 − α0
C 0 (kGE ) − E (E (R (θ) |x = z, z))
(1 + χ) E (R (θ)) − C 0 (kGE )
=
α0
(1 + χ) E (E (R (θ) |x = z, z)) − C 0 (kGE )
E (R (θ)) − C 0 (kGE )
The second ratio converges to 1 as χ → 0, and therefore it follows that as χ → 0, C 0 (kGE ) ≈
(1 + (1 − α0 ) χ) E (E (R (θ) |x = z, z)) and Q/Q̂ → 0. Expected dividends are


VGE
E (R (θ))
1 + (1 − α0 ) χ
≈
−
(1 + (1 − α0 ) χ)1/χ
E (E (R (θ) |x = z, z))
1+χ
(E (E (R (θ) |x = z, z)))1+1/χ


E (R (θ))
− 1 e1−α0
→
E (E (R (θ) |x = z, z))
The expected dividends in the partial equilibrium benchmark are
VP E
(E (E (R (θ) |x = z, z)))1+1/χ





1/χ
E (R (θ))
1 − α0
α0
E (R (θ))
=
1−
−
1 + (1 − α0 )
−1
E (E (R (θ) |x = z, z))
1+χ
1+χ
E (E (R (θ) |x = z, z))
and therefore VP E / (E (E (R (θ) |x = z, z)))1+1/χ → ∞.
Proof of Proposition 6:
For any of the policy interventions considered, let (TI , VI ) and (TF , VF ) denote the aggregate market
values and aggregate dividends from the perspective of incumbent and final shareholders. From

u0 (C 2 )
the FOC w.r.t. α of incumbent shareholders, we have TI /VI = v0I C I1 and TF /VF = u0F CF2 .
I( I )
50

Intertemporal efficiency is satisfied if and only if Q̂ =

u0I (CI2 )
vI0 (CI1 )


= u0F CF2 , and therefore TI /VI =

TF /VF . Incumbent shareholders withdraw from equity markets if Q̂TI < VI , while final shareholders


withdraw if VF u0F CF2 < TF . A situation of excess demand occurs if VF u0F CF2 > TF , and final
shareholders demand becomes arbitrarily high. Our proof evaluates for each of the policies and
cases whether one of these cases arises.
(i) Since regulatory interventions do not affect market values (i.e. TI = TF = T and VI = VF =
V ), it is automatically the case that TI /VI = TF /VF . Now, if E (E (R (θ) |x = z, z)) > E (R (θ)),
market values must exceed V /Q, which is strictly positive. Since intertemporal MRS are aligned
with market returns at Q̂, the marked remains in equilibrium, i.e. situations of excess demand and
supply or intertemporal distortions do not arise with regulation in the case of upside risk.
If instead E (E (R (θ) |x = z, z)) < E (R (θ)), then market values fall short of V /Q, and any
intervention that increases k must lower market values and eventually make them negative, because
k (E (E (R (θ) |x = z, z)) − C (k) /k) is decreasing and negative if k is sufficiently large. Thus if
C (k) /k =

1
0
1+χ C (k)

≥ E (E (R (θ) |x = z, z)), we have T < 0, and the market inevitably shuts

down. For small enough χ, this occurs for any k > kGE .
(ii) For transaction taxes we have VI = VF = V , but TI = Q−1 E ((1 − τ (z)) P (z, k)) while
TF = Q−1 E (P (z, k)).

It follows that TI = TF if and only if E (τ (z) P (z, k)) = 0.

pose that E (E (R (θ) |x = z, z)) > E (R (θ)).

Sup-

Combining the first-order condition with finan-

cial transaction taxes with the characterization of Q/Q̂ in general equilibrium implies that the
same characterization of investment incentives applies except that E (E (R (θ) |x = z, z)) is replaced with E ((1 − τ̂ (z)) E (R (θ) |x = z, z)). From the same steps as above, it follows that as
long as E ((1 − τ̂ (z)) E (R (θ) |x = z, z)) > E (R (θ)), C 0 (kGE ) ≈ (1 + α0 χ) E (R (θ)) for small χ,
so the policy has no first-order effects on investment. Finally, suppose that the policy exactly
implements first best C 0 (k) = E (R (θ)). Revenue-neutrality requires that E (τ (z) P (z, k)) = 0,
1
or E (τ (z) E (R (θ) |x = z, z)) = E (τ (z)) C (k) /k = E (τ (z)) 1+χ
E (R (θ)), while the implementa-

tion of k ∗ requires E ((1 − τ (z)) E (R (θ) |x = z, z)) = E ((1 − τ (z))) E (R (θ)). Combining these two
χ
equalities yields E (E (R (θ) |x = z, z)) − E (R (θ)) = −E (R (θ)) E (τ (z)) 1+χ
, which can hold in the

limit as χ → 0 only if E (τ (z)) → −∞.
(iii) Suppose that E (E (R (θ) |x = z, z)) < E (R (θ)). For any policy such that E (R (θ)) >
E ((1 − τ̂ (z)) E (R (θ) |x = z, z)), we have C 0 (k) ≈ (1 + (1 − α0 ) χ) E ((1 − τ̂ (z)) E (R (θ) |x = z, z))
for small χ. A tax policy that reduces downside risk therefore improves investment incentives. The
n
o
1
tax revenue is kQ−1 E (τ (z) E (R (θ) |x = z, z)) − E (τ (z)) 1+χ
C 0 (k) . Using the characterization

51

of C 0 (k) and rearranging terms, this expression can be rewritten as



α0 χ
−1
E (E (R (θ) |x = z, z)) − E ((1 − τ̂ (z)) E (R (θ) |x = z, z)) 1 − E (τ (z))
kQ
.
1+χ
For small enough χ, this expression is unambiguously negative for any tax policy such that
E ((1 − τ̂ (z)) E (R (θ) |x = z, z)) > E (E (R (θ) |x = z, z)) . Hence intertemporal distortions are unavoidable. The implied shareholder subsidy converges to k {C 0 (k) − E (E (R (θ) |x = z, z))} > 0,
and has the exact same size as a direct subsidy to investment.
The market value of equity for incumbent shareholders is TI = kQ−1 E ((1 − τ̂ (z)) E (R (θ) |x = z, z))

n

α0 χ
1+χ

which converges to 0 as χ → 0. The aggregate price paid by final shareholders is


1 + (1 − α0 ) χ
−1
E (E (R (θ) |x = z, z)) − E ((1 − τ̂ (z)) E (R (θ) |x = z, z))
TF = kQ
1+χ
and must be strictly negative for small χ. The subsidy on equity purchases thus exceeds the overall
market value of equity, so that final shareholders pay a negative price for their equity stake, equity
purchases are a free lunch for final shareholders. The transaction tax/subsidy policy thus causes
an excess demand for equity.
(iv) Consider a market intervention with E (E (R (θ) |x = z, z)) < E (R (θ)). For any intervention
  
  



√
√
threshold ẑ, we have VI = E Π θ, k̂ , QTI = QP̄ Φ λz ẑ +E Π θ, k̂ |x = z, z; z ≥ ẑ 1 − Φ λz ẑ ,
  

Q (TI − TF ) = QP̄ ·Pr (x ∈ [z, x̂] , z ≤ ẑ), and VI −VF = E Π θ, k̂ |x ∈ [z, x̂] , z ≤ ẑ ·Pr (x ∈ [z, x̂] , z ≤ ẑ).
  

In addition, QP̄ = E Π θ, k̂ |x = ẑ, ẑ . k̂ solves the first-order condition
Q̂
α0
Q

Z

∞

 
 


p
λz z + (1 − α0 ) E (R (θ)) − C 0 k̂
= 0.
E (R (θ) |x = z, z) − C 0 k̂ dΦ

ẑ

 
For any ẑ ≤ z ∗ , we obtain C 0 k̂ ≥ E (R (θ) |x = z, z; z ≥ ẑ), and therefore


 
1
QTI = k̂ E (R (θ) |x = ẑ, ẑ) Φ
λz ẑ + E (R (θ) |x = z, z; z ≥ ẑ) 1 − Φ
λz ẑ −
C 0 k̂
1+χ



p

p

1
≤ k̂ E (R (θ) |x = ẑ, ẑ) Φ
λz ẑ + E (R (θ) |x = z, z; z ≥ ẑ) 1 − Φ
λz ẑ −
1+χ
p





p



which is unambiguously negative for sufficiently small χ. Therefore, there is no intervention with
a threshold ẑ ≤ z ∗ that does not cause incumbent shareholders to withdraw from the market.
 
Suppose next that ẑ > z ∗ . This implies that E (R (θ)) < C 0 k̂ < E (R (θ) |x = z, z; z ≥ ẑ).
Rewrite the first-order condition for k̂ as
α0
1−Φ
1 − α0


p

λz ẑ



=

 
C 0 k̂ − E (R (θ))

Q

 
Q̂ E (R (θ) |x = z, z; z ≥ ẑ) − C 0 k̂
52



o
,

where
Q
Q̂

=

E (R (θ) |x = ẑ, ẑ) Φ

√



√
λz ẑ + E (R (θ) |x = z, z; z ≥ ẑ) 1 − Φ λz ẑ −
 
1
E (R (θ)) − 1+χ
C 0 k̂

1
0
1+χ C

 
k̂
.

Therefore, define z1 by
E (R (θ)) = E (R (θ) |x = z1 , z1 ) Φ



p

p
λz z1 + E (R (θ) |x = z, z; z ≥ z1 ) 1 − Φ
λ z z1

as the intervention threshold at which the market return exactly matches the fundamental return,
and note that E (R (θ) |x = z, z; z ≥ z1 ) > E (R (θ)) > E (R (θ) |x = z1 , z1 ). For any ẑ ≤ z1 , we
necessarily obtain that QTI ≤ 0 for sufficiently small χ, and hence that the policy intervention
necessarily induces a market breakdown.
If instead ẑ ≥ z1 , the intervention is so large that it transforms the investment return into an
upside risk. As χ → 0, the first-order condition can be re-written as:
 
0 k̂ − E (R (θ))
C
α0
 
Ψ≈
1 − α0
E (R (θ)) − 1 C 0 k̂
1+χ

where

√
1 − Φ λz ẑ (E (R (θ) |x = z, z; z ≥ ẑ) − E (R (θ)))


√
√
,
Ψ=
Φ λz ẑ (E (R (θ) |x = ẑ, ẑ) − E (R (θ))) + 1 − Φ λz ẑ (E (R (θ) |x = z, z; z ≥ ẑ) − E (R (θ)))
 
Therefore, for small χ, we have C 0 k̂ ≈ (1 + α̂χ) E (R (θ)), where α̂ = αΨ/ (1 − α + αΨ). With
this, we can characterize QTI , QTF , VI , and VF :


p


p
 1 + α̂χ
QTI = k̂ E (R (θ) |x = ẑ, ẑ) Φ
E (R (θ))
λz ẑ + E (R (θ) |x = z, z; z ≥ ẑ) 1 − Φ
λz ẑ −
1+χ


1 + α̂χ
(1 − α̂) χ
VI = k̂E (R (θ)) 1 −
= k̂E (R (θ))
1+χ
1+χ


1 + α̂χ
E (R (θ))
QTF = QTI − k̂ · Pr (x ∈ [z, x̂] , z ≤ ẑ) · E (R (θ) |x = ẑ, ẑ) −
1+χ


1 + α̂χ
VF = VI − k̂ · Pr (x ∈ [z, x̂] , z ≤ ẑ) · E (R (θ) |x ∈ [z, x̂] , z ≤ ẑ) −
E (R (θ)) .
1+χ
It is straight-forward to check that QTI > 0 and QTF > 0, and TI R TF , if and only if E (R (θ) |x = ẑ, ẑ) R
1+α̂χ
1+χ E (R (θ)).

Moreover, TI /TF reaches a positive finite limit as χ → 0, for any ẑ > ze.

At the same time, VI → 0 as χ → 0. Let z2 solve E (R (θ) |x ∈ [z, x̂] , z ≤ z2 ) = E (R (θ)). If
ẑ = z2 , VF = VI . But since at ẑ = z2 , we have E (R (θ) |x = ẑ, ẑ) > E (R (θ) |x ∈ [z, x̂] , z ≤ z2 ) =
53

E (R (θ)), it follows that TI > TF , so that the intervention leads to an intertemporal distortion. If
instead ẑ > z2 , it follows that VF < 0 for sufficiently low χ, causing final shareholders to withdraw
from the equity market, and resulting in a market breakdown with excess supply of shares.
Finally, if ẑ ∈ (z1 , z2 ), VF reaches a positive, finite limit as χ → 0. Since Q ∼ 1/VI becomes
infinitely large, but QTI and QTF both reach positive finite limist as χ → 0, it must be the case
that TF → 0. But then VF /TF → ∞, and demand by final shareholders must be unboundedly
large, resulting in excess demand for shares. 
Proof of Proposition 7:
 
Let ω θ̂ denote the leverage ratio

w
k

that satisfies (14) with equality. Then the incumbent share-

holder’s return takes the form

  Z
    
  Z ∞ 
 
p
ρ ω θ̂ ; θ̂ = 1/ω θ̂
R (θ) − R θ̂ dΦ( λP θ) = 1/ω θ̂

∞



p
R0 (θ) 1 − Φ( λP θ) dθ.

θ̂

θ̂

The optimal choice of θ̂ satisfies the first-order condition
 

 
   
√
−R0 θ̂ 1 − Φ( λP θ̂)
d ln ρ ω θ̂ ; θ̂
ω 0 θ̂

√
= R∞ 0
0=
−  ,
dθ̂
ω θ̂
θ̂ R (θ) 1 − Φ( λP θ) dθ
along with the second order condition

d2 ln ρ(ω (θ̂);θ̂)
dθ̂2

< 0.

(i) With R̄ > 2 and λP = λ, there exists an optimal threshold θ̂ at which the lender’s break-even
condition is satisfied and the borrower’s return exceeds 1. We thus need to show that a lower value
of λP strictly increases borrower returns for given θ̂ and w/k, and increases the optimal choice of
√
θ̂ and w/k. Borrower returns are decreasing in λP since
Z ∞
Z ∞


p
p
∂
0
√
R (θ) 1 − Φ( λP θ) dθ = −
R0 (θ) θφ( λP θ)dθ
∂ λP θ θ̂
θ̂
√
∂ ln ρ(ω (θ̂);θ̂)
is negative for any symmetric R. The optimal choice of θ̂ is decreasing in λP whenever
∂ θ̂
√
is decreasing in λP . But
   
 
 (
√
)
R∞ 0
√
√
∂ 2 ln ρ ω θ̂ ; θ̂
−R0 θ̂ 1 − Φ( λP θ̂)
R
(θ)
θφ(
λ
θ)dθ
θ̂φ(
θ̂)
λ
P
P


R ∞ θ̂
√
√
−
= R∞ 0
√
√
0
λ
θ)
dθ
R
(θ)
1
−
Φ(
∂ θ̂∂ λP
1 − Φ( λP θ̂)
P
θ̂
θ̂ R (θ) 1 − Φ( λP θ) dθ
is negative whenever the term in brackets is positive, which is straight-forward to check for θ̂ < 0,
and follows from the fact that uφ(u)/ (1 − Φ(u)) is strictly increasing in u for u > 0.



  
 
(ii) As λP → 0, ρ wk ; θ̂ converges to 1/ω θ̂ 12 R̄ − R θ̂ . The incumbent shareholders
will then choose to borrow if for some θ̂,
Z θ̂
Z ∞
 
 
 
√
√
1
R (θ) − R θ̂ dΦ( λθ),
R̄ − R θ̂
> ω θ̂ = 1 − E (R (θ)) + ε
R (θ) dΦ( λθ) +
2
−∞
θ̂
54

or equivalently
(
R̄ > minθ̂

Z

θ̂

2 − 2 (1 − ε)

√

 
√ 
R (θ) dΦ( λθ) − R θ̂ 1 − 2Φ( λθ̂)

)

−∞

Z
= 2 − R̄maxθ̂

θ̂

−∞

n
√ o
√
1 − 2εΦ( λθ̂) − 2 (1 − ε) Φ( λθ) R00 (θ) dθ

where R0 (θ) = R (θ) /R̄ normalizes R (θ) to the interval [0, 2] and has expected value E (R0 (θ)) = 1.
√ o
√
R θ̂ n
Since −∞ 1 − 2εΦ( λθ̂) − 2 (1 − ε) Φ( λθ) R00 (θ) dθ > 0 for all θ̂ ≤ 0 there exists
R̃ (ε; R0 (·)) =
1 + maxθ̂

2
n
<2
√
√ o
0 (θ) dθ
1
−
2εΦ(
λ
θ̂)
−
2
(1
−
ε)
Φ(
λθ)
R
0
−∞

R θ̂



and whenever R̄ ∈ R̃ (ε; R0 (·)) ; 2 , the incumbent shareholders prefer to borrow and invest, even
though the expected returns from investing are strictly less than 1. 
Proof of Proposition 8:
 
From the first-order condition (1 + b) C 0 k̂ = E (E (R (θ) |x = z, z)), k̂ is decreasing in b. Substituting the FOC into expected dividends we obtain
  
V = E (R (θ)) k̂ − (1 + b) C k̂ = E (R (θ)) −


1
E (E (R (θ) |x = z, z)) k̂
1+χ

which is decreasing in k̂ and increasing in b, whenever E (E (R (θ) |x = z, z)) /E (R (θ)) > 1 + χ. 
Proof of Proposition 9:
(i) Let y 0 be such that E (E (R (θ) |x = z, z, y 0 ) |y 0 ) = E (E (R (θ) |x = z, z)). We write V (y) /V as


V (y)
E (E (R (θ) |x = z, z, y) |y) 1/χ E (E (R (θ) |x = z, z, y) |y) − (1 + χ) E (R (θ) |y)
=
.
V
E (E (R (θ) |x = z, z))
E (E (R (θ) |x = z, z)) − (1 + χ) E (R (θ))
Since R (·) is convex, E (E (R (θ) |x = z, z)) > E (R (θ)) and E (E (R (θ) |x = z, z, y) |y) > E (R (θ) |y)
for all y. Therefore,
limχ→0

E (E (R (θ) |x = z, z, y) |y) − (1 + χ) E (R (θ) |y)
E (E (R (θ) |x = z, z, y) |y) − E (R (θ) |y)
=
> 0.
E (E (R (θ) |x = z, z)) − (1 + χ) E (R (θ))
E (E (R (θ) |x = z, z)) − E (R (θ))

But then limχ→0 V (y) /V = 0 for all y < y 0 and limχ→0 V (y) /V = ∞ for all y > y 0 . Since
P r (y > y 0 ) > 0, it follows that limχ→0 E (V (y)) /V = ∞. At the same time, we know that V < 0
and therefore E (V (y)) < V < 0 for sufficiently low χ.
 

 
 
χ
(ii) We have E P z, k̂
= 1+χ
{E (E (R (θ) |x = z, z))}1+1/χ and E P z, y, k̂ (y) |y =
 
 
 

1+1/χ
χ
{E
(E
(R
(θ)
|x
=
z,
z,
y)
|y)}
and
therefore
lim
E
P
z,
y,
k̂
(y)
|y
/E
P
z,
k̂
=
χ→0
1+χ
∞ for all y > y 0 .
55

Proof of Proposition 10:
Follows directly from the arguments in the text and the assumption that E (R (θ) |x = z, z) /E (R (θ) |z)
is strictly increasing.
Proof of Proposition 11:
Consider a small perturbation of investment parametrized by (ηI , ηF ), such that
dkI = ηI {E (RI (θ)) − E [E (RI (θ) |x = z, z)]} and dkF (z) = ηF (E (RF (θ) |x = z, z) − E (RF (θ) |z)).
The final shareholders’ expected payoff is
{E (RI (θ)) − E [E (RI (θ) |x = z, z)]} kI + E {kF (z) (E (RF (θ) |z) − E (RF (θ) |x = z, z))} ,
and therefore their welfare is unchanged if
dkI {E (RI (θ)) − E [E (RI (θ) |x = z, z)]} = −E {dkF (z) (E (RF (θ) |z) − E (RF (θ) |x = z, z))} ,
or
ηI
=
ηF

n
o
E (E (RF (θ) |z) − E (RF (θ) |x = z, z))2
{E (RI (θ)) − E [E (RI (θ) |x = z, z)]}2

.

The incumbent shareholders’ expected payoff is
E [E (RI (θ) |x = z, z)] kI − CI (kI ) + E {kF (z) E (RF (θ) |x = z, z)} − E {CF (kF (z))}
=E [E (RI (θ) |x = z, z)] kI − CI (kI ) + E {E (RF (θ) |z) kF (z)} − E {CF (kF (z))}
+ E {kF (z) (E (RF (θ) |x = z, z) − E (RF (θ) |z))}
Therefore the change in expected payoffs resulting from the perturbation is
n
o
n

o
0
0
E [E (RI (θ) |x = z, z)] − CI (kI ) dkI + E E (RF (θ) |z) − CF (kF (z)) dkF (z)
+ E {dkF (z) (E (RF (θ) |x = z, z) − E (RF (θ) |z))}
From the first-order conditions defining kI and kF (z), the first two terms are zero, while the
n
o
third term equals ηF E (E (RF (θ) |z) − E (RF (θ) |x = z, z))2 > 0, which shows that incumbent
shareholders are made strictly better off by the perturbation. 

56

