NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

HANDLE WITH CARE:
THE LOCAL AIR POLLUTION COSTS OF COAL STORAGE.
Akshaya Jha
Nicholas Z. Muller
Working Paper 23417
http://www.nber.org/papers/w23417

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
May 2017

The authors would like to thank Max Auffhammer, Prashant Bharadwaj, Jim Bushnell, Steve
Cicala, Karen Clay, Lucas Davis, Meredith Fowlie, Katrina Jessoe, David Rapson, Jim Sallee,
and Wally Thurman as well as seminar and conference participants (listed chronologically) at
Penn State University, the Midwest Energy Fest, the Property and Environmental Research
Center (PERC) Seminar, UC Berkeley, UC Davis, the Heartland Workshop, the Workshop on
Environmental and Energy Policy hosted by Utah State University, and UC San Diego. Jha would
also like to gratefully acknowledge that work on this project was supported by the Lone Mountain
Fellowship provided by PERC. Muller acknowledges support provided by the USEPA under:
EPA-G2014-STAR-J1. Any remaining errors are our own. The views expressed herein are those
of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic
Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.
© 2017 by Akshaya Jha and Nicholas Z. Muller. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to
exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.

Handle with Care: The Local Air Pollution Costs of Coal Storage.
Akshaya Jha and Nicholas Z. Muller
NBER Working Paper No. 23417
May 2017
JEL No. H23,Q40,Q52,Q53
ABSTRACT
Burning coal is known to have environmental costs; this paper quantities the local environmental
costs of transporting and storing coal at U.S. power plants for the sample period 2002-2012. We
first demonstrate that a 10% increase in coal stockpiles (number of deliveries) results in a 0.07%
(0.16%) increase in the average concentration of fine particulates (PM2.5) for locations up to 25
miles away from, and downwind from, plants. We next assess the impacts of PM2.5 on average
adult and infant mortality rates using coal stockpiles and deliveries as instruments for PM2.5. Our
findings within this instrumental variables framework indicate that a 10% increase in PM2.5
leads to a 1.1% (6.6%) increase in average adult (infant) mortality rates; these causal estimates
are similar in magnitude to the epidemiological estimates used by the USEPA in their regulatory
impact analyses. Our estimated increase in mortality rates implies local environmental costs of
$183 ($203) per ton of coal stockpiled (delivered); to put this in perspective, the average power
plant paid roughly $48 per ton for coal during our sample period. These sizable but highly
localized environmental costs of coal transportation and storage disproportionately impact the
economically disadvantaged communities living near coal-fired power plants.

Akshaya Jha
Carnegie Mellon University
Hamburg Hall Office 3016
4800 Forbes Avenue
Pittsburgh, PA 15232
Website: http://www.akshayajha.com
akshayaj@andrew.cmu.edu
Nicholas Z. Muller
Department of Economics
Warner Hall, 305D
Middlebury College
303 College Street
Middlebury, VT 05753
and NBER
nicholas.muller74@gmail.com

1

Introduction

The reliance on coal as an energy source has a multitude of well-known environmental
consequences.1 Burning coal emits global pollutants which contribute to climate change
as well as criteria air pollutants which affect the health status of local populations. Mining coal can cause acid mine drainage and the ecological impacts of mountaintop removal
are significant. As a result of these different environmental impacts, coal is subject to a
plethora of regulatory constraints. For example, the effects of current mining operations
as well as abandoned mine sites are managed by the Surface Mining Control and Reclamation Act of 1977. Transportation of coal by trains, trucks, or barges is governed by
fuel and emission standards set by the United States Environmental Protection Agency
(USEPA). Finally, the combustion of coal for power generation and manufacturing is
regulated by the Clean Air Act. Seemingly every stage of the supply chain from coal
production at mines to coal burned by power plants is subject to a policy constraint.
Despite this thicket of environmental regulations relevant to coal, our paper uncovers
an as yet unstudied dimension of coal use that we argue requires policy intervention:
the environmental consequences of the coal purchase and storage behavior of U.S. power
plants. We first demonstrate that coal deliveries to power plants and the level of coal
stockpiles held at these plants result in statistically significant increases in the concentrations of fine particulates (P M2.5 ) within 25 miles of these plants.2 This highly local
but sizable effect of coal procurement on ambient P M2.5 levels provides local, state, and
federal regulators with a new lever they can use to comply with the National Ambient
Air Quality Standards (NAAQS) established by the Clean Air Act. Moreover, large
quantities of coal are also stored, transported, and handled at coal mines and coal export
terminals. Coal export terminals in particular are located in densely populated coastal
cities such as Los Angeles, Houston, and Baltimore. An empirical connection between
coal delivery, storage, and ambient P M2.5 can inform the ongoing debate regarding the
potential adverse health impacts of coal terminals on local communities.3
1

See NRC (2010) for a comprehensive report on the environmental externalities associated with energy

use.
2

Jaffe et al. (2015) studies the emissions of diesel particulate matter (DPM) and coal dust from
trains in the Columbia River Gorge in Washington State; they find that the passage of a diesel powered
open-top coal train results in nearly twice as much respirable P M2.5 compared to the passage of a
diesel-powered freight train not carrying coal in an open hopper.
3
There is staunch local opposition to two proposed coal export terminals in Washington (near Bellingham and Longview) as well as a proposed terminal in Oakland due in part to concerns surrounding the

2

We also test for a causal relationship between mortality rates and exposure to P M2.5
using coal deliveries and stockpiles as instruments for P M2.5 exposure. Few empirical
relationships have a more significant bearing on environmental policy evaluation than
the link between P M2.5 and mortality. For example, the USEPA has repeatedly found
that the vast majority of the benefits from the Clean Air Act come from reductions in
mortality risk due to decreased P M2.5 exposure ((EPA, 1999); (EPA, 2010)). Thus, the
estimated magnitude of the benefits from any policy designed to reduce air pollution is
quite sensitive to which P M2.5 /mortality estimate is used (EPA, 2010). We demonstrate
this point by quantifying the monetary social costs of plants’ coal purchase and storage
behavior using the same approach as the USEPA’s benefit-cost analyses of the Clean Air
Act. This calculation relies on our estimated relationship between coal procurement and
P M2.5 , the relationship between P M2.5 and mortality rates, as well as standard valuation
techniques to monetize changes in mortality. We consider two different estimates of
the link between P M2.5 and mortality rates: our estimate versus the epidemiological
estimate currently used by the USEPA. Though our P M2.5 /mortality-rate relationship is
not markedly different in magnitude from existing epidemiological estimates, the resulting
local environmental costs of coal procurement differ substantially based on which of the
two estimates is used.
Our paper combines several sources of data for the sample period 2002-2012. First,
we use monthly, plant-level data on coal purchases and stockpiles provided by the Energy
Information Administration (EIA). These coal procurement data are linked to monthly
average P M2.5 concentration levels at roughly 1,000 monitored sites across the United
States, which are collected from the Air Quality System (AQS) database maintained
by the Environmental Protection Agency (EPA). Weather conditions play a large role
in dictating P M2.5 levels; moreover, wind speed, wind direction, and precipitation are
important determinants of the extent to which coal stockpiles and coal deliveries generate
P M2.5 . Due to this, our analysis incorporates monthly meteorological data collected from
roughly 1,600 monitors across the United States from the National Climatic Data Center
(NCDC). Finally, we assess the extent to which P M2.5 affects mortality using county-bymonth specific mortality rates provided by the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention
negative health consequences from coal dust; these proposed terminals have not been built as of March
2017. Moreover, the city of Oakland voted to ban the transport and storage of large coal shipments
within their jurisdiction; a recent New York Times article (Fuller, 2016) provides more details regarding
this ban.

3

(CDC Wonder, 2016).
To estimate the impact of coal stockpiles and coal deliveries on local P M2.5 concentration levels, we specify a spatial econometric framework that matches air quality
(AQ) monitoring stations to coal-fired power plants within a given distance radius. This
framework allows us to test for the distance at which plants’ coal purchase and storage
behavior ceases to affect pollution levels. We find that a 10% increase in coal stockpiles
(number of deliveries) results in a 0.06% (0.12%) increase in average P M2.5 concentration
levels for coal-fired power plants within 25 miles of their matched air quality monitor. In
contrast, there is no statistical link between coal procurement (for either coal stockpiles
or deliveries) and P M2.5 levels for plants beyond 25 miles of their matched air quality
monitor; the effect of coal procurement on P M2.5 concentration levels is highly localized.4 This is intuitive, given that the emissions from coal stockpiles, coal handling, and
trains delivering coal all occur at ground level and are therefore not likely to be entrained
in upper-level winds. In contrast, the effects of coal combustion on P M2.5 are regional
because the emissions from coal combustion are typically released from tall smokestacks.
Importantly, we find no link between locally monitored carbon monoxide and either
coal stored or delivered using the same empirical framework; this provides strong evidence
that our estimated relationship between coal procurement and P M2.5 is not capturing
any combustion-based source of P M2.5 emissions such as the coal burned by power plants
or the fuel burned by the trains, trucks, and barges carrying coal to power plants. Finally,
our estimated effects of coal procurement on P M2.5 are higher: 1) for areas downwind
from a plant, and 2) for lower levels of precipitation.5 These empirical results using
spatiotemporal variation in weather, our placebo tests considering carbon monoxide, as
well as our battery of controls give us confidence that we have causally identified how
coal stored and delivered affects P M2.5 .
We next estimate the impact of P M2.5 concentration levels on mortality rates using
the coal stored at, and obtained by, power plants as instruments for P M2.5 exposure.
4

Clay, Lewis and Severnini (2015) examines the economic benefits versus environmental costs of coalfired power plant openings in the United States from 1938-1962; they similarly find that the local air
pollution costs from coal-fired power plants were concentrated primarily within 30 miles of these plants.
5
There is a growing literature that utilizes wind direction to identify how local air pollution affects
economic and environmental outcomes; among others, this identification strategy is used by Anderson
(2015) to examine how long-term air pollution exposure affects mortality, Herrnstadt and Muehlegger
(2015) to study the effect of air pollution on crime, and Deryugina et al. (2016) to investigate how air
pollution affects health outcomes and health utilization for the elderly.

4

This instrumental variables (IV) strategy relies on the assumption that a plant’s coal
procurement behavior is unlikely to affect local mortality rates except through its effect
on P M2.5 exposure. We argue that this identifying assumption is likely to hold, thus
asserting that our paper presents a novel identification strategy for the causal relationship
between P M2.5 and mortality rates. Our analysis consider mortality rates associated
with different causes of death: deaths due to the cardiovascular system, deaths due
to the respiratory system, and deaths due to the nervous system. We also examine
total number of deaths of any type, both for people over 30 years old (“adults”) and
children aged 0 to 4 (“infants”). Finally, deaths due to external causes such as accidents
are considered as a placebo test. Our specifications include a bevy of controls as well
as county-year fixed effects. We find an economically small (and sometimes negative)
association between P M2.5 and mortality rates if we simply estimate this relationship
using ordinary least squares. However, the effects of P M2.5 on all of the aforementioned
mortality rates, excepting the external-cause mortality rate, are positive, statistically
significant, and economically significant when we instrument using the monthly level of
coal stockpiles and the monthly number of coal deliveries from nearby power plants. Of
particular note, we find that a 10% increase in P M2.5 leads to a 1.1% (6.6%) increase in
average overall adult (infant) mortality rates.
Our estimated semi-elasticities indicate that a one microgram per cubic meter increase in P M2.5 causes a 1% increase in adult mortality. The findings from the two
epidemiological studies most commonly used by the EPA indicate a mortality response
between 0.6% and 1.3% per unit of P M2.5 (Krewski et al. (2009); Lepeule et al. (2012)).
Previous empirical research reports that the damages from air pollution are significant
in magnitude and that these damages are mostly due to increased mortality risk from
exposure to P M2.5 .6 However, recent work in economics has challenged the causal basis
for the link between exposure to PM and the adverse effects on mortality risk reported
in epidemiological studies.7 Thus, we contribute both to the economics literature testing
for a causal relationship between P M2.5 and mortality rates as well as the epidemiological literature used by policymakers such as the EPA to quantify the impacts of P M2.5
emissions. Our IV results also provide further empirical evidence that there is a link
6

This empirical literature includes NRC (2010), EPA (2010), Muller, Mendelsohn and Nordhaus
(2011), and Muller (2014).
7
This work includes (among others) Currie, Neidell et al. (2005), Currie, Neidell and Schmieder
(2009), and Chay and Greenstone (2003).

5

between P M2.5 concentration levels and plants’ coal procurement behavior.
Finally, we combine our estimates of the effect of coal procurement on P M2.5 with
our IV estimates of the effect of P M2.5 on mortality rates in order to calculate the
increased number of deaths from coal deliveries and storage. These health risks are
monetized using the value of statistical life (VSL) approach that is standard both for
academic studies and federal regulatory impact analyses ((EPA, 1999); (EPA, 2010)).
We calculate that the local environmental cost of P M2.5 increases from coal stockpiles is
$182.67 per ton of coal stockpiled; the local air pollution cost per ton of coal delivered
is $202.51. Roughly 75% of this social cost is due to adult mortality while 25% is from
infant mortality since far more adults are exposed to P M2.5 relative to infants. Our air
pollution cost estimates are sizable given that the average U.S. coal-fired power plant
pays roughly $48 per ton for coal, stockpiles 212,781.6 tons of coal and has 106,235 tons
of coal delivered to it each month. However, if we translate tons of coal to MWh of
electricity, our local air pollution costs are $95.51 per MWh-equivalent of coal stored
and $103.12 per MWh-equivalent of coal delivered. Levy, Baxter and Schwartz (2009)
finds that the social cost of increased P M2.5 exposure from coal being burned is roughly
$230 per MWh. Thus, our empirical estimates of the local environmental damages from
purchasing and storing coal are sizable, but not unreasonably so when compared to
estimates of the local air pollution costs of burning coal. Finally, unlike the environmental
impacts from burning coal, the local air pollution costs of transporting and storing coal
are borne primarily by people living within 25 miles of coal-fired power plants. Given
that people living in census tracts with power plants have lower per-capita incomes and
educational attainment on average relative to residents of census tracts without power
plants, the highly localized environmental costs of coal procurement disproportionately
affect economically disadvantaged communities.8
Summarizing, our paper has two primary contributions. First, we inform the policy
debate surrounding the environmental impacts of coal transportation and storage at
coal mines, power plants, and export terminals. Second, we quantify the relationship
between P M2.5 and mortality rates; this estimated relationship is arguably the most
important component of any cost-benefit analysis of any environmental policy designed
8

Davis (2011) similarly finds that neighborhoods near fossil-fuel fired power plants have lower average
household income and educational attainment using restricted-access census microdata from 1990 and
2000.

6

to improve air quality. Moreover, many purely economic policies also have the unintended
consequence of affecting air quality. For example, Jha (2017) argues that U.S. coalfired electricity generation plants facing output price regulation hold larger stockpiles
of coal on-site for the same level of coal consumption and receive more deliveries per
month for the same quantity of coal purchased relative to plants facing electricity market
mechanisms. The results from our paper indicate that this regulatory-induced increase
in coal stockpiles and number of deliveries has environmental costs in addition to the
economic costs documented in Jha (2017). This example demonstrates that the debate
surrounding even purely economic policy questions, such as whether electricity generation
should be provided under regulation versus markets, must account for the environmental
impacts of the different policies.
The remainder of the paper proceeds as follows. In Section 2, we elaborate on the
physical process underlying how plants’ coal purchase and storage behavior can result in
higher P M2.5 concentration levels. Section 3 describes the data sources and the methodology used to estimate the relationship between plants’ coal procurement behavior and
P M2.5 concentration levels, while Section 4 presents the empirical results demonstrating
that increases in coal purchase and storage behavior lead to increases in P M2.5 concentration levels. Our instrumental variables approach for identifying the effect of P M2.5
concentration levels on mortality rates is discussed in Section 5. In Section 6, we quantify the local environmental health costs of increases in average mortality rates due to
P M2.5 emissions from coal purchased and stored. Finally, we conclude in Section 7 by
illustrating how our findings can be applied to a variety of other policy contexts, such
as the environmental costs of coal dust at mines and export terminals as well as the environmental impacts of distortions to plant-level coal purchase and stockpiling behavior
due to the structure of output price regulation.

2
2.1

Economic and Environmental Background
Input Coal Procurement Behavior of U.S. Power Plants

Coal-fired power plants burn coal in order to heat water into steam that drives the
turbines used to generate electricity. These power plants typically run continuously;

7

their electricity generation does not vary substantially day-to-day. Plants inject their
electricity into the transmission grid where it is distributed regionally to where electricity
is needed; thus, short-term fluctuations in electricity demand near a coal-fired power
plant do not map directly into its electricity generation. Jha (2017) describes the factors
underlying the coal purchase and storage behavior of U.S. coal-fired power plants; these
factors include regional electricity demand, spot coal prices, and natural gas prices. All
of these factors vary regionally rather than local to the power plant. We argue based on
this that plant-level electricity demand (and thus plant-level coal procurement) is unlikely
to be affected by local economic conditions. This assertion is important because local
mortality rates are undoubtedly correlated with unobserved local economic conditions,
which is why we identify increases in mortality rates due to increases in P M2.5 using coal
delivered and stored as instruments.
Power plants purchase the majority of their input coal from long-term contracts with
coal suppliers, purchasing the remainder from spot markets. They also store large quantities of coal on-site to hedge against coal price and supply risks; these coal inventories
are very rarely resold in practice.9 Coal is not homogeneous; coal mined from different
regions of the United States differs in heat content, sulfur content, ash content, distance
from mine to plant, etc. Coal-fired power plants primarily value the heat content of coal;
burning a ton of coal with a higher heat content generates a larger amount of output electricity. Sulfur content and ash content are important primarily for their environmental
impacts. Finally, roughly 67 percent of coal is transported via rail. The remaining coal
is shipped via barge (12%), trucks (10%) and various other modes of transportation used
primarily for short distances (ex: conveyors, pipelines, etc.).10 The local environmental
costs of coal delivered to a power plant can differ substantially based on the mode of
transportation.
9

This lack of resale is due primarily to the fact that coal transportation infrastructure is designed
to bring coal to power plants rather than away from them; therefore, coal becomes very costly to resell
once it’s in a plant’s stockpile.
10
These statistics are for the year 2013 and come from EIA’s “Today In Energy”:
http://www.eia.gov/todayinenergy/detail.cfm?id=16651.

8

2.2

Environmental Impacts of U.S Coal-fired Generation

It is well-known that N Ox , SO2 , and P M2.5 emissions result in elevated mortality risk
among exposed populations. Earlier work has shown that U.S. coal-fired power plants
emit significant levels of N Ox , SO2 , and P M2.5 when burning coal; these emissions
caused approximately 27,000 deaths in the United States in 1999. Emissions-induced
deaths resulting from power plants burning coal fell to roughly 9,500 in 2011 due to
differences in the type of coal burned by plants as well as the increased prevalence of
scrubbing technology (Muller, 2014).
While the environmental costs of burning coal are well-documented (NRC and NAS,
2010), this paper explores the local environmental costs of emissions from coal stockpiles
and coal deliveries. We posit two mechanisms for emissions from coal stockpiles. The
first is wind erosion. Wind blowing over uncovered coal stockpiles entrains fine particulates; these passive, or fugitive, dust emissions become a constituent of ambient P M2.5 .
Second, coal stockpiles emit volatile gases. Specifically, coal in open stockpiles undergoes
oxidation, which releases a set of pollutants including hydrocarbons and sulphuric gases
(Zhang, 2013). The gases result in the formation of secondary organic P M2.5 that is a
constituent of the ambient P M2.5 collected at monitoring stations.
Roughly 67 percent of coal is delivered by train; the coal carried by these trains is
typically in uncovered freight cars. Barges and trucks carrying coal are also typically
uncovered. Finally, there is a significant coal handling process at the power plant any
time coal is delivered, which includes moving the coal from the train to different places
within the plant site, separating “light dust” from the coal, and crushing the coal in
order to make it suitable for burning.11 Thus, we expect coal deliveries to result in
increased P M2.5 levels due to wind erosion (dust entrainment), gaseous discharge and
the movement of coal piles around the plant. Additionally, trains run on diesel fuel;
burning diesel is also associated with increased P M2.5 concentration levels. Thus, the
burning of diesel may be another factor determining the local environmental costs from
coal deliveries.
Our empirical strategy does not distinguish between the two types of passive emissions
(dust entrainment and gaseous discharges) from coal stockpiles; P M2.5 emissions resulting
11
An article on Electrical Engineering Portal (Raman, 2012) provides a brief description of the coal
handling process at power plants.

9

from both of these mechanisms increase mortality rates in local populations and thus
contribute to local environmental health costs. Similarly, we do not disentangle how
much of the P M2.5 increase from coal deliveries comes from passive P M2.5 emissions from
coal piles versus emissions from the coal handling process when coal is delivered, as both
of these factors contribute to the local environmental costs of transporting coal. However,
we provide empirical evidence that our effect of coal procurement (either stockpiles or
deliveries) on P M2.5 does not result from the combustion of any fuel; our effect is not
driven by either the coal burned by the power plant or the diesel or gasoline burned
by the trains, barges and trucks transporting coal. To be clear, these combustion-based
sources do emit P M2.5 , but we focus on the local environmental costs at the power plant
from purchasing and storing coal in this paper.

3

Local Environmental Impacts of Coal Procurement: Data and Methodology

This section describes the data used to estimate the link between plant-level coal procurement behavior (coal stockpiles and number of deliveries) and P M2.5 concentration
levels at nearby air quality monitors. We also present the empirical framework used to
measure this relationship, which includes specifying our set of controls for alternative
sources of P M2.5 , such as burning coal, as well as other factors that increase or decrease
P M2.5 for a given set of sources such as wind speed, wind direction, and precipitation.

3.1

Data Sources

We use monthly, plant-level data from 2002-2012 on end-of-month fuel inventories and
fuel purchases from the Energy Information Administration (EIA).12 Regarding plants’
coal purchases, we have order-level data on the month of purchase, quantity purchased,
delivered price, heat content, sulfur content, ash content, and the coal’s county of origination. Finally, we only consider electricity generation plants whose primary business
purpose is the sale of electricity to the public; this excludes plants that also sell signif12

The data regarding fuel inventories for 2002-2012 are confidential; we obtained a research contract
from the EIA in order to use these restricted-access data.

10

icant quantities of heat (“combined heat and power plants”) as well as commercial and
industrial plants that generate electricity for their own use.
We also use the Air Quality System (AQS) data provided by the Environmental
Protection Agency (EPA). This publicly available database includes hourly readings of
ambient P M2.5 concentrations at roughly 1,000 monitored sites across the contiguous
United States. We aggregate these data to obtain monthly average P M2.5 levels for each
air quality monitor for the sample period 2002-2012.
Our meteorological controls come from the quality controlled local climatological data
(QCLCD) collected by the National Climatic Data Center (NCDC). These data include
hourly wind speed and direction, dry bulb temperature, wet bulb temperature, dew-point
temperature, relative humidity, station pressure, and precipitation at approximately
1,600 U.S. locations. We aggregate these data to the meteorological monitor/monthof-sample level by taking time-weighted averages over hours of dry bulb temperature,
wet bulb temperature, dew-point temperature, relative humidity, and station pressure;
we use the meteorological monitor/month-of-sample level sum of hourly precipitation.
Wind speed is an important factor in determining both how much P M2.5 is generated
from various sources as well as how this P M2.5 is dispersed. Thus, we also control for the
(5, 10, 20, 30, 40, 50, 60, 70, 80, 90, 95) hourly percentiles of wind speed, calculated over
all hours-of-sample for each meteorological monitor/month-of-sample. Finally, we use the
wind-speed weighted monthly average wind direction measured at each meteorological
monitor; the results presented below differ very little if we instead take an un-weighted
average.
We additionally control for a variety of other factors that can affect the P M2.5 concentration reading at an air quality monitor in each month. First, the EPA’s Continuous
Monitoring Emissions System (CEMS) collects hourly data for each plant on SO2 , CO2 ,
and N Ox emissions (in tons) resulting from coal burned; we sum these hourly data to the
monthly level and control for the total SO2 , CO2 , and N Ox emissions for each plant in
each month-of-sample. We also control for the total monthly quantity of coal purchased
by each plant as well as the total monthly electricity generation produced by each plant;
both variables come from EIA data.
The AQS database provides the latitude and longitude for each air quality monitor,
the NCDC database provides the latitude and longitude (as well as wind direction in each
11

month-of-sample) for each meteorological monitor, and the EPA eGrid database provides
the latitude and longitude for each coal-fired power plant. We use these variables in order
to merge air quality monitors to coal-fired power plants and meteorological monitors.

3.2

Data Merge

We merge each air quality monitor i to meteorological monitors and coal-fired power
plants as follows:
1. For each month-of-sample, we find all meteorological monitors within M miles of
air quality monitor i. We take a weighted average of the meteorological data (for
example, wind speed and wind direction) across these meteorological monitors for
each air quality monitor i, where we weight by the inverse of the distance between
the air quality monitor and the meteorological monitor.13
2. If M = 25 miles, we consider all coal-fired power plants less than 25 miles away
from air quality monitor i. If M = 50 miles, we consider all coal-fired power plants
between 25 miles and 50 miles away from air quality monitor i.
Thus, our unit of observation is an air quality monitor/power plant pair for each
month-of-sample, emphasizing that each air quality monitor can be linked to multiple
power plants for a given month-of-sample. We examine how the effects of coal stockpiles
and number of deliveries on P M2.5 concentration levels decay with distance by separately
estimating these effects for plants within 25 miles of their corresponding air quality
monitor versus plants between 25 miles and 50 miles away from their corresponding air
quality monitor. We also show how the effect of coal procurement on P M2.5 varies with
the relative wind direction between air quality monitor and power plant (read: upwind
versus downwind) as well as locally-monitored precipitation levels. We provide further
details on our data sources and data construction in Appendix Section B.
13

Our empirical results do not differ substantially if we instead take an un-weighted average of the
meteorological data.

12

3.3

Empirical Framework

We are interested in estimating the effect of coal stockpiles held by coal-fired power plants
on local P M2.5 concentration levels. We consider both “Log-Log” and “Levels-Levels”
specifications. Our Log-Log specification for how coal stockpiles impact P M2.5 levels is:
log(P M 2.5i,t + 1) = αc,t + θi,p + log(CSp,t )γi,p + log(

Pi,t
X

CSk,t )ψ + Xi,p,t β + i,p,t

(1)

k=1,k6=p

where a unit of observation is an air quality monitor i and a coal-fired power plant p
in month-of-sample t. Pi,t is the number of coal-fired power plants merged with each air
quality monitor i in each month t.
We control for the total level of coal stockpiles across all plants k 6= p so that the
log(CSp,t ) term doesn’t capture positive correlations in stockpile increases across plants.
For example, if a one ton increase in coal stockpiles at plant p is typically associated
with a 0.5 ton increase in coal stockpiles at plant q, we do not want to include the effect
of the 0.5 ton increase at plant q on P M2.5 in our estimate of γi,p . We also control for
a wide variety of alternative factors that affect local P M2.5 levels, such as annual sulfur
content and ash content of coal purchased by the plant, monthly quantity of coal received
by the plant, monthly number of coal deliveries to the plant, the plant’s monthly total
electricity generation, the plant’s monthly total SO2 , CO2 , and N Ox emissions from coal
burned (in tons), wind speed, dry bulb temperature, wet bulb temperature, dew-point
temperature, relative humidity, station pressure, and precipitation. Finally, we include
fixed effects for each county-of-air-quality-monitor/month-of-sample (αc,t ) and air quality
monitor/power plant (θi,p ). We report a specification considering one overall coefficient
(γi,p ≡ γ), as well as specifications allowing γi,p to vary by relative wind direction and
precipitation.14
Our goal is to estimate how the level of P M2.5 measured by a given air quality monitor
is affected by a one ton increase in coal stockpiles at a given plant, controlling for all of
the other factors listed above. The Log-Log specification in Equation 1 implies that this
14
Coal-fired power plants only stock-out in roughly 0-5% of the months-of-sample for which we observe
them; thus, we drop observations with zero stockpiles. The empirical results are similar if we keep
these zero stockpile observations in the sample; for these specifications, we include log(CSp,t + 1) and
1(CSp,t > 0) (an indicator variable for coal stockpile levels greater than zero) rather than log(CSp,t ).

13

partial effect in levels for observation (i, p, t) is:
dP Mˆ2.5i,t
P M 2.5i,t + 1
= γˆi,p (
)
dCSp,t
CSp,t
We also estimate a Levels-Levels specification in order to report partial effects in levels.
This Levels-Levels specification, presented below, additionally serves as a sensitivity check
of the functional form relating coal stockpiles to P M2.5 :

P M 2.5i,t = αc,t + θi,p + CSp,t γi,p + (

Pi,t
X

CSk,t )ψ + Xi,p,t β + i,p,t

k=1,k6=p

This specification includes the same set of controls as listed above; the partial effect
associated with coal stockpiles is simply γˆi,p in the Levels-Levels case.
Finally, we also estimate both the Log-Log and Levels-Levels specifications replacing
coal stockpiles (CSp,t ) with the number of coal deliveries (N Dp,t ) arriving at plant p
in month-of-sample t.15 We control for the same factors as described above, with the
obvious exception of the number of deliveries (our dependent variable); our number of
deliveries specifications instead control for coal stockpiles. We estimate these specifications both controlling for the total monthly quantity received and not controlling for
quantity received in order to explore the extent to which P M2.5 emissions stem from an
additional ton of coal delivered versus an additional delivery (no matter how much coal
is delivered).
For all specifications, our standard errors are clustered at the air quality monitor level
and we weight our regressions by the inverse distance between air quality monitor and
power plant.16
15
We consider log(N Dp,t + 1) for the Log-Log specifications given that there are a non-trivial number
of plant/month-of-sample observations where there are zero deliveries (read: the plant did not purchase
coal in that month-of-sample).
16
We re-ran our regressions: 1) weighting each observation by the inverse of the number of power
plants matched to each air quality monitor, and 2) not weighting at all. Our empirical findings are very
similar for both of these alternative weighting schemes; these results are available upon request.

14

4

Local Environmental Impacts of Coal Procurement: Empirical Findings

In this section, we present our regression results regarding the link between coal purchase/stockpiling behavior and P M2.5 concentration levels. We find that a 10% increase
in coal stockpiles (number of deliveries) results in a 0.06% (0.12%) increase in average
P M2.5 concentration levels for populations within 25 miles of power plants. We find no
average effect of either number of deliveries or coal stockpiles on P M2.5 when examining
plants farther than 25 miles away from their corresponding air quality (AQ) monitor.
This is intuitive, given that the wind erosion and volatile emissions from coal piles at
or near ground level can only travel so far. The decay of our effect after 25 miles also
makes clear that we are primarily capturing the effect of coal deliveries at the power
plant rather than all along the route from origin mine to destination power plant.
We should also expect more severe increases in P M2.5 concentrations for local populations downwind from coal piles and train deliveries (read: the wind is blowing from the
coal pile to the local population). Consistent with this intuition, we estimate that the
average P M2.5 increase from coal purchase and storage behavior is larger for AQ monitors that are downwind of nearby coal-fired power plants. Also, precipitation is known
to reduce ambient P M2.5 concentration levels; we show that the average P M2.5 increases
from both coal stockpiles and number of deliveries are lower for higher levels of precipitation. Finally, we consider a variety of robustness checks in order to demonstrate that our
empirical results are not driven by the emissions from the coal burned by power plants
or the fuel burned by trains, barges, or trucks delivering coal to the power plant. For example, carbon monoxide (CO) is emitted when any fuel is burned; we demonstrate that
there is no effect of either coal stockpiles or number of deliveries on CO at any distance
bandwidth. Summarizing, we have confidence that we’ve identified a causal relationship
between coal procurement (coal stockpiles and deliveries) and P M2.5 for three reasons.
First, we find no effect of coal procurement on CO as expected. Moreover, our regression
specifications control for an extensive array of other factors that affect P M2.5 . Finally,
consistent with predictions from the environmental science literature, we find that coal
procurement results in higher levels of P M2.5 for AQ monitors downwind of power plants
and observations with low levels of precipitation.

15

4.1

Overall Effect of Coal Stockpiles and Number of Deliveries
on P M2.5 Concentrations

The top (bottom) panel of Table 1 displays the results from the Levels-Levels (Log-Log)
specification with the number of coal deliveries arriving at each plant in each monthof-sample as the covariate of interest. The summary statistics corresponding to all regressions discussed in this section are in Appendix Tables A.1 and A.2. The unit of
observation for all regressions in this section is an air quality monitor/power plant pair
in a given month-of-sample.
We find that an additional delivery results in an increase in monthly average P M2.5
levels of 0.018 micrograms per cubic meter (ug/m3 ) when we restrict our sample to plants
within 25 miles of their corresponding air quality (AQ) monitor. This regression model
explains nearly 85% of the variation in ambient P M2.5 readings. Similarly, the bottom
panel of Table 1 indicates that a 10% increase in number of deliveries is associated with
a 0.12% increase in average P M2.5 concentration levels at AQ monitor/power plant pairs
within 25 miles of each other. The effect of coal deliveries on P M2.5 is statistically significant for the 25 mile bandwidth for both the Levels-Levels and Log-Log specifications.
However, we find no statistical link between average P M2.5 concentration levels and number of deliveries for either the Levels-Levels or Log-Log specifications when focusing on
plants between 25 and 50 miles from their corresponding AQ monitors.17 This result indicates that we are capturing the effect of coal being delivered to the power plant rather
than the P M2.5 emissions from coal piles in open train hoppers all along the route from
origin coal mine to destination power plant.
Coal deliveries may increase P M2.5 concentration levels in a number of ways, including wind erosion and gaseous emissions from coal transported in uncovered piles,
coal handling at the power plant, and the fuel burned by the trains, barges, and trucks
delivering coal. However, the combustion of any fuel emits carbon monoxide as well
as P M2.5 , and we show below in Section 4.4 that there is no statistical link between
carbon monoxide (CO) and number of deliveries. This rules out any combustion-based
explanation for our effect such as the burning of coal by power plants or the burning of
17

We also ran all of our regressions for plants between 50-100 miles and 100-200 miles away from their
AQ monitors. We do not find a statistically significant effect for these distance bandwidths for most
specifications, which is unsurprising given that we demonstrate that our effect of coal procurement on
P M2.5 decays even for distances farther than 25 miles away.

16

Table 1: Overall Effect of Number of Deliveries on P M2.5 Concentration
Dependent Variable: P M 2.5i,t
Dist. Bandwidth (≤ 25 Miles) (25-50 Miles)
N Dp,t
0.0180**
0.0011
(0.0085)
(0.0048)
Observations
48,521
92,886
R-squared
0.847
0.824
Dependent Variable: log(P M 2.5i,t ) + 1
Dist. Bandwidth (≤ 25 Miles) (25-50 Miles)
log(N Dp,t + 1)
0.0124**
0.0034
(0.0053)
(0.0034)
Observations
R-squared

47,169
0.849

90,535
0.829

Notes: This table presents the regression results regarding the link between number of deliveries and
P M2.5 concentration levels. The top panel of this table regresses number of deliveries on P M2.5 (in
micrograms per cubic meter) in levels; the bottom panel of this table regresses number of deliveries
on P M2.5 in logs. A unit of observation for these regressions is plant/air quality monitor/month-ofsample. We restrict our sample to plants within 25 miles of their air quality (AQ) monitor in Column
1 and we restrict our sample to plants between 25 and 50 miles of their AQ monitor in Column 2.
Standard errors are clustered by air quality monitor and are reported in parentheses. ***,**,* denote
statistical significance at the 1%, 5%, and 10% level, respectively. We control for quantity received,
coal stockpiles, and sum of deliveries from other plants. We also include meteorological controls,
EPA emissions controls, coal quality controls, and thermal generation controls. Finally, we include
facility code/AQ monitor fixed effects and county-of-AQ-monitor/month-of-sample fixed effects. We
weight observations by the inverse of the distance between air quality monitor and plant for these
regressions. See Section 3.3 for more details regarding our regression specification. See Appendix
Tables A.1 and A.2 for the summary statistics associated with these regressions.

fuel by the trains, barges, and trucks delivering coal. Also, the effect of the quantity of
coal delivered on P M2.5 is not statistically significant in either the Levels-Levels or the
Log-Log specifications presented in Table 1. This provides evidence that it is the act
of delivering coal rather than the quantity of coal delivered that generates the majority
of our estimated increase in local P M2.5 concentration levels.18 As described in Section
2.2, the coal handling and preparation process at power plants is quite involved. P M2.5
emissions can be generated during many stages of this process, including when power
18

We also present the effect of number of deliveries on P M2.5 emissions without controlling for total
quantity of coal delivered in Appendix Table A.3. We see from this table that there is a statistically
significant and positive effect of number of deliveries on P M2.5 for plants within 25 miles of their AQ
monitor. Moreover, this effect has similar size whether or not we control for quantity delivered (0.0180 in
Table 1 versus 0.0146 in Appendix Table A.3 for the Levels-Levels specification). This provides further
evidence that the majority of our effect of coal deliveries on P M2.5 comes from an additional shipment
rather than more coal being delivered in a given shipment.

17

plant managers extract light dust from coal, crush coal to make is suitable to burn, or
simply move coal around on-site. Based on the empirical evidence provided above, our
effect of the number of deliveries on P M2.5 is likely driven by the handling of coal at
power plants rather than wind erosion/gaseous emissions from open coal piles on trains,
barges, and trucks or the fuel burned by these modes of transportation.
The top panel of Table 2 reports the results from the Levels-Levels specification where
the size (in tons) of the coal stockpiles held at each power plant in each month-of-sample
is the covariate of interest. A one ton increase in coal stockpiles increases ambient P M2.5
levels by 1.02e-06 ug/m3 when only plants within 25 miles of their corresponding air quality
(AQ) monitor are included. However, we find no statistical link between coal stockpiles
and P M2.5 when focusing on plants between 25 and 50 miles of their AQ monitor. We
should expect this given that the P M2.5 emissions from the wind erosion of stationary coal
stockpiles at ground level and the volatile emissions from these coal piles can only travel
so far. The bottom panel of Table 2 shows the estimated elasticities from the Log-Log
specification for the coal stockpile models. We see that a 10% increase in coal stockpiles
results in a 0.06% increase in average P M2.5 concentration levels for plants within 25
miles of their AQ monitor, but there is no statistical link between coal stockpiles and
P M2.5 for plants between 25 and 50 miles of their AQ monitors.

4.2

The Effects of Coal Stockpiles and Number of Deliveries on
P M2.5 Concentrations By Wind Direction

In this subsection, we interact the covariate of interest (number of deliveries in Table
3 and coal stockpiles in Table 4) with the relative bearing from coal-fired power plant
to air quality (AQ) monitor. A relative bearing of 0◦ means that the wind is blowing
directly from the power plant to the AQ monitor, while a relative bearing of 180◦ means
that the wind is blowing directly from the AQ monitor to the power plant. For each
plant/air quality (AQ) monitor pair in each month-of-sample, we code the AQ monitor
as “downwind” from the plant if their relative bearing is less than 90◦ and code the AQ
monitor as “upwind” from the plant if their relative bearing is greater than 90◦ .
The top panel of Table 3 shows that, for the sample restricted only to plants within
25 miles of each AQ monitor, the partial effect of number of deliveries on P M2.5 is statis-

18

Table 2: Overall Effect of Coal Stockpiles on P M2.5 Concentration
Dependent Variable: P M 2.5i,t
Dist. Bandwidth (≤ 25 Miles) (25-50 Miles)
CSp,t
1.02e-06***
3.18e-08
(2.26e-07)
(1.06e-07)
Observations
48,521
92,886
R-squared
0.847
0.824
Dependent Variable: log(P M 2.5i,t ) + 1
Dist. Bandwidth (≤ 25 Miles) (25-50 Miles)
log(CSp,t )
0.0061**
-0.0016
(0.0031)
(0.0018)
Observations
R-squared

47,169
0.849

90,535
0.829

Notes: This table presents the regression results regarding the link between coal stockpiles and
P M2.5 concentration levels. The top panel of this table regresses coal stockpiles (in tons) on P M2.5
(in micrograms per cubic meter) in levels; the bottom panel of this table regresses coal stockpiles
on P M2.5 in logs. A unit of observation for these regressions is plant/air quality monitor/month-ofsample. We restrict our sample to plants within 25 miles of their air quality (AQ) monitor in Column
1 and we restrict our sample to plants between 25 and 50 miles of their AQ monitor in Column 2.
Standard errors are clustered by air quality monitor and are reported in parentheses. ***,**,* denote
statistical significance at the 1%, 5%, and 10% levels respectively. We control for quantity received,
number of deliveries, and sum of coal stockpiles from other plants. We also include meteorological
controls, EPA emissions controls, coal quality controls, and thermal generation controls. Finally,
we include facility code/AQ monitor fixed effects and county-of-AQ-monitor/month-of-sample fixed
effects. We weight observations by the inverse of the distance between air quality monitor and plant
for these regressions. See Section 3.3 for more details regarding our regression specification. See
Appendix Tables A.1 and A.2 for the summary statistics associated with these regressions.

tically significant and positive for monitors downwind from plants, but not statistically
significant for monitors upwind of plants. Moreover, the effect for the 25 mile bandwidth
for downwind monitors in Table 3 (0.0244) is larger than the overall average effect across
both upwind and downwind AQ monitors reported in Table 1 (0.0180). We should expect more severe increases in P M2.5 concentrations for local populations downwind from
coal deliveries given that P M2.5 particulates are carried from the power plant to the AQ
monitor by these downwind currents. Finally, we find no link between the number of coal
deliveries and P M2.5 for plants between 25 and 50 miles away from their AQ monitor,
regardless of whether they are upwind or downwind from their AQ monitor.
The bottom panel of Table 3 shows the results for the directional models expressed
in terms of elasticities between number of deliveries and P M2.5 . As with the LevelsLevels specification, we find a positive and statistically significant elasticity only for AQ
19

Table 3: Effect of Number of Deliveries on P M2.5 Concentration: Upwind vs.
Downwind
Dependent Variable: P M 2.5i,t
Dist. Bandwidth
(≤ 25 Miles)
N Dp,t ×

(25-50 Miles)

Monitor Downwind from Plant

0.0244**
(0.0100)

0.0039
(0.0047)

Monitor Upwind from Plant

0.0110
(0.0105)

-0.0021
(0.0066)

Observations
48,521
92,886
R-squared
0.847
0.824
Dependent Variable: log(P M 2.5i,t ) + 1
Dist. Bandwidth
(≤ 25 Miles) (25-50 Miles)
log(N Dp,t + 1)×
Monitor Downwind from Plant

0.0163***
(0.0056)

0.0042
(0.0036)

Monitor Upwind from Plant

0.0089
(0.0058)

0.0026
(0.0036)

Observations
R-squared

47,169
0.849

90,535
0.829

Notes: This table presents the regression results regarding how the link between number of deliveries
and P M2.5 concentration levels varies with wind direction. The top panel of this table regresses
number of deliveries on P M2.5 (in micrograms per cubic meter) in levels; the bottom panel of
this table regresses number of deliveries on P M2.5 in logs. In both panels, number of deliveries is
interacted with the relative bearing between power plant and air quality monitor. A relative bearing
of 0◦ means that the wind is blowing directly from the power plant to the AQ monitor, while a
relative bearing of 180◦ means that the wind is blowing directly from the AQ monitor to the power
plant. For each plant/air quality (AQ) monitor pair, we code the AQ monitor as “downwind” from
the plant if their relative bearing is less than 90◦ and code the AQ monitor as “upwind” from the
plant if their relative bearing is greater than 90◦ . A unit of observation for these regressions is
plant/air quality monitor/month-of-sample. We restrict our sample to plants within 25 miles of
their air quality (AQ) monitor in Column 1 and we restrict our sample to plants between 25 and
50 miles of their AQ monitor in Column 2. Standard errors are clustered by air quality monitor
and are reported in parentheses. ***,**,* denote statistical significance at the 1%, 5%, and 10%
level, respectively. We control for quantity received, coal stockpiles, and sum of deliveries from
other plants. We also include meteorological controls, EPA emissions controls, coal quality controls,
and thermal generation controls. Finally, we include facility code/AQ monitor fixed effects and
county-of-AQ-monitor/month-of-sample fixed effects. We weight observations by the inverse of the
distance between air quality monitor and plant for these regressions. See Section 3.3 for more details
regarding our regression specification. See Appendix Tables A.1 and A.2 for the summary statistics
associated with these regressions.

20

monitors that are both within 25 miles of their plant and downwind from their plant.
We find no effect of number of deliveries on P M2.5 for: 1) plants between 25 and 50 miles
from their AQ monitor, or 2) AQ monitors upwind from their plant. As expected, the
downwind elasticity reported for the 25 mile bandwidth in Table 3 (0.0163) is larger than
the corresponding overall estimate reported in the bottom panel of Table 1 (0.0124).
The top panel of Table 4 displays the results for the directional models in which
the size of coal stockpiles (in tons) is the independent variable of interest. We see a
similar pattern in empirical results as with the number of deliveries regressions. First,
the interaction terms between coal stockpiles and the dummy variable for (relative) angles
between 0◦ to 90◦ is positive and statistically significant for plants less than 25 miles away
from their AQ monitor for both the Levels-Levels (top panel) and Log-Log (bottom panel)
specifications. The estimated coefficients for downwind AQ monitors are larger than the
corresponding estimates for upwind AQ monitors for both the less than 25 miles (Column
1) and between 25-50 miles (Column 2) distance bandwidths. However, neither the
upwind nor downwind coefficient estimates are statistically significant for plants between
25 and 50 miles from their AQ monitor. Finally, the estimated coefficient for downwind
monitors in Table 4 (1.14e-06) is larger than the corresponding overall estimate reported
in Table 2 (1.02e-06). We draw the exact same conclusions when examining the Log-Log
specification presented in the bottom panel of Table 4 as described above for the LevelsLevels specification. P M2.5 particulates are generated both from wind blowing over coal
piles as well as from the volatile gases emitted by these piles. Our empirical findings are
consistent with the fact that these P M2.5 particulates are transported from power plant
to AQ monitor via downwind currents.

4.3

The Effect of Coal Stockpiles and Number of Deliveries on
P M2.5 Concentrations Interacted with Precipitation

In this subsection, we interact monthly, plant-level number of deliveries and coal stockpiles with the logarithm of monthly total precipitation as measured by the set of meteorological monitors within M miles of the plant’s corresponding air quality (AQ) monitor.
For example, if there are four meteorological monitors within M miles of a given AQ
monitor, we take the monthly sum over the hourly data on precipitation for each meteorological monitor and then take the inverse-distance weighted average over all four of
21

Table 4: Effect of Coal Stockpiles on P M2.5 Concentration: Upwind vs. Downwind
Dependent Variable: P M 2.5i,t
Dist. Bandwidth
(≤ 25 Miles)
CSp,t ×

(25-50 Miles)

Monitor Downwind from Plant

1.14e-06***
(2.17e-07)

6.53e-08
(1.23e-07)

Monitor Upwind from Plant

9.18e-07***
(2.81e-07)

9.82e-09
(1.06e-07)

Observations
48,521
92,886
R-squared
0.847
0.824
Dependent Variable: log(P M 2.5i,t ) + 1
Dist. Bandwidth
(≤ 25 Miles) (25-50 Miles)
log(CS p,t )×
Monitor Downwind from Plant

0.0067**
(0.0031)

-0.0015
(0.0018)

Monitor Upwind from Plant

0.0056*
(0.0030)

-0.0017
(0.0018)

Observations
R-squared

47,169
0.849

90,535
0.829

Notes: This table presents the regression results regarding how the link between coal stockpiles
and P M2.5 concentration levels varies with wind direction. The top panel of this table regresses
coal stockpiles (in tons) on P M2.5 (in micrograms per cubic meter) in levels; the bottom panel of
this table regresses coal stockpiles on P M2.5 in logs. In both panels, coal stockpiles are interacted
with the relative bearing between power plant and air quality monitor. A relative bearing of 0◦
means that the wind is blowing directly from the power plant to the AQ monitor, while a relative
bearing of 180◦ means that the wind is blowing directly from the AQ monitor to the power plant.
For each plant/air quality (AQ) monitor pair, we code the AQ monitor as “downwind” from the
plant if their relative bearing is less than 90◦ and code the AQ monitor as “upwind” from the
plant if their relative bearing is greater than 90◦ . A unit of observation for these regressions is
plant/air quality monitor/month-of-sample. We restrict our sample to plants within 25 miles of
their air quality (AQ) monitor in Column 1 and we restrict our sample to plants between 25 and
50 miles of their AQ monitor in Column 2. Standard errors are clustered by air quality monitor
and are reported in parentheses. ***,**,* denote statistical significance at the 1%, 5%, and 10%
levels respectively. We control for quantity received, number of deliveries, and sum of coal stockpiles
from other plants. We also include meteorological controls, EPA emissions controls, coal quality
controls, and thermal generation controls. Finally, we include facility code/AQ monitor fixed effects
and county-of-AQ-monitor/month-of-sample fixed effects. We weight observations by the inverse of
the distance between air quality monitor and plant for these regressions. See Section 3.3 for more
details regarding our regression specification. See Appendix Tables A.1 and A.2 for the summary
statistics associated with these regressions.

these monitors for each month-of-sample.19 We consider M = 25 for the within 25 mile
19

We weight by the inverse of the distance between the AQ monitor and each meteorological monitor;
the empirical results are very similar if we take an unweighted average instead.

22

bandwidth specifications and M = 50 for the 25-50 mile bandwidth specifications.
The top panel of Table 5 shows that an increased number of coal deliveries generates
less additional P M2.5 at higher levels of precipitation. This is intuitive because local
pollution levels are known to decrease with rainfall due to “wet deposition”: P M2.5
particulates are brought from the atmosphere to the ground by rain. Thus, if transporting
and delivering coal generates a given amount of P M2.5 , less of this P M2.5 remains in the
atmosphere for higher levels of monthly total precipitation. It is especially striking that
there is a positive and statistically significant effect of number of deliveries on P M2.5
even for plants between 25-50 miles from their AQ monitor when there is zero monthly
total precipitation; P M2.5 can remain in the air and thus travel greater distances if there
is no rainfall to bring these fine particulates to the ground.20 We draw exactly the same
conclusions as described above for the Levels-Levels specification when examining the
results from the Log-Log specification presented in the bottom panel of Table 5.
Table 6 displays the results interacting monthly total precipitation with coal stockpiles. As with the number of deliveries, if a one ton increase in coal stockpiles translates
into a given level of P M2.5 , we should expect less of this P M2.5 to remain in the atmosphere for higher levels of precipitation due to wet deposition. We find that this intuition
holds for both the top panel (Levels-Levels specification) and bottom panel (Log-Log
specification) of Table 6. Namely, we see from Table 6 that the interaction term between
coal stockpiles and monthly precipitation is statistically significant and negative for both
the less than 25 miles and the 25-50 mile distance bandwidths. As before, we see that
there is a positive and statistically significant effect of coal stockpiles on P M2.5 even
for plants between 25-50 miles away from their AQ monitor when there is zero monthly
total precipitation; this highlights the importance of rainfall in reducing the level of local
ambient P M2.5 concentration levels.

4.4

Robustness Checks and Sensitivity Analyses

One potential concern with our empirical specification is that our estimates capture the
P M2.5 increases from burning coal rather than purchasing and storing it. We consider two
20

We find positive and statistically significant increases in P M2.5 from coal procurement (both number
of deliveries and coal stockpiles) even for plants between 100 and 200 miles from their AQ monitors if
there is no precipitation in the entire month; these results are available upon request.

23

Table 5: Effect of Number of Deliveries on P M2.5 Concentration: Interacted with
Precipitation
Dependent Variable: P M 2.5i,t
Dist. Bandwidth
(≤ 25 Miles) (25-50 Miles)
N Dp,t ×
Constant

0.0593***
(0.0141)

0.0298***
(0.0065)

log(P recipitation + 1)

-0.0303***
(0.0086)

-0.0217***
(0.0042)

Observations
48,521
92,886
R-squared
0.847
0.824
Dependent Variable: log(P M 2.5i,t ) + 1
Dist. Bandwidth
(≤ 25 Miles) (25-50 Miles)
log(N Dp,t + 1)×
Constant

0.0286***
(0.0066)

0.0218***
(0.0037)

log(P recipitation + 1)

-0.0124***
(0.0037)

-0.0135***
(0.0020)

Observations
R-squared

47,169
0.849

90,535
0.829

Notes: This table presents the regression results regarding how the link between number of deliveries
and P M2.5 concentration levels varies with precipitation. The top panel of this table regresses
number of deliveries on P M2.5 (in micrograms per cubic meter) in levels; the bottom panel of
this table regresses number of deliveries on P M2.5 in logs. In both panels, number of deliveries is
interacted with the log of total monthly precipitation (measured in inches); we include months-ofsample with zero precipitation by adding one to our total monthly precipitation variable. A unit
of observation for these regressions is plant/air quality monitor/month-of-sample. We restrict our
sample to plants within 25 miles of their air quality (AQ) monitor in Column 1 and we restrict
our sample to plants between 25 and 50 miles of their AQ monitor in Column 2. Standard errors
are clustered by air quality monitor and are reported in parentheses. ***,**,* denote statistical
significance at the 1%, 5%, and 10% level, respectively. We control for quantity received, coal
stockpiles, and sum of deliveries from other plants. We also include meteorological controls, EPA
emissions controls, coal quality controls, and thermal generation controls. Finally, we include facility
code/AQ monitor fixed effects and county-of-AQ-monitor/month-of-sample fixed effects. We weight
observations by the inverse of the distance between air quality monitor and plant for these regressions.
See Section 3.3 for more details regarding our regression specification. See Appendix Tables A.1 and
A.2 for the summary statistics associated with these regressions.

robustness checks in order to rule out this concern. First, we include more flexible controls
for the monthly total thermal generation at each coal-fired power plant; in particular,
we control for linear, quadratic, and cubic terms for monthly thermal generation as well
24

Table 6: Effect of Coal Stockpiles on P M2.5 Concentration: Interacted with
Precipitation
Dependent Variable: P M 2.5i,t
Dist. Bandwidth
(≤ 25 Miles) (25-50 Miles)
CSp,t ×
Constant

1.65e-06***
(2.59e-07)

4.59e-07***
(1.02e-07)

log(P recipitation + 1)

-4.67e-07***
(1.29e-07)

-3.07e-07***
(5.57e-08)

Observations
R-squared

48,521
0.847

92,886
0.824

Dependent Variable: log(P M 2.5i,t ) + 1
Dist. Bandwidth
(≤ 25 Miles) (25-50 Miles)
log(CS p,t )×
Constant

0.0116***
(0.0030)

0.0045***
(0.0016)

log(P recipitation + 1)

-0.0048***
(0.0009)

-0.0048***
(0.0004)

Observations
R-squared

47,169
0.850

90,535
0.830

Notes: This table presents the regression results regarding how the link between coal stockpiles
and P M2.5 concentration levels varies with precipitation. The top panel of this table regresses coal
stockpiles (in tons) on P M2.5 (in micrograms per cubic meter) in levels; the bottom panel of this
table regresses coal stockpiles on P M2.5 in logs. In both panels, coal stockpiles are interacted with
the log of total monthly precipitation (measured in inches); we include months-of-sample with zero
precipitation by adding one to our total monthly precipitation variable. A unit of observation for
these regressions is plant/air quality monitor/month-of-sample. We restrict our sample to plants
within 25 miles of their air quality (AQ) monitor in Column 1 and we restrict our sample to plants
between 25 and 50 miles of their AQ monitor in Column 2. Standard errors are clustered by air
quality monitor and are reported in parentheses. ***,**,* denote statistical significance at the 1%,
5%, and 10% levels respectively. We control for quantity received, number of deliveries, and sum of
coal stockpiles from other plants. We also include meteorological controls, EPA emissions controls,
coal quality controls, and thermal generation controls. Finally, we include facility code/AQ monitor
fixed effects and county-of-AQ-monitor/month-of-sample fixed effects. We weight observations by
the inverse of the distance between air quality monitor and plant for these regressions. See Section
3.3 for more details regarding our regression specification. See Appendix Tables A.1 and A.2 for the
summary statistics associated with these regressions.

as logged monthly thermal generation. Our empirical results including these controls
(presented in Appendix Tables A.4 and A.5) are very similar to those presented above,
indicating that variation in electricity generation is not driving our findings regarding
25

the relationship between P M2.5 and coal procurement (read: coal stockpiles and number
of deliveries).
We also consider carbon monoxide (CO) as our dependent variable rather than P M2.5 .
Combustion of any fuel (be it coal, diesel, or gasoline) emits both P M2.5 and CO. Thus,
we would expect to see a positive association between coal procurement and CO if our
empirical findings are due to combustion-based sources such as the burning of coal or the
burning of diesel or gasoline from the trains, barges and trucks carrying coal. Instead, we
find in Table 7 that there is no statistically significant link between changes in number
of deliveries and local P M2.5 concentration levels for either the within 25 miles or the
25-50 mile distance bandwidths. Similarly, Table 8 demonstrates that there is not a
statistically significant, positive association between coal stockpiles and carbon monoxide
concentration levels.21 Tables 7 and 8 provide strong evidence that our effect of coal
stockpiles and number of coal deliveries on P M2.5 is not coming from any alternative
source based on combustion. This rules out many of the potential confounding sources
of our findings, including the burning of coal or the burning of fuel by trains, barges, or
trucks delivering coal.
One may also be concerned that our empirical results are driven by weighting our
regressions by the inverse distance between air quality monitor and power plant. To
alleviate this concern, we re-ran our analyses: 1) weighting each observation by the
inverse of the number of power plants matched to each air quality monitor, and 2) not
weighting at all. We find very similar results for both of these alternative weighting
schemes; these empirical results are available upon request.

5

The Effect of P M2.5 on Mortality Rates

The previous section estimated the impact of coal procurement on P M2.5 . This section quantifies the impact of P M2.5 concentration levels on mortality rates using coal
stockpiles and number of deliveries as instruments for P M2.5 . We first describe our data
on mortality rates. We next specify the ordinary least squares (OLS) and instrumental
21
The coefficient estimate on coal stockpiles is statistically significant at the 10% level for the 25-50
mile bandwidth for the Levels-Levels specification (top panel, Column 2). However, this coefficient
estimate is negative rather than positive (increased coal stockpiles lead to lower CO) and its magnitude
is not economically significant.

26

Table 7: Overall Effect of Number of Deliveries on CO Concentration
Dependent Variable: COi,t
Dist. Bandwidth (≤ 25 Miles) (25-50 Miles)
N Dp,t
-0.0004
0.0006
(0.0019)
(0.0010)
Observations
14,190
27,461
R-squared
0.865
0.809
Dependent Variable: log(COi,t ) + 1
Dist. Bandwidth (≤ 25 Miles) (25-50 Miles)
log(N Dp,t + 1)
-0.0003
-0.0032
(0.0045)
(0.0054)
Observations
R-squared

13,812
0.866

26,709
0.824

Notes: This table presents the regression results regarding the link between number of deliveries
and carbon monoxide (CO) concentration levels. The top panel of this table regresses number of
deliveries on carbon monoxide (in parts per million) in levels; the bottom panel of this table regresses
number of deliveries on carbon monoxide in logs. A unit of observation for these regressions is
plant/air quality monitor/month-of-sample. We restrict our sample to plants within 25 miles of
their air quality (AQ) monitor in Column 1 and we restrict our sample to plants between 25 and
50 miles of their AQ monitor in Column 2. Standard errors are clustered by air quality monitor
and are reported in parentheses. ***,**,* denote statistical significance at the 1%, 5%, and 10%
level, respectively. We control for quantity received, coal stockpiles, and sum of deliveries from
other plants. We also include meteorological controls, EPA emissions controls, coal quality controls,
and thermal generation controls. Finally, we include facility code/AQ monitor fixed effects and
county-of-AQ-monitor/month-of-sample fixed effects. We weight observations by the inverse of the
distance between air quality monitor and plant for these regressions. See Section 3.3 for more details
regarding our regression specification. See Appendix Tables A.1 and A.2 for the summary statistics
associated with these regressions.

variables (IV) regression frameworks used to measure the impact of P M2.5 on mortality
rates due to different causes. Finally, we present our empirical results for both OLS and
IV specifications. Summarizing our findings, we see an economically small (and sometimes negative) association between P M2.5 and mortality rates when examining the OLS
results. However, the effect of P M2.5 on mortality rates is positive, statistically significant, and economically significant when we instrument using monthly plant-level coal
stockpiles and number of deliveries. Among other results, we find that a 10% increase in
P M2.5 leads to a 1.1% (6.6%) increase in average overall adult (infant) mortality rates.
One potential criticism of our coal procurement instruments is that power plants
respond to electricity demand, and electricity demand is correlated with local economic
outcomes and therefore local health outcomes. However, coal-fired power plants largely

27

Table 8: Overall Effect of Coal Stockpiles on CO Concentration
Dependent Variable: COi,t
Dist. Bandwidth (≤ 25 Miles) (25-50 Miles)
CSp,t
1.26e-08
-5.23e-08*
(3.60e-08)
(2.81e-08)
Observations
14,190
27,461
R-squared
0.865
0.810
Dependent Variable: log(COi,t ) + 1
Dist. Bandwidth (≤ 25 Miles) (25-50 Miles)
log(CSp,t + 1)
-0.0002
-0.0023
(0.0041)
(0.0030)
Observations
R-squared

13,812
0.866

26,709
0.824

Notes: This table presents the regression results regarding the link between coal stockpiles and
carbon monoxide (CO) concentration levels. The top panel of this table regresses coal stockpiles (in
tons) on carbon monoxide (in parts per million) in levels; the bottom panel of this table regresses
coal stockpiles on carbon monoxide in logs. A unit of observation for these regressions is plant/air
quality monitor/month-of-sample. We restrict our sample to plants within 25 miles of their air
quality (AQ) monitor in Column 1 and we restrict our sample to plants between 25 and 50 miles
of their AQ monitor in Column 2. Standard errors are clustered by air quality monitor and are
reported in parentheses. ***,**,* denote statistical significance at the 1%, 5%, and 10% levels
respectively. We control for quantity received, number of deliveries, and sum of coal stockpiles from
other plants. We also include meteorological controls, EPA emissions controls, coal quality controls,
and thermal generation controls. Finally, we include facility code/AQ monitor fixed effects and
county-of-AQ-monitor/month-of-sample fixed effects. We weight observations by the inverse of the
distance between air quality monitor and plant for these regressions. See Section 3.3 for more details
regarding our regression specification. See Appendix Tables A.1 and A.2 for the summary statistics
associated with these regressions.

run continuously during our sample period, with little month-to-month variation in their
electricity generation. Moreover, the electricity produced by power plants goes into the
electricity transmission grid; this electricity generation is distributed regionally. Hence,
coal-fired power plants typically do not respond to month-to-month variation in local
electricity demand. This in turn makes it unlikely that power plants’ coal purchase
and storage behavior affects local health outcomes through the channel of local economic
outcomes correlated with electricity demand. As such, we argue that this setting provides
a novel strategy for identifying the causal relationship between P M2.5 and mortality rates.

28

5.1

Data Sources For Mortality Rate Regressions

We collect monthly, county-level total number of deaths by category from the Centers
for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC); these categories are deaths related to the
cardiovascular, respiratory, or nervous systems, deaths due to external causes, and total
number of deaths by age group. We present results considering only people who are older
than 30 years old (“adults”), as this is the sub-population considered in epidemiological
studies such as Krewski et al. (2009). We also provide the empirical results counting
deaths of people of all ages in Appendix A; these all-age results are very similar to
those presented below for the ages 30+ subpopulation. Finally, our empirical results
demonstrate that infants (children ages 0-4) are especially vulnerable to the mortality
risk associated with P M2.5 increases.
We also use annual, county-level population data by age group from the Survey of
Epidemiology and End Results (SEER) collected by the National Bureau of Economic
Research (NBER) website.

5.2

Empirical Framework

We estimate the following specification relating mortality rates to local P M2.5 concentrations:
log(

Deathsc,t
) = αc,y + log(P M 2.5i,t + 1)γ + Xi,p,t β + i,p,t
P opc,y

(2)

where c indexes the county where air quality monitor (AQ) i is located, p indexes a coalfired power plant linked to AQ monitor i, t indexes the month-of-sample, and y indexes
the year-of-sample. This specification includes the same set of controls Xi,p,t as described
in Section 3 as well as county-of-AQ-monitor/year fixed effects (αc,y ). We estimate this
equation separately for each type of mortality rate (cardiovascular, respiratory, nervous,
external, total, and infant).
The first-stage regression for our instrumental variables (IV) specification is:
log(P M 2.5i,t + 1) = δc,y + log(CSp,t + 1)θ1 + log(N Dp,t + 1)θ2 + Xi,p,t η + i,p,t

In particular, we instrument for log(P M2.5 + 1) in Equation 2 with both log(CSp,t ) and
log(N Dp,t + 1). As with the OLS framework, we estimate this IV specification separately

29

for each type of mortality rate. Our standard errors are clustered by air quality monitor
and we weight by population for both OLS and IV specifications.22 Finally, we focus on
plants within 25 miles of their corresponding air quality monitor, as we found that there’s
a statistical link between coal procurement and P M2.5 for this distance bandwidth but
not the 25-50 mile distance bandwidth in Section 4.

5.3

Empirical Results

The top panel of Table 9 lists the empirical results when regressing mortality rate on
P M2.5 concentrations using the OLS framework described in the previous subsection.
We run separate regressions for the mortality rates associated with the cardiovascular
system, the respiratory system, the nervous system, all adult deaths, and external causes
such as accidents. The summary statistics for the regressions in this subsection are
relegated to Appendix Section A. Interpreting the first column of Table 9, we find that
a 10% increase in P M2.5 concentration levels corresponds to a 0.09% increase in the
cardiovascular mortality rate on average. Column 2 indicates that a 10% increase in
P M2.5 is associated with a 0.16% average increase in the rate of deaths due to the
respiratory system. The OLS coefficient estimates in Columns 1 and 2 are statistically
significant but economically small. However, Column 3 shows a negative and statistically
significant association between P M2.5 exposure and the nervous system mortality rate,
while the coefficient estimate on log(P M2.5 + 1) is not statistically significant in the total
mortality rate regression (Column 4). The mortality rate due to external causes such as
accidents should not be related to P M2.5 concentration levels; however, the OLS results
in Column 6 show a negative and statistically significant association between the external
mortality rate and P M2.5 .
In contrast, the bottom panel of Table 9 provides the empirical results relating P M2.5
concentration levels to mortality rates for the instrumental variables (IV) specification.
As with the OLS results, we find a positive and statistically significant link between P M2.5
concentration levels and both cardiovascular and respiratory mortality rates. However,
the estimated coefficients in Columns 1 and 2 are much larger for the IV specification
relative to the OLS specification; the IV findings indicate that a 10% increase in P M2.5
concentration levels results in a 1.3% (4.7%) average increase in the cardiovascular (res22

Our empirical results are similar if we do not weight by population.

30

Table 9: P M2.5 on Mortality Rate: 25 Mile Bandwidth for Adults

VARIABLES

Cardio MR

OLS Specification
Resp. MR Nervous MR

Total MR

External MR

log(P M2.5 + 1)

0.009**
(0.004)

0.016***
(0.006)

-0.018**
(0.009)

0.003
(0.003)

-0.024***
(0.007)

Observations
R2

42,988
0.911

36,961
0.717

29,122
0.790

44,021
0.919

30,255
0.753

Total MR

External MR

VARIABLES
log(P M2.5 + 1)

Observations
R2

Cardio MR

IV Specification
Resp. MR Nervous MR

0.134***
(0.039)

0.469***
(0.094)

0.239**
(0.097)

0.109***
(0.027)

-0.104
(0.086)

42,093
0.903

36,203
0.609

28,558
0.769

42,965
0.908

29,741
0.752

Notes: This table presents the OLS and IV results regarding the link between P M2.5 concentration
levels and adult (ages 30+) mortality rates. The top panel of this table regresses the log of P M2.5 on
county/month specific mortality rates, while the bottom panel of this table uses both coal stockpiles
and number of deliveries as instruments for P M2.5 when assessing the impact of P M2.5 on mortality
rates. A unit of observation for these regressions is plant/air quality monitor/month-of-sample. We
restrict our sample to plants within 25 miles of their air quality (AQ) monitor. Standard errors
are clustered by air quality monitor and are reported in parentheses. ***,**,* denote statistical
significance at the 1%, 5%, and 10% levels respectively. We control for quantity received and
also include meteorological controls, EPA emissions controls, coal quality controls, and thermal
generation controls. We include county-of-AQ monitor/month-of-sample fixed effects as well. We
weight observations by the population of the county where the AQ monitor is located for these
regressions. See Section 5.2 for more details regarding our regression specification. See Appendix
Table A.6 for the summary statistics associated with these regressions.

piratory) mortality rate. Moreover, the IV coefficient estimates in Columns 3 and 4 are
positive and statistically significant as expected; we find a positive link between P M2.5
exposure and both nervous system mortality rates as well as total mortality rates. Using
the IV framework, there is not a statistically significant relationship between the external
mortality rate and P M2.5 exposure in Column 5; this finding is consistent with the intuition that the probability of death due to external causes such as accidents should not
change substantially with P M2.5 concentration levels. Thus, this lack of a relationship between P M2.5 and the external mortality rate provides evidence that we are not capturing
some other source of variation that simultaneously increases both P M2.5 concentration
levels and mortality rates.23
23

We obtain similar results if we only use coal stockpiles as an instrument rather than both coal

31

We focus on the overall mortality rate for the subsample of people over 30 years
old because the USEPA typically uses the association between P M2.5 levels and overall,
post-30 mortality rates reported by Krewski et al. (2009) or Lepeule et al. (2012) in its
regulatory impact analyses for P M2.5 .24 For example, Lepeule et al. (2012) reports that a
1 ug/m3 increase in P M2.5 is associated with a 1.4% increase in overall, post-30 mortality
rates. The annual mean P M2.5 reading in 2014 was 8.4 ug/m3 ; at this mean P M2.5 level,
a1

ug/m3

increase in P M2.5 amounts to a 11.9% increase in P M2.5 levels. This suggests

an elasticity of

0.014
0.119

= 0.12 based on the coefficient estimate reported by Lepeule et al.

(2012). The estimate of the all-cause, post-30 mortality elasticity with respect to P M2.5
implied by Lepeule et al. (2012) (0.12) is quite similar to our elasticity estimate (0.11).
However, P M2.5 levels have fallen since the Lepeule et al. (2012) study was published.
For example, the annual average P M2.5 level was 12.47

ug/m3

in 2008; a 1 unit change

in P M2.5 from the 2008 annual average level implies an elasticity of 0.18. However, we
obtain an elasticity of

0.006
0.119

= 0.05 if we instead use the P M2.5 /adult mortality semi-

elasticity estimate from Krewski et al. (2009) evaluated at 2014 average P M2.5 levels.
Summarizing, our IV estimate of the all-cause, post-30 mortality elasticity with respect
to P M2.5 (which in 0.11) is slightly smaller than the Lepeule et al. (2012) estimate (either
0.12 based on 2014 average P M2.5 levels or 0.18 based on 2008 average P M2.5 levels) but
larger than the Krewski et al. (2009) estimate (either 0.05 based on 2014 average P M2.5
levels or 0.08 based on 2008 average P M2.5 levels). Thus, our estimated elasticity of
mortality rate with respect to P M2.5 has a similar magnitude as the epidemiological
estimates used by the regulatory impact analyses (RIAs) conducted by the USEPA; this
lends further credence to these RIAs.
Finally, we focus on the effect of P M2.5 on the mortality rates for children ages 0 to
4 (“infants”) in Table 10. Infants are known to be especially vulnerable to the negative
health effects from P M2.5 . Consistent with this intuition, we see from the IV results in
the bottom panel of Table 10 that the average increase in infant mortality from a 1%
increase in P M2.5 (0.66%) is much larger than the corresponding average increase in adult
mortality rates (0.11%). Finally, we see from the top panel of Table 10 that ordinary least
squares does not identify a positive link between P M2.5 and infant mortality, highlighting
both the necessity of our instrumental variables identification strategy based on coal
stockpiles and number of coal deliveries (see Appendix Table A.8).
24
The empirical results for the full population (see Appendix Table A.7) are quite similar to the results
described above for the over-30 subpopulation.

32

Table 10: P M2.5 on Infant Mortality Rate: 25 Mile Bandwidth for Ages 0-4
OLS Specification
VARIABLES
Total Infant MR
log(P M2.5 + 1)

-0.012
(0.016)

Observations
11,291
R2
0.648
IV Specification
VARIABLES
Total Infant MR
log(P M2.5 + 1)

0.657***
(0.030)

Observations
R2

11,085
0.442

Notes: This table presents the OLS and IV results regarding the link between P M2.5 concentration
levels and total infant (ages 0-4) mortality rate. The top panel of this table regresses the log of
P M2.5 on county/month specific total infant mortality rate, while the bottom panel of this table
uses both coal stockpiles and number of deliveries as instruments for P M2.5 when assessing the
impact of P M2.5 on infant mortality rate. A unit of observation for these regressions is plant/air
quality monitor/month-of-sample. We restrict our sample to plants within 25 miles of their air
quality (AQ) monitor. Standard errors are clustered by air quality monitor and are reported in
parentheses. ***,**,* denote statistical significance at the 1%, 5%, and 10% levels respectively.
We control for quantity received and also include meteorological controls, EPA emissions controls,
coal quality controls, and thermal generation controls. We include county-of-AQ monitor/month-ofsample fixed effects as well. We weight observations by the population of the county where the AQ
monitor is located for these regressions. See Section 5.2 for more details regarding our regression
specification. See Appendix Table A.6 for the summary statistics associated with these regressions.

procurement as well as the strength of the statistical link between coal procurement and
P M2.5 concentration levels.

6

Local Environmental Health Costs of Coal Procurement

We estimated the effect of coal procurement on P M2.5 in Section 4. The previous section
measured the effect of local P M2.5 concentration levels on mortality rates. This section
combines those two estimates; we translate the increases in P M2.5 from coal stockpiles
and deliveries into total number of deaths and ultimately calculate the social cost from
33

those deaths in dollars per ton using the Value of Statistical Life (VSL) approach. We
also present two alternative methods of calculating social costs as sensitivity analyses.
First, we use a concentration-response relationship from the epidemiological literature in
order to translate our estimated P M2.5 increase from coal procurement into total adult
deaths. This alternative approach does not use our estimates of the effect of P M2.5 on
mortality rates. We also present social costs in life-years lost per ton of coal stockpiled or
delivered, allowing the reader to choose their own VSL when calculating social costs in
dollars per ton. Summarizing our primary findings, we calculate that a one ton increase
in coal stockpiles has local environmental costs of $182.67 while a one ton increase in the
quantity of coal delivered has local environmental costs of $202.51. Roughly 75% (25%)
of these social costs come from adult (infant) mortality due to the greater number of
adults exposed to the P M2.5 increases relative to infants.

6.1

Translating Partial Effects to Local Environmental Costs:
Methodology

In Section 4, we measured the extent to which fugitive and gaseous emissions from coal
deliveries and coal stockpiles have an effect on ambient P M2.5 levels. We quantify the
local health costs of such emissions in this section. We focus exclusively on mortality
risk because prior research has shown that the majority of damage from P M2.5 exposure is due to elevated mortality risk (EPA (1999); Muller, Mendelsohn and Nordhaus
(2011)). This aspect of the analysis relies on plant-level average partial effects linking
for
coal stockpiles and deliveries to P M2.5 . We denote these partial effects ∆P M 2.5CS
p
D
for number of deliveries, which we obtain by averaging
coal stockpiles and ∆P M 2.5N
p

our air quality monitor/plant/month-of-sample level partial effects from Section 4 over
air quality monitors and months-of-sample for each power plant p. We divide the partial
effect from an additional delivery by the number of tons in the delivery in order to derive
a comparable marginal emissions figure for a ton of coal delivered versus a ton of coal
stockpiled. Summarizing, these partial effects translate a ton of coal stored or delivered
into P M2.5 increases in micrograms per cubic meter. We focus on ∆P M 2.5CS
in the
p
description below purely for ease of exposition.
We also rely on our estimated impact of P M2.5 on average adult and infant mortality
rates from Section 5; we denote these impacts ∆M Radult and ∆M Rinf ant . ∆M Radult and
34

∆M Rinf ant are based on estimated semi-elasticities converting P M2.5 in micrograms per
cubic meter into percentage changes in average adult and infant mortality rates. The
following equation formally describes how we calculate the total number of adult deaths
from coal procurement induced increases in P M2.5 concentration levels:
Mp =

13
X

M Rc,a (∆M Radult )(∆P M 2.5CS
p )P OPc,a

(3)

a=1

where M Rc,a is the mortality rate of age group a in the county c where power plant p is
located. We collect data on baseline mortality rates from the Centers for Disease Control
and Prevention (CDC) for the year 2011; these mortality rate data are provided in 13
age groups. For P OPc,a , we use 2010 U.S. census block level population data in order
to find the total number of people in age group a living in census blocks in county c
whose centroid is within 25 miles of power plant p.25 We partially aggregate the Census
population data in order to match the age group designations used by the CDC for the
mortality rate data.
The result of multiplying population times mortality rate gives us total number
of deaths for each age group; we use the partial effects we estimated in Section 4
(∆P M 2.5CS
p ) as well as the semi-elasticities we estimated in Section 5 in order to calculate the total number of adult deaths (Mp ) attributable to increased P M2.5 exposure
stemming from coal stockpiles.
The equation describing how to calculate total number of infant deaths is:
Mp = M Rc (∆M Rinf ant )(∆P M 2.5CS
p )P OPc,inf ant
where P OPc,inf ant is the population of children ages 0 to 4 (“infants”) living in census
blocks both within 25 miles of power plant p and in the same county c as power plant p.
M Rc is the county-level infant mortality rate.
As a sensitivity analysis, we also use the concentration-response relationship estimated
in Krewski et al. (2009) in order to map the effect of coal stockpiles on P M2.5 into total
number of adult deaths. This approach, specified below, does not use our estimates of
25

In practice, this census block based population is typically only slightly smaller than county-level
population because the median county land area in the United States is 640 square miles (2010 Census).

35

the relationship between P M2.5 and mortality rates:
Mp =

13
X

P OPc,a M Rc,a (1 −

a=1

1
)
exp(ρ∆P M 2.5CS
p )

where ρ is a statistically estimated parameter reported by Krewski et al. (2009). Both
population (P OPc,a ) and mortality rates (M Rc,a ) are the same as defined above for
Equation 3.
The next step is quantifying the cost in dollars of these deaths. We employ the Value
of a Statistical Life (VSL) methodology for this conversion (Viscusi and Aldy, 2003),
using a VSL of $9.85 million based on the regulatory impact analyses for air pollution
conducted by the USEPA. The monetary marginal damage due to emissions from an
additional ton of coal stockpiled at plant p is given by:
M DpCS = MpCS V SL

We also calculate the life-years lost due to coal procurement induced increases in
P M2.5 concentration levels. To do this, we employ data on conditional life expectancy
by age group from the National Vital Statistics Reports (U.S. 2011 Life Tables). In our
VSL-based approach, we assume that an additional death in a given age group due to
increases in P M2.5 results in the loss of full life expectancy for that age group. In contrast,
life-years lost are calculated as the change in mortality risk for a given age group due to
P M2.5 increases times the conditional life expectancy of that age group. As an example,
if pollution exposure at a given location increases mortality risk for a given age group by
5%, then the years of life lost due to this pollution exposure is 0.05 times the conditional
life expectancy for that age group.

6.2

Translating Partial Effects to Local Environmental Costs:
Empirical Results

We calculate the local environmental health costs due to increases in P M2.5 emissions
from coal stockpiles and number of deliveries using the methodology discussed above. We
report social cost estimates based on the Log-Log specifications that account for the wind

36

direction between air quality monitor and coal-fired power plant;26 we focus on the partial
effects for plants within 25 miles of their corresponding air quality (AQ) monitor. Table
11 shows the results from these social cost calculations for the median plant; we present
the median social cost rather than the average social cost as the plant-level distribution
of these social costs is right-skewed. Column 1 of this table uses the link between P M2.5
and mortality estimated in Krewski et al. (2009) for adults (ages 30+), Column 2 of
this table uses our estimate of the effect of P M2.5 on overall adult mortality rates, and
Column 3 uses our estimate of the effect of P M2.5 on overall infant (ages 0-4) mortality
rates.
We see from Column 2 of the top panel of Table 11 that the monetary damage
per ton of coal stockpiled (delivered) due to increased adult mortality rates is $141.17
($159.73). The additional social cost from coal stockpiles (number of deliveries) due to
infant mortality is $41.50 ($42.78) per ton. Though a 1% increase in P M2.5 results in a
higher percentage increase in infant mortality rates relative to adult mortality rates, the
health cost for infants is smaller than the health cost for adults because the population
of adults is substantially larger than the population of infants. Our social cost estimates
for adults are substantially larger when we use our estimated effect of P M2.5 on adult
mortality rate rather than the effect estimated in Krewski et al. (2009), which makes sense
given that we estimate a larger effect of P M2.5 on adult mortality than Krewski et al.
(2009). However, our social cost estimates are slightly smaller than those found in Lepeule
et al. (2012), indicating that our estimates are not unreasonably large when compared to
the epidemiological literature. This highlights the importance of the relationship between
P M2.5 and mortality rates in quantifying the local environmental costs of air pollution;
even small differences in the P M2.5 /mortality rate relationship used to calculate social
costs result in large differences in these social costs.
These per-ton local environmental damages from coal stockpiles and number of deliveries are quite large given that the average plant pays roughly $48 per ton for coal,
stockpiles 212,781.6 tons of coal and has 106,235 tons of coal delivered to it. However,
the middle panel of Table 11 presents our social costs on a per-MWh basis rather than
a per-ton basis; we convert tons of coal burned to MWh of electricity generated using
26

Our social cost estimates are similar in magnitude if we instead use the Levels-Levels specifications
(Appendix Table A.9) or if we instead use the Log-Log specifications that fail to account for wind
direction (Appendix Table A.10).

37

monthly, plant-level data on coal consumption (in tons) and electricity generation (in
MWh). Our estimates of the per-MWh social costs summing across both adults and infants from storing (delivering) coal are $95.51 ($103.12). As a basis for comparison, Levy,
Baxter and Schwartz (2009) reports a median social cost (across roughly 400 plants) of
about $140 per MWh for P M2.5 increases due to the combustion of coal; this translates
to roughly $230 per MWh if we adjust for the value of statistical life (VSL) used in our
paper versus the VSL used in Levy, Baxter and Schwartz (2009). Burning coal emits significantly more P M2.5 than storing and transporting coal; it is thus comforting that our
local environmental health cost estimates for coal purchased and stored are substantially
smaller than the local environmental health costs estimated for coal burned.
Table 11: Local Environmental Costs of Coal Procurement

CSp,t
N Dp,t

Air Pollution Costs: Dollars Per Ton
Adult: Krewski et al. (2009) Adult: IV Regression Infant: IV Regression
79.90
141.17
41.50
90.41
159.73
42.78

CSp,t
N Dp,t

Air Pollution Costs: Dollars Per MWh
Adult: Krewski et al. (2009) Adult: IV Regression Infant: IV Regression
42.16
74.51
21.00
45.08
79.64
23.48

CSp,t
N Dp,t

Air Pollution Costs: Life-Years Per 10,000 Tons
Adult: Krewski et al. (2009) Adult: IV Regression Infant: IV Regression
1.08
1.90
3.32
1.27
2.24
3.42

Notes: This table presents the local environmental costs of coal stockpiles and number of deliveries
for the median plant in our sample. We use the partial effects of coal stockpiles and number of
deliveries on P M2.5 based on the Log-Log specification accounting for the relative bearing between
power plant and air quality monitor from Section 4; we average over air quality monitors and
months-of-sample to obtain plant-specific partial effects. Column 1 of each panel uses the link
between P M2.5 estimated in Krewski et al. (2009) for adults (ages 30+), Column 2 of each panel
uses our own estimated link between P M2.5 and adult mortality from Section 5, and Column 3
uses our estimated link between P M2.5 and infant (ages 0-4) mortality. The top panel of this table
presents local environmental costs per ton of coal stockpiled and delivered. The middle panel of this
table presents social costs per MWh-equivalent of coal stockpiled and delivered; we convert tons of
coal to MWh of electricity by taking plant-specific total number of tons of coal burned and dividing
by total electricity generated. We use a value of statistical life of 9.85 million dollars to quantify
the costs in dollars of the increased mortality from coal procurement based P M2.5 for these top two
panels. Finally, the bottom panel presents social costs in life-years per 10,000 tons stockpiled and
delivered.

We also see from Table 11 that the local environmental damages from storing coal
are smaller than the local environmental costs of delivering coal. Our effect of number of
38

deliveries on P M2.5 primarily captures the emissions from coal handling and preparation
at the power plant; the effect of coal stockpiles on P M2.5 is due to the wind erosion and
gaseous emissions from stationary stockpiles. Thus, our empirical findings are consistent
with the notion that the air pollution costs from displacing coal should be larger than
the air pollution costs from a stationary coal pile.
The bottom panel of Table 11 presents our local environmental cost estimates in lifeyears per-10,000 tons. Focusing on Column 2, we see that a 10,000 ton increase in coal
stockpiled (delivered) results in roughly 1.90 (2.24) life-years lost for adults.27 Table 11
tells us that a 10,000 ton increase in coal stockpiles results in 0.1433 (=
deaths; this means that roughly 13.26 (=

1.90
)
0.1433

141.17
9850000

× 10, 000)

life-years lost equals a death due to

the increased P M2.5 exposure from coal stockpiles. Thus, the reader can pick either a
different value of statistical life (VSL) or a different conversion rate between life-years
lost and deaths in order to scale up or scale down our local environmental cost estimates.
Figure 1 displays the geographic dispersion across the United States of our plantspecific estimates of the local environmental damages from increased P M2.5 exposure
due to a one ton increase in coal stockpiles. This figure highlights that the environmental costs of coal stockpiling are highly local; most counties do not have a power plant
located in them, and thus do not incur any local environmental costs from plants stockpiling coal. Figure 1 also shows that local environmental damages are higher in areas
with higher populations; for example, we see particularly high health costs associated
with coal stockpiles in the Northeastern region of the United States. Figure 2 demonstrates directly that our estimates of the per-ton local environmental costs from coal
stockpiling increase with total county-level adult population. This figure also shows that
the distribution of local environmental health costs are right-skewed; for example, we
estimate extremely large air pollution costs per ton of coal stockpiled in Cook County
(which contains Chicago).
Finally, the average census tract with a coal-fired power plant within its boundaries
has a lower median family income, a lower per-capita income, and a lower proportion of
residents with a bachelor’s degree relative to the average census tract without a coal-fired
power plant; these tract-level averages, calculated using data from the 2000 U.S. Census,
are displayed in Table 12. This evidence suggests that the highly localized environmental
27

We draw exactly the same conclusions if we present our findings on a per-GWh basis rather than a
per-10,000 ton basis (see Appendix Table A.11).

39

Figure 1: Damages Per Ton of Coal Stockpiled Across the U.S.

Notes: This figure displays the geographic dispersion across the United States of our plant-specific
estimates of the local environmental damages from increased P M2.5 exposure due to a one ton
increase in coal stockpiles. We use the effect of coal stockpiles on P M2.5 based on the Log-Log
specification accounting for the relative bearing between power plant and air quality monitor from
Section 4; we average over air quality monitors and months-of-sample to obtain a plant-specific
partial effect. We calculate damages based on our own estimated link between P M2.5 and adult
mortality from Section 5. We use a value of statistical life of 9.85 million dollars to quantify the
costs in dollars of the increased mortality from coal procurement based P M2.5 .

40

0

Damage ($/ton)
10000
20000

30000

Figure 2: Damages Per Ton Stockpiled versus Total Population

0

1000000
2000000
County Population Over 30

3000000

Notes: This scatterplot shows the relationship between county-level adult (ages 30+) population
and our plant-specific estimates of the local environmental damages from increased P M2.5 exposure
due to a one ton increase in coal stockpiles. The adult population of the county where each coal-fired
power plant is located comes from the 2010 U.S. Census. We use the effect of coal stockpiles on
P M2.5 based on the Log-Log specification accounting for the relative bearing between power plant
and air quality monitor from Section 4; we average over air quality monitors and months-of-sample
to obtain a plant-specific partial effect. Damages are calculated based on our own estimated link
between P M2.5 and adult mortality from Section 5. We use a value of statistical life of 9.85 million
dollars to quantify the costs in dollars of the increased mortality from coal procurement based P M2.5 .

41

Table 12: Census Tract Summary Statistics: With versus Without a Power Plant
Tracts with a Plant
Average Std. Dev.
Prop. with a Bachelor’s Degree
0.19
0.17
Per-Capita Income
18,536
6,380.70
Median Family Income
45,926.54 15,812.66

Tracts without a Plant
Average
Std. Dev.
0.24
0.19
21,070.9
11,530.13
50,490.47 24,277.27

Notes: This table presents census-tract level summary statistics separately for the 632 tracts with a
coal-fired power plant located within their borders versus the remaining 64,874 census tracts that do
not have a coal-fired power plant within their borders. The tract-level proportion of residents with
a bachelor’s degree, per-capita income, and median family income are collected from the 2000 U.S.
Census. The locations of coal-fired power plants are collected from the eGrid database constructed
by the USEPA.

impacts of coal transportation and storage are borne disproportionately by economically
disadvantaged communities.28

7

Conclusion and Policy Implications

Reliance on coal as an energy source is known to have environmental consequences all
along the supply chain from coal produced at mines to coal burned at power plants. This
paper uncovers a new dimension of coal use, the coal purchase and storage behavior of
U.S. power plants, that requires environmental policy intervention. We first quantify
the effect of coal deliveries and coal stockpiles on local ambient air pollution. Next, this
variation in local air pollution from coal procurement is used to identify the link between
P M2.5 and mortality rates. Finally, we combine our estimates with the methodology
utilized by the USEPA in their regulatory impact analyses in order to calculate the
per-ton social costs from plants’ coal purchase and storage behavior.
This paper demonstrates that the storage and conveyance of coal contributes to ambient P M2.5 ; thus, local, state, and federal air quality regulators have a new policy lever
they can use to comply with the National Ambient Air Quality Standards. Our analysis
also aids in the design of policies that manage the local environmental consequences of
any large scale coal transport or storage decision. As will be demonstrated below, this
is especially important for coal export terminals given that these terminals are located
28

Our empirical evidence is corroborated by Davis (2011), which finds that neighborhoods near fossilfuel fired power plants have lower average household incomes and educational attainment using restrictedaccess census microdata from 1990 and 2000.

42

in densely populated areas and transport and store large quantities of coal. Finally, our
results can be used to assess the local environmental consequences of even purely economic policies. As an example of this, power plants subject to output price regulation
hold larger quantities of coal on site on average relative to plants facing electricity market mechanisms (Jha, 2017); our findings indicate that this results in higher local P M2.5
concentration levels around regulated power plants. We argue that this environmental
cost should be included in assessments of utility rate regulation.
Summarizing our primary results, we find that a 10% increase in coal stockpiles
(number of deliveries) results in a 0.06% (0.12%) increase in P M2.5 concentration levels
on average. These P M2.5 concentration increases are more severe for: 1) local populations
downwind from coal-fired power plants, and 2) areas/months with less precipitation.
However, the combustion of any fuel, whether it’s coal burned by the power plant or
the fuel burned by the trains, barges, and trucks carrying coal, emits both P M2.5 and
carbon monoxide (CO). We show that there is no statistical effect of either coal stockpiles
or number of deliveries on carbon monoxide (CO), providing strong evidence that our
estimated increase in P M2.5 from coal procurement is not driven by combustion-based
sources of P M2.5 .
We next estimate the effect of P M2.5 on mortality rates, separately for mortality
rates based on cardiovascular system deaths, respiratory system deaths, nervous system
deaths, overall adult (people ages 30+) deaths, overall infant (children ages 0-4) deaths,
and deaths from external causes such as accidents. Ordinary least squares (OLS) regressions of P M2.5 exposure on mortality rates yield economically small and sometimes
negative coefficient estimates. In contrast, we see positive, statistically significant, and
economically significant effects of P M2.5 exposure on mortality rates (excepting the external cause mortality rate) if we instrument for P M2.5 with coal stockpiles and number
of coal deliveries. The positive effect of P M2.5 exposure on mortality rates is especially
large for infants. Our elasticity estimate of the overall adult mortality rate with respect
to P M2.5 based on our new identification strategy is roughly in line with those used by
policymakers such as the USEPA to assess the environmental costs of P M2.5 exposure.
Thus, we provide evidence that these policy analyses are not significantly over-stating or
under-stating the effects of P M2.5 on mortality rates.
Finally, we combine our estimates of the average increase in P M2.5 from coal pro-

43

curement and the average increase in mortality rates from P M2.5 in order to quantify
the social costs of coal stockpiles and deliveries. In particular, we calculate the total
number of adult and infant deaths from coal procurement based P M2.5 emissions and
use the Value of a Statistical Life approach to monetize this mortality. Our results indicate that health costs are roughly $183 ($203) per ton of coal stockpiled (delivered).
These local environmental costs are sizable given that U.S. coal-fired power plants pay
roughly $48 per ton for coal on average. However, our estimates are not unreasonably
large given that the per-MWh local damages from delivering and storing coal ($95.51 per
MWh-equivalent for storing coal and $103.12 per MWh-equivalent for delivering coal) are
substantially smaller than the local environmental damages from burning coal (roughly
$230 per MWh from Levy, Baxter and Schwartz (2009)).
The economic costs of simple P M2.5 mitigation strategies, such as covering coal stockpiles or the rail cars containing coal, are almost certainly small when compared to the
environmental costs incurred by the economically disadvantaged communities living near
coal-fired power plants and railroad tracks. Moreover, a policy requiring that coal piles
be covered does not require significant coordination across jurisdictions because the environmental impacts of coal purchase and storage behavior are highly local; for example,
the vast majority of the local environmental costs from a plant’s coal storage and handling behavior are incurred in the jurisdiction where this plant is located. This stands
in direct contrast to proposed policy interventions for global pollutants such as the CO2
emissions generated when coal is burned. Thus, local environmental policies designed
to mitigate the P M2.5 emissions from coal procurement are likely easier to enact and
implement relative to policies designed to mitigate global or regional pollutants such as
CO2 or SO2 . Finally policies targeting the P M2.5 emissions from coal procurement may
be a low-cost method to comply with the National Ambient Air Quality Standards.
The local environmental health costs from coal handling and storage apply more
broadly than our examination of U.S. coal-fired power plants. The terminals exporting
coal, the railroads used to transport coal, and the mines that produce coal are also likely
to be associated with increased P M2.5 exposure from dust emissions. To demonstrate
this, we combine our estimates of the effect of coal storage on local P M2.5 with data
from SNL Financial on the location of coal export terminals and the monthly quantity
of coal stored at the terminals in order to provide a rough estimate of the social costs

44

from these facilities. Using the methodology described in the previous section, we find
local environmental costs of $325 per ton of coal stored at a terminal. This value is
considerably larger than the effect from coal stockpiles at power plants primarily because
export terminals are located in or near large cities while power plants tend to be in rural
areas. The data report 36 terminals in the coterminous United States, each of which
hold an average of roughly 29,900 tons of coal. Our back-of-the-envelope estimate of
the monthly damage from export terminals due to P M2.5 exposure is $350 million which
amounts to $4.2 billion annually. This exercise demonstrates that the adverse impacts
on community health from coal export terminals are likely to be significant.
Finally, even purely economic policies may have environmental consequences; thus,
the environmental impacts of different policy options must be included in any costbenefit analysis. For example, 75% of U.S. coal-fired electricity generation was produced
under output price regulation in 2015. Jha (2017) finds within a matched differencein-differences framework that, relative to plants facing electricity market mechanisms,
regulated plants: 1) hold roughly 13% more coal stockpiles controlling for coal consumption, and 2) receive roughly 13% more deliveries per month controlling for quantity
purchased.29 Our paper demonstrates that these regulatory distortions to coal procurement behavior have environmental costs in addition to the economic costs documented
in Jha (2017). Namely, we estimate that a one ton increase in coal stockpiles has an
air pollution cost of $182.67, while coal deliveries generate social costs of $202.51 per
ton. For our 2002-2012 sample of plants within 25 miles of an air quality monitor, regulated plants on average hold 261,999.8 tons of coal and receive 135,436.5 tons of coal per
month; there are 193 regulated plants in our data. Thus, the monthly air pollution costs
across all regulated plants of the 13% increase in coal stockpiles due to the structure of
output price regulation is approximately $1.2 billion (= 182.67 × 193 × 0.13 × 261, 999.8).
The equivalent calculation for coal deliveries yields an estimate of monthly damages of
roughly $700 million (= 202.51 × 193 × 0.13 × 135, 436.5). Annualizing this figure, the
total damages from coal stockpiles (coal deliveries) are $14 billion ($8 billion). Jaramillo
and Muller (2016) estimates that electric power generation in the United States (including both coal and natural gas plants) produced damages of roughly $230 billion in
2002 and $170 billion in 2011 (both magnitudes are in 2014 dollars). Hence, our aggre29

Jha (2017) argues that these distortions to coal procurement occur due to the structure of output
price regulation, which provides a working capital allowance for coal stockpiles held on-site and partially
passes through coal purchase costs into the output price paid by consumers.

45

gate estimates of the air pollution damages from increases in coal procurement at power
generation facilities due to output price regulation range between 10% and 13% of the
aggregate damages from combustion at these power plants.

References
Anderson, Michael L. 2015. “As the Wind Blows: The Effects of Long-Term Exposure
to Air Pollution on Mortality.”
Chay, Kenneth Y, and Michael Greenstone. 2003. “The Impact of Air Pollution
on Infant Mortality: Evidence from Geographic Variation in Pollution Shocks Induced
by a Recession.” The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 1121–1167.
Clay, Karen, Joshua Lewis, and Edson Severnini. 2015. “Canary in a Coal Mine:
Impact of Mid-20th Century Air Pollution Induced by Coal-Fired Power Generation
on Infant Mortality and Property Values.” Working paper.
Currie, Janet, Matthew Neidell, and Johannes F Schmieder. 2009. “Air pollution
and infant health: Lessons from New Jersey.” Journal of health economics, 28(3): 688–
703.
Currie, Janet, Matthew Neidell, et al. 2005. “Air Pollution and Infant Health:
What Can We Learn from California’s Recent Experience?” The Quarterly Journal of
Economics, 120(3): 1003–1030.
Davis, Lucas W. 2011. “The effect of power plants on local housing values and rents.”
Review of Economics and Statistics, 93(4): 1391–1402.
Deryugina, Tatyana, Garth Heutel, Nolan H Miller, David Molitor, and Julian Reif. 2016. “The Effect of Pollution on Health and Health Care Utilization:
Evidence from Changes in Wind Direction.”
EPA. 2010. “The Benefits and Costs of the Clean Air Act 1990 to 2020: EPA Report to
Congress.” United States Environmental Protection Agency, Office of Air and Radiation: Office of Policy in Washington, DC.

46

EPA, S. 1999. “The Benefits and Costs of the Clean Air Act: 1990 to 2010.” EPA-410R99-001. Washington, DC: US Environmental Protection Agency, Office of Air and
Radiation.
Fuller, Thomas. 2016. “Oakland Votes to Block Large Shipments of Coal.” The New
York Times.
Herrnstadt, Evan, and Erich Muehlegger. 2015. “Air Pollution and Criminal Activity: Evidence from Chicago Microdata.” National Bureau of Economic Research.
Jaffe, Daniel, Justin Putz, Greg Hof, Gordon Hof, Jonathan Hee, Dee Ann
Lommers-Johnson, Francisco Gabela, Juliane L Fry, Benjamin Ayres,
Makoto Kelp, et al. 2015. “Diesel particulate matter and coal dust from trains in
the Columbia River Gorge, Washington State, USA.” Atmospheric Pollution Research,
6(6): 946–952.
Jaramillo, Paulina, and Nicholas Z Muller. 2016. “Air pollution emissions and
damages from energy production in the US: 2002–2011.” Energy Policy, 90: 202–211.
Jha, Akshaya. 2017. “Dynamic Regulatory Distortions: Coal Procurement at US Power
Plants.” Working Paper.
Krewski, Daniel, Michael Jerrett, Richard T Burnett, Renjun Ma, Edward Hughes, Yuanli Shi, Michelle C Turner, C Arden Pope III, George
Thurston, Eugenia E Calle, et al. 2009. Extended follow-up and spatial analysis
of the American Cancer Society study linking particulate air pollution and mortality.
Health Effects Institute Boston, MA.
Lepeule, Johanna, Francine Laden, Douglas Dockery, and Joel Schwartz. 2012.
“Chronic exposure to fine particles and mortality: an extended follow-up of the Harvard
Six Cities study from 1974 to 2009.” Environmental health perspectives, 120(7): 965.
Levy, Jonathan I, Lisa K Baxter, and Joel Schwartz. 2009. “Uncertainty and
variability in health-related damages from coal-fired power plants in the United States.”
Risk Analysis, 29(7): 1000–1014.
Muller, Nicholas Z. 2014. “Boosting GDP growth by accounting for the environment.”
Science, 345(6199): 873–874.
47

Muller, Nicholas Z, Robert Mendelsohn, and William Nordhaus. 2011. “Environmental accounting for pollution in the United States economy.” The American
Economic Review, 101(5): 1649–1675.
NRC and NAS. 2010. “Hidden Costs of Energy: Unpriced Consequences of Energy Production and Use.” National Research Council (US). Committee on Health·
Environmental· and Other External Costs and Benefits of Energy Production and
Consumption. National Academies Press.
NRC, NAS. 2010. Hidden Costs of Energy: unpriced consequences of energy production
and use. National Academy of Sciences, National Research Council. National Academy
Press, Washington, D.C., USA.
Raman, Bipul. 2012. “Coal handling plant in a thermal power generating station.”
Electrical Engineering Portal.
Viscusi, W Kip, and Joseph E Aldy. 2003. “The value of a statistical life: a critical
review of market estimates throughout the world.” Journal of risk and uncertainty,
27(1): 5–76.
Zhang, Xing. 2013. “Gaseous Emissions from Coal Stockpiles.” IEA Clean Coal Centre
Working Paper CCC/213.

48

List of Tables
1

Overall Effect of Number of Deliveries on P M2.5 Concentration . . . . . .

17

2

Overall Effect of Coal Stockpiles on P M2.5 Concentration . . . . . . . . .

19

3

Effect of Number of Deliveries on P M2.5 Concentration: Upwind vs.
Downwind . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

20

4

Effect of Coal Stockpiles on P M2.5 Concentration: Upwind vs. Downwind

22

5

Effect of Number of Deliveries on P M2.5 Concentration: Interacted with
Precipitation

6

. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

24

Effect of Coal Stockpiles on P M2.5 Concentration: Interacted with Precipitation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

25

7

Overall Effect of Number of Deliveries on CO Concentration . . . . . . .

27

8

Overall Effect of Coal Stockpiles on CO Concentration . . . . . . . . . .

28

9

P M2.5 on Mortality Rate: 25 Mile Bandwidth for Adults . . . . . . . . .

31

10

P M2.5 on Infant Mortality Rate: 25 Mile Bandwidth for Ages 0-4 . . . .

33

11

Local Environmental Costs of Coal Procurement . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

38

12

Census Tract Summary Statistics: With versus Without a Power Plant .

42

List of Figures
1

Damages Per Ton of Coal Stockpiled Across the U.S. . . . . . . . . . . .

40

2

Damages Per Ton Stockpiled versus Total Population . . . . . . . . . . .

41

49

List of Appendix Tables
A.1 Summary Statistics: Plants less than 25 Miles from AQ Monitor . . . . .

51

A.2 Summary Statistics: Plants between 25 and 50 Miles from AQ Monitor .

52

A.3 Number of Deliveries on P M2.5 : No Quantity Received Control . . . . . .

53

A.4 Overall Effect of Number of Deliveries on P M2.5 Concentration: Additional Generation Controls . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

54

A.5 Overall Effect of Coal Stockpiles on P M2.5 Concentration: Additional Generation Controls . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

55

A.6 Mortality Rate Summary Statistics: 25 Mile Bandwidth . . . . . . . . . .

56

A.7 P M2.5 on Mortality Rate: All Ages/25 Mile Bandwidth . . . . . . . . . .

57

A.8 P M2.5 on Adult Mortality Rates Using only CSp,t as an Instrument . . .

58

A.9 Local Environmental Costs of Coal Procurement: Levels-Levels Specification 59
A.10 Local Environmental Costs of Coal Procurement Not Accounting For
Wind Direction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

60

A.11 Local Environmental Costs of Coal Procurement In Life-Years: Per GWh

60

List of Appendix Figures

50

A

Additional Tables and Figures

A.1

Additional Tables and Figures: Coal Procurement and
P M2.5
Table A.1: Summary Statistics: Plants less than 25 Miles from AQ Monitor
Variable
Obs
P M2.5 (in ug/m3 )
47,169
Stockpiles (in tons)
47,169
Number of Deliveries
47,169
Quantity Received (in tons)
47,169
Distance (in miles)
47,169
Relative Angle (in degrees)
47,169
Precipitation (in inches)
47,169
Dry Bulb Temp. (in degrees Fahrenheit)
47,169
Dew Point Temp. (in degrees Fahrenheit) 47,169
Wet Bulb Temp. (in degrees Fahrenheit)
47,169
Relative Humidity (percentage)
47,169
Station Pressure (in hundredths of an inch) 47,169
5% Wind Speed (in miles-per-hour)
47,169
95% Wind Speed (in miles-per-hour)
47,169
Num. of Plants per AQ Monitor
29,453

Mean
11.760
212,781.6
2.899
106,235
8.678
87.915
3.442
53.334
42.612
48.036
70.448
29.256
0.328
15.874
1.602

Std. Dev.
3.934
244,681.8
3.628
123,238.9
6.953
55.813
3.838
17.491
16.773
15.873
7.780
1.012
0.842
3.541
0.841

Notes: This table presents the summary statistics for the regressions regarding the effect of coal
procurement (coal stockpiles and number of coal deliveries) on P M2.5 discussed in Section 4. A
unit of observation for these regressions is plant/air quality monitor/month-of-sample. We weight
observations by the inverse of the distance between AQ monitor and power plant for these summary
statistics. We restrict our sample to plants within 25 miles of their air quality (AQ) monitor for this
table.

51

Table A.2: Summary Statistics: Plants between 25 and 50 Miles from AQ Monitor
Variable
Obs
Mean
Std. Dev.
3
ug
P M2.5 (in /m )
90,535
12.412
4.150
Stockpiles (in tons)
90,535 327,299 402,177.1
Number of Deliveries
90,535
4.529
5.205
Quantity Received (in tons)
90,535 177,000.3 213,660.9
Distance (in miles)
90,535
36.528
7.276
Relative Angle (in degrees)
90,535
88.438
53.912
Precipitation (in inches)
90,535
3.539
4.616
Dry Bulb Temp. (in degrees Fahrenheit)
90,535
54.554
16.876
Dew Point Temp. (in degrees Fahrenheit) 90,535
43.920
16.389
Wet Bulb Temp. (in degrees Fahrenheit)
90,535
49.243
15.416
Relative Humidity (percentage)
90,535
70.619
6.860
Station Pressure (in hundredths of an inch) 90,535
29.322
0.744
5% Wind Speed (in miles-per-hour)
90,535
0.311
0.705
95% Wind Speed (in miles-per-hour)
90,535
14.907
3.345
Num. of Plants per AQ Monitor
45,283
1.999
1.412
Notes: This table presents the summary statistics for the regressions regarding the effect of coal
procurement (coal stockpiles and number of coal deliveries) on P M2.5 discussed in Section 4. A
unit of observation for these regressions is plant/air quality monitor/month-of-sample. We weight
observations by the inverse of the distance between AQ monitor and power plant for these summary
statistics. We restrict our sample to plants between 25 and 50 miles of their air quality (AQ) monitor
for this table.

52

Table A.3: Number of Deliveries on P M2.5 : No Quantity Received Control
Dependent Variable: P M 2.5i,t
Dist. Bandwidth (≤ 25 Miles) (25-50 Miles)
N Dp,t
0.0146*
-0.0062
(0.0077)
(0.0049)
Observations
48,521
92,886
R-squared
0.847
0.824
Dependent Variable: log(P M 2.5i,t ) + 1
Dist. Bandwidth (≤ 25 Miles) (25-50 Miles)
log(N Dp,t + 1)
0.0069*
-0.0053**
(0.0041)
(0.0026)
Observations
R-squared

47,169
0.849

90,535
0.829

Notes: This table presents the regression results regarding the link between number of deliveries
and P M2.5 concentration levels not controlling for the total monthly quantity of coal delivered to
each power plant. The top panel of this table regresses number of deliveries on P M2.5 (in micrograms
per cubic meter) in levels; the bottom panel of this table regresses number of deliveries on P M2.5
in logs. A unit of observation for these regressions is plant/air quality monitor/month-of-sample.
We restrict our sample to plants within 25 miles of their air quality (AQ) monitor in Column 1
and we restrict our sample to plants between 25 and 50 miles of their AQ monitor in Column 2.
Standard errors are clustered by air quality monitor and are reported in parentheses. ***,**,* denote
statistical significance at the 1%, 5%, and 10% level, respectively. We control for coal stockpiles, and
sum of deliveries from other plants. We also include meteorological controls, EPA emissions controls,
coal quality controls, and thermal generation controls. Finally, we include facility code/AQ monitor
fixed effects and county-of-AQ-monitor/month-of-sample fixed effects. We weight observations by
the inverse of the distance between air quality monitor and plant for these regressions. See Section
3.3 for more details regarding our regression specification. See Appendix Tables A.1 and A.2 for the
summary statistics associated with these regressions.

53

Table A.4: Overall Effect of Number of Deliveries on P M2.5 Concentration: Additional
Generation Controls
Dependent Variable: P M 2.5i,t
Dist. Bandwidth (≤ 25 Miles) (25-50 Miles)
N Dp,t
0.0178**
0.0012
(0.0074)
(0.0044)
Observations
48,521
92,886
R-squared
0.847
0.824
Dependent Variable: log(P M 2.5i,t ) + 1
Dist. Bandwidth (≤ 25 Miles) (25-50 Miles)
log(N Dp,t + 1)
0.0123**
0.0034
(0.0048)
(0.0030)
Observations
R-squared

47,169
0.849

90,535
0.829

Standard errors clustered by air quality monitor in parentheses
Facility Code/AQ Monitor Fixed Effects Included
AQ County/Month-of-Sample Fixed Effects Included
Sum of Deliveries from Other Plants Included
Meteorological and EPA Emissions Controls Included
Coal Quality, Quantity Received, and Thermal Generation Controls Included
*** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1
Notes: This table presents the regression results regarding the link between number of deliveries
and P M2.5 concentration levels controlling flexibly for total monthly thermal generation. The top
panel of this table regresses number of deliveries on P M2.5 (in micrograms per cubic meter) in levels;
the bottom panel of this table regresses number of deliveries on P M2.5 in logs. A unit of observation
for these regressions is plant/air quality monitor/month-of-sample. We restrict our sample to plants
within 25 miles of their air quality (AQ) monitor in Column 1 and we restrict our sample to plants
between 25 and 50 miles of their AQ monitor in Column 2. Standard errors are clustered by air
quality monitor and are reported in parentheses. ***,**,* denote statistical significance at the 1%,
5%, and 10% level, respectively. We include a linear, quadratic, and cubic term for monthly thermal
generation as well as logged monthly thermal generation as controls in these regressions. We also
control for quantity received, coal stockpiles, and sum of deliveries from other plants. Finally,
we include facility code/AQ monitor fixed effects and county-of-AQ-monitor/month-of-sample fixed
effects. We weight observations by the inverse of the distance between air quality monitor and plant
for these regressions. See Section 3.3 for more details regarding our regression specification. See
Appendix Tables A.1 and A.2 for the summary statistics associated with these regressions.

54

Table A.5: Overall Effect of Coal Stockpiles on P M2.5 Concentration: Additional
Generation Controls
Dependent Variable: P M 2.5i,t
Dist. Bandwidth (≤ 25 Miles) (25-50 Miles)
CSp,t
1.02e-06***
3.13e-08
(2.05e-07)
(8.32e-08)
Observations
48,521
92,886
R-squared
0.847
0.824
Dependent Variable: log(P M 2.5i,t ) + 1
Dist. Bandwidth (≤ 25 Miles) (25-50 Miles)
log(CSp,t )
0.0061**
-0.0016
(0.0029)
(0.0016)
Observations
R-squared

47,169
0.849

90,535
0.829

Notes: This table presents the regression results regarding the link between coal stockpiles and
P M2.5 concentration levels controlling flexibly for total monthly thermal generation. The top panel
of this table regresses coal stockpiles (in tons) on P M2.5 (in micrograms per cubic meter) in levels;
the bottom panel of this table regresses coal stockpiles on P M2.5 in logs. A unit of observation for
these regressions is plant/air quality monitor/month-of-sample. We restrict our sample to plants
within 25 miles of their air quality (AQ) monitor in Column 1 and we restrict our sample to plants
between 25 and 50 miles of their AQ monitor in Column 2. Standard errors are clustered by air
quality monitor and are reported in parentheses. ***,**,* denote statistical significance at the 1%,
5%, and 10% level, respectively. We include a linear, quadratic, and cubic term for monthly thermal
generation as well as logged monthly thermal generation as controls in these regressions. We also
control for quantity received, number of deliveries, and sum of deliveries from other plants. Finally,
we include facility code/AQ monitor fixed effects and county-of-AQ-monitor/month-of-sample fixed
effects. We weight observations by the inverse of the distance between air quality monitor and plant
for these regressions. See Section 3.3 for more details regarding our regression specification. See
Appendix Tables A.1 and A.2 for the summary statistics associated with these regressions.

55

A.2

Additional Figures/Tables: Mortality Rate Regressions
Table A.6: Mortality Rate Summary Statistics: 25 Mile Bandwidth

Variable
Mortality Rate: Cardio (Per 1,000 People)
Mortality Rate: Respiratory (Per 1,000 People)
Mortality Rate: Nervous (Per 1,000 People)
Mortality Rate: Total (Per 1,000 People)
Mortality Rate: External (Per 1,000 People)
Population
P M2.5 (in ug/m3 )
Stockpiles (in Tons)
Number of Deliveries
Infant Mortality Rate: Total (Per 1,000 People)

Obs
Mean
42,093
0.413
36,203
0.106
28,558
0.054
42,965
1.167
29,741
0.063
42,965 1,282,459
42,965
12.704
42,965 173,513.4
42,965
3.479
11,085
0.021

Std. Dev.
0.106
0.031
0.018
0.223
0.021
1,119,970
3.959
210,923.6
3.114
0.006

Notes: This table presents the summary statistics for the OLS and IV regressions regarding the link
between P M2.5 concentration levels and mortality rates discussed in Section 4. A unit of observation
for these regressions is plant/air quality monitor/month-of-sample. We weight observations by the
population of the county where the AQ monitor is located for these summary statistics. We restrict
our sample to plants within 25 miles of their air quality (AQ) monitor for this table. All of the
mortality rates listed are for adults (ages 30+) except for the total mortality rate for infants (ages
0-4).

56

Table A.7: P M2.5 on Mortality Rate: All Ages/25 Mile Bandwidth
VARIABLES
log(P M2.5 + 1)

Observations
R2

Cardio MR

Resp. MR

Nervous MR

Total MR

External MR

0.0088**
(0.0036)

0.0138**
(0.0055)

-0.0163*
(0.0086)

0.0023
(0.0028)

-0.0257***
(0.0065)

42,996
0.916

37,054
0.735

29,489
0.800

44,027
0.926

33,708
0.773

Standard errors clustered by air quality monitor in parentheses
County of AQ Monitor/Year-of-Sample Fixed Effects Included
Meteorological and EPA Emissions Controls Included
Coal Quality, Quantity Received, and Thermal Generation Controls Included
*** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1

VARIABLES
log(P M2.5 + 1)

Observations
R2

Cardio MR

Resp. MR

Nervous MR

Total MR

External MR

0.134***
(0.0377)

0.461***
(0.0887)

0.196**
(0.0850)

0.117***
(0.0286)

-0.0739
(0.0648)

42,101
0.908

36,293
0.636

28,921
0.787

42,965
0.914

33,079
0.773

Standard errors clustered by air quality monitor in parentheses
County of AQ Monitor/Year-of-Sample Fixed Effects Included
Meteorological and EPA Emissions Controls Included
Coal Quality, Quantity Received, and Thermal Generation Controls Included
*** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1
Notes: This table presents the OLS and IV results regarding the link between P M2.5 concentration
levels and mortality rates considering people of all ages. The top panel of this table regresses
the log of P M2.5 on county/month specific mortality rates, while the bottom panel of this table
uses both coal stockpiles and number of deliveries as instruments for P M2.5 when assessing the
impact of P M2.5 on mortality rates. A unit of observation for these regressions is plant/air quality
monitor/month-of-sample. We restrict our sample to plants within 25 miles of their air quality
(AQ) monitor. Standard errors are clustered by air quality monitor and are reported in parentheses.
***,**,* denote statistical significance at the 1%, 5%, and 10% levels respectively. We control for
quantity received and also include meteorological controls, EPA emissions controls, coal quality
controls, and thermal generation controls. We include county-of-AQ-monitor/month-of-sample fixed
effects as well. We weight observations by the population of the county where the AQ monitor is
located for these regressions. See Section 5.2 for more details regarding our regression specification.
See Appendix Table A.6 for the summary statistics associated with these regressions.

57

Table A.8: P M2.5 on Adult Mortality Rates Using only CSp,t as an Instrument
VARIABLES

Cardio MR

Resp. MR

Nervous MR

Total MR

External MR

0.0086**
(0.0036)

0.0156***
(0.0055)

-0.0179**
(0.0088)

0.0027
(0.0027)

-0.0234***
(0.0070)

Observations
R2

42,988
0.911

36,961
0.717

29,122
0.790

44,021
0.919

30,255
0.753

VARIABLES

Cardio MR

Resp. MR

Nervous MR

Total MR

External MR

0.230***
(0.0465)

0.473***
(0.0984)

0.0721
(0.0875)

0.182***
(0.0359)

0.0088
(0.0811)

42,093
0.885

36,203
0.607

28,558
0.788

42,965
0.886

29,741
0.754

log(P M2.5 + 1)

log(P M2.5 + 1)

Observations
R2

Notes: This table presents the OLS and IV results regarding the link between P M2.5 concentration
levels and adult (ages 30+) mortality rates. The top panel of this table regresses the log of P M2.5
on county/month specific mortality rates, while the bottom panel of this table uses coal stockpiles
as an instrument for P M2.5 when assessing the impact of P M2.5 on mortality rates. A unit of
observation for these regressions is plant/air quality monitor/month-of-sample. We restrict our
sample to plants within 25 miles of their air quality (AQ) monitor. Standard errors are clustered
by air quality monitor and are reported in parentheses. ***,**,* denote statistical significance at
the 1%, 5%, and 10% levels respectively. We control for number of deliveries, and quantity received.
We also include meteorological controls, EPA emissions controls, coal quality controls, and thermal
generation controls. Finally, we include county-of-AQ-monitor/month-of-sample fixed effects. We
weight observations by the population of the county where the AQ monitor is located for these
regressions. See Section 5.2 for more details regarding our regression specification. See Appendix
Table A.6 for the summary statistics associated with these regressions.

58

A.3

Additional Results: Quantification of Local Environmental
Damages

Table A.9: Local Environmental Costs of Coal Procurement: Levels-Levels Specification

CSp,t
N Dp,t

Air Pollution Costs: Dollars Per Ton
Adult: Krewski et al. (2009) Adult: IV Regression Infant: IV Regression
95.04
167.91
39.42
33.50
59.19
14.82

CSp,t
N Dp,t

Air Pollution Costs: Dollars Per MWh
Adult: Krewski et al. (2009) Adult: IV Regression Infant: IV Regression
46.48
82.12
19.49
18.87
33.34
8.03

CSp,t
N Dp,t

Air Pollution Costs: Life-Years Per 10,000 Tons
Adult: Krewski et al. (2009) Adult: IV Regression Infant: IV Regression
1.23
2.17
3.15
0.46
0.81
1.18

Notes: This table presents the local environmental costs of coal stockpiles and number of deliveries
for the median plant in our sample. We use the effect of coal stockpiles (number of deliveries) on
P M2.5 based on the Levels-Levels specification accounting for the relative bearing between power
plant and air quality monitor; we average over air quality monitors and months-of-sample to obtain
a plant-specific partial effect. Column 1 of each panel uses the link between P M2.5 estimated in
Krewski et al. (2009) for adults (ages 30+), Column 2 of each panel uses our own estimated link
between P M2.5 and adult mortality from Section 5, and Column 3 uses our estimated link between
P M2.5 and infant (ages 0-4) mortality. The top panel of this table presents local environmental costs
per ton of coal stockpiled and delivered. The middle panel of this table presents social costs per
MWh-equivalent of coal stockpiled and delivered; we convert tons of coal to MWh of electricity by
taking plant-specific total number of tons of coal burned and dividing by total electricity generated.
We use a value of statistical life of 9.85 million dollars to quantify the costs in dollars of the increased
mortality from coal procurement based P M2.5 for these top two panels. Finally, the bottom panel
presents social costs in life-years per 10,000 tons stockpiled and delivered.

59

Table A.10: Local Environmental Costs of Coal Procurement Not Accounting For Wind
Direction

CSp,t
N Dp,t

Air Pollution Costs: Dollars Per Ton
Adult: Krewski et al. (2009) Adult: IV Regression Infant: IV Regression
74.94
132.40
39.37
89.81
158.66
42.81

CSp,t
N Dp,t

Air Pollution Costs: Dollars Per MWh
Adult: Krewski et al. (2009) Adult: IV Regression Infant: IV Regression
39.23
69.31
19.68
45.36
80.13
21.05

CSp,t
N Dp,t

Air Pollution Costs: Life-Years Per 10,000 Tons
Adult: Krewski et al. (2009) Adult: IV Regression Infant: IV Regression
1.03
1.81
3.15
1.16
2.04
3.42

Notes: This table presents the local environmental costs of coal stockpiles and number of deliveries
for the median plant in our sample. We use the effect of coal stockpiles (number of deliveries) on
P M2.5 based on the Log-Log specification that does not account for the relative bearing between
power plant and air quality monitor; we average over air quality monitors and months-of-sample to
obtain a plant-specific partial effect. Column 1 of each panel uses the link between P M2.5 estimated
in Krewski et al. (2009) for adults (ages 30+), Column 2 of each panel uses our own estimated link
between P M2.5 and adult mortality from Section 5, and Column 3 uses our estimated link between
P M2.5 and infant (ages 0-4) mortality. The top panel of this table presents local environmental costs
per ton of coal stockpiled and delivered. The middle panel of this table presents social costs per
MWh-equivalent of coal stockpiled and delivered; we convert tons of coal to MWh of electricity by
taking plant-specific total number of tons of coal burned and dividing by total electricity generated.
We use a value of statistical life of 9.85 million dollars to quantify the costs in dollars of the increased
mortality from coal procurement based P M2.5 for these top two panels. Finally, the bottom panel
presents social costs in life-years per 10,000 tons stockpiled and delivered.

Table A.11: Local Environmental Costs of Coal Procurement In Life-Years: Per GWh
CSp,t
N Dp,t

Adult: Krewski et al. (2009)
0.06
0.06

Adult: IV Regression
0.11
0.11

Infant: IV Regression
0.17
0.19

Notes: This table presents the local environmental costs of coal stockpiles and number of deliveries
for the median plant in our sample. We use the partial effects of coal stockpiles and number of
deliveries on P M2.5 based on the Log-Log specification accounting for the relative bearing between
power plant and air quality monitor from Section 4; we average over air quality monitors and monthsof-sample to obtain plant-specific partial effects. This table presents social costs in life-years per
GWh-equivalent of coal stockpiled (delivered); we convert tons of coal to GWh of electricity by
taking plant-specific total number of tons of coal burned and dividing by total electricity generated.
Column 1 of each panel uses the link between P M2.5 estimated in Krewski et al. (2009) for adults
(ages 30+), Column 2 of each panel uses our own estimated link between P M2.5 and adult mortality
from Section 5, and Column 3 uses our estimated link between P M2.5 and infant (ages 0-4) mortality.

60

B

Data Appendix

This Appendix section describes the data used in this paper as well as the data construction process in detail.

B.1

Data Sources: P M2.5 and CO Concentration Levels

We use the Air Quality System (AQS) data provided by the United States Environmental
Protection Agency (USEPA). This publicly available database includes hourly readings
of ambient P M2.5 concentrations at roughly 1,000 monitored sites across the contiguous
United States. We aggregate these data to monthly average P M2.5 levels for each air
quality monitor for the sample period 2002-2012. Similarly, the AQS data includes hourly
readings of carbon monoxide (CO) concentrations at roughly 700 monitored sites across
the contiguous United States. As with P M2.5 , we aggregate these data to monthly average
CO levels for each air quality monitor for the regressions in Section 4.4. Importantly,
the AQS database also provides the latitude and longitude for each P M2.5 monitor and
CO monitor.
These

hourly,

monitor-level

P M2.5

and

CO

data

are

available

at:

http://aqsdr1.epa.gov/aqsweb/aqstmp/airdata/download files.html.

B.2

Data Sources: Coal Procurement

We collect monthly, plant-level data on end-of-month coal inventories, total monthly coal
consumption, and total monthly generation from Forms EIA-906 (for 2002-2007) and
EIA-923 (for 2008-2012).30 Data on coal stocks for 2002-2012 are considered proprietary;
we obtained a research contract with the Energy Information Administration (EIA) in
order to use these data for our analysis.
We construct coal purchase quantities, prices, number of deliveries, sulfur content and
ash content from Forms EIA-423 (2002-2007) and EIA-923 (2008-2012).31 The variables
in this purchase dataset include month of purchase, quantity purchased, delivered price,
30

Monthly, plant-level total coal consumption and monthly, plant-level total electricity generation are
available at: http://www.eia.gov/electricity/data/eia923/.
31
This purchase dataset is available at: http://www.eia.gov/electricity/data/eia423/ for pre-2008 data
and http://www.eia.gov/electricity/data/eia923/ for post-2008 data.

61

heat content, sulfur content, ash content, county of origin, and whether the delivery came
from a long-term contract or the spot market. These data are at the “order level”; an
“order” as defined by these forms is based on the following criteria:
“Data on coal received under each purchase order or contract with a supplier should be
reported separately. Aggregation of coal receipt data into a single line item is allowed if
the coal is received under the same purchase order or contract and the purchase type,
fuel, mine type, State of origin, county of origin, and supplier are identical for each
delivery.”
In some specifications, we consider the “number of deliveries” to a plant in each month,
as measured by the number of orders each plant reports on the form for each month-ofsample. Thus, our measure for the number of deliveries may be under-estimated to the
extent that deliveries under the same purchase order are aggregated as described in the
above quotation.
We only consider electricity generation plants whose “primary business purpose is the
sale of electricity to the public”32 ; this excludes plants that also sell significant quantities
of heat (“combined heat and power plants”) as well as commercial and industrial plants
that generate electricity for their own use.
The EPA eGrid database provides the latitude and longitude for each coal-fired power
plant; this database is located at: http://www.epa.gov/energy/egrid.

B.3

Data Sources: Meteorological Variables

Our meteorological controls come from the quality controlled local climatological data
(QCLCD) collected by the National Climatic Data Center (NCDC); these data include
hourly wind speed and direction, dry bulb temperature, wet bulb temperature, dew-point
temperature, relative humidity, station pressure, and precipitation at approximately
1,600 U.S. locations. We aggregate these data to the meteorological monitor/monthof-sample level by taking time-weighted averages over hours of dry bulb temperature,
wet bulb temperature, dew-point temperature, relative humidity, and station pressure;
we use the meteorological monitor/month-of-sample level sum of hourly precipitation.
32

This quotation is from the EIA Form 923 data dictionary.

62

Wind speed is of primary importance to quantifying the local environmental costs associated with coal procurement as wind blowing over coal stockpiles and coal deliveries
generates P M2.5 . Thus, we also control for the (5, 10, 20, 30, 40, 50, 60, 70, 80, 90,
95) hourly percentiles of wind speed, calculated over all hours-of-sample for each meteorological monitor/month-of-sample. Finally, we use the wind-speed weighted monthly
average wind direction measured at each meteorological monitor. Importantly, the NCDC
database also provides the latitude and longitude for each meteorological monitor.
These

hourly,

monitor-level,

meteorological

data

are

available

at:

http://www.ncdc.noaa.gov/orders/qclcd/.

B.4

Data Sources: SO2 , CO2 , and N Ox Emissions from Coal
Combustion

The EPA’s Continuous Monitoring Emissions System (CEMS) collects hourly data for
each plant on SO2 , CO2 , and N Ox emissions (in tons) resulting from coal burned; we
sum these hourly data to the monthly level and control for the total SO2 , CO2 , and N Ox
emissions for each plant in each month-of-sample.
These hourly, plant-level data on emissions from coal burned are available at:
http://ampd.epa.gov/ampd/.

B.5

Data Merge

We merge each air quality monitor i to meteorological monitors and coal-fired power
plants as follows:
1. For each month-of-sample, we find all meteorological monitors within M miles of
air quality monitor i. We take a weighted average of the meteorological data (for
example, wind speed and wind direction) across these meteorological monitors for
each air quality monitor i, where we weight by the inverse of the distance between
the air quality monitor and the meteorological monitor.
2. If M = 25 miles, we consider all coal-fired power plants less than 25 miles away
from air quality monitor i. If M = 50 miles, we consider all coal-fired power plants
63

between 25 miles and 50 miles away from air quality monitor i.
Thus, our unit of observation is an air quality monitor/power plant pair for each
month-of-sample, emphasizing that each air quality monitor can be linked to multiple
power plants for a given month-of-sample. We examine how the effects of coal stockpiles
and number of deliveries on P M2.5 concentration levels decay with distance by separately
estimating these effects for plants within 25 miles of their corresponding air quality
monitor versus plants between 25 miles and 50 miles away from their corresponding air
quality monitor.

64

