NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

FROM EXTREME TO MAINSTREAM:
HOW SOCIAL NORMS UNRAVEL
Leonardo Bursztyn
Georgy Egorov
Stefano Fiorin
Working Paper 23415
http://www.nber.org/papers/w23415

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
May 2017

We would like to thank Daron Acemoglu, Abhijit Banerjee, Davide Cantoni, Esther Duflo,
Benjamin Enke, Raymond Fisman, Tarek Hassan, John List, Emir Kamenica, Ricardo PerezTruglia, Frank Schilbach, Andrei Shleifer, Hans-Joachim Voth, and Noam Yuchtman, for helpful
comments and suggestions. Excellent research assistance was provided by Raymond Han, Jacob
Miller, and Aakaash Rao. We are grateful to the UCLA Behavioral Lab for financial support.
This study received approval from the UCLA Institutional Review Board. The experiments
reported in this study can be found in the AEA RCT Registry (AEARCTR-0001752 and
AEARCTR-0002028). The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily
reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.
© 2017 by Leonardo Bursztyn, Georgy Egorov, and Stefano Fiorin. All rights reserved. Short
sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission
provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

From Extreme to Mainstream: How Social Norms Unravel
Leonardo Bursztyn, Georgy Egorov, and Stefano Fiorin
NBER Working Paper No. 23415
May 2017
JEL No. C90,D03,D72,D83,P16,Z10
ABSTRACT
Social norms are typically thought to be persistent and long-lasting, sometimes surviving through
growth, recessions, and regime changes. In some cases, however, they can quickly change. This
paper examines the unraveling of social norms in communication when new information becomes
available, e.g., aggregated through elections. We build a model of strategic communication
between citizens who can hold one of two mutually exclusive opinions. In our model, agents
communicate their opinions to each other, and senders care about receivers' approval. As a result,
senders are more likely to express the more popular opinion, while receivers make less inference
about senders who stated the popular view. We test these predictions using two experiments. In
the main experiment, we identify the causal effect of Donald Trump's rise in political popularity
on individuals' willingness to publicly express xenophobic views. Participants in the experiment
are offered a bonus reward if they authorize researchers to make a donation to an antiimmigration organization on their behalf. Participants who expect their decision to be observed
by the surveyor are significantly less likely to accept the offer than those expecting an anonymous
choice. Increases in participants' perceptions of Trump's popularity (either through experimental
variation or through the “natural experiment” of his victory) eliminate the wedge between private
and public behavior. A second experiment uses dictator games to show that participants judge a
person less negatively for publicly expressing (but not for privately holding) a political view they
disagree with if that person's social environment is one where the majority of people holds that
view.

Leonardo Bursztyn
Department of Economics
University of Chicago
1126 E. 59th Street
Chicago, IL 60637
and NBER
bursztyn@uchicago.edu
Georgy Egorov
Kellogg School of Management
Northwestern University
2211 Campus Drive
Evanston, IL 60208
and NBER
g-egorov@kellogg.northwestern.edu

Stefano Fiorin
Anderson School of Management
University of California, Los Angeles
110 Westwood Plaza C502
Los Angeles, CA 90095
stefanofiorin@ucla.edu

1

Introduction

Social norms are an important element of any society: some behaviors and opinions are socially
desirable while others are stigmatized. There is growing evidence that individuals care to a large
extent about how they are perceived by others and that such concerns might affect important
decisions in a variety of settings, from charitable donations (DellaVigna et al., 2012), to schooling
choices (Bursztyn and Jensen, 2015), to political behavior (DellaVigna et al., 2017, Enikolopov et
al., 2017, Perez-Truglia and Cruces, Forthcoming). Moreover, these social image concerns matter
both in interactions with other people from the same social group (Bursztyn and Jensen, 2015) and
in interactions with strangers, such as surveyors and solicitors (DellaVigna et al., 2012, DellaVigna
et al., 2017). In particular, even individuals with very strongly-held political views might avoid
publicly expressing them if they believe their opinion is not popular in their social environment
(Bursztyn et al., 2016).
A recent literature has documented the persistence of cultural traits and norms over long periods
of time (Voigtländer and Voth, 2012, Fernandez, 2007, Giuliano, 2007, Algan and Cahuc, 2010,
Alesina, Giuliano, and Nunn, 2013). However, little is known about what factors might lead
long-standing social norms to change, or even more so, to change quickly. In this paper, we
argue that aggregators of private opinions in a society, such as elections, might lead to updates in
individuals’ perceptions of what people around them think, and thus induce fast changes in the
social acceptability of holding certain opinions and in the likelihood that these opinions are publicly
expressed.
Consider the support for the communist regime in the Soviet Union in the late 1980s. Kuran
(1991) argues that many individuals opposed the regime but believed others supported it. In that
environment, a referendum on the regime would have quickly updated people’s opinions about the
views of others. Incorrect beliefs about the opinions of others are not restricted to totalitarian
regimes, where expressing personal views is often risky. In fact, as we argue below, if most individuals assume that a specific opinion is stigmatized, the stigma might be sustained in equilibrium.1
In this paper, we formalize this idea and test it using experiments with real stakes. In our main
experiment, we show that Donald Trump’s rise in popularity and eventual victory during the 2016
U.S. presidential campaign causally increased individuals’ perception of the social acceptability of
holding strong anti-immigration (or xenophobic) views and their willingness to publicly express
them.
We present a simple model of strategic communication between individuals who can hold one
1

This phenomenon is known in social psychology as “pluralistic ignorance” (Katz and Allport, 1931), where
privately most people reject a view, but incorrectly believe that most other people accept it, and therefore end up
acting accordingly. For example, in 1968 most white Americans substantially over-estimated the support among
other whites for racial segregation (O’Gorman, 1975). A related concept is that of “preference falsification” (Kuran,
1995): people’s stated, public preferences are influenced by social acceptability, and might be different from their
true, private preference.

1

of the two mutually exclusive convictions (e.g., xenophobic and tolerant). Each sender delivers a
message (states his view) to a recipient, who in turn uses this message to make a Bayesian update
on the sender’s true conviction (e.g., whether or not the sender is xenophobic). In our setting, as
in DellaVigna et al. (2017), lying is costly, so messages have some credibility; at the same time,
citizens can pay this cost and lie, so communication need not be truthful. Importantly, the sender
has social image concerns: he values other people’s perception of his type. Thus, for example, if he
thinks most other people are tolerant, he might want to hide his xenophobic views and pay the cost
of lying; conversely, if he believes that most other people are xenophobic, he would not only feel
free to state such a view if he shares it, but may express xenophobia even if he is tolerant. Thus,
senders have incentives to ‘pander to the majority’. In the extreme cases we may have a ‘political
correctness’ equilibrium, wherein all senders state the same view regardless of their true conviction,
thus preventing learning about true convictions. Receivers are Bayesian, and their perception of a
sender of a message depends on the strategy that senders use. In the example above, if xenophobic
individuals say that they are tolerant because they believe that most are tolerant, then anyone who
expresses xenophobic opinions must indeed be xenophobic. At the same time, if most receivers
are believed to be xenophobic so that even some tolerant people express such views, then a person
stating xenophobic views is not necessarily a xenophobe, and thus will be judged less harshly by
tolerant people.
Our model predicts, in particular, that a positive update in beliefs about the share of xenophobes
in a society makes xenophobic messages more likely. Our framework thus illustrates how a shock to
the information possessed by individuals, such as an election where this particular issue (tolerance
vs. xenophobia) is salient, can rapidly change the social norm in communication behavior: what
was unacceptable and rarely, if ever, spoken, could become acceptable and normal in a matter of
weeks, if not days.
Quite interestingly, the logic of the paper suggests that information aggregation can make
an ‘extreme’ topic ‘mainstream’, but not the other way around: such a shock cannot make a
mainstream topic extreme. This is easy to see: if a topic is mainstream and socially acceptable,
individuals know how widely and by whom each opinion is shared, in which case information
aggregation is unlikely to reveal new information. Of course, if underlying fundamentals change –
for example, more people become radicalized, or people become more judgmental of others – then
a certain viewpoint could move from mainstream to extreme. However, since this involves changes
in fundamentals, this is likely to be a slow and gradual process.
We test the model on both the senders’ and recipients’ sides using real-stakes experiments on
Amazon Mechanical Turk (MTurk) based on two recent votes. On the sender’s side, we focus on the
2016 U.S. presidential election. Throughout his campaign, Donald Trump proposed, among other
things, the construction of a wall separating the US and Mexico and a ban on Muslims from entering
the U.S. His popularity might thus send an informative signal to the population about the number

2

of people who sympathize with these proposals and thus about those who hold xenophobic views.
As the experimental evidence we provide suggests, this signal is likely leading to a positive update
in beliefs about the share of xenophobes in the country. As a result, Donald Trump’s electoral
success potentially caused a shift in social norms regarding expressed views on immigrants.
More specifically, in the two weeks before the election which took place on November 8, 2016,
participants were offered a bonus cash reward if they authorized the researchers to make a donation
to a strongly anti-immigration organization on their behalf. Accepting the offer is therefore a
profitable xenophobic action. At baseline, participants who randomly expected their decision to
be potentially observed by and discussed with a surveyor in a future interaction (the “public”
condition) were significantly more likely to forgo the donation bonus payment than those who
expected their choice to be entirely anonymous (the “private” condition). This suggests the presence
of social stigma associated with the action. Before making the donation decision, a random subset of
participants received information that positively updated their perceptions of Trump’s popularity
in their home state on the eve of the election. We first show that this information positively
updates their beliefs about the local popularity of holding xenophobic views. We then show that,
for these participants, the wedge in the likelihood of undertaking the xenophobic action in private
and public disappeared. This difference with respect to the baseline condition was driven entirely
by an increase in the donation rate in the public condition, with no change in the private condition.
We also exploited the “natural experiment” of Trump’s unexpected victory as an alternative
“treatment” that could generate increases in the willingness to publicly express xenophobic views.
We replicate the experimental intervention shortly after the election, restricting the design to
the baseline condition with no initial information on Trump’s popularity. We find that after the
election, the wedge between private and public donation rates disappeared, even in the absence of
the experimental information intervention. Again, this difference was entirely driven by an increase
in the public donation rate; the private donation rate remained unchanged from the pre-election
survey. Our results suggest that Donald Trump’s rise in popularity did not casually make these
participants more xenophobic, but instead made the already more-intolerant ones more comfortable
about publicly expressing their views. We also discuss suggestive evidence of the precise mechanisms
driving our findings.
A second, auxiliary experiment studies the receiver’s side. We exploit the general lack of
knowledge among MTurk users in Democrat-leaning U.S. states about the 2009 Swiss referendum
that banned the construction of minarets in that country. We consider this an ideal setting for
two reasons. First, the topic of the referendum was closely aligned to that of our main experiment.
Second, the fact that most participants were unaware not only of the ban, but also of the fact that
the majority of the Swiss population supported it, allows us to manipulate their beliefs about the
public support for the ban.
After stating their personal views on whether the construction of minarets should be banned,

3

participants played a dictator game with a real, anonymous Swiss person. We randomize what
information was given about the Swiss person to evaluate via revealed preference how different
information affected the participant’s opinion of that person. We focus on participants who reported
being against banning the construction of minarets. In the first treatment group, individuals who
were randomly told that the Swiss person is in favor of the ban significantly reduced their donation
levels in the dictator game, when compared to a control group where that piece of information was
not provided. In the second treatment group, participants were additionally informed that 57%
of Swiss respondents also supported the ban, which positively updated participants’ priors about
the share of Swiss individuals in support of the ban. Note that this was the actual support level
for the ban in the 2009 referendum. Thus, when informed that the Swiss person is surrounded by
other people who support the ban, participants judged that person less negatively for expressing
that view, understanding that he might have done so to pander to the majority: donation amounts
went up significantly compared to the first treatment group.
A potential alternative interpretation is that participants judge the Swiss person less negatively
for holding his opinion when the majority of Swiss support the ban, regardless of whether his support
was expressed in public. For example, it could be that participants feel that they cannot blame a
person for privately holding a view if that person is surrounded by many other people who also
hold that view and who could also have influenced the private opinions of that person. To directly
rule out this alternative interpretation and confirm that our findings are driven by the anticipation
by participants that the Swiss person might have had strategic reasons to publicly express an
intolerant view, we also ran an additional experiment emphasizing that the Swiss person’s opinion
was expressed anonymously. In that treatment, informing participants of a higher level of public
support for the ban in Switzerland does not increase donation amounts.
Our results suggest that Trump’s rise in popularity and eventual electoral victory might have
already casually changed social norms regarding the expression of xenophobic views in the U.S.
Though we detect no changes in privately-held views, we believe the findings on public expression
are of great policy relevance. For example, increases in public expression of anti-foreign sentiment
might also lead to more frequent acts of hate crime against foreign minorities. Indeed, recent
reports indicate a steep increase in the number of hate crimes against these groups throughout the
campaign period, and especially after Donald Trump’s election. For example, a recent report by the
Center for the Study of Hate and Extremism indicates that across eight major metropolitan areas
in the U.S., the number of hate crimes increased by more than 20% in 2016 (CSBS, 2017). This
increase is significantly larger in both absolute and relative terms than any year-to-year increase in
hate crimes in these cities since 2010. Increases in public expression of hate against some minorities
might also spur increases in expression of hate against other minorities. For example, the same
report shows that hate crimes against blacks and Jews in New York City also increased substantially
between March 2016 and March 2017. More common public expression of certain views might also

4

facilitate coordination for large-scale actions, such as demonstrations and movements, and recent
work has provided evidence that such demonstrations and movements might affect many important
outcomes, from election results (Madestam et al., 2013) to the stock market valuation of different
firms (Acemoglu et al., Forthcoming). In addition, reductions in the stigma associated with holding
previously-extreme views might lead to shifts in the language used in and reported by the popular
media, and might also reduce the stigma associated with consuming and discussing certain news
sources on the far side of the political spectrum. For example, the news website Breitbart has
more than doubled its share of general news audience between the end of 2014 and July 2016,
reaching 9% of the market – 18 million visitors – that month.2 Increases in public expression of
such views can thus lead to increases in individuals’ overall exposure to them, and more exposure
might eventually lead to changes in privately-held views, via persuasion or simple conformism.
Our results contribute to a growing literature that examines the impacts of political institutions
on social norms and culture more generally. This literature typically studies the long-run impact
of political institutions (e.g., Lowes et al., 2016); here we show that changes on the political side
can lead to fast reversals in social norms. Our paper also adds to a recent theoretical literature
on social norms (e.g., Bénabou and Tirole, 2011, and Acemoglu and Jackson, Forthcoming) by
studying how new information may lead to the unraveling of such norms. Our findings speak
to a cross-disciplinary literature on the consequences of political action, both theoretical (e.g.,
Lohmann, 1993) and empirical (e.g., Madestam et al., 2013). Methodologically, this paper also
relates to a literature on the measurement of sensitive attitudes, which includes approaches such
as the “randomized response technique” (Warner, 1965), the “list experiment” (Raghavarao et al.,
1979), the “endorsement experiment” (Sniderman, 1993), and the “lost letter technique” (Milgram,
1977). In our study, the private donation decision provides a measure based on revealed preference,
and where concerns about social desirability are minimized due to anonymity. Conceptually, our
main experiment is novel since it exploits both experimental and natural occurring variation as two
alternative approaches. Randomized informational interventions are often subject to the criticism
of not being entirely natural, while before/after designs based on natural variation suffer from
lack of true randomization. In our setting, the two approaches yielded very similar results, which
provides extra assurance of the validity of our tests of the model.
Theoretically, the two most important precursors to our paper are Bernheim (1994) and Morris
(2001). Bernheim (1994) studies the behavior of individuals with social concerns and predicts the
emergence of social norms. People with similar preferences will adhere strictly to such norms,
while people with extreme tastes will choose not to do so. The possibility of complete pooling
and the resulting non-transmission of information is suggested in Morris (2001), where an advisor
who is afraid of being perceived as biased ultimately avoids giving advice in all states of the
world. Our model can be viewed as combining and simplifying the two approaches to get a model
2

See https://fivethirtyeight.com/features/trump-made-breitbart-great-again/.

5

with straightforward comparative statics results that highlight the role of individual beliefs and
information shocks. One can loosely view the model as adapting the binary message structure of
Morris (2001) to the social communication setting of Bernheim (1994).
Our work also relates to existing papers studying the economic consequences of conformity.
Prendergast (1993) identifies rational incentives for managers to conform to supervisors’ opinions in
order to appear competent, which in turn hampers information transmission. Andreoni et al. (2016)
study ‘conformity traps,’ situations where groups of individuals fail to coordinate on a beneficial
action due to individual incentives to conform to the predominant and inefficient behavior. In a
laboratory experiment they find, in particular, that opinion polls can facilitate changes of norms
that benefit the group. Their setting, however, is one of full information, and thus opinion polls
facilitate switching from one equilibrium to another. Our model has incomplete information and
features a unique equilibrium, and elections can change the beliefs about the distribution of other
people’s opinions (though we do not take a position on whether overcoming conformity is necessarily
socially beneficial). In a different setting, Kets and Sandroni (2015) study the trade-off between
the performance of conforming versus diverse groups of individuals.
The remainder of this paper proceeds as follows. We introduce a simple framework formalizing
our argument in Section 2. In Section 3, we present the design and results from the main experiment
studying the 2016 U.S. presidential elections. In Section 4, we present the design and results from
the auxiliary dictator game experiment. Section 5 concludes.

2

Theoretical Framework

2.1

A model of communication

There is a continuum of citizens.3 Citizens can hold one of two mutually exclusive convictions, A
or B; we sometimes call it their type and write ti ∈ {A, B} for citizen i. (One can think of these as
‘beliefs’ in colloquial sense, but we reserve the word ‘beliefs’ for the game-theoretical notion.) The
share of citizens holding conviction A is p, so Pr (ti = A) = p. We do not assume that p is known,
and instead allow citizens to hold an incorrect belief about the share of citizens with conviction A,
which we denote by q. To avoid dealing with higher-order beliefs, we assume that q is common
knowledge.
The citizens are paired with one another; within each pair, there is a sender i and recipient
j. Sender i sends message mi , and we assume that the message space is binary, so message
mi ∈ {A, B}. Sending a message mi may involve the following costs for citizen i. First, sending
a message mi 6= ti incurs a cost of lying li ; this cost is assumed to be distributed uniformly on
[0, 1] (this can be thought of as normalization), and independently of ti (i.e., citizens holding either
3

We could instead assume communication between two individuals. The results would not change at all.

6

conviction are equally averse to lying).4 Second, the sender bears a cost proportional (with intensity
factor denoted by a) to his belief that the recipient does not approve his type. Consequently, the
expected utility of a citizen i with two-dimensional type (ti , li ) from sending message mi to recipient
j is given by
Ui (mi ) = −li I{mi 6=ti } + aq Prj (ti = A | mi ) + a (1 − q) (1 − Prj (ti = A | mi )) ,

(1)

where Prj (ti = A | mi ) is the recipient’s posterior that the sender is type A conditional on the
message he sent, mi .
In this game, we are interested in Perfect Bayesian Equilibria, which furthermore satisfy the
D1 criterion (Cho and Kreps, 1987).

2.2

Analysis

We start our analysis with the case q > 12 , which means that types ti = A are perceived to be more
numerous. Then senders with the same type ti = A communicate truthfully. Indeed, by sending
message mi = B they would incur the cost of lying and furthermore make the receiver’s opinion
about them worse, on average.5 For senders of type ti = B, there is a cutoff z, so that those with
li < z send message mi = A (i.e., they lie if it is not too costly) and those with li > z send mi = B.
As a result, recipient j who got message mi = A believes that the sender is ti = A with probability
Prj (ti = A | mi = A) =

q
q + (1 − q) z

and a recipient who got message mi = B believes that the sender is type ti = B for sure, so
Prj (ti = A | mi = B) = 0.
This implies that for a sender with type (ti = B, li ), sending message mi = A results in expected
utility
Ui (mi = A) = aq

(1 − q) z
q
+ a (1 − q)
− li ,
q + (1 − q) z
q + (1 − q) z

whereas sending message mi = B results in expected utility
Ui (mi = B) = a (1 − q) .
4

Thus, in our model, communication is not ‘cheap talk’, as in Crawford and Sobel (1982). See Kartik, Ottaviani,
and Squintani (2007) and Kartik (2009) for models of strategic communication with lying costs in an uninformed
principal – informed agent framework.
5
This argument implicitly uses the fact that types t = A are relatively more likely to send message m = A than
types t = B. We formally prove that this holds in every equilibrium in the Supplemental Appendix. Intuitively, this
follows from the presence of costs of lying, which make the two messages asymmetric.

7

(Because only recipients of type B will approve of him). The sender with type (ti = B, li = z) is
indifferent if and only if
aq

q
(1 − q) z
+ a (1 − q)
− z = a (1 − q) ,
q + (1 − q) z
q + (1 − q) z

or, equivalently,
− (1 − q) z 2 − qz + aq (2q − 1) = 0.
The left-hand side is positive at z = 0 and equals aq (2q − 1) − 1 at z = 1. Thus, if aq (2q − 1) ≥ 1,
then (almost) everyone sends message mi = A. If aq (2q − 1) < 1, then there is a unique interior
solution, given by
s 
2
q
q
1
(2q − 1) q
z=
−
.
+a
4 1−q
1−q
2 (1 − q)
If q <

1
2,

(2)

the analysis is similar; the difference is that all types with ti = B communicate

truthfully, whereas at least some types with ti = A (those with lowest cost of lying) send message
mi = B. More precisely, if a (1 − q) (1 − 2q) ≥ 1, then everyone sends mi = B, and otherwise the
cutoff of citizens with ti = A is given by
s 

1 1−q 2
1−q 1−q
z̃ =
+ a (1 − 2q)
−
.
4
q
q
2q

(3)

Lastly, if q = 12 , then everyone communicates truthfully. We summarize these results in the following
proposition.
Proposition 1. Denote v =
(i) If q ≤

√

1
2

2
.
a2 +8a+a

There is a unique equilibrium, taking the following form.

− v, then every sender sends message mi = B.

(ii) If q ∈ 12 − v, 12 then citizens with conviction B send message B for sure, while citizens

with conviction A send message B iff their costs of lying li < z̃, where z̃ ∈ (0, 1) is given by (3),
and send message A otherwise.
(iii) If q = 21 , then every sender sends message mi = ti , i.e., communicates truthfully.

(iv) If q ∈ 12 , 12 + v , then citizens with conviction A send message A for sure, while citizens
with conviction B send message A iff their costs of lying li < z, where z ∈ (0, 1) is given by (2),
and send message B otherwise.
(v) If q ≥

1
2

+ v, then every sender sends message mi = A

Thus, if q =

1
2

(case iii), then everyone would communicate truthfully regardless of a. If a is

high enough (a > 1) and q is close to 0 or 1 (cases i and v), then the equilibrium takes the ‘political
correctness’ form, where all senders communicate the message that a majority of receivers would
prefer. The requirement a > 1 reflects that the sender’s concern about the receiver’s opinions has to
8

be strong enough to overcome even the highest cost of lying. For intermediate values of q, citizens
who have a low cost of lying pander to the majority, but those who have high cost of lying do not.
Even if the equilibrium is not fully of the ‘political correctness’ form, communication depends
on the beliefs that citizens have as well as their sensitivity to the opinion of others. The cutoffs (2)
and (3) are both increasing in a, meaning that if senders are more concerned with the receiver’s
opinion, they are more likely to send a message preferred by a majority of receivers. Furthermore,
(2) is increasing in q, provided that q > 21 . This happens for two reasons. First, a higher q makes
it more likely that the recipient is of type A, which makes the sender even more willing to send
message A. Second, and more subtly, a higher q increases the receiver’s prior that the sender is
type A, which means that the drop in his opinion about the sender who discloses his conviction B
is now higher, and the sender’s chance to ‘pass’ as type A if he sends message A is also higher. The
cutoff (3) is decreasing in q for similar reasons, which again implies that the share of senders who
send A is increasing in q even if q < 21 . Of course, a higher objective number of citizens of type
A, p, also increases the share of senders sending A: while this does not change the strategy of an
individual sender, this is true since citizens with conviction A are relatively more likely to send A.
We summarize these comparative statics results in the following proposition.
Proposition 2. Suppose that q ∈

1
2


− v, 21 + v , so in the unique equilibrium both messages are

sent with positive probabilities. Then:
(i) An increase in p, the objective share of citizens with conviction A, leads to more senders
sending message A;
(ii) An increase in q, the citizens’ belief about the share of those with conviction A, also leads
to more senders sending message A.
(iii) An increase in a leads to more senders sending message A if q >
sending message B
More generally,

if q < 21 .
for q < 12

There is no effect if q =
− v or q >

1
2

1
2

and to more senders

1
2.

+ v, these results hold in a weak sense.

Proposition 2 describes the effect of parameters on the behavior of senders. We are also interested in their effect on the receiver’s beliefs about the sender following the receipt of either
message. To understand these effects, suppose that q >

1
2.

Then after receiving message B, the

receiver is certain that the sender was of type B, so Prj (ti = A | mi = B) = 0. At the same time,
as argued above, after receiving message A, the receiver’s posterior probability that the sender is
of type A equals Prj (ti = A | mi = A) =

q
q+(1−q)z .

Since z is increasing in a, this posterior belief

is decreasing in a. This is natural: if a is higher, more citizens of type B misrepresent themselves
by sending message mi = A, thus making at less likely that a random sender of message A is truly
type A. Now consider the comparative statics with respect to q. Here, there are two effects. First,
the cutoff z is increasing in q, thus making it harder to be sure that a sender with message A
is indeed type A. But, on the other hand, a higher q implies an overall higher share of citizens
9

with type A (as perceived by the receiver), which implies a higher prior they have on sender being
type A, which, all things equal, would imply a higher posterior. These two effects contribute to a
non-monotone overall effect: the posterior Prj (ti = A | mi = A) is highest (equal to 1) at q = 12
q
and q = 1, and otherwise it is U-shaped, with the minimum attained at q = 12 ≈ 0.71. We thus
have the following result.
Proposition 3. Suppose again that both messages are sent with positive probabilities. Then the posterior of a receiver j that the sender who sent message mi = A is indeedqti = A, Prj (ti = A | mi = A),


is constant and equal to 1 for q < 12 , decreases in q when q ∈ 21 , 12 and increases back to 1
q

1
when q ∈
,
1
. This posterior always exceeds 21 and is decreasing in a if q > 12 . It does not
2
depend on the objective share of citizens with type A, p.
In other words, the receiver’s posterior that the sender who sent message mi = A is indeed
type ti = A evolves as follows. If conviction A is shared only by a minority (q < 21 ), then message
mi = A is taken at face value, as only ti = A would send it. As the share of citizens with conviction
A becomes a majority, receivers would recognize that this message could be sent for strategic reason
and this
qwould decrease Prj (ti = A | mi = A) down from 1. However, at some point (specifically,
at q = 12 ), they would recognize that there are many citizens with type ti = A, and the posterior
would increase again, up to 1 as q tends to 1). Of course, a similar result applies with respect to
Prj (ti = A | mi = B), which we omit to save space.

2.3

Dynamics

Let us now consider a simple extension of the previous model that will enable us to study how
certain shocks to the underlying parameters affect communication strategies within the society,
as well as social learning. There may be multiple reasons for shocks: arrival of new information
that makes some people change their opinions, a speech by an influential politician or celebrity,
or others. Here, we consider elections as a particular case of a shock that aggregates convictions
and allows citizens to learn about members of their society that they do not directly communicate
with.6
Specifically, we consider a three-period model. In each of the periods, each citizen communicates
with a continuum of other citizens, and we assume that in these communications he is both the
sender and the receiver. Informally, we think about citizens adopting a certain ‘persona’ for the
whole period, and if what they learned during that period about the rest of the society suggests
it would be better to act differently, they can send different messages in the subsequent periods.
6

Political campaigns that precede elections may, of course, persuade people to change convictions about issues or
make some issues more salient than others. This may also change communication strategies in the society. Here, we
only focus on the moment of elections as the source of the information shock.

10

Formally, we assume that each citizen is matched with three disjoint continua of other citizens, and
in each of the periods, he sends a message to all other citizens matched to him in that period and
receives messages from all of them.7 Before period 1, the share of citizens having conviction A, i.e.,
p, is realized, and Nature instead sends a public noisy signal to all citizens, so citizens start period
1 with a common belief that the share of citizens with conviction A is q. They communicate in
period 1, update on p and communicate in period 2. Between periods 2 and 3, Nature reveals p
(e.g., through elections), after which the citizens have a final round of communication. Such timing
allows us to compare the social norms learned through strategic communication (period 2) and
the social norms learned through public information aggregation (period 3). We do not introduce
any discounting, but since each agent is infinitesimal and does not expect to change others’ beliefs
for the subsequent periods, each agent would communicate to maximize his static payoffs with or
without discounting.
We have the following result.
Proposition 4. Let again v =

√

2
.
a2 +8a+a

(i) If the initial signal q satisfies q ∈

Then:
1
2


− v, 12 + v , then each citizen sends the same message

in periods 2 and 3. In period 1, some act differently, unless p = q.

(ii) If the initial signal q satisfies q ∈
/ 12 − v, 12 + v , then each citizen sends the same message
in periods 1 and 2. They also act the same way in period 3 if p, q ≤

1
2

− v or p, q ≥

1
2

+ v, and

differently otherwise.
This result is mainly of interest if the original belief was wrong. If q is relatively close to 12 , then
both messages are sent with positive probabilities. Each citizen is then perfectly able to deduce p
from what they observe in period 1. Indeed, suppose, for the sake of the argument, that q ≥ 12 . In
this case, the share of messages A equals p + (1 − p) z, where z is given by (2). For the assumed
values of q, z < 1, and therefore p can be perfectly learned. Once this is the case, there is no
learning between periods 2 and 3, and therefore citizens act identically, knowing that the share of
citizens with conviction A is p and is common knowledge.
The pattern is very different if q is not close to

1
2

(and a > 1). In this case, all citizens, regardless

of their conviction, send the same message in period 1 in equilibrium (A if q is close to 1 and B
if q is close to 0). As a result, what each citizen observes does not depend on p, and therefore no
citizen makes any inference about p. The second period is then identical to the first one. However,
the true value of p is revealed before period 3, and this can potentially lead to a different behavior.
Namely, if q >
if p >

1
2

1
2

+ v, so all citizens were sending A in periods 1 and 2, then this will only continue

+ v as well, while if p ≤

1
2

+ v, then some (or, in the extreme case p ≤

7

1
2

− v, all) citizens

For example, suppose that citizens are randomly allocated in a unit cube with coordinates (x, y, z). In period 1,
citizen (x, y, z) communicates with citizens of the form (∗, y, z), in period 2, he does so with (x, ∗, z), and in period
3, he communicates with those of the form (x, y, ∗). Within a period, all citizens communicate simultaneously, so the
message that a citizen sends is not affected by what he receives in that period.

11

will start sending message B.
We thus observe the following. If the original citizens’ beliefs about their fellow citizens are
sufficiently moderate, the society is able to learn the true parameter through communication, and
elections do not reveal new information and therefore do not lead to a change in behavior. However,
if the original beliefs led the society to a ‘political correctness’ equilibrium, then there is no learning
in communication. In this case, elections can reveal new and surprising information, and thus can
lead to a discontinuous change in beliefs and behaviors.

2.4

Predictions

The model implies the following testable predictions.
(i) An increase in the citizens’ prior belief about the share of citizens having a certain conviction
also increases the likelihood that the corresponding message is sent.
(ii) The receiver’s posterior that the sender who sent a message indeed has the corresponding


conviction depends on this prior nonmonotonically. Namely, it equals 1 for priors on 0, 12 ∪

{1}, and it is U-shaped on 12 , 1 , while always exceeding 12 .
(iii) A shock that aggregates preferences in the society does not change individual behavior if the
society was not in a ‘political correctness’ equilibrium. If it was, then a shock may change
behavior.

3

Main Experiments: U.S. Presidential Elections

We developed two experiments with workers from the online platform MTurk. A number of recent
papers in economics have used the same platform to conduct surveys or experiments (e.g., Kuziemko
et al. 2015, Elias et al. 2016). The platform draws workers from very diverse backgrounds, though
it is not representative of the U.S. population as a whole.

3.1
3.1.1

Experimental Design
Intervention Before the Election

During the two weeks prior to the presidential election, we recruited participants (N = 458) from
the eight states in which the expected probability of Donald Trump’s victory at the state level
was 100%, according to the website Predictwise: Alabama, Arkansas, Idaho, Nebraska, Oklahoma,
Mississippi, West Virginia, and Wyoming. MTurk workers with at least 80% approval rate could see
our request, which was described as a “5 minute survey” with a reward of $0.50. Each worker could
participate in the survey only once. Workers who clicked on the request were displayed detailed

12

instructions about the task, and given access to links to the study information sheet and the actual
survey. The survey was conducted on the online platform Qualtrics.
After answering a number of demographic questions, half of the participants were randomly
informed about the 100% local odds from the website (information condition) while the other half
were not informed (control condition).8 Though restricting to these states might affect the external
validity of the findings, it also allows us not to worry about the role of heterogeneous priors (and
updates) in response to an informational treatment: the 100% forecast ensured that for this half
of the sample, the direction of the update in Trump’s perceived local popularity is either zero or
positive, but never negative.9
Participants were then all asked to predict to share of individuals in their state that agree with
a relatively strong anti-immigration statement:10
Both legal and illegal immigration should be drastically reduced because immigrants
undermine American culture and do not respect American values.
This provides a measure of the perceived local popularity of anti-immigrant sentiment.
In the next part of the intervention, we measured the perceived social acceptability of strong
anti-immigrant sentiment using a donation experiment with real stakes. Participants were first
told that they would be given the possibility to make a donation to a randomly drawn organization
that could either be anti- or pro-immigration, to ensure that participants would not associate
the experimenters with a specific political view. To maximize power and avoid direct deception,
the randomization was such that more than 90% of participants (N=428) would get assigned the
organization we were interested in: the Federation of American Immigration Reform. To make
sure participants were aware of the organization’s very strong anti-immigration stance, a few more
details about the organization and its founder were provided in the experiment:
8

See the survey scripts in the Supplemental Appendix.
Eliciting priors in the control group to assess the direction of the update would have been challenging since the
forecast information was available online. Therefore, asking the question before the donation decision could have
undone the treatment. Answers to the question if asked after the donation decision could have been affected by the
decision itself and by the private/public condition later assigned to the participant.
10
Here we describe the protocol of the experiment as it was registered on the AEA RCT registry with number
AEARCTR-0001752. As described in the registry, we planned to reach 400 individuals by November 7 – the day
before the election and thus conceptually the last day in which the survey could be done (also pre-registered as the
trial end date). In the piloting phase (on October 26 and 27,) we were able to recruit 184 participants. We thus
expected not to have any issue recruiting 400 more subjects in the eight days between October 31 and November 7,
given that in two days we were able to survey nearly half of that sample size. However, only 274 MTurk workers
selected themselves into the study during the registered trial dates. The number of active MTurk workers in these
states is lower than we had originally expected (and to our knowledge no estimates of the MTurk population in
those states exist), which made it difficult to recruit enough participants before the election. In order to reach the
desired (and registered) sample size, we decided to include individuals who participated in the pilot experiment
conducted before the registration with nearly identical versions of the protocol. In particular, both the wording of
the informational treatment and the wording of the donation decision were completely unchanged. If we restrict the
analysis to the 274 subjects who followed the registered protocol, results are directionally similar, as discussed in
Subsection 3.3.
9

13

The Federation for American Immigration Reform (FAIR) is an immigration-reduction
organization of concerned individuals who believe that immigration laws must be reformed, and seeks to reduce overall immigration (both legal and illegal) into the United
States. The founder of FAIR is John Tanton, author of ‘The Immigration Invasion’ who
wrote “I’ve come to the point of view that for European-American society and culture
to persist requires a European-American majority, and a clear one at that.”
Participants were then asked if they would like to authorize the researchers donate $1 to that
organization on their behalf. The money would not come from the subject’s $0.50 payment for
participation in the study. Moreover, the participant would also be paid an extra $1 (or about 1/6
of an hourly wage on MTurk) if he/she authorized the donation. Rejecting the donation would not
affect the monetary payoffs to the participants in any way other than through the loss of this extra
amount.
In addition to the original randomization of informing subjects about Trump’s probability
of victory in the participant’s state, we introduced a second layer of cross-randomization at the
donation stage. Half of the participants were assured that their donation authorization would be
kept completely anonymous, and that no one, not even the researchers would be able to match their
decision to their name: we refer to this condition as the Private condition. Specifically, participants
were told:
Note: just like any other answer to this survey, also your donation decision will be
completely anonymous. No one, not even the researchers, will be able to match your
decision to your name.
The other half of the subjects were instead informed, right before the donation question was
displayed to them, that they might be personally contacted by the research team to verify their
answers to the questions in the remaining part of the survey: this is what we refer to as the Public
condition.
Important: in order to ensure the quality of the data collected, a member of the research
team might personally contact you to verify your answers to the next question and
the following ones.
Names and contact information were not collected during the intervention, since the practice
is not allowed on MTurk. As a result, it was not possible to credibly lead participants to believe
that their decision would be observed by other individuals, for example, from their state. However,
on MTurk it is possible to contact participants individually on the platform via their worker ID.
We were therefore able to minimize the use of deception since the decision was anonymous yet researchers could still potentially contact participants (moreover, participants in the public condition
14

might have believed that they would be asked for personal information in case they were contacted
later on). As mentioned before, social acceptability with respect to surveyors and solicitors is also
informative to the study of social pressure and social image concerns, as examined in DellaVigna
et al. (2014) and DellaVigna et al. (2017).
3.1.2

Intervention After the Election

We also exploited the natural experiment of Trump’s unexpected victory as an alternative “treatment” potentially leading to an increase in the social acceptability of holding xenophobic views. We
repeated the experimental intervention in the same states during the first week after the election,
restricting the design to the control condition with no additional initial information on Trump’s
popularity. We recruited both subjects who had participated before the election (N = 168; 166 of
them assigned to the anti-immigration organization) and new participants (N = 218; 215 assigned
to that organization). Based on naturally occurring variation, we can assess the impact of Trump’s
electoral victory on the perceived social acceptability of xenophobia.

3.2

Linking the Experiment to the Theoretical Framework

In what follows, we assume that A is the xenophobic conviction, while B is the opposite (tolerant)
one. In the main experiment, the communication is between the subject (the sender ) and the
researcher (the receiver ). Moreover, q here corresponds to the sender’s beliefs about the share of
xenophobes in the country. We consider two treatments that test the effect of manipulating q on the
likelihood that a xenophobic message is sent, thus testing the comparative static result associated
with q from Proposition 2:
• Treatment 1: the researchers communicate to the subject that Trump is winning for sure in
their state.
• Treatment 2: Trump wins the election.
Note that though both treatments increase q, their effect might operate through different channels. In particular, since Treatment 1 provides information about the area where the sender lives,
the effect is likely operating through the sender updating his beliefs about what the receiver thinks
of him in the absence or in the presence of a xenophobic message being communicated. On the
other hand, since Treatment 2 provides information at the country level, it might also lead to an
update in the sender’s priors on whether the receiver is a xenophobe. In our discussion of results,
we provide suggestive evidence consistent with these hypotheses.

15

3.3

Main Results

Appendix Table A.1 provides evidence that individual characteristics are balanced across all four
pre-election experimental conditions, confirming that the randomization was successful. The first
four columns of Figure 1 display our main findings from the pre-election experiment. In the control
condition before the election, we observe a large and statistically significant wedge between donation rates in private and in public: a drop from 54% in private to 34% in public (the p-value of a
t test of equality is 0.002). Among individuals in the information condition, we observe no difference in private and public donation rates, which are 47% and 46%, respectively (p-value=0.839).
Moreover, we find no significant difference in private donation rates between the information and
control conditions (p-value=0.280), suggesting that the information is not increasing privately-held
xenophobia. The increase in public donation rates between the two conditions is statistically significant (p-value=0.089), as is the difference in differences between donation rates in private across
conditions and donation rates in public across conditions (p-value=0.050). These results indicate
that the information provided causally increased the social acceptability of the action to the point
of eliminating the original social stigma associated with it. The first two columns of Table 1 display
the difference in differences results in regression format and show that our results are unchanged
when individual covariates are included. The table also displays p-values from permutation tests,
showing that our findings are robust to that inference method.
As an additional way of examining the effect of Trump’s increased popularity on public expression of the xenophobic action, we compare the private and public donation rates in the control
condition before and after the election. In the last two columns of Figure 1, we analyze the actions
of respondents who participated in both waves of the experiment. Though we focus on a subset of
the original participants, we find no evidence of selective attrition, and the samples in the different
conditions (before and after) are again well balanced (see Appendix Table A.2). In private, we
again observe no increase in donation rates (54% before the election and 49% after the election,
p-value=0.440). In public, we observe a significant increase from 34% before the election to 48%
after it (p-value=0.060). The difference in differences between donation rates in private before and
after the election and donation rates in public before and after the election in the control condition
is also statistically significant (p-value=0.062). It is worth emphasizing that the donation rates
following the two different “treatments” (either experimental or natural) are extremely similar:
47% vs. 49% in private, and 46% vs. 48% in public. The last two columns of Table 1 display the
results in regression format, and again confirm that the findings are robust to using permutation
tests. Our results are also robust to different samples for the post-election experiment, such as also
including new participants, as displayed in Appendix Table A.3.11
11

If we restrict the analysis to the 274 subjects who followed the registered protocol results are directionally similar:
raw donation rates are respectively, for the the private and public groups, 54% and 35% in the control condition before
the election, 50% and 39% in the information condition before the election, and 39% and 45% in the control condition

16

3.4
3.4.1

Discussion
Potential Mechanisms

In the experimental intervention before the election, the information provided to participants generated a positive (or null) update in their beliefs about Trump’s local popularity. Although this
might have also updated a participant’s belief regarding whether the surveyor is a xenophobe, we
believe that the main effect of the information shock was to update a participant’s belief about
the surveyor’s priors about the share of xenophobes around the participant. While we don’t have
a direct measure of this belief about the surveyor’s prior, we elicited the update in participants’
beliefs about the share of xenophobes in their home state – a good proxy for the other variable. For
the proxy to be valid, we need the update in participants’ beliefs about the share of xenophobes
in their state to go in the same direction as the update in their beliefs about the surveyor’s beliefs
about that same share. We believe this a reasonable assumption.
Figure 2 provides evidence that the information shock led to a positive update in beliefs about
the opinions about other individuals in the same state. In the control condition before the election,
the average guess was that 64% of other people in the participant’s home state would agree with the
xenophobic statement, while it was 68% in the information condition (p-value=0.062). This small
increase in the average guess might not fully display the impact that the information intervention
had on the distribution of beliefs about others. The distribution in the information condition firstorder stochastically dominates the distribution in the control condition (a Kolmogorov-Smirnov
test of equality of the two distributions yields a p-value of 0.072). For example, the percentage
of participants who think that the share of those agreeing with the xenophobic statement in their
state is above 90% increases substantially with the provision of information (from 9% to 17%, with
a p-value of 0.018).
When we analyze the effects of Trump’s actual victory on the social stigma associated with
the donation decision, it is less clear ex ante that an update in respondents’ beliefs about the
surveyor’s priors regarding the share of xenophobes in the respondents’ state would the main
driver of the findings. After the election, the surveyor is not directly providing any information
that would necessarily lead to an unambiguously weakly positive update in perceptions of Trump’s
local popularity. For example, participants might now believe that Trump’s actual margin of
victory in their state might was smaller than what the surveyor had originally expected. Indeed,
when comparing the pre-election control group with the group after the election, we find no shift in
the distribution of beliefs about the share of xenophobes in participants’ home states (see Appendix
after the election. As with the full sample, the wedge between the public and private condition is significant in the
control condition before the election (p-value 0.018), and not significant in the information condition (p-value 0.219),
or after the election (p-value 0.607). The difference in differences between donation rates in private across conditions
and donation rates in public across conditions is smaller than in the full sample and not significant before the election
(8.4%, p-value 0.486), but large and significant after the election (24.9%, p-value 0.068).

17

Figure A.1). However, there is an unambiguously weakly positive update in participants’ perception
of Trump’s national popularity. According to our model, this will increase the probability that
participants: (i) think that the surveyor is xenophobic, and (ii) think that the surveyor will judge
them less negatively even if the researcher is not xenophobic. Hence, although we do not provide
direct evidence of these mechanisms, the nature of the intervention suggests that these two elements
are the likely drivers of the findings in the comparison of pre- and post-election donation rates.
3.4.2

Further Interpreting the Findings

Although the effects we find are extremely large, it is important to note that they are coming
from a marginal positive signal of Trump’s local popularity starting from a situation where he
was already believed to be extremely popular locally. Even in the control condition, the average
individual believes that 64% of people in his/her state agree with the xenophobic statement, and
34% of participants make the donation in public. Though we cannot test this hypothesis, perhaps
an increase in the perceived popularity of holding xenophobic views and a reduction of the related
social stigma might have already taken place throughout the presidential campaign, before the
experiment took place. It is also possible that the statement we chose might have been perceived as
relatively mild toward the end of the campaign period, so the small update in beliefs about the views
of others regarding the chosen statement could correspond to larger updates for a more extreme
statement. Of course, we cannot estimate how large the effects of our experiment would have been
had the baseline level of Trump’s perceived local popularity been lower (as in the beginning of the
campaign season) and thus the effect of the signal possibly stronger.
Finally, we can rule out that our main effect is coming from participants updating their beliefs
about the instrumental benefits associated with donating to the organization (for example, because
the organization is now more likely to fulfill its mission). Any effect explained by that factor would
have showed up in the private donation rates too.

4

Auxiliary Experiment: Dictator Game

4.1
4.1.1

Experimental Design
Wave 1 – Non-Anonymous Behavior by the Swiss Player

In late February 2017, we recruited participants from the six states in which Hillary Clinton won
the presidential election with the highest margin: California, Hawaii, Maryland, Massachusetts,
New York, and Vermont. This was done to maximize the chances of recruiting subjects with liberal
views, and in particular subjects with no anti-Muslim sentiment.12
12
As in the main experiment, Turk workers with at least 80% approval rate could see our request, which in this case
was described as a “4-5 minutes short survey” with a reward of $0.50. Each worker could participate in the survey

18

First, after answering a number of demographic questions, all participants were explained that a
minaret is a tower typically built adjacent to a mosque and traditionally used for the Muslim call to
prayer. Second, they were asked whether they would support the introduction of a law prohibiting
the building of minarets in their state. We focus on subjects who reported to be against the
introduction of this law (N = 396), and we examine how they interact with a person who has
opposite views. In order to do so, in the third part of the survey, participants were told they were
matched with a subject from another survey and were asked to play a dictator game in which
they could decide how to split $3 (half of an hourly wage on the platform) between themselves
and the other participant. We randomly assigned our participants to three different groups and
randomized the background information we gave to our participants about the person they were
matched with. Participants in the control group were only told that the participant they were
matched with was a 24-year-old male from Switzerland. Note that we used real 24-year-old male
subjects from Switzerland recruited to take part of a short survey by a research assistant from the
University of Zurich.
Participants in the anti-minarets group were additionally told that this person supports the
prohibition of the building of minarets in Switzerland. Participants in the anti-minarets, public
support group were instead told that “like 57.5% of Swiss respondents, the participant supports
the prohibition of the building of minarets in Switzerland.”
4.1.2

Wave 2 – Anonymous Behavior by the Swiss Player

If we find higher donations in the Anti-minarets, public support group, when compared to the antiminarets, we can conclude that the participants may believe that the Swiss person has strategic
reasons to state that he is anti-minarets, and for this reason judge him less for expressing that view.
However, a potential alternative interpretation for this result is that participants might judge the
Swiss person less negatively when the majority of Swiss support the ban, regardless of whether his
support was expressed in public. For example, it could be that participants feel that they cannot
blame a person for privately holding a view if that person is surrounded by many other people who
also hold that view and who could also have influenced the private opinions of that person.
To explicitly rule out this possibility, we conducted a slightly modified version of our protocol on
the days immediately following the first wave of the dictator game experiment. In the second wave,
participants were informed about the fact that the 24-year-old male from Switzerland expressed his
opinion in an anonymous survey. As in the original version, we recruited participants from the six
states in which Hillary Clinton won the presidential election with the highest margin (California,
Hawaii, Maryland, Massachusetts, New York, and Vermont). To make sure we could recruit enough
only once. Workers who clicked on the request were displayed detailed instructions about the task, and given access
to links to the study information sheet and the actual survey. The survey was conducted on the online platform
Qualtrics. The script used in this auxiliary experiment is displayed in the Supplemental Appendix.

19

participants, we also included six other states with a high share of votes for Clinton (Connecticut,
Delaware, Illinois, New Jersey, Rhode Island, and Washington).13
The design of this experiment was almost identical to the original version. Once again, we
focus on subjects who reported to be against the introduction of the ban (N = 427). The main
difference with the original version, is that we emphasized how the Swiss participant expressed
his opinion anonymously. Instead of writing as before that “we matched you with a participant
from another survey”, in this version we wrote “we matched you with a participant from another
anonymous survey.” In our treatment groups we emphasized once again that the survey the Swiss
participants participated in was anonymous: “In our anonymous survey, like the one you just
completed, he said he supports the prohibition of the building of minarets in Switzerland.” We call
this first treatment group the anonymous anti-minarets group. Finally, instead of writing “like
57.5% of Swiss respondents, the participant supports the prohibition of the building of minarets in
Switzerland” in this case we wrote “According to numbers from 2009, 57.5% of Swiss respondents
are in favor of prohibiting the building of minarets.” We call this second treatment group the
anonymous anti-minarets, public support group.14
4.1.3

Elicitation of Beliefs

At the end of the intervention, subjects in the control group were also asked about their beliefs
regarding the share of the Swiss population who supports banning the construction of minarets,
and whether they believed the ban is legal in Switzerland. In the first wave we did not collect
this information for individuals in the anti-minarets and anti-minarets public support groups. To
check whether their beliefs about the share of the Swiss population supporting the ban are not
changed by the treatments, we included both the control group and the treatment groups in the
second wave. The share thinking that a majority of Swiss support the ban is almost identical in
the control group and the anti-minarets group (respectively 20 and 25%, with a p-value for the
13

As in the other two experiments, Turk workers with at least 80% approval rate could see our request, which in
this case was described as a “4-5 minutes short survey” with a reward of $0.50. Each worker could participate in the
survey only once, and only if she did not participate in our other experiment. Workers who clicked on the request
were displayed detailed instructions about the task, and given access to links to the study information sheet and the
actual survey. The survey was conducted on the online platform Qualtrics. The script used in this second wave of
the auxiliary experiment is displayed in the Supplemental Appendix.
14
Our design also included a fourth group (N=136 in wave 1, and N=139 in wave 2), where participants were instead
told: “Building minarets is illegal in Switzerland, following a 2009 referendum. Like 57.5% of Swiss respondents,
the participant supports the prohibition of the building of minarets in Switzerland. However, he did not vote in
the referendum since he was under legal voting age” in wave 1, and “In our anonymous survey, like the one you
just completed, he said he supports the prohibition of the building of minarets in Switzerland. Building minarets is
illegal in Switzerland, following a 2009 referendum. According to numbers from 2009, 57.5% of Swiss respondents
are in favor of prohibiting the building of minarets. However, the person you are matched with did not vote in the
referendum since he was under legal voting age” in wave 2. This treatment was intended to test whether providing
information that a view is not only held by a majority but is also official would additionally change the donation
rates. We found no effect of this additional treatment relative to the second treatment group. We report these results
in Appendix Figures A.2 and A.3.

20

test of equality of 0.301), but increases to 63% in the anti-minarets public support group (p-values
of the test of equality are 0.000 against both groups). The median belief about the share of the
Swiss population supporting the ban is 30% in both control and anti-minarets groups, and 55% in
the anti-minarets public support group. This confirms that our experimental manipulation indeed
shifted beliefs about the level of popular support for the ban in Switzerland.15
Participants across conditions were also asked whether they believed the construction of minarets
is legal in Switzerland: across the three groups, the majority reported to think that constructing
minarets was legal (88% in the control group, 77% in the anti-minarets group, and 74% in the
anti-minarets public support group).16 We can thus rule out that the effects are affected by the
fact that the ban is actually legal, and can thus isolate the role of public opinion on participants’
judgment of the Swiss player.

4.2

Linking the Experiment to the Theoretical Framework

We have the following predictions, which help us test Proposition 3.
• Anti-minarets group: The Swiss person is revealed to be anti-minarets. The participants’
prior that Swiss people are on average anti-minarets is relatively low. This has two implications. First, before the information about the Swiss person is communicated, the perceived
probability that he is anti-minarets is low. Second, and more importantly, he is not thought
to have strategic reasons to pretend to be anti-minarets, because this view is not thought to
be popular among citizens in Switzerland (the subjects believe that the equilibrium that this
Swiss person faces would imply that he will only say mi = A if he indeed has type ti = A).
Thus, the posterior that this person is anti-minarets increases all the way to 1. This lowers
donations when compared to the control group.
• Anti-minarets, public support group: The Swiss person is revealed to be anti-minarets, and
also we also reveal that 57% of Swiss respondents support banning minarets. Now, compared
to the previous experimental condition, the participants may believe that the Swiss person
has strategic reasons to state that he is anti-minarets. This decreases Prj (ti = A | mi = A)
from 1 to some value which, however, must be greater than 12 , as follows from Proposition 3.
This implies that donations should be higher than in the previous treatment group, but not
as high as in the control group.
15

Here we report the numbers from the second wave of the experiment, since the first wave only asked beliefs in
the control group. The numbers for this group are very similar across waves; for example, in the first wave, 17% of
control group participants believe a majority of Swiss people support the ban, compared to 20% in the second wave.
The median belief is 30% for the control groups in both waves.
16
While the beliefs are significantly different when comparing the control group with either of the two treatment
groups (the p-values for the test of equality are 0.013 against the anonymous anti-minarets group and 0.002 against
the anonymous anti-minarets public support group), there is no statistical difference between the two treatment groups
(the p-value for the test of equality is 0.500).

21

The second wave of the experiment helps us further test our model and rule out the main
alternative interpretation:
• Anonymous anti-minarets group: The Swiss person is revealed to be privately anti-minarets.
Again, subjects’ prior that Swiss people are on average anti-minarets is relatively low. The
posterior that the Swiss player is anti-minarets is 1, so donations should be similar to the
ones in the Anti-minarets group.
• Anonymous anti-minarets, public support group: The Swiss person is revealed to be privately anti-minarets, and also we also reveal that 57% of Swiss respondents support banning
minarets. Unlike the non-anonymous version of this treatment, participants do not think the
Swiss person has strategic reasons to state that he is anti-minarets, since the expression is
anonymous. As a result, the posterior that the Swiss player is against anti-minarets is again
1 and the donation levels should be similar to those in the Anti-minarets group.

4.3

Results

Appendix Table A.4 provides a test of balance of individual characteristics across all six conditions
from the two waves and separately for the three conditions of each wave. Although the two waves
were not conducted simultaneously, the variables are fairly well-balanced when pooling the two
waves. Only the share of white respondents is marginally unbalanced (p-value of 0.085). As
a result, to simplify the exposition of our findings, below we pool the observations in the control
groups from the two waves, and compare the raw outcome variables across the two waves. Appendix
Figures A.4 and A.5 display the results separately for the two waves of the experiment and show
that the numbers are almost identical for the two control groups.
We now turn to the main findings from the auxiliary experiment, displayed in Figure 3. Panel
A displays comparisons of average donations across groups. In the control condition, where participants are only told that they are matched with a 24-year-old male from Switzerland, we observe
an average transfer to the Swiss participant of $1.03. The average transfer is substantially lower
for subjects in the anti-minarets group, who are also told that this person supports the prohibition
on building minarets in Switzerland: the average transfer for this group is $0.69. The effect of
informing subject about the anti-Muslim views of the Swiss participant is statistically significant
(p-value=0.000). However, the average transfer among subjects in the anti-minarets, public support
group who are told that the majority of Swiss respondents are against minarets is $0.92, which
is not statistically different from the average transfer in the control group (the p-value of the difference is 0.162) but is substantially higher than the average transfer in the anti-minarets group
(p-value=0.013). The average donation in the anonymous anti-minarets group is identical to that
in the anti-minarets group, at $0.69. The average donation in the anonymous anti-minarets, public
support group is also very similar: $0.70. These two levels are significantly different from the av22

erage in the control group (p-value=0.000 in both cases). The average donation in the anonymous
anti-minarets, public support group is also significantly lower than the one in the first-wave version
of the treatment (p-value=0.014).
Panel B compares across conditions the share of participants who do not share any of their $3
endowment with the Swiss person. The percentage of participants deciding not to transfer anything
to the Swiss respondent increases from 22% in the control group to 42% in the anti-minarets group
(p-value 0.000), while only 27% of subjects in the anti-minarets, public support decide to keep all $3.
This percentage is not statistically different from the one in the control group (p-value=0.370), but
is substantially lower than the one for subjects in the anti-minarets group (p-value=0.013). Here
again, the levels of the outcome variable in the two anonymous treatments are almost identical
to the level in the anti-minarets group: 43% and 44%. Importantly, the share of participants
not donating is significantly higher in the anonymous anti-minarets, public support group when
compared to the non-anonymous version of the treatment (p-value=0.004).
Panel C displays a similar pattern for the median transfer, which is $1.50 in the control group,
$0.30 in the anti-minarets group, and $1.20 in the anti-minarets, public support group. While the
median transfer in the control group is higher than the median transfer in both other groups (p-value
against the anti-minarets is 0.000 and against the anti-minarets public, support group is 0.030),
providing information about the fact that 57.5% of Swiss respondents support the prohibition on
building minarets makes a statistically significant difference (p-value 0.000), when compared to the
anti-minarets group. The median donation in the two anonymous groups are identical ($0.50).
The median donation in the anonymous anti-minarets group is not significantly different from the
median in the anti-minarets group (p-value 0.496). The median donation in the anonymous antiminarets, public support group is significantly lower than the median in the anti-minarets, public
support group (p=0.021).
Overall, across all three outcome variables, the results confirm the four predictions stemming
from the model. Appendix Table A.5 displays the results in regression format and show that our
results are unchanged when individual covariates are included.

5

Conclusion

We show that a positive update in people’s beliefs about Donald Trump’s popularity increases their
willingness to publicly express xenophobic views. Building on a simple model of communication
and on a second auxiliary experiment with a dictator game, we also provide suggestive evidence of
the mechanisms behind the effects. By aggregating information about individuals’ private views,
elections can update positively people’s perceptions about the share of people who support an
opinion previously believed to be stigmatized. This may in turn change people’s perceptions about
the negative judgement they will face for expressing their opinion.

23

Though beyond the scope of our study, the potential interaction between private and public
opinions might exacerbate the effects of events that trigger changes in the social acceptability of
holding particular views. Moreover, higher electoral support for a candidate associated with certain
views might shape individuals’ perceptions of the social desirability of those views, regardless of
whether or not the candidate wins the election.
Our findings shed light on the factors that can trigger rapid change in social norms, and in
particular, norms against the expression of xenophobic views. Our results suggest that social
norms regarding the expression of such views in the U.S. might have already been causally changed
by Trump’s rise in popularity and eventual electoral victory. More broadly, the mechanisms we
study in this paper might help explain the rise – and potential consequences – of other crucial
recent events such as the Brexit vote in the UK, and more generally the rise in anti-immigrant and
anti-minority sentiment in the developed world.

24

References
Acemoglu, Daron and Matthew O. Jackson. “Social Norms and the Enforcement of Laws,”
Journal of the European Economic Association, Forthcoming.
–, Tarek A. Hassan, and Ahmed Tahoun. “The Power of the Street: Evidence from Egypt’s
Arab Spring,” Review of Financial Studies, Forthcoming.
Alesina, Alberto, Paola Giuliano, and Nathan Nunn (2013). “On the Origins of Gender
Roles: Women and the Plough,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 128(2), 469–530.
Algan, Yann and Pierre Cahuc (2010). “Inherited Trust and Growth,” American Economic
Review, 100(5), 2060–92.
Andreoni, James, Nikos Nikiforakis, and Simon Siegenthaler (2016). “Social Change and
the Conformity Trap,” working paper.
Bénabou and Jean Tirole (2011). “Laws and Norms,” NBER Working Paper 17579.
Bernheim, B. Douglas (1994). “A Theory of Conformity”, Journal of Political Economy, 102(5),
841–877.
The Bridge Initiative (2016). “When islamophobia turns violent: the 2016 U.S. presidential
elections”.
Bursztyn, Leonardo, and Robert Jensen (2015). “How does peer pressure affect educational
investments?” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 130(3), 1329–1367.
– , Michael Callen, Bruno Ferman, Saad Gulzar, Ali Hasanain, and Noam Yuchtman
(2016). “Political Identity: Experimental Evidence on Anti-Americanism in Pakistan.”
Center for the Study of Hate and Extremism (2017). “Special Status Report: Hate Crime
in Metropolitan Areas.”
Cho, In-Koo, and David M. Kreps (1987). “Signaling Games and Stable Equilibria,” Quarterly
Journal of Economics, 102(2), 179–221.
Crawford, V. and J. Sobel (1982). “Strategic Information Transmission,” Econometrica, 50,
1431–1452.
DellaVigna, Stefano, John A. List, and Ulrike Malmendier (2012). “Testing for altruism
and social pressure in charitable giving,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 127(1), 1–56.
– , – , – , and Gautam Rao (2017). “Voting to Tell Others,” The Review of Economic Studies,
84(1), 143–181.
25

Elias, Julio J., Nicola Lacetera, and Mario Marcis (2016). “Efficiency-Morality Trade-offs
in Repugnant Transactions: A Choice Experiment,” Working paper.
Enikolopov, Ruben, Alexey Makarin, Maria Petrova, and Leonid Polishchuk (2017)
“Social image, Networks, and Protest Participation,” Working paper.
Fernández, Raquel (2007). “Women, Work, and Culture,” Journal of the European Economic
Association, 5(2-3), 305–332.
Giuliano, Paola (2007). “Living Arrangements in Western Europe: Does Cultural Origin Matter?” Journal of the European Economic Association, 5(5), 927–952.
Kartik, Navin (2009). “Strategic Communication with Lying Costs,”Review of Economic Studies,
76, 1359–1395.
– , Ottaviani, M., and Squintani, F. (2007). “Credulity, Lies, and Costly Talk,” Journal of
Economic Theory, 134(1), 93–116.
Katz, Daniel, and Floyd H. Allport (1931). “Students’ attitudes: A Report of the Syracuse
University Reaction Study,” Syracuse, Craftsman, Syracuse, NY.
Kets, Willemien, and Alvaro Sandroni (2015). “Challenging Conformity: A Case for Diversity,” working paper.
Kuran, Timur (1991). “The east European revolution of 1989: Is it surprising that we were
surprised?” American Economic Review, 81, 121–25.
– , (1995). Private Truths, Public Lies: The Social Consequences of Preference Falsification,
Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard University Press.
Kuziemko, Ilyana, Michael I. Norton, Emmanuel Saez, and Stefanie Stantcheva (2015).
“How elastic are preferences for redistribution? Evidence from randomized survey experiments,” American Economic Review, 105, 1478–1508.
Lohmann, Susanne (1993). “A Signaling Model of Informative and Manipulative Political Action?” American Political Science Review, 88, 319–333.
Lowes, Sara, Nathan Nunn, James A. Robinson and Jonathan Weigl (2016). “The
Evolution of Culture and Institutions: Evidence from the Kuba Kingdom.”
Madestam, Andreas, Daniel Shoag, Stan Veuger, and David Yanagizawa-Drott (2013).
“Do Political Protests Matter? Evidence from the Tea Party Movement,” Quarterly Journal
of Economics, 128(4), 1633–1685.

26

Milgram, Stanley (1977). “The individual in a social world: essays and experiments,” AddisonWesley, Reading, MA.
Morris, Stephen (2001). “Political Correctness,” Journal of Political Economy 109(2), 231–265.
O’Gorman, Hubert J. (1975). “Pluralistic ignorance and white estimates of white support for
racial segregation,” Public Opinion Quarterly, 39, 313–330.
Perez-Truglia, Ricardo and Guillermo Cruces (Forthcoming). “Partisan Interactions: Evidence from a Field Experiment in the United States,” Journal of Political Economy.
Prendergast, Canice (1993). “A Theory of the ‘Yes Men’,” American Economic Review, 83(4),
757–770.
Raghavarao, Damaraju, and Walter T. Federer (1979). “Block total response as an alternative to the randomized response method in surveys,” Journal of the Royal Statistical Society,
B41, 40–45.
Sniderman, Paul M., Thomas Piazza (1993). The scar of race, Harvard University Press,
Cambridge, MA.
Southern Poverty Law Center (2016). “Over 200 incidents of hateful harassment and intimidation since election day.”
Warner, Stanley L. (1965). “Randomized response: a survey technique for eliminating evasive
answer bias,” Journal of the American Statistical Association, 60, 63–69.
Voigtländer, Nico, and Hans-Joachim Voth (2012). “Persecution Perpetuated: The Medieval
Origins of Anti-Semitic Violence in Nazi Germany,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 127(3),
1339–1392.

27

Figures and Tables

70

Figure 1: Main Experiment: Donation Rates Before and After the Election
P=0.002

P=0.839

P=0.882

60

P=0.060
P=0.089

54%

34%

47%

46%

49%

48%

0

10

20

Donation Rates
30
40
50

Private
Public

Control Before Election

Information Before Election

Control After Election

Notes: the two bars on the left display donation rates to the anti-immigration association
for individuals in the private and public conditions in the control group before the election
(full sample, respectively N=112 and N=111), the two central bars display those in the
information group before the election (full sample, respectively N=102 and N=103), and
the last two bars display those in the control group after the election (for individuals
already surveyed before the election, respectively N=82 and N=84). Error bars reflect 95%
confidence intervals. Top horizontal bars show p-values for t tests of equality of means
between different experimental conditions.

28

1

Figure 2: Main Experiment: Beliefs About Others

.8

t test P=.062

Cumulative Distribution
.4
.6

K−S test P=.072

0

.2

Control
Information

0

20
40
60
80
Perceived Popularity of Anti−Immigrant Sentiments

100

Notes: Empirical cumulative distributions of perceived popularity of anti-immigrant sentiments for individuals in the control and information conditions before the election (respectively N=223 and N=205). The two vertical lines display the means of the two distributions.
K-S P is the p-value of a Kolmogorov-Smirnov test of equality of the two distributions, while
t test P is the p-value of a test of equality of means.

29

Figure 3: Auxiliary Experiments: Donation Rates
Panel A
Panel B
P=0.162

P=0.000
P=0.000

P=0.014

P=0.962
P=0.013

P=0.004
P=0.922

P=0.911
P=0.370

$1.03

$0.69

$0.92

$0.69

P=0.013

P=0.862

Share Not Donating
.2
.3
.4
.5

P=0.000

$0.70

22%

42%

27%

43%

44%

Control Group

Anti−Minarets

Anti−Minarets
Public Support

Anonymous
Anti−Minarets

Anonymous
Anti−Minarets
Public Support

0

0

.1

.25

Average Donation Amounts
.5
.75
1

P=0.000

P=0.000

.6

1.25

P=0.000

Control Group

Anti−Minarets

Anti−Minarets
Public Support

Anonymous
Anti−Minarets

Anonymous
Anti−Minarets
Public Support

Panel C
1.75

P=0.000
P=0.003

P=0.496

P=0.021

P=0.023

P=1.000

.25

Median Donation Amounts
.5
.75
1
1.25 1.5

P=0.000

P=0.000

$0.30

$1.20

$0.50

$0.50

Anti−Minarets

Anti−Minarets
Public Support

Anonymous
Anti−Minarets

Anonymous
Anti−Minarets
Public Support

0

$1.50
Control Group

Notes: Panel A displays average donation amounts to the Swiss individual in the five
experimental conditions: the control group (N = 279, pooling 142 observations from the
first auxiliary experiment and 137 observations from the second anonymous version of
the auxiliary experiment), the anti-minarets group (N=133), and the anti-minarets public
support group (N=131), the anonymous anti-minarets group (N=149), and the anonymous
anti-minarets public support group (N=141). Panel B displays the percent of subjects not
making positive donations. Panel C displays median donation amounts. Error bars reflect
95% confidence intervals. Top horizontal bars show p-values for t tests of equality of means
between different experimental conditions.

30

Table 1: Main Experiment: Difference in Differences Regressions
Dependent Variable
Dummy: individual donates to anti-immigrant organization
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
Public
-0.202*** -0.200*** -0.202***
-0.199***
[0.065]
[0.066]
[0.065]
[0.065]
(0.004)
(0.005)
(0.004)
(0.007)
Information
-0.074
-0.077
-0.074
-0.076
[0.069]
[0.068]
[0.069]
[0.068]
(0.277)
(0.266)
(0.277)
(0.281)
Public*Information
0.188*
0.178*
0.188*
0.178*
[0.096]
[0.096]
[0.096]
[0.096]
(0.045)
(0.062)
(0.045)
(0.062)
After Election
-0.057
-0.062
[0.073]
[0.072]
(0.380)
(0.304)
Public*After Election
0.191*
0.186*
[0.102]
[0.101]
(0.071)
(0.080)
Control Private Before Election
0.545
Controls
No
Yes
No
Yes
N
428
428
594
594
R2
0.022
0.033
0.017
0.034
Notes: Columns (1) and (2) includes the full pre-election sample. Columns (3) and (4) add the
post-election sample of individuals already surveyed before the election. Columns (1) presents
OLS regression of a dummy variable for whether a individual donates to the anti-immigration
organization on a dummy for the Public condition, a dummy for the Information condition, and a
dummy for the Public Information condition. The control private condition before the election is
the omitted group, for which we report the mean donation rate. Columns (3) replicates and adds
a dummy for the after election condition, and a dummy for the Public after election condition.
Columns (2) and (4) replicate and add individual covariates (gender, age, marital status, years
of education, household income, and race). Robust standard errors in brackets. P-values from
permutation tests with 1,000 repetitions in parentheses. * significant at 10%; ** significant at
5%; *** significant at 1%.

31

Supplemental Appendix
(Not For Publication)
Theory Proofs
Proof of Proposition 1. Since (1) is decreasing in li if mi 6= ti and does not depend on li if
mi = ti , it follows that in any equilibrium, if two citizens i and i0 have ti = ti0 = X ∈ {A, B} and
li < li0 , then mi = X implies mi0 = X. Thus, there are two cutoffs z̃ and z such that citizen i with
type ti = A sends message mi = A if li > z̃ and sends mi = B if li < z̃; likewise, citizen with type
ti = B sends message mi = A if li < z and sends mi = B if li > z̃.
Suppose that q ≥ 21 , and suppose, to obtain a contradiction, that z̃ > 0. This implies that type
(ti = A, li = z̃) at least weakly prefers to send message B, and thus type (ti = A, li = 0) strictly
prefers to do so. Consider citizen i0 with type (ti0 = B, li0 = 0). Since the payoffs of these two
citizens from sending message A are identical (from (1) it immediately follows that Ui (mi = A) =
Ui0 (mi0 = A)), and so are their utilities from sending message message B, we have that citizen i0
also strictly prefers to send message B. Thus, in this equilibrium all citizen with conviction B
send message B, so z = 0. This implies that the receiver’s beliefs satisfy Prj (ti = A | mi = A) = 1
and Prj (ti = A | mi = B) =
citizen

i0 )

qz̃
qz̃+1−q .

Therefore, the utility of a citizen i defined above (and also of

from sending messages A and B are, respectively,
Ui (mi = A) = aq;
Ui (mi = B) = a (2q − 1)

qz̃
+ a (1 − q) .
qz̃ + 1 − q

We thus have
Ui (mi = A) − Ui (mi = B) = a (2q − 1)

1−q
.
qz̃ + 1 − q

Since q ≥ 12 , we have Ui (mi = A) ≥ Ui (mi = B), which contradicts the earlier result that citizen i
strictly prefers to send message B. This proves that if q ≥ 12 , then in equilibrium z̃ = 0.
We can similarly prove that if q ≤ 21 , then in equilibrium z = 0. Applying both results to the
case q = 12 , we have that z = z̃ = 0, so (almost) all types communicate truthfully. This proves the
first part of the proposition.
Now consider the case q >

1
2.

We have already proved that z̃ = 0 in this case. Suppose,

to obtain a contradiction, that z = 0.

Then we would have Prj (ti = A | mi = A) = 1 and

Prj (ti = A | mi = B) = 0. Consequently, for a citizen i with li = 0, we would have Ui (mi = A) =
ap and Ui (mi = B) = a (1 − p), thus implying Ui (mi = A) > Ui (mi = B), so sending message A
is strictly preferred for type (ti = B, li = 0), which contradicts z = 0. This implies that z > 0.

32

Now suppose that z = 1, implying that (almost) all types send message A. In this case,
Prj (ti = A | mi = A) = q and Prj (ti = A | mi = B) is not defined by Bayesian updating. However, applying the D1 criterion, we have that the type (ti = B, li = 1) is the one that benefits from deviating to mi = B most. Therefore, the only belief consistent with D1 criterion is
Prj (ti = A | mi = B) = 0. In this case, for this type (ti = B, li = 1), we have
Ui (mi = A) = aq 2 + a (1 − q)2 − 1,
Ui (mi = B) = a (1 − q) .
This type weakly prefers to send message A if and only if aq (2q − 1) ≥ 1. This implies that
an equilibrium with z̃ = 0 and z = 1, where (almost) all senders send mi = A, is only possible
if aq (2q − 1) ≥ 1. It is straightforward to verify that this is indeed an equilibrium under these
conditions.
Suppose that z ∈ (0, 1). This is only possible if the type (ti = B, li = z) is indifferent between
sending the two messages, which holds if and only if
− (1 − q) z 2 − qz + aq (2q − 1) = 0.
As argued in the main text, at z = 0 the left-hand side is positive and at z = 1 it equals aq (2q − 1)−
1 and therefore is negative iff aq (2q − 1) < 0. Furthermore, this equation has exactly one positive
root and exactly one negative root. Consequently, z ∈ (0, 1) is only possible if aq (2q − 1) < 1, in
which case this value z is uniquely given by (2). It is straightforward to verify that this is indeed
an equilibrium. To finish the proof for the case q > 21 , it suffices to observe that aq (2q − 1) − 1 ≥ 0
if and only if
1
q≥
4

r
1+

8
1+
a

!
=

1
+ v.
2

Lastly, we need to consider the case q < 12 . However, it is completely symmetric to the case
q > 12 , and we omit the proof. 
Proof of Proposition 2. Suppose q ≥ 12 . Then the share of citizens who send message A,
which equals p + z (1 − p), is increasing in p, since z does not depend on it. Likewise, if q ≤ 21 ,
then the threshold z̃ does not depend on p, and then the share of citizens sending message A equals
p (1 − z̃), it is also increasing in p. The first result follows.
Consider the effect of an increase in q. First, suppose that q >

33

1
2.

Let us prove that z is

increasing in q, to do so, let x =

q
1−q ,

then x is increasing in q. We have
r

1 2
1
x + a (2q − 1) x − x
4
2
a (2q − 1) x

z =
=

=

q

1 2
4x

+ a (2q − 1) x + 12 x
a (2q − 1)

q

1
4

+ a (2q − 1) x1 +

.
1
2

Since this is increasing in x, and also z is increasing in q directly, we have that z is increasing in q.
This proves the statement for q > 21 . If q ≤ 12 , the proof is similar and is omitted.
Finally, suppose that a increases. If q > 21 , then the share of citizens sending A is increasing
in a, since z is increasing in a. If q < 12 , the proof is similar. If q = 12 , then an increase in a has
no effect on the share of citizens that send message A in this case, which is q. This completes the
proof. 
Proof of Proposition 3. The result for a immediately follows from Prj (ti = A | mi = A) =
q
q+(1−q)z

(which is valid if q > 12 ) and the formula for z, (2). To get the comparative statics with

respect to q, consider
q
q + (1 − q) z
1
1 + 1−q
q z
1
q
.
1−q
1
1
+
+
a
(2q
−
1)
2
4
q

Prj (ti = A | mi = A) =
=
=

Notice that the term (2q − 1) 1−q
q is increasing in q for q <

q

1
2

and decreasing in q for q >

q

1
2;

indeed,


1−q
1 − 2q 2
(2q − 1)
=
.
q
q2
q
q
1
1
This implies that the converse (decreasing for q <
2 and increasing for q >
2 ) is true for
d
dq

Prj (ti = A | mi = A).
Lastly, consider minimum possible value for Prj (ti = A | mi = A). Since we only need to consider the case p = q > 12 , and also only the case where aq (2p − 1) < 1 (otherwise Prj (ti = A | mi = A) =

34

q > 12 ), we have
Prj (ti = A | mi = A) =
>

1
1
2

+

q

+

q

1
2
1−q
q2

+ a (2p − 1) 1−q
q

1
1
2

>

where we plugged q = 21 , since

1
4

+

1
q

1−q
q2

1
4

+

1
4

1
= ,
2
+2

is decreasing in q. This completes the proof. 

Proof of Proposition 4. The proof immediately follows from Proposition 1 and from the
text. 

35

Appendix Figures

1

Figure A.1: Main Experiment: Beliefs About Others After Election

.8

t test P=.905

Cumulative Distribution
.4
.6

K−S test P=.961

0

.2

Control Before Election
Control After Election

0

20
40
60
80
Perceived Popularity of Anti−Immigrant Sentiments

100

Notes: Empirical cumulative distributions of perceived popularity of anti-immigrant sentiments for individuals in the control condition before and after the election (respectively
N=223 and N=166). The two vertical lines display the means of the two distributions. K-S
P is the p-value of a Kolmogorov-Smirnov test of equality of the two distributions, while t
test P is the p-value of a test of equality of means.

36

.5

1.25

Figure A.2: Auxiliary Experiment: Donation Decisions with Referendum Treatment
Panel A
Panel B

.4
$0.69

$0.92

Share Not Donating
.2
.3

$1.02

$0.85

P=0.728

25%

42%

27%

29%

Control Group

Anti−Minarets

Anti−Minarets
Public Support

Anti−Minarets
Referendum

0

0

.1

.25

Average Donation Amounts
.5
.75
1

P=0.432

Control Group

Anti−Minarets

Anti−Minarets
Public Support

Anti−Minarets
Referendum

1.75

Panel C

$1.50

$0.30

$1.10

$1.00

Control Group

Anti−Minarets

Anti−Minarets
Public Support

Anti−Minarets
Referendum

0

.25

Median Donation Amounts
.5
.75
1
1.25

1.5

P=0.695

Notes: Panel A displays average donation amounts to the Swiss individual in the four
experimental conditions: the control group (N=142), the anti-minarets group (N=133),
the anti-minarets public support group (N=131), and the anti-minarets referendum group
(N=136). Panel B displays the percent of subjects not making positive donations. Panel
C displays median donation amounts. Error bars reflect 95% confidence intervals. Top
horizontal bars show p-values for t tests of equality of means between different experimental
conditions.

37

Figure A.3: Auxiliary Anonymous Experiment: Donation Decisions with Referendum
Treatment
Panel A
Panel B
.5

1.25

P=0.386

$0.69

$0.70

Share Not Donating
.2
.3
.4

$1.04

$0.69

22%

43%

44%

39%

Control Group

Anti−Minarets

Anti−Minarets
Public Support

Anti−Minarets
Referendum

0

0

.1

.25

Average Donation Amounts
.5
.75
1

P=0.906

Control Group

Anti−Minarets

Anti−Minarets
Public Support

Anti−Minarets
Referendum

1.75

Panel C

$1.50

$0.50

$0.50

$0.50

Control Group

Anti−Minarets

Anti−Minarets
Public Support

Anti−Minarets
Referendum

0

.25

Median Donation Amounts
.5
.75
1
1.25

1.5

P=1.000

Notes: Panel A displays average donation amounts to the Swiss individual in the four
experimental conditions: the anonymous control group (N=137), the anonymous antiminarets group (N=149), the anonymous anti-minarets public support group (N=141), and
the anonymous anti-minarets referendum group (N=139). Panel B displays the percent
of subjects not making positive donations. Panel C displays median donation amounts.
Error bars reflect 95% confidence intervals. Top horizontal bars show p-values for t tests
of equality of means between different experimental conditions.

38

1.25

Figure A.4: Auxiliary Experiment: Donation Rates
Panel A
Panel B
P=0.596

P=0.260
.5

P=0.013

$0.69

Share Not Donating
.2
.3
.4

$1.02

P=0.002

P=0.013

$0.92

25%

42%

27%

Control Group

Anti−Minarets

Anti−Minarets
Public Support

0

0

.1

.25

Average Donation Amounts
.5
.75
1

P=0.000

Control Group

Anti−Minarets

Anti−Minarets
Public Support

Panel C
1.75

P=0.030
P=0.000

$1.50

$0.30

$1.10

Control Group

Anti−Minarets

Anti−Minarets
Public Support

0

.25

Median Donation Amounts
.5
.75
1
1.25 1.5

P=0.000

Notes: Panel A displays average donation amounts to the Swiss individual in the three
experimental conditions: the control group (N=142), the anti-minarets group (N=133),
and the anti-minarets public support group (N=131). Panel B displays the percent of
subjects not making positive donations. Panel C displays median donation amounts. Error
bars reflect 95% confidence intervals. Top horizontal bars show p-values for t tests of
equality of means between different experimental conditions.

39

P=0.000

P=0.000

P=0.862

.5

$0.69

$0.70

22%

43%

44%

Control Group

Anonymous
Anti−Minarets

Anonymous
Anti−Minarets
Public Support

0

.1

$1.04

P=0.000

P=0.922

Share Not Donating
.2
.3
.4

P=0.000

0

Average Donation Amounts
.25
.5
.75
1

1.25

Figure A.5: Auxiliary Anonymous Experiment: Donation Rates
Panel A
Panel B

Control Group

Anonymous
Anti−Minarets

Anonymous
Anti−Minarets
Public Support

Panel C
1.75

P=0.000
P=1.000

$1.50

$0.50

$0.50

Control Group

Anonymous
Anti−Minarets

Anonymous
Anti−Minarets
Public Support

0

.25

Median Donation Amounts
.5
.75
1
1.25 1.5

P=0.000

Notes: Panel A displays average donation amounts to the Swiss individual in the three
experimental conditions: the anonymous control group (N=137), the anonymous antiminarets group (N=149), and the anonymous anti-minarets public support group (N=141).
Panel B displays the percent of subjects not making positive donations. Panel C displays
median donation amounts. Error bars reflect 95% confidence intervals. Top horizontal bars
show p-values for t tests of equality of means between different experimental conditions.

40

Appendix Tables
Table A.1: Main Experiment Before Election: Balance of Covariates
Full Sample
Control
Control
Information Information p-value
Private
Public
Private
Public
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
Female
0.65
0.63
0.61
0.71
0.66
0.511
[0.477]
[0.484]
[0.489]
[0.458]
[0.476]
Age
36.17
35.53
35.73
35.65
37.87
0.419
[11.437]
[10.953]
[11.637]
[11.136]
[12.015]
Married
0.48
0.44
0.44
0.48
0.58
0.120
[0.500]
[0.498]
[0.499]
[0.502]
[0.496]
Education
14.54
14.67
14.54
14.34
14.60
0.684
[2.034]
[2.094]
[2.057]
[2.027]
[1.962]
Income
67102.80
67455.36
71621.62
63186.27
65728.16
0.200
[32845.443] [36229.968] [29093.596] [29296.954] [35853.786]
White
0.86
0.85
0.84
0.87
0.88
0.754
[0.348]
[0.360]
[0.370]
[0.335]
[0.322]
Totals
428
112
111
102
103
Notes: Column (1) reports the mean level of each variable, with standard deviations in
brackets, for the full sample. Columns (2) to (5) report the mean level of each variable, with
standard deviations in brackets, for all the experimental conditions. Column (6) reports the
p-value of a test that means are the same in all the experimental conditions.

41

Table A.2: Main Experiment After Election: Balance of Covariates
Panel A: After Election Balance of Covariates
Full Repeated Sample
Control Private
Control Public
p-value
After Election
After Election
After Election
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
Female
0.59
0.59
0.60
0.898
[0.493]
[0.496]
[0.494]
Age
36.46
36.89
36.04
0.593
[10.289]
[8.973]
[11.468]
Married
0.49
0.51
0.48
0.645
[0.501]
[0.503]
[0.502]
Education
14.69
14.68
14.70
0.951
[2.023]
[1.974]
[2.081]
Income
68343.37
70731.71
66011.90
0.356
[32832.857]
[32165.870]
[33498.604]
White
0.86
0.87
0.86
0.872
[0.347]
[0.343]
[0.352]
Information Before Election
0.48
0.51
0.45
0.751
[0.501]
[0.503]
[0.501]
Public Before Election
0.48
0.46
0.50
0.444
[0.501]
[0.502]
[0.503]
Totals
166
82
84
Panel B: After Election Sample Selection
Full Sample
Non-repeated Sample Repeated Sample p-value
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
Female
0.64
0.67
0.60
0.136
[0.481]
[0.473]
[0.492]
Age
36.15
36.01
36.40
0.713
[11.309]
[11.877]
[10.283]
Married
0.49
0.49
0.49
0.918
[0.500]
[0.501]
[0.501]
Education
14.55
14.47
14.67
0.309
[2.033]
[2.041]
[2.019]
Income
67772.93
67534.48
68184.52
0.840
[33374.356]
[33820.315]
[32686.249]
White
0.86
0.86
0.86
0.814
[0.349]
[0.353]
[0.345]
Information Before Election
0.48
0.48
0.49
0.801
[0.500]
[0.500]
[0.501]
Public Before Election
0.50
0.50
0.48
0.661
[0.501]
[0.501]
[0.501]
Totals
458
290
168
Notes: Panel A reports summary statistics for the repeated sample and presents a test of random assignment for
the experiment after the election. Column (1) reports the mean level of each variable, with standard deviations
in brackets, for the full sample of individuals who had participated in the survey both before and after the
election. Columns (2) and (3) report the mean level of each variable, with standard deviations in brackets,
for all the experimental conditions. Column (4) reports the p-value of a test that means are the same in both
the experimental conditions. Panel B reports summary statistics for the full sample and presents a test of
selective attrition for the experiment after the election. Column (1) reports the mean level of each variable,
with standard deviations in brackets, for the full sample of individuals who had participated in the survey
before the election. Columns (2) and (3) report the mean level of each variable, with standard deviations in
brackets, respectively for individuals who did not participate and participated in the survey after the election.
Column (4) reports the p-value of a test that means are the same in both the conditions.

42

43

Table A.3: Main Experiment: Difference in Differences Regressions
Dummy: individual donates to anti-immigrant organization
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
(7)
(8)
Public
-0.202*** -0.200*** -0.202*** -0.199*** -0.202*** -0.205*** -0.202*** -0.203***
[0.065]
[0.066]
[0.065]
[0.065]
[0.065]
[0.066]
[0.065]
[0.065]
(0.004)
(0.005)
(0.004)
(0.007)
(0.001)
(0.001)
(0.000)
(0.002)
Information
-0.074
-0.077
-0.074
-0.076
-0.074
-0.079
-0.074
-0.079
[0.069]
[0.068]
[0.069]
[0.068]
[0.069]
[0.068]
[0.069]
[0.068]
(0.277)
(0.266)
(0.277)
(0.281)
(0.287)
(0.250)
(0.269)
(0.248)
Public*Information
0.188*
0.178*
0.188*
0.178*
0.188*
0.186*
0.188*
0.183*
[0.096]
[0.096]
[0.096]
[0.096]
[0.096]
[0.096]
[0.096]
[0.096]
(0.096)
(0.062)
(0.045)
(0.062)
(0.042)
(0.050)
(0.049)
(0.053)
After Election
-0.057
-0.062
-0.209*** -0.197**
-0.148**
-0.116*
[0.073]
[0.072]
[0.064]
[0.092]
[0.058]
[0.062]
(0.380)
(0.304)
(0.005)
(0.002)
(0.001)
(0.006)
Public*After Election
0.191*
0.186*
0.307*** 0.311*** 0.263*** 0.260***
[0.102]
[0.101]
[0.094]
[0.094]
[0.083]
[0.082]
(0.071)
(0.080)
(0.000)
(0.000)
(0.007)
(0.007)
Control Private
0.545
Before Election
Controls
No
Yes
No
Yes
No
Yes
No
Yes
N
428
428
594
594
643
643
809
809
2
R
0.022
0.033
0.017
0.034
0.023
0.033
0.014
0.031
Notes: Columns (1) and (2) includes the full pre-election sample. Columns (3) and (4) add only the post-election sample
of individuals already surveyed before the election. Columns (5) and (6) add only the post-election sample of individuals
not surveyed before the election. Columns (7) and (8) add both the post-election samples. Columns (1) presents OLS
regression of a dummy variable for whether a individual donates to the anti-immigration organization on a dummy for
the Public condition, a dummy for the Information condition, and a dummy for the Public Information condition. The
control private condition before the election is the omitted group, for which we report the mean donation rate. Columns
(3) replicates and adds a dummy for the after election condition, and a dummy for the Public after election condition.
Columns (2) and (4) replicate and add individual covariates (gender, age, marital status, years of education, household
income, and race). Robust standard errors in brackets. P-values from permutation tests with 1,000 repetitions in
parentheses. * significant at 10%; ** significant at 5%; *** significant at 1%.

Dependent Variable

44

Full Sample

Control Group

Anti-Minarets

Anonymous
Anonymous
Anonymous
Anti-Minarets
Control Group Anti-Minarets
Anti-Minarets
p-value
p-value
p-value
Public Support
Public Support (2)=(3)=(4)
(5)=(6)=(7)
(All)
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
(7)
(8)
(9)
(10)
Female
0.44
0.47
0.42
0.45
0.47
0.40
0.40
0.726
0.350
0.653
[0.496]
[0.501]
[0.496]
[0.499]
[0.501]
[0.491]
[0.492]
Age
33.49
32.96
33.49
32.39
34.62
34.13
33.26
0.700
0.564
0.577
[10.618]
[10.141]
[10.548]
[10.223]
[11.329]
[11.083]
[10.333]
Married
0.32
0.27
0.32
0.27
0.40
0.34
0.33
0.649
0.414
0.198
[0.468]
[0.444]
[0.467]
[0.448]
[0.492]
[0.474]
[0.473]
Education
15.22
15.35
15.39
15.13
15.07
15.32
15.09
0.528
0.542
0.654
[2.054]
[2.046]
[2.095]
[1.967]
[2.074]
[2.131]
[2.016]
Income
64872.42
67253.52
59959.35
66564.89
70875.91
60335.57
64148.94
0.190
0.055
0.105
[37454.946]
[37988.322]
[33993.104]
[38069.188]
[38558.101]
[35329.838]
[39744.530]
White
0.70
0.64
0.63
0.68
0.77
0.72
0.72
0.708
0.538
0.085
[0.460]
[0.481]
[0.484]
[0.469]
[0.420]
[0.448]
[0.449]
Totals
823
142
123
131
137
149
141
Notes: Column (1) reports the mean level of each variable, with standard deviations in brackets, for the full sample (pooling the original and the anonymous versions of the
auxiliary experiment). Columns (2) to (7) report the mean level of each variable, with standard deviations in brackets, for all the experimental conditions. Column (8) reports
the p-value of a test that means are the same in the three experimental conditions in the original version of the auxiliary experiment. Column (9) reports the p-value of a test
that means are the same in the three experimental conditions in the anonymous version of the auxiliary experiment. Column (10) reports the p-value of a test that means are the
same in all the experimental conditions.

Table A.4: Auxiliary Experiment: Balance of Covariates

Table A.5: Auxiliary Experiment: Regressions
Dependent Variable
Anti-Minarets

Anti-Minarets Public Support

Anonymous Anti-Minarets

Anonymous Anti-Minarets Public Support

Anti-Minarets Public Support Anti-Minarets
Anonymous Anti-Minarets Public Support Anonymous Anti-Minarets
Anonymous Anti-Minarets
Anti-Minarets
Anonymous Anti-Minarets Public Support
Anti-Minarets Public Support

Average donation
(1)
(2)
-0.340*** -0.345***
[0.078]
[0.077]
(0.000)
(0.000)
-0.108
-0.107
[0.077]
[0.077]
(0.171)
(0.167)
-0.336*** -0.339***
[0.071]
[0.070]
(0.000)
(0.000)
-0.328*** -0.329***
[0.159]
[0.073]
(0.000)
(0.000)

Dummy: no donation
(3)
(4)
0.190***
0.197***
[0.051]
[0.051]
(0.000)
(0.000)
0.042
0.042
[0.047]
[0.046]
(0.405)
(0.395)
0.197***
0.197***
[0.048]
[0.046]
(0.000)
(0.000)
0.207***
0.205***
[0.049]
[0.049]
(0.000)
(0.000)

Median donation
(5)
(6)
-1.200*** -0.792***
[0.229]
[0.170]
(0.000)
(0.000)
-0.400**
-0.225
[0.176]
[0.154]
(0.085)
(0.192)
-1.000*** -0.713***
[0.210]
[0.144]
(0.000)
(0.000)
-1.000*** -0.740***
[0.216]
[0.000]
(0.000)
(0.000)

0.232**
[0.093]
(0.014)
0.008
[0.084]
(0.916)
0.004
[0.088]
(0.967)
-0.220**
[0.089]
(0.017)

-0.148**
[0.059]
(0.013)
0.010
[0.058]
(0.860)
0.007
[0.060]
(0.907)
0.165***
[0.057]
(0.003)

0.800***
[0.270]
(0.013)
0.000
[0.283]
(0.618)
0.200
[0.294]
(0.357)
-0.600**
[0.259]
(0.035)

0.238**
[0.092]
(0.010)
0.010
[0.083]
(0.909)
0.006
[0.086]
(0.945)
-0.222**
[0.089]
(0.017)

-0.155***
[0.059]
(0.007)
0.007
[0.057]
(0.875)
0.001
[0.059]
(0.986)
0.163***
[0.057]
(0.003)

0.567**
[0.222]
(0.009)
-0.027
[0.207]
(0.898)
0.079
[0.215]
(0.701)
-0.515**
[0.214]
(0.018)

Control Group
1.030
0.233
1.500
Controls
No
Yes
No
Yes
No
Yes
N
823
R2
0.045
0.079
0.039
0.075
0.067
0.095
Notes: Columns (1) presents an OLS regression of the donation amount to the Swiss individual on a dummy for the
anti-minarets group, a dummy for the anti-minarets public support group, a dummy for the anonymous anti-minarets
group, and a dummy for the anonymous anti-minarets public support group. The control is the omitted group, for which
we report the mean donation amount. Columns (3) presents an OLS regression of a dummy variable for subjects not
making positive donations to the Swiss individual on treatment dummies. The control is the omitted group, for which
we report the share of subjects not making positive donations. Columns (5) presents a quantile median regression of
the donation amount to the Swiss individual on treatment dummies. The control is the omitted group, for which we
report the median donation amount. “Anti-Minarets Public Support - Anti-Minarets” gives the difference between the
coefficient on “Anti-Minarets Public Support” and the coefficient on “Anti-Minarets.” “Anonymous Anti-Minarets Public
Support - Anonymous Anti-Minarets” gives the difference between the coefficient on “Anonymous Anti-Minarets Public
Support” and the coefficient on “Anonymous Anti-Minarets.” “Anonymous Anti-Minarets - Anti-Minarets” gives the
difference between the coefficient on “Anonymous Anti-Minarets” and the coefficient on “Anti-Minarets.” “Anonymous
Anti-Minarets Public Support - Anti-Minarets Public Support” gives the difference between the coefficient on “Anonymous
Anti-Minarets Public Support” and the coefficient on “Anti-Minarets Public Support.” Columns (2), (4) and (6) replicate
and add individual covariates (gender, age, marital status, years of education, household income, and race). Robust
standard errors in brackets. P-values from permutation tests with 1,000 repetitions in parentheses. * significant at 10%;
** significant at 5%; *** significant at 1%.

45

Survey Scripts
Demographics

• What is your state of legal residence?
• What is your gender?
– Male
– Female
• What is your year of birth?
• What is your marital status?
– Single
– Married
• How would you describe your ethnicity/race? Please, check all that apply.
– White or European American
– Black or African American
– Hispanic or Latino
– Asian or Asian American
– Other
• What is the highest level of school you have completed or the highest degree you have received?
– Less than high school degree
– High school graduate (high school diploma or equivalent including GED)
– Some college but no degree
– Associate degree in college (2-year)
– Bachelor’s degree in college (4-year)
– Master’s degree
– Doctoral degree
– Professional degree (JD, MD)

46

• What is your household annual income? Please indicate the answer that includes your entire household
income in 2015 before taxes.
– Less than $10,000
– $10,000 to $19,999
– $20,000 to $29,999
– $30,000 to $39,999
– $40,000 to $49,999
– $50,000 to $59,999
– $60,000 to $69,999
– $70,000 to $79,999
– $80,000 to $89,999
– $90,000 to $99,999
– $100,000 to $149,999
– $150,000 or more

47

Main Experiment: Control Private

• From 0 to 100, what share of people in the population of [state] do you think agrees with the following
statement?
“Both legal and illegal immigration should be drastically reduced because immigrants undermine
American culture and do not respect American values.”
• We will now randomly select one among two different organization, and will give you the possibility
to make a donation to the selected organization:
– one is an organization which seeks to reduce overall migration to the United States;
– one is an organization which welcomes immigrants to the United States.
• The organization randomly chosen for you is the Federation for American Immigration Reform (FAIR).
The Federation for American Immigration Reform is an immigration-reduction organization of
concerned individuals who believe that immigration laws must be reformed and seeks to reduce overall
immigration (both legal and illegal) into the United States. The founder of FAIR is John Tanton,
author of “The Immigration Invasion” who wrote “I’ve come to the point of view that for EuropeanAmerican society and culture to persist requires a European-American majority, and a clear one at that.”
Would you like to have us donate $1 on your behalf to the Federation for American Immigration
Reform? If you decide to have $1 donated to the immigration-reduction organization FAIR, we will also
transfer $1 extra to your MTurk account. So, if you decide to donate, instead of $0.50 you will be paid
in total $1.50. If instead you prefer not to donate, you will be paid only $0.50 for completing the survey.
Note: just like any other answer to this survey, also your donation decision will be completely anonymous. No one, not even the researchers, will be able to match your decision to your
name.
So would you like to have us donate $1 on your behalf to the Federation for American Immigration Reform?
– Yes
– No
• From 0 to 100, what do you think is the probability of Donald Trump winning the presidential election
in [state]?

48

Main Experiment: Treatment Private

• From 0 to 100, what do you think is the probability of Donald Trump winning the presidential election
in [state]?
• According to recent estimates from PredictWise, the predicted probability of Donald Trump winning
the presidential election in [state] is 100%. That means that the vast majority of voters in [state] are
probably going to support Donald Trump.
Note:

PredictWise reflects academic research into prediction markets.

The backbone of predictions by PredictWise are

generated from real-money markets that trade contracts on upcoming events. Estimates were downloaded on the PredictWise
website on October 31, 2016. For more information, visit http://predictwise.com/.

• From 0 to 100, what share of people in the population of [state] do you think agrees with the following
statement?
“Both legal and illegal immigration should be drastically reduced because immigrants undermine
American culture and do not respect American values.”
• We will now randomly select one among two different organization, and will give you the possibility
to make a donation to the selected organization:
– one is an organization which seeks to reduce overall migration to the United States;
– one is an organization which welcomes immigrants to the United States.
• The organization randomly chosen for you is the Federation for American Immigration Reform (FAIR).
The Federation for American Immigration Reform is an immigration-reduction organization of
concerned individuals who believe that immigration laws must be reformed and seeks to reduce overall
immigration (both legal and illegal) into the United States. The founder of FAIR is John Tanton,
author of “The Immigration Invasion” who wrote “I’ve come to the point of view that for EuropeanAmerican society and culture to persist requires a European-American majority, and a clear one at that.”
Would you like to have us donate $1 on your behalf to the Federation for American Immigration
Reform? If you decide to have $1 donated to the immigration-reduction organization FAIR, we will also
transfer $1 extra to your MTurk account. So, if you decide to donate, instead of $0.50 you will be paid
in total $1.50. If instead you prefer not to donate, you will be paid only $0.50 for completing the survey.
Note: just like any other answer to this survey, also your donation decision will be completely anonymous. No one, not even the researchers, will be able to match your decision to your
name.
So would you like to have us donate $1 on your behalf to the Federation for American Immigration Reform?
– Yes
– No

49

Main Experiment: Control Public

• From 0 to 100, what share of people in the population of [state] do you think agrees with the following
statement?
“Both legal and illegal immigration should be drastically reduced because immigrants undermine
American culture and do not respect American values.”
• Important: in order to ensure the quality of the data collected, a member of the research team might
personally contact you to verify your answers to the next question and the following ones.
• We will now randomly select one among two different organization, and will give you the possibility
to make a donation to the selected organization:
– one is an organization which seeks to reduce overall migration to the United States;
– one is an organization which welcomes immigrants to the United States.
• The organization randomly chosen for you is the Federation for American Immigration Reform (FAIR).
The Federation for American Immigration Reform is an immigration-reduction organization of
concerned individuals who believe that immigration laws must be reformed and seeks to reduce overall
immigration (both legal and illegal) into the United States. The founder of FAIR is John Tanton,
author of “The Immigration Invasion” who wrote “I’ve come to the point of view that for EuropeanAmerican society and culture to persist requires a European-American majority, and a clear one at that.”
Would you like to have us donate $1 on your behalf to the Federation for American Immigration
Reform? If you decide to have $1 donated to the immigration-reduction organization FAIR, we will also
transfer $1 extra to your MTurk account. So, if you decide to donate, instead of $0.50 you will be paid
in total $1.50. If instead you prefer not to donate, you will be paid only $0.50 for completing the survey.
So would you like to have us donate $1 on your behalf to the Federation for American Immigration Reform?
– Yes
– No
• From 0 to 100, what do you think is the probability of Donald Trump winning the presidential election
in [state]?

50

Main Experiment: Treatment Public

• From 0 to 100, what do you think is the probability of Donald Trump winning the presidential election
in [state]?
• According to recent estimates from PredictWise, the predicted probability of Donald Trump winning
the presidential election in [state] is 100%. That means that the vast majority of voters in [state] are
probably going to support Donald Trump.
Note:

PredictWise reflects academic research into prediction markets.

The backbone of predictions by PredictWise are

generated from real-money markets that trade contracts on upcoming events. Estimates were downloaded on the PredictWise
website on October 31, 2016. For more information, visit http://predictwise.com/.

• From 0 to 100, what share of people in the population of [state] do you think agrees with the following
statement?
“Both legal and illegal immigration should be drastically reduced because immigrants undermine
American culture and do not respect American values.”
• Important: in order to ensure the quality of the data collected, a member of the research team might
personally contact you to verify your answers to the next question and the following ones.
• We will now randomly select one among two different organization, and will give you the possibility
to make a donation to the selected organization:
– one is an organization which seeks to reduce overall migration to the United States;
– one is an organization which welcomes immigrants to the United States.
• The organization randomly chosen for you is the Federation for American Immigration Reform (FAIR).
The Federation for American Immigration Reform is an immigration-reduction organization of
concerned individuals who believe that immigration laws must be reformed and seeks to reduce overall
immigration (both legal and illegal) into the United States. The founder of FAIR is John Tanton,
author of “The Immigration Invasion” who wrote “I’ve come to the point of view that for EuropeanAmerican society and culture to persist requires a European-American majority, and a clear one at that.”
Would you like to have us donate $1 on your behalf to the Federation for American Immigration
Reform? If you decide to have $1 donated to the immigration-reduction organization FAIR, we will also
transfer $1 extra to your MTurk account. So, if you decide to donate, instead of $0.50 you will be paid
in total $1.50. If instead you prefer not to donate, you will be paid only $0.50 for completing the survey.
So would you like to have us donate $1 on your behalf to the Federation for American Immigration Reform?
– Yes
– No

51

Auxiliary Experiment: Control Group

• A minaret is a tower typically built adjacent to a mosque and is traditionally used for the Muslim call
to prayer.
Would you support the introduction of a law prohibiting the building of minarets in [state]?
– Yes, I think the building of minarets should be prohibited in [state].
– No, I think the building of minarets should be allowed in [state].
• In this exercise, we matched you with a participant from another survey. You will not know who you
are paired with; only the researchers will know this. However, we will provide you with some additional
background information about the other participant.
The participant you are matched with is a 24-year-old male from Switzerland.
You and the other participant will split a total bonus of $3. You alone will make the decision of
how much of the $3 you will receive and how much of the $3 the other participant will receive. Whatever
decision you make will be implemented. You can choose to divide the $3 however you like. Whatever
you do not give to the other person you get to keep. The amount you keep will be credited to your
MTurk account in the form of a bonus payment. For example, if you decide to give $1.70, then you will
receive a bonus payment of $1.30.
How much would you like to give to the other person?

52

Auxiliary Experiment: Anti-minarets

• A minaret is a tower typically built adjacent to a mosque and is traditionally used for the Muslim call
to prayer.
Would you support the introduction of a law prohibiting the building of minarets in [state]?
– Yes, I think the building of minarets should be prohibited in [state].
– No, I think the building of minarets should be allowed in [state].
• In this exercise, we matched you with a participant from another survey. You will not know who you
are paired with; only the researchers will know this. However, we will provide you with some additional
background information about the other participant.
The participant you are matched with is a 24-year-old male from Switzerland.
prohibition of the building of minarets in Switzerland.

He supports the

You and the other participant will split a total bonus of $3. You alone will make the decision of
how much of the $3 you will receive and how much of the $3 the other participant will receive. Whatever
decision you make will be implemented. You can choose to divide the $3 however you like. Whatever
you do not give to the other person you get to keep. The amount you keep will be credited to your
MTurk account in the form of a bonus payment. For example, if you decide to give $1.70, then you will
receive a bonus payment of $1.30.
How much would you like to give to the other person?

53

Auxiliary Experiment: Anti-minarets Public Support

• A minaret is a tower typically built adjacent to a mosque and is traditionally used for the Muslim call
to prayer.
Would you support the introduction of a law prohibiting the building of minarets in [state]?
– Yes, I think the building of minarets should be prohibited in [state].
– No, I think the building of minarets should be allowed in [state].
• In this exercise, we matched you with a participant from another survey. You will not know who you
are paired with; only the researchers will know this. However, we will provide you with some additional
background information about the other participant.
The participant you are matched with is a 24-year-old male from Switzerland. Like 57.5% of
Swiss respondents, the participant supports the prohibition of the building of minarets in Switzerland.
You and the other participant will split a total bonus of $3. You alone will make the decision of
how much of the $3 you will receive and how much of the $3 the other participant will receive. Whatever
decision you make will be implemented. You can choose to divide the $3 however you like. Whatever
you do not give to the other person you get to keep. The amount you keep will be credited to your
MTurk account in the form of a bonus payment. For example, if you decide to give $1.70, then you will
receive a bonus payment of $1.30.
How much would you like to give to the other person?

54

Auxiliary Experiment: Anti-minarets Referendum

• A minaret is a tower typically built adjacent to a mosque and is traditionally used for the Muslim call
to prayer.
Would you support the introduction of a law prohibiting the building of minarets in [state]?
– Yes, I think the building of minarets should be prohibited in [state].
– No, I think the building of minarets should be allowed in [state].
• In this exercise, we matched you with a participant from another survey. You will not know who you
are paired with; only the researchers will know this. However, we will provide you with some additional
background information about the other participant.
The participant you are matched with is a 24-year-old male from Switzerland. Building minarets
is illegal in Switzerland, following a 2009 referendum. Like 57.5% of Swiss respondents, the participant
supports the prohibition of the building of minarets in Switzerland. However, he did not vote in the
referendum since he was under legal voting age.
You and the other participant will split a total bonus of $3. You alone will make the decision of
how much of the $3 you will receive and how much of the $3 the other participant will receive. Whatever
decision you make will be implemented. You can choose to divide the $3 however you like. Whatever
you do not give to the other person you get to keep. The amount you keep will be credited to your
MTurk account in the form of a bonus payment. For example, if you decide to give $1.70, then you will
receive a bonus payment of $1.30.
How much would you like to give to the other person?

55

Auxiliary Anonymous Experiment: Control Group

• A minaret is a tower typically built adjacent to a mosque and is traditionally used for the Muslim call
to prayer.
Would you support the introduction of a law prohibiting the building of minarets in [state]?
– Yes, I think the building of minarets should be prohibited in [state].
– No, I think the building of minarets should be allowed in [state].
• In this exercise, we matched you with a participant from another anonymous survey. You will not know
who you are paired with. However, we will provide you with some additional background information
about the other participant.
The participant you are matched with is a 24-year-old male from Switzerland.
You and the other participant will split a total bonus of $3. You alone will make the decision of
how much of the $3 you will receive and how much of the $3 the other participant will receive. Whatever
decision you make will be implemented. You can choose to divide the $3 however you like. Whatever
you do not give to the other person you get to keep. The amount you keep will be credited to your
MTurk account in the form of a bonus payment. For example, if you decide to give $1.70, then you will
receive a bonus payment of $1.30.
How much would you like to give to the other person?

56

Auxiliary Anonymous Experiment: Anti-minarets

• A minaret is a tower typically built adjacent to a mosque and is traditionally used for the Muslim call
to prayer.
Would you support the introduction of a law prohibiting the building of minarets in [state]?
– Yes, I think the building of minarets should be prohibited in [state].
– No, I think the building of minarets should be allowed in [state].
• In this exercise, we matched you with a participant from another anonymous survey. You will not know
who you are paired with. However, we will provide you with some additional background information
about the other participant.
The participant you are matched with is a 24-year-old male from Switzerland. In our anonymous survey, like the one you just completed, he said he supports the prohibition of the building of
minarets in Switzerland.
You and the other participant will split a total bonus of $3. You alone will make the decision of
how much of the $3 you will receive and how much of the $3 the other participant will receive. Whatever
decision you make will be implemented. You can choose to divide the $3 however you like. Whatever
you do not give to the other person you get to keep. The amount you keep will be credited to your
MTurk account in the form of a bonus payment. For example, if you decide to give $1.70, then you will
receive a bonus payment of $1.30.
How much would you like to give to the other person?
• Out of 100 respondents from Switzerland, how many do you believe would support prohibiting the
building of minarets?
• Do you think building minarets is legal or illegal in Switzerland?
– Legal
– Illegal

57

Auxiliary Anonymous Experiment: Anti-minarets Public Support

• A minaret is a tower typically built adjacent to a mosque and is traditionally used for the Muslim call
to prayer.
Would you support the introduction of a law prohibiting the building of minarets in [state]?
– Yes, I think the building of minarets should be prohibited in [state].
– No, I think the building of minarets should be allowed in [state].
• In this exercise, we matched you with a participant from another anonymous survey. You will not know
who you are paired with. However, we will provide you with some additional background information
about the other participant.
The participant you are matched with is a 24-year-old male from Switzerland. In our anonymous survey, like the one you just completed, he said he supports the prohibition of the building of
minarets in Switzerland. According to numbers from 2009, 57.5% of Swiss respondents are in favor of
prohibiting the building of minarets.
You and the other participant will split a total bonus of $3. You alone will make the decision of
how much of the $3 you will receive and how much of the $3 the other participant will receive. Whatever
decision you make will be implemented. You can choose to divide the $3 however you like. Whatever
you do not give to the other person you get to keep. The amount you keep will be credited to your
MTurk account in the form of a bonus payment. For example, if you decide to give $1.70, then you will
receive a bonus payment of $1.30.
How much would you like to give to the other person?
• Out of 100 respondents from Switzerland, how many do you believe would support prohibiting the
building of minarets?
• Do you think building minarets is legal or illegal in Switzerland?
– Legal
– Illegal

58

Auxiliary Anonymous Experiment: Anti-minarets Referendum

• A minaret is a tower typically built adjacent to a mosque and is traditionally used for the Muslim call
to prayer.
Would you support the introduction of a law prohibiting the building of minarets in [state]?
– Yes, I think the building of minarets should be prohibited in [state].
– No, I think the building of minarets should be allowed in [state].
• In this exercise, we matched you with a participant from another anonymous survey. You will not know
who you are paired with. However, we will provide you with some additional background information
about the other participant.
The participant you are matched with is a 24-year-old male from Switzerland. In our anonymous
survey, like the one you just completed, he said he supports the prohibition of the building of minarets
in Switzerland. Building minarets is illegal in Switzerland, following a 2009 referendum. According to
numbers from 2009, 57.5% of Swiss respondents are in favor of prohibiting the building of minarets. However, the person you are matched with did not vote in the referendum since he was under legal voting age.
You and the other participant will split a total bonus of $3. You alone will make the decision of
how much of the $3 you will receive and how much of the $3 the other participant will receive. Whatever
decision you make will be implemented. You can choose to divide the $3 however you like. Whatever
you do not give to the other person you get to keep. The amount you keep will be credited to your
MTurk account in the form of a bonus payment. For example, if you decide to give $1.70, then you will
receive a bonus payment of $1.30.
How much would you like to give to the other person?
• Out of 100 respondents from Switzerland, how many do you believe would support prohibiting the
building of minarets?
• Do you think building minarets is legal or illegal in Switzerland?
– Legal
– Illegal

59

