NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

THE LERNER SYMMETRY THEOREM:
GENERALIZATIONS AND QUALIFICATIONS
Arnaud Costinot
Iván Werning
Working Paper 23427
http://www.nber.org/papers/w23427

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
May 2017

We thank Mostafa Beshkar and Gene Grossman for helpful comments. The views expressed
herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of
Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.
© 2017 by Arnaud Costinot and Iván Werning. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to
exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.

The Lerner Symmetry Theorem: Generalizations and Qualifications
Arnaud Costinot and Iván Werning
NBER Working Paper No. 23427
May 2017
JEL No. F1,F10,F11,F12,F13,F23
ABSTRACT
The Lerner Symmetry Theorem (Lerner, 1936) establishes the equivalence between import tariffs
and export taxes in a simple neoclassical economy with two countries, two final goods, and no
trade costs. In this paper we provide a number of generalizations and qualifications of this wellknown result. Among other things, we show that the absence of trade deficits is neither necessary
nor sufficient for Lerner Symmetry to hold. We conclude by discussing its implications for border
tax adjustments.

Arnaud Costinot
Department of Economics, E52-534
MIT
77 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge MA 02142
and NBER
costinot@mit.edu
Iván Werning
Department of Economics, E52-536
MIT
77 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02139
and NBER
iwerning@mit.edu

1

Introduction

When should one country be concerned about changes in its neighbor’s tax system? What
type of policies should be deemed protectionist and regulated by the World Trade Organization? What type of tax reforms are neutral in a global economy? How do global
imbalances and global supply chains affect, if at all, the answers to these questions?
The Lerner Symmetry Theorem (Lerner, 1936) provides an important starting point for
thinking about tax neutrality in a global economy. It establishes the equivalence between
import tariffs and export taxes and, as a corollary, the neutrality of any tax reform that
would increase import tariffs and export subsidies by the same amount.
The Lerner Symmetry Theorem was originally derived in a simple neoclassical economy with two countries, two final goods, no trade costs, and no distortionary taxes. Over
the last eighty years, both the world economy and trade theory have changed. Multinational firms, imperfect competition, and trade costs are now part of the workhorse models in international trade. Due to these advancements, a result as important as the Lerner
Symmetry Theorem deserves a modern treatment.
Our goal to offer a number of generalizations and qualifications of this well-known result. We first consider a general Arrow-Debreu economy with linear taxes. In this context,
we highlight three sufficient conditions for Lerner Symmetry to hold. The first one relates
to the fragmentation of production across countries; the second one relates to the possibility of consumption in multiple countries; and the third relates to foreigners’ holdings
of domestic assets. Among other things, we show that the absence of trade imbalances is
neither necessary nor sufficient for Lerner Symmetry to hold.
We then illustrate how the same formal argument can be extended to economies where
firms have market power, consumers have behavioral biases, taxes are non-linear, and
prices are sticky. Motivated by the influential work of Auerbach and coauthors (see Auerbach et al. 2017 for a recent summary), we conclude by discussing the implications of our
results for border tax adjustments.
We are not the first to offer generalizations and qualifications of Lerner’s (1936) original theorem. McKinnon (1966) establishes the robustness of Lerner Symmetry Theorem to
the introduction of traded intermediate goods. Ray (1975) argues that symmetry breaks
down under monopoly pricing, though his proof implicitly relies on the assumption that
demand functions are not homogeneous of degree zero in prices. Once homogeneity of
degree zero is restored, Lerner Symmetry remains valid under monopoly pricing, a point
emphasized by Eaton, Grossman, Kaempfer and Tower (1983).
Most closely related to our work is Kaempfer and Tower (1982) who establish a general

1

version of Lerner Symmetry Theorem in an environment where all balance of payment
debits and credits can be taxed and subsidized. In the absence of such general taxes and
subsidies, Lerner Symmetry breaks down, for instance, in the presence of cross-country
asset holdings, as recently discussed in Blanchard (2009). Compared to existing work,
we focus on a more general environment; we offer a simpler proof of Lerner Symmetry
Theorem; and we derive new insights about the conditions under which one should expect tax reforms to be neutral, including the nature of multinational production and the
composition of foreign asset positions.
The Lerner Symmetry Theorem has direct implications for the equivalence between
currency and fiscal devaluation. As originally noted by Keynes (1931), and more recently
studied by Farhi, Gopinath and Itskhoki (2014), a government can mimic the effect of a
currency devaluation by combining an import tariff with an export subsidy. In economies
with flexible exchange rate, the Lerner Symmetry Theorem implies that such combination
should be neutral, a point emphasized by Staiger and Sykes (2010).
As we discuss at the end of the paper, the Lerner Symmetry Theorem also provides a
natural starting point to study the neutrality of border tax adjustments. In this respect,
our analysis generalizes the neutrality results in Meade (1974) and Grossman (1980).
The rest of the paper is organized as follows. Section 2 derives a general Lerner Symmetry Theorem in a neoclassical environment. Section 3 extends our benchmark result
to non-neoclassical environments. Section 4 concludes with an application to border tax
adjustments.

2
2.1

The Neoclassical Benchmark
Economic Environment

Consider a world economy comprising many countries, many commodities, many firms,
and many households. In principle, firms may produce and sell commodities in multiple
countries. Likewise, households may work and consume around the world.
Taxes. All economic transactions between a buyer and a seller may be subject to taxation. Taxes may vary across source and destination countries, across commodities, as well
as across firms and households.
Let tijk (n) denote the ad-valorem tax imposed by country j on a buyer n who purchases
commodity k in that country from a seller producing in country i. The buyer n may be
either a household, purchasing a final good, or a firm, purchasing intermediate inputs or
2

labor services. We impose no restriction on the sign of tijk (n). If i 6= j, then tijk (n) ≥ 0
corresponds to an import tariff, whereas tijk (n) ≤ 0 corresponds to an import subsidy.
Let sijk (n) denote the ad-valorem tax imposed by country i on a seller n who produces
commodity k in that country and sells it in country j. Again, a seller may be either a firm
or a household and we impose no restriction on the sign of sijk (n). If i 6= j, then sijk (n) ≥ 0
corresponds to an export subsidy, whereas sijk (n) ≤ 0 corresponds to an export tax.
Tax revenues in each country i are rebated lump-sum to the set of households, Hi , who
are resident of that country. τ (h) denotes the lump-sum transfer to household h.
Firms. Each firm f chooses its input vector, m( f ) ≡ {mijk ( f )} ≥ 0, and its output vector,
y( f ) ≡ {yijk ( f )} ≥ 0, in order to maximize its profits taking as given the untaxed prices
of commodities, p ≡ { pijk }, as well as the schedule of taxes and subsidies that it faces,
t( f ) ≡ {tijk ( f )} and s( f ) ≡ {sijk ( f )}. Formally, firm f ’s profit maximization problem is
π( f ) ≡

max

(m( f ),y( f ))∈Ω( f )

p(1 + s( f )) · y( f ) − p(1 + t( f )) · m( f ),

(1)

where we let Ω( f ) denote firm f ’s production set and we use the convention p(1 +
s( f )) ≡ { pijk (1 + sijk ( f ))} and p(1 + t( f )) ≡ { pijk (1 + tijk ( f ))}, with · the scalar product of two vectors. In what follows, we let πi ( f ) ≡ ∑ j,k [ pijk (1 + sijk ( f ))yijk ( f ) − pkji (1 +
tkji ( f ))mkji ( f )] denote the profits deriving from production in country i.
Households. Each household h chooses its consumption vector, c(h) ≡ {cijk (h)} ≥ 0, as
well as its supply of services, l (h) ≡ {lijk (h)} ≥ 0, in order maximize her utility taking
as given untaxed prices as well as taxes and subsidies. Letting u(·; h) denote her utility
function and Γ(h) denote the set of feasible bundles, (c(h), l (h)), the utility maximization
problem of household h can be expressed as
max

(c(h),l (h))∈Γ(h)

u ( c ( h ) − l ( h ); h )
p(1 + t(h)) · c(h) = p(1 + s(h)) · l (h) + π · θ (h) + τ (h)

(2)

where π ≡ {π ( f )} is the vector of firms’ profits and θ (h) ≡ {θ ( f , h)} is the vector of
firms’ shares by household h. Endowments, of either goods or factors, can be treated as
shares of simple firms.

3

Market Clearing. For all commodities, supply is equal to demand. In vector notation,
this can be expressed compactly as

∑ y ( f ) + ∑ l ( h ) = ∑ c ( h ) + ∑ m ( f ).
f

h

h

(3)

f

Government. In any country i, the government’s budget is balanced,

∑ pkji (∑ tkji (h)ckji (h) + ∑ tkji ( f )mkji ( f ))
j,k

h

f

−∑
j,k

pijk (

∑ sijk (h)lijk (h) + ∑ sijk ( f )yijk ( f )) = ∑
h

f

τ ( h ).

(4)

h∈ Hi

Competitive Equilibrium. A competitive equilibrium with taxes, t ≡ {tijk (n)} and s ≡
{sijk (n)}, and lump-sum transfers, τ ≡ {τ (h)}, corresponds to c ≡ {c(h)}, l ≡ {l (h)},
m ≡ {m( f )}, y ≡ {y( f )}, and p ≡ { pijk } such that: (i ) (m( f ), y( f )) solves (1) for all f ; (ii )
(c(h), l (h)) solves (2) for all h; and (iii ) conditions (3) and (4) hold.

2.2

A General Lerner Symmetry Theorem

Fix some country i0 with ad-valorem taxes on buyers and sellers located in that country,
ti0 ≡ {tkji0 (n)} and si0 ≡ {sik0 j (n)}, and domestic lump-sum transfers, τi0 ≡ {τ (h)}h∈ Hi .
0
We are interested in characterizing the set of neutral tax reforms in that country. Throughout this paper, we rely on the following definition.
Definition 1. Given taxes and lump-sum transfers in the rest of the world, a tax reform from
(ti0 , si0 ) to (t̃i0 , s̃i0 ) in country i0 is neutral if there exist domestic lump-sum transfers, τ̃i0 , such
that the set of equilibrium allocations (c, l, m, y) is the same under (ti0 , si0 , τi0 ) and (t̃i0 , s̃i0 , τ̃i0 ).
Our generalization of the Lerner Symmetry Theorem emphasizes three conditions under which tax reforms in country i0 are neutral.
A1. For any firm f , production possibilities in country i0 are independent of possibilities in other
countries,
Ω ( f ) = Ω i0 ( f ) × Ω − i0 ( f ),
where Ωi0 ( f ) denotes the set of feasible input-output vectors, ({mkji0 ( f )}, {yik0 j ( f )}), in country
i0 and Ω−i0 ( f ) denotes the set of feasible vectors, ({mkji ( f )}i6=i0 , {yijk ( f )}i6=i0 ), in other countries.
A2. For any domestic household h ∈ Hi0 , there is no consumption or employment abroad,
cijk (h) = l jik (h) = 0 for any i, any k, and any j 6= i0 ,
4

for any foreign household h ∈
/ Hi0 , there is no consumption or employment in country i0 ,
ciik 0 (h) = lik0 i (h) = 0 for any i and any k.

A3. For any foreign household h ∈
/ Hi0 , the net value of assets held in country i0 is zero,
πi0 · θ (h) = 0,
where πi0 ≡ {πi0 ( f )} is the vector of firms’ profits deriving from production in i0 .
Under the three previous conditions, a general Lerner Symmetry Theorem can be
stated as follows.
Theorem 1. Suppose that A1-A3 hold. Then any tax reform from (ti0 , si0 ) to (t̃i0 , s̃i0 ) is neutral
if (i ) cross-border taxes satisfy
1 + t̃kji0 (n) = η (1 + tkji0 (n)) for all j 6= i0 and k,
1 + s̃ik0 j (n) = η (1 + sik0 j (n)) for all j 6= i0 and k,
and (ii ) local taxes satisfy
1 + t̃ik0 i0 (n) = λk (1 + tik0 i0 (n)) for all k,
1 + s̃ik0 i0 (n) = λk (1 + sik0 i0 (n)) for all k,
with η > 0 and λk > 0.
Proof. We follow a guess and verify strategy. Given prices, { pijk }, and lump-sum transfers,
τi0 (h), in the original equilibrium with taxes (ti0 , si0 ), let us construct the new equilibrium
prices such that for all k,
p̃ijk = pijk /η if either i 6= i0 or j 6= i0 ,
p̃ik0 i0 = pik0 i0 /λk , otherwise,
and the new lump-sum transfers such that
τ̃ (h) = p(1 + t̃(h)) · c(h) − p(1 + s̃(h)) · l (h) − π̃ · θ (h) for all h ∈ Hi0 ,

5

with π̃ ≡ {π̃ ( f )} the vector of firms’ profits under the new tax schedule,
π̃ ( f ) =

∑ [ p̃ijk (1 + s̃ijk ( f ))yijk ( f ) − p̃kji (1 + t̃kji ( f ))mkji ( f )].

i,j,k

By construction, the after-tax prices faced by firms are either unchanged in country i0
or divided by η in other countries. Under condition A1, this implies that the solution
to the profit maximization problem, (m( f ), y( f )), must be unchanged for all firms in all
countries, whereas the value of profits associated with production in country i0 must be
unchanged and divided by η in other countries. Under condition A3, this implies that the
income of households in country i 6= i0 must be divided by η. Together with condition
A2, it follows that the solution to the utility maximization problem, (c(h), l (h)), must be
unchanged for all h ∈
/ Hi0 . In country i0 , lump-sum transfers are constructed such that
the budget constraint of any household still holds. Since prices are unchanged in country
i0 , it follows that the solution to the utility maximization problem, (c(h), l (h)), must also
be unchanged for any h ∈ Hi0 . To conclude note that good market clearing conditions (3)
and the government’s budget balance (4) in any country i 6= i0 must still trivially hold.
Thus, the government’s budget constraint in country i0 must also hold by Walras’ law.

2.3

Discussion

In a general Arrow-Debreu economy, such as the one that we consider, a proportional
change in all taxes should leave the set of equilibrium allocations unchanged as discussed,
for instance, by Diamond and Mirrlees (1971). Such a reform would necessarily leave
relative prices unchanged. In addition, any increase in the overall price levels faced by
households and firms that it may trigger would be exactly matched by an increase in the
government’s tax revenues.
One can think of Theorem 1, as well as the original Lerner Symmetry Theorem, as
an alternative neutrality result that allows for more flexible tax reforms, namely reforms
that only require uniform changes across trade taxes. In Lerner (1936), one can think
of the initial tax schedule as an import tariff on the first commodity, t1ji0 (n) = t, with
all other taxes being zero, and as the new tax schedule as an export tax, s2i0 j (n) = s,
with all other taxes being zero. Provided that 1 + s = 1/(1 + t), 1 states that such a
reform, which corresponds to η = 1/(1 + t), would be neutral. For the exact same reason,
starting from no taxes, a uniform increase in import tariff and export subsidy such that
1 + t = 1 + s = η, is neutral. We come back to this point when discussing border tax
adjustments in Section 4.
6

A stronger neutrality result, that allows for more flexible tax reforms, of course, requires stronger assumptions on technology, preferences and the allocation of property
rights. The main contribution of our analysis is to clarify the nature of these restrictions.
The first of our sufficient condition, A1, is a restriction on technology that requires
the separability of firm’s decision across markets. Under this assumption, although there
may be global supply chains, in the sense that a firm from Japan may export intermediate
goods to China, combine these goods with Chinese labor to produce final goods, and export those to the United States, it is as if all firms operating in country i0 were “domestic”
firms. These firms may sell output in foreign markets and buy inputs from abroad, but
they are domestic in the sense that all their transactions are subject to “domestic” taxes,
i.e. those imposed by country i0 at the border. In such an environment, which is the one
considered by Lerner and the rest of the literature, higher trade taxes in country i0 , η > 1,
accompanied by lower prices abroad, as described in the proof of Theorem 1 would have
no effect on the relative price by any individual firm.
A1 is a potentially strong restriction. Suppose, for instance, that the same CEO, a
scarce input, manages affiliates in China and the United States. If so, one would expect
changes in the level of prices in one country relative to another to have real effects. Specifically, if the marginal value of the CEO’s time goes up in the United States, she should
allocate more time to the U.S. affiliate and less time to the Chinese affiliate. This is true
even though both affiliates may only be selling locally and may only be subject to local
taxes in these markets. Similarly, A1 is likely to be violated in economies where exporting
firms located in the United States must incur distribution costs in China. In such cases,
one can think of distribution services as untaxed imports. If so, a decrease in Chinese
distribution costs would incentivize U.S. firms to sell more in China.
The second of our sufficient condition, A2, is the counterpart of A1 on the household
side. It would hold if one were to restrict preferences so that households only derive
utility from consumption of commodities in their country of residence. A simple way to
think about A2 is that it rules out tourism. Intuitively, when the U.S. taxes imports and
subsidizes exports, this mimics a dollar devaluation, which, with flexible exchange rates,
should be offset by an appreciation of the dollar. In our proof, as mentioned above, prices
in the rest of the world should go down by a factor η. For a U.S. resident who spends his
vacation in France, such a dollar appreciation will not be neutral. Like in the distribution
example, neutrality breaks down because French exports of services are untaxed by the
U.S. government.
While the first two conditions focus on restrictions on technology and preferences
such that the “relevant” relative prices remain unchanged, A3 focus on wealth effects. It
7

guarantees that if the the level of prices faced by households change, their wealth change
by the same amount, thereby guaranteeing the neutrality of the tax reform. Although the
argument is mathematically trivial, A3 clarifies two important economic points.
First, the existence of trade imbalances is neither necessary nor sufficient for the tax
reforms that we consider to be neutral. For instance, the United States could have assets
abroad, and run a trade deficit forever, or liabilities, and run a trade surplus forever.
Provided that foreigners do not have assets or liabilities in the United States, and that
domestic transfers can be used to offset the heterogeneous exposure of U.S. households
to exchange rate movements, the tax reform that we consider in Theorem 1 would be
neutral.
It is true that if the United States is currently running a trade deficit, then taxes collected through a uniform tariff on U.S. imports would exceed the subsidies paid on U.S.
exports. But such changes in tax revenues would be exactly offset by the increase in prices
faced by U.S. households, leaving consumption and production, both in the United States
and the rest of the world, unchanged.
Second, there is an asymmetry between U.S. and foreign assets and liabilities. According to A3, it is not just that gross rather than net foreign asset positions matter, but rather
that only the gross assets position of foreigners in the United States matters. In the case of
U.S. assets abroad, any change in value caused by a tax reform satisfying the conditions of
Theorem 1 must be exactly offset by a change in tax revenues and, in turn, the lump-sum
transfers to the households. In contrast, in the case of foreign assets in the United States,
there are no transfers abroad to compensate foreign households for changes the value of
their assets.

3

Beyond the Neoclassical Benchmark

Having provided a general proof of the Lerner Symmetry Theorem in neoclassical economies,
we now briefly describe how our formal argument extends to non-neoclassical economies.
Imperfect Competition Consider the same economic environment as in Section 2, except for the fact that firms no longer behave as price-takers. Namely, suppose that the
profit-maximization problem generalizes
max

(m( f ),p( f ),y( f ))∈Ω( f ,{m( f 0 ),p( f 0 ),y( f 0 )} f 0 6= f )

p( f )(1 + s( f )) · y( f ) − p( f )(1 + t( f )) · m( f ),

8

(5)

with the feasible set Ω( f , {m( f 0 ), p( f 0 ), y( f 0 )} f 0 6= f ) now a function of the quantities and
prices chosen by other firms. Bertrand competition, in the absence of trade in intermediate goods, corresponds to the special case where given the prices chosen by its competitors, Ω( f , {m( f 0 ), p( f 0 ), y( f 0 )} f 0 6= f ) determines the residual demand curve faced by firm
f . Cournot competition corresponds to the special case where given the quantities chosen
by its competitors, Ω( f , {m( f 0 ), p( f 0 ), y( f 0 )} f 0 6= f ) determines the inverse of the residual
demand curve faced by each firm. For the proof of Theorem 1 to remain valid in this
more general environment, it is sufficient to have (i ) the solution to (5) being homogeneous of degree zero in taxes and (ii ) the profit functions being homogeneous of degree
one. Under both Bertrand and Cournot competition, the fact that consumers’ demand is
homogeneous of degree zero in all prices guarantees that the two previous are satisfied.
Behavioral Agents. For the same reason that our results do not require firms to be pricetakers, Theorem 1 does not require households to be rational. Provided that demand is
homogenous of degree zero in prices and Walras’ law hold, our formal argument still
goes through. In fact, for any tax reform such that λk = 1 for all k, since neutrality can
be achieved entirely by a movement of the nominal exchange rate, equal to 1/η, Lerner
Symmetry can even hold in economies where agents are subject to nominal illusion, as
in Gabaix (2014). The reason is that under such an exchange rate adjustment, all local
currency prices remain unchanged after the tax reform.
Non-Linear Taxes. At a formal level, our analysis already allows non-linear taxes since
the value of a tax depends on whether a firm is buying or selling a good. More generally,
we could assume that taxes vary with quantities sold. As long as the tax changes that we
consider are uniform in the sense of conditions (i ) and (ii ) in Theorem 1, one can follow
the exact same guess and verify strategy to establish the validity of Lerner Symmetry in
such an environment.
Nominal Rigidities. The neoclassical environment presented in Section 2 assumes flexible prices. As mentioned above, for any tax reform such that λk = 1 for all k, the only
relative prices that needs to adjust for the proof of Theorem 1 to go through are the prices
of foreign relative to domestic goods, which a movement of the nominal exchange rate
can achieve. Hence, our general Lerner Symmetry Theorem can allow price stickiness
provided that exchange rate is not fixed. The fact that the tax reforms considered in Theorem 1 are no longer neutral if exchange rates are fixed is, of course, the focus of the
literature on fiscal devaluations mentioned in our introduction.
9

4

Application to Border Tax Adjustments

We conclude by discussing the implications of our theoretical results for border tax adjustments. In line with the work of Auerbach et al. (2017) arguing for a move towards
destination-based profits taxation, we ask: What would happen if U.S. firms were allowed to subtract exports from their profits, while no longer being allowed to subtract
imports?1
Consider the profits of a firm f operating in the United States, both before and after the
tax adjustment. Suppose that, initially, profits are subject to an ad-valorem corporate tax,
tπ , and, for expositional convenience, that there are no other taxes. Using our notation,
the profits of a firm f operating in the United States before border tax adjustment can then
be expressed as
k
k
πUS ( f ) = (1 − tπ ) ∑[ pUSj
yUSj
( f ) − pkjUS mkjUS ( f )].
j,k

After the border tax adjustment, the same after-tax profits are given by
k
k
k
k
πUS ( f ) =(1 − tπ ) ∑[ pUSUS
yUSUS
( f ) − pUSUS
mUSUS
( f )]
k

+

∑

k
k
[ pUSj
yUSj
( f ) − pkjUS mkjUS ( f )].

j6=US,k

In the notation of Theorem 1, this corresponds to a tax reform such that η = 1/(1 − tπ )
and λk = 1 for all k. If Assumptions A1-A3 hold, this should be neutral.
Assumptions A1-A3 are by no means trivial restrictions. But it seems fair to say that
there are few theoretical results in economics that are as robust as Lerner Symmetry. As
already noted in Section 2.3, the fact that the United States runs a trade deficit today or
owns assets abroad does not break the neutrality of border tax adjustments. What breaks
neutrality is the value of foreigner’s assets in the United States. In response to a border
tax adjustment, the value of these assets would increase relative to foreign prices, thereby
creating a positive transfer from the United States towards the rest of the world. Ultimately, of course, the key issue is not whether A3 as well as A1 and A2 hold in practice;
we know that they do not. The issue is whether departures from A1-A3 are quantitatively
important or not.
We conclude by noting that although VAT are often discussed in the context of border
1 Such

a change has been discussed recently in the GOP proposal for tax reform, “A Better Way.”
A description of the proposal can be found at://abetterway.speaker.gov/_assets/pdf/ABetterWay-TaxPolicyPaper.pdf. See also Weisbach (2017) for a detailed discussion.

10

tax adjustments—because exports are exempt from VAT, whereas imports are not—a VAT
is unlikely to be neutral. Provided that factor supply is not perfectly inelastic, a uniform
VAT or sales tax imposed would affect labor supply and, in turn, wages and other prices.
Yet, VAT are legal from the point of view of the World Trade Organization, whereas the
border tax adjustment described above, because it combines an (illegal) import tariff with
an (illegal) export subsidy, might not be. Lerner Symmetry is a simple, but difficult idea.

11

References
Auerbach, Alan, Michael P. Devereux, Michael Keen, and John Vella, “DestinationBased Cash Flow Taxation,” Oxford University Centre for Business Taxation Working Paper
Series, 2017.
Blanchard, Emily J., “Trade Taxes and International Investment,” Canadian Journal of Economics, 2009, 42 (3), 882–899.
Diamond, Peter A. and James A. Mirrlees, “Optimal Taxation and Public Production I:
Production Efficiency,” American Economic Review, 1971, 61 (1), 8–27.
Eaton, Jonathan, Gene M. Grossman, William Kaempfer, and Edward Tower, “The Impact of Monopoly Pricing on the Lerner Symmetry Theorem: a comment,” Quarterly
Journal of Economics, 1983, 98, 529–533.
Farhi, Emmanuel, Gita Gopinath, and Oleg Itskhoki, “Fiscal Devaluations,” Review of
Economic Studies, 2014, 81 (2), 725–760.
Gabaix, Xavier, “A Sparsity-Based Model of Bounded Rationality,” Quarterly Journal of
Economics, 2014, 129 (4), 1661–1710.
Grossman, Gene M., “Border Tax Adjustments? Do They Distort Trade?,” Journal of International Economics, 1980, 10, 117–128.
Kaempfer, William H. and Edward Tower, “The Balance of Payments Approach to Trade
Tax Symmetry Theorems,” Weltwirtschaftliches Archive, 1982, 118, 148–65.
Keynes, John Maynard, “Addendum I to: Great Britain,” Committee on Finance and Industry. Report (London, His Majesty’s Stationery Office), 1931, pp. 190–209.
Lerner, A. P., “The Symmetry Between Import and Export Taxes,” Economica, 1936, 3 (11),
306–313.
McKinnon, Ronald I., “Intermediate Products and Differential Tariffs: a Generalization
of Lerner’s Symmetry Theorem,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 1966, 80, 584–615.
Meade, James E., “A Note on Border Tax Adjustments,” Journal of Political Economy, 1974,
82, 1013–1015.
Ray, E. J., “The Impact of Monopoly Pricing on the Lerner Symmetry Theorem,” Quarterly
Journal of Economics, 1975, 89, 591–602.
12

Staiger, Robert W. and Alan O. Sykes, “Currency Manipulation and World Trade,” World
Trade Review, 2010, 9 (4).
Weisbach, David A., “A Guide to the GOP Tax Plan – The Way to a Better Way,” mimeo
University of Chicago, 2017.

13

