                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                  STRAIGHT TALKERS AND VAGUE TALKERS:
     THE EFFECTS OF MANAGERIAL STYLE IN EARNINGS CONFERENCE CALLS

                                         Michał Dzieliński
                                        Alexander Wagner
                                       Richard J. Zeckhauser

                                        Working Paper 23425
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w23425


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                      May 2017


We thank Karthik Balakrishnan, Snehal Banerjee, Francois Brochet, Joey Engelberg, Thomas
Hellmann, Samuli Knüpfer, Tim Loughran, Marina Niessner, Chris Parsons, Marta Serra-Garcia,
Joel Sobel, David Solomon, Jared Stanfield, and Christian Wilk and seminar participants at Aarhus
University, Copenhagen Business School, Stockholm School of Economics, Stockholm University, UC
San Diego, the University of Hamburg, and the University of Nottingham as well as conference
participants at the 2017 AFA Meetings, the 2016 EFA Meetings, the 2016 EFMA Meetings, the 2017
European Winter Finance Summit, the 2016 FMA Meetings, the 2016 FMA Asia-Pacific Meetings, the
2016 SFI Gerzensee Research Days, the 2016 SFS Cavalcade, the Textual Analysis in Economics and
Finance workshop, and the 2016 Young Scholars Nordic Finance Workshop for valuable comments.
We thank the Swiss Finance Institute and the NCCR FINRISK and the UZH Research Priority
Program Financial Market Regulation for support. We thank Maxim Litvak and Denis Petrov for
excellent programming. Ivan Petzev has provided outstanding research assistance. This paper was
previously circulated under the title: “In no (un)certain terms: Managerial style in communicating
earnings news.” The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the
views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

At least one co-author has disclosed a financial relationship of potential relevance for this research.
Further information is available online at http://www.nber.org/papers/w23425.ack

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2017 by Michał Dzieliński, Alexander Wagner, and Richard J. Zeckhauser. All rights reserved.
Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission
provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Straight Talkers and Vague Talkers: The Effects of Managerial Style in Earnings Conference
Calls
Michał Dzieliński, Alexander Wagner, and Richard J. Zeckhauser
NBER Working Paper No. 23425
May 2017
JEL No. G14,G30

                                          ABSTRACT

Managers conducting earnings conference calls display distinctive styles in their word choice.
Some CEOs and CFOs are straight talkers. Others, by contrast, are vague talkers. Vague talkers
routinely use qualifying words indicating uncertainty, such as “approximately”, “probably”, or
“maybe”. Analysts and the stock market attend to the style of managerial talk. They find
earnings news less informative when managers are vague; they respond less and more slowly
as a result. Thus, quantitative information and straightforward contextual information
prove to be complements. Vague communications have the potential benefit of tamping down
over-optimistic analysts expectations.

Michał Dzieliński                                     Richard J. Zeckhauser
Stockholm University                                  John F. Kennedy School of Government
Stockholm Business School                             Harvard University
Kräftriket 7                                          79 John F. Kennedy Street
106 91 Stockholm                                      Cambridge, MA 02138
Sweden                                                and NBER
mdz@sbs.su.se                                         richard_zeckhauser@harvard.edu

Alexander Wagner
University of Zurich - Swiss Finance Institute
Department of Banking and Finance
Plattenstrasse 14
CH-8032 Zurich, Switzerland
and CEPR
alexander.wagner@bf.uzh.ch
1    Introduction
Graham and Dodd (1934), the pioneers of value investing, introduced the idea that investors
should pay attention to the hard facts when analyzing the value of a company. The hard-
est of hard in their analysis was the price/earnings ratio. As has been known for at least
half a century, investors indeed attend strongly to earnings announcements (Beaver, 1968).
Moreover, CFOs consider earnings to be the most important numbers they communicate
externally (Graham, Harvey, and Rajgopal, 2005). Although the disclosure of corporate
financials has become fairly standardized and fancy models are often used to process the
numbers, many practitioners emphasize that assessment by humans still plays an impor-
tant role in interpreting earnings news. Survey evidence shows that analysts regard private
phone calls with management and the Q&A session of earnings conference calls as particu-
larly important for generating earnings forecasts (Brown, Call, Clement, and Sharp, 2015).
Fund managers, interviewed by Barker, Hendry, Roberts, and Sanderson (2012) state that
“building up an understanding of the company” is one of the main motives for systematic
personal interactions with top company executives.
    Importantly, different managers employ very different phraseology when communicating
with market participants. This paper sheds light on one important aspect of this variation:
whether managers are vague or straight-talking when discussing earnings information. We
hypothesize that clearer, i.e., less vague, communication from managers should enable an-
alysts and investors to better understand the company. This in turn should enhance the
ability of these participants to interpret newly revealed information, such as earnings, and
to incorporate it into forecasts and stock prices. Thus, we ask: How, if at all, does the
vagueness in managerial communication affect analyst and investor responses to earnings
news? Are some managers straight talkers and others vague talkers, and if so, does the
market care?
    To answer these questions, we employ information available from earnings conference
calls of public US companies from 2003 to 2015. Every quarter managers conduct such calls
to discuss recent financial results and the outlook for their company. They begin with a
prepared presentation. They follow this with a question and answer (Q&A) session with
the security analysts attending the call. These calls are routinely led by the company’s top
executives. CFOs participate actively alongside the CEOs, as CFOs also play an important
role transmitting value-relevant information from companies to markets. In particular,

                                             1
markets use the information discussed on the conference call to complement and interpret
the hard earnings numbers.
    We focus on the use of uncertain words such as “approximately”, “probably” or “maybe”
(as compiled in the Loughran and McDonald (2011) uncertainty wordlist). Such words
introduce vagueness and cloud communication. Hence, the frequency of such words in
total words spoken by a manager on a call is our measure of vagueness. For each call, we
compute, separately for CEOs and CFOs, the percentage of uncertain words they used in
the presentation and the Q&A part of the call. As discussed further below, prior work on
disclosure has focused on written communication, highlighting, for example, the important
role of readability. Yet very little evidence is available on the use and role of vagueness,
uncertain or qualifying statements, in spoken communication.
    Our first result is that when managers talk more vaguely on an earnings conference
call, the earnings response coefficient (ERC) is smaller, that is, stock prices react less to an
earnings surprise (a deviation of the earnings from the analyst consensus). Interestingly,
vagueness in answers drives this result more than vagueness in presentations. This is robust
to controlling for other important determinants of stock price reactions to conference calls,
such as linguistic tone, the negativity and vagueness of analyst questions, the use of numbers
in the call, length of sentences, and whether a firm provides earnings guidance.
    The logical next question is why vagueness dampens the market response. Each of three
factors could be at play. Vaguer language may reflect: (1) a manager’s consistent style,
(2) persistent firm characteristics related to its communication culture or indeed its business
model, or (3) current conditions. We argue that our analysis offers an important new angle
on the market’s response to corporate communication, as the conference call setting allows
us to separate out company-specific and manager-specific elements of communication. In
particular, the presentation part of each call is carefully prepared, often with guidance from
the investor relations department, arguably to be consistent with the communication culture
of the firm. The Q&A part of the conference call, while also prepared and rehearsed to the
extent possible, requires managers to speak comparatively extemporaneously. Indeed, at
times, they must respond to questions that they did not anticipate.
    We can thus simultaneously observe the same person delivering a fully scripted (presen-
tation) and a necessarily somewhat more improvised (Q&A session) message about the same
firm, under the same business conditions. This enables us to powerfully control for both


                                               2
firm culture and time-varying uncertainty in the company’s operations. Thus, comparing
presentations and answers enables us to extract the personal communication styles of the
CEOs and CFOs. We note that this method could still yield insights even if answers were
not completely ad hoc. It would only require that company-related factors influence pre-
sentations more than answers. We can also benchmark linguistic patterns in the conference
call to the earnings press releases (EPR), which are not communicated by specific people
and hence are even more likely to reflect firm characteristics.
    To illustrate the adequacy of our approach, we compare the language of the EPR, of
the conference call presentation, and the answers on the call, respectively, both before
and after a change in management. Two findings are noteworthy: First, the language of
answers changes much more strongly when the specific person speaking changes than does
the language of the presentation, while the language in the earnings press release is hardly
affected. Second, tracking the same manager switching from one firm to another, we find
the language of answers is much more consistent between the manager’s old and new firm
than is the language of the presentation or the EPR. Hence, as long as the person delivering
information does not change, linguistic patterns regarding the use of uncertain words remain
quite stable in the answers, even when that person switches firms. These results clearly point
to the existence of personal style.
    We next decompose the vagueness of each manager when answering analyst questions
explicitly into several parts. Specifically, we regress our measure of vagueness on (1) the
manager’s fixed effect (which thus represents her vagueness style), (2) her own vagueness
in the presentation (to control unobservable firm-level factors that influence uncertainty at
the time of the call), and (3) other features of manager and analyst speech as well as firm
characteristics. Finally, (4) there remains an unexplained residual vagueness in manager
answers during each call. Crucially, we find that managers differ substantially in their style
of vagueness.
    Since building up an understanding of a company and its managers is a process that
requires repeated interactions, we expect the persistent vagueness style to matter most.
And that is what we find. By contrast, residual vagueness explains little of the ERC.
Interestingly, the effect of the CEO vagueness style is substantially stronger among S&P500
companies than in smaller firms. When CEO vagueness is one standard deviation above
the mean, the ERC in an S&P500 firm is lower by 13%, a sizable difference. The firm size


                                              3
is even more relevant when it comes to CFOs: CFO vagueness only significantly affects
ERCs of S&P500 companies. These results hold also in the sample of firms that experience
managerial turnover (which allows us to control for firm fixed effects). For CFOs, we also
have enough cases of “movers”, that is, managers who switch from being CFO at one firm
to being CFO at another firm. Even when restricting attention to this sample of movers,
we find that CFO vagueness dampens the earnings response.
    One explanation of these results is that vague managers convey less than the full amount
of information but a conceivable alternative explanation is that in a second-best fashion
vague style in fact corrects for the otherwise prevalent overconfidence of managers. If that
were true, stock returns would revert after the initial stronger reaction to straight-talking
CEOs’ earnings surprises. As a third alternative, investors could underreact to vague in-
formation. If that were true, there would be a stronger post-call drift for vaguer CEOs. In
fact, post-call drift differs little between straight talker and vague talker CEOs.
    These results show that earnings (“hard information”) and straightforward managerial
explanations surrounding this information (“soft information”) are complements, not sub-
stitutes. Specifically, if earnings and contextual language were substitutes, investors would
pay more, not less, attention to the quantitative information (such as earnings surprises)
when faced with vague managers. We find the opposite: vagueness in the “soft” explanatory
component leads to greater discounting of the earnings surprise itself.
    Interestingly, in companies with a larger share of transient investors – investors seeking to
exploit any edge of information they can obtain – manager vagueness does not dampen the
initial response, and there is less drift. In sum, earnings communicated by vaguer managers
are indeed less informative, but skilled investors can pierce through the veil of vagueness.
    Next, we explore further consequences of vagueness. Three sets of results emerge. First,
the market overall reacts less to earnings announcements of companies run by vague man-
agers. This is illustrated, for example, by trading volume during the two days surrounding
conference calls. It increases by 55% for calls hosted by highly vague CEOs (those in the
top quintile of the vagueness distribution), compared to an average increase of 64% and
72% for particularly straight-talking CEOs (those in the bottom quintile of vagueness).
    Second, analysts take longer to adjust their estimates to earnings news when faced with
vague managers. Fewer of them react within three days of the call. Furthermore, analyst
uncertainty, as indicated by the revision frequency of their forecasts after the call until the


                                               4
next call, tends to be magnified by managerial vagueness.
    In sum, managerial vagueness substantially affects how market participants respond to
earnings conference calls, in ways that make the response less efficient. However, our final
result highlights potential benefits of vagueness: firms with vaguer CEOs are more likely
to exceed than undershoot analyst expectations, that is, vague communication appears to
help steer analysts away from making overly optimistic predictions for future earnings.
    Our study lies at the intersection of three literatures. First, a substantial body of research
discusses how the presentation of disclosures affects firm value.1 Several papers have studied
the ease with which written text in corporate disclosure documents can be processed. For
example, Loughran and McDonald (2014) show that firms whose 10-K documents are less
easily readable experience higher stock return volatility, greater analyst dispersion, and
larger absolute earnings surprises, and Hwang and Kim (2016) show that closed-end funds
whose reports are less readable suffer higher discounts.2 The use of uncertain words in
written communication was studied by Loughran and McDonald (2013), who show that
a high fraction of uncertain words (as well as negative words and weak modal words) in
IPO prospectuses produce higher first-day IPO returns and larger volatility3 , and Ertugrul,
Lei, Qiu, and Wan (2016), who show that firms with larger 10-K file sizes and a higher
proportion of uncertain and weak modal words in 10-Ks have stricter loan contract terms
and greater future stock price crash risk. Most closely related to our work, Demers and
Vega (2011) find that greater linguistic certainty in written earnings announcements leads
to a stronger immediate response to earnings news and less drift.
    Our work differs on three important dimensions from all these studies: 1. We focus
on spoken words, not on written reports. 2. We study how the vagueness of individual
managers matters, rather than overall company documents. 3. We examine to what extent
any effects found are due to consistent style vs. time-varying residual vagueness. In doing so,
we highlight the result that the relatively more improvised answers section of the conference
   1
     See, e.g., Fields, Lys, and Vincent (2001), Healy and Palepu (2001), Botosan (2006), Beyer, Cohen,
Lys, and Walther (2010) for reviews.
   2
     Other examples linking opaqueness in language to investor reactions and/or firm outcomes include Li
(2008), Miller (2010), Lehavy, Li, and Merkeley (2011), Rennekamp (2012), and You and Zhang (2009);
see Loughran and McDonald (2016) for a survey. In addition to the choice of language, the use of investor
relations firms can influence investors’ access to and processing of information (Solomon, 2012).
   3
     While Loughran and McDonald (2013, p. 308) are careful to note that their findings from IPOs do not
necessarily mean that uncertain words are important also for large, established firms, we find that, in fact,
managerial vagueness has particularly pronounced effects at large companies.


                                                     5
call, rather than the prepared remarks, helps to explain the market response. Because we
can control for the vagueness of the presentation, while assessing the impact of the manager’s
answers, we are simultaneously controlling for other, potentially unobserved and hard-(or
impossible)-to-measure factors that are correlated with the firm’s reporting style on a call.
This allows us to conclude that personal vagueness style of managers is the main driver.
    Second, we add to the literature on earnings conference calls. The vast majority of
existing papers focus on the linguistic tone of managers’ and analysts’ language on these
calls (see Henry and Leone (2016) and Loughran and McDonald (2016) for surveys). We
use tone as a control variable. A number of papers have analyzed managerial tactics on
conference calls. For example, Mayew (2008) and Cohen, Lou, and Malloy (2013) demon-
strate that managers strategically call on analysts to prevent bad news from being revealed
on conference calls. Hollander, Pronk, and Roelofsen (2010) study managerial attempts to
dodge questions. Larcker and Zakolyukina (2012) find that the presence of words related to
deception predicts future accounting problems. Zhou (2014) documents managers’ attempts
to shift blame to external factors. Allee and DeAngelis (2015) find that managers struc-
ture their linguistic tone as part of their overall narrative on the call. Lee (2016) measures
the stylistic similarity between the presentation and answers, based on the use of so-called
function words, to detect managers’ use of scripted language in the latter part. He finds
that markets react negatively to scripted answers. Bushee, Gow, and Taylor (2016) show
that linguistic complexity (as measured by the Gunning fog index) diminishes information
uncertainty when it is driven by the need to convey complex information, but enhances it
when it indicates possible obfuscatory tactics of managers.
    To our knowledge, the use of uncertain words – albeit a simple and intuitive measure
of vague communication – has not been explored systematically in the context of confer-
ence calls.4 Interestingly, we find that the fixed component of vagueness, rather than the
time-varying, potentially strategic component, most strongly affects market reactions. This
is consistent with the observation that managers, analysts, and investors also interact in
many other settings, such as private meetings, private phone calls, broker-hosted investor
   4
    In their analysis of the predictive power of managerial tone Druz, Petzev, Wagner, and Zeckhauser
(2016) control for the frequency of uncertain words and other evasive tactics (such as the use of “atypical”
tenses), but they do not explore the potential of vagueness to slow down the incorporation of news in prices.
Moreover, they control for firm/CEO fixed effects and thus focus on the time-varying components of tone,
uncertainty, and other speech variables, rather than the stable communication style of managers.



                                                     6
conferences, and analyst/investor-days (Green, Jame, Markov, and Subasi, 2014; Soltes,
2014; Solomon and Soltes, 2015; Kirk and Markov, 2017).
    Our study explicitly contrasts the (relatively) scripted presentation and the (relatively)
extemporaneous answers part of the call to measure the same linguistic feature, vague talk.
Other papers also focus on answers, because less scripted language is likely to be used
there. In addition to the managerial tactics papers mentioned above, for example, Green,
Jame, and Lock (2015) use a variety of speech markers to infer managers’ extraversion
from their answers to analyst questions and subsequently show that extraversion improves
career outcomes. Gow, Kaplan, Larcker, and Zakolyukina (2016) use a large number of
linguistic features from answers of managers on conference calls to construct proxies for
personality traits, and they then show that these personality traits correlate with firm
policy choices. Brochet, Naranjo, Miller, and Yu (2017) study international conference
calls, documenting, among other things, that managers from a more individualistic culture
use a more optimistic tone in answers but not in presentations, and Brochet, Naranjo, and
Yu (2016) study language barriers. Our study contributes with a formal decomposition of
vagueness in answers into a systematic (“style”) and a time-varying residual component.
We show that the former matters most for earnings responses.
    Finally, our study adds to the literature on manager style. Existing studies evidence the
role of style by the statistical significance of manager fixed effects in variables related to firm
policy. Such analyses encounter difficulties separating manager style from the effects of firm
organization or culture, since both the manager and the firm are observed simultaneously.
The identification strategy spearheaded by Bertrand and Schoar (2003) relies on managers
who transition from one firm to another during the sample period. Using this strategy,
researchers have studied the role of manager style for accounting practices (Ge, Matsumoto,
and Zhang, 2011), tax avoidance (Dyreng, Hanlon, and Maydew, 2010) as well as the provi-
sion, intensity and accuracy of earnings guidance (Bamber, Jiang, and Wang, 2010; Brochet,
Faurel, and McVay, 2011; Yang, 2012). In a recent study, most closely related to this work,
Davis, Ge, Matsumoto, and Zhang (2015) find a significant manager-specific fixed effect
in the tone of earnings conference calls. However, this moving–managers approach to the
style issue has been criticized by Fee, Hadlock, and Pierce (2013), who argue that endoge-
nous reasons are likely to simultaneously produce both a manager transition and a shift in
company policies. Our analysis shows that dimensions of style reflected in speech patterns


                                                7
can be identified by contrasting relatively unscripted answers and formal presentations on
earnings conference calls. In contrast to the usual approach of estimating manager fixed
effects directly in corporate outcomes, we can test directional predictions about the eco-
nomic effects of vagueness, and we can draw conclusions about the quantitative importance
of style. We discuss this contribution in more detail in Section 4.
    The paper proceeds as follows. Section 2 discusses the conference call data and other
measure of vagueness. Section 3 presents evidence on the economic importance of vagueness
for the earnings response. Section 4 assesses how to parse the roles of firm characteristics
and managerial style in explaining word choice in presentation and Q&A parts of the call.
Section 5 further explores the relation of managerial vagueness style and analyst and market
responses. Section 6 summarizes the results for CFOs. Section 7 concludes.


2       Measuring vagueness and other speech characteris-
        tics on conference calls
Table 1 presents summary statistics of our data. Table A.1 in the Appendix contains
an overview of variable definitions. This section focuses on our key explanatory variable,
vagueness, and other speech characteristics we extract from earnings conference calls.


2.1     Conference call transcripts
Like the vast majority of the literature, we rely on transcripts of quarterly earnings con-
ference calls for publicly listed US companies from 2003 through 2015, which we obtain
from Thomson Reuters Street Events.5 We begin with the full sample, which consists of
122,160 calls for 5,095 distinct firms. For the average firm, we have about 24 conference
calls, corresponding to an observation period of 6 years.
    The transcript of each call contains, at the top, a list of conference call participants,
divided into corporate participants and analysts. We use a Python script to capture the
words spoken by each company participant, and thus create our textual variables of interest
(see below) for both the overall call and for each manager separately. We first extract names
    5
     Mayew and Venkatachalam (2012) demonstrate that in addition vocal cues, indicating managers’ affec-
tive states during the call, provide useful information about future firm performance.



                                                   8
and the titles of the call participants. We then search in the “title” field for keywords such as
“CEO”, “Chief Executive”, “CFO”, “Chief Financ” to identify the two respective executives.
We complement and verify our identification of job titles by matching executives’ names to
Execucomp. Based on this procedure, we find that the CEO and CFO are present in more
than 93% and 92% of the calls respectively, confirming that it is usual procedure to have
the two top executives involved. We identify 9,859 CEOs and 11,098 CFOs.

      [Table 1 about here]

    The estimation of manager vagueness style, performed later in this analysis separately
for CEOs and CFOs, requires a certain minimum number of observations for each manager.
Hence, for the CEO sample we only retain transcripts of conference calls featuring CEOs
who over their combined tenure (possibly at more than one firm) have participated in at
least 5 such calls. This eliminates 8,664 calls in which a CEO was at all present and 3,802
distinct CEOs, most of whom participated in at most 2 calls. This leaves 6,057 CEOs,
for whom we can estimate style. As Table 1 shows, the CEO sample is similar to the full
sample, in particular with regard to firm characteristics and outcomes.6
    Applying the same filter of at least 5 calls to CFOs removes 10,396 calls (of those in
which the CFO was at all present) for 4,727 distinct managers. Here too, the restricted
sample with 6,371 CFOs appears much the same as the full sample with respect to all
relevant variables. This gives us confidence that the technical restrictions we impose in
order to more reliably estimate manager style are not likely to affect our results.
    The average call consists of almost 6,000 words, roughly equally split between the pre-
sentation and answers. This provides ample material for the linguistic analysis of each part.
The average CEO speaks 1,363 words during the presentation and 1,886 words answering
analyst questions.7 The CFOs speak slightly less in the presentation (1,153 words); they are
also less involved in answering questions on average (819 words). Relating these numbers
to the total length of conference calls reveals that on average CEOs are responsible for 46%
of the words in the presentation and 61% in the answers part. The respective shares for the
  6
     The average number of calls per CEO is, by construction, higher in the CEO sample than in the full
sample.
   7
     The numbers we quote for CEOs refer to the CEO sample and those for CFOs to the CFO sample.
Table 1 also provides those numbers for the full sample. The numbers for our sample and the full sample
are similar, except the average number of calls per manager.



                                                  9
CFOs are 39% and 26.5%. Hence, between them the CEO and CFO are responsible for the
vast majority of the content in both parts.


2.2      Vagueness
Our main variable of interest is manager vagueness on the call. We proxy vagueness by
the use of “uncertain” words like “approximately”, “probably”, or “maybe”. The full list,
based on Loughran and McDonald (2011), contains 297 such words.8 A subset of this list
are 27 “weak modal” words, and we obtain similar results with this list of “weasel” words.
    An important step suggested by Loughran and McDonald (2016) when applying word
counts in a new context is to investigate which words occur most frequently, because ac-
cording to Zipf’s law, they will have an outsized influence on any measure constructed from
those counts. In Figure 1 we plot the frequencies of the 25 most popular uncertain words,
based on conference call presentations and answers for the overall management team. The
obtained list is intuitive and suggests that no “patently misclassified” (Loughran and Mc-
Donald, 2016) words are driving the results. Rather, many of the top uncertain words are
qualifiers reflecting the probabilities and confidence intervals associated with statements
made by managers on conference calls. In this sense, vagueness could entail a loss of in-
formation but it could also reflect uncertainty inherent in speaking about future prospects.
As we discuss below, we try to disentangle these different interpretations by comparing how
vagueness affects short- versus long-run responses to earnings.

      [Figure 1 about here]

    Loughran and McDonald (2016) find that 1% of the negative words account for about
44% of the negative word count in 10-K/Q-type SEC filings. For uncertain words in con-
ference calls we find a similar ratio. Across all presentation sections, the top 3 of the 297
uncertain words - “approximately”, “believe” and “may” - account for 38% of the uncertain
word count. Across all answers, the top 3 words are “probably”, “could” and “believe”:
together they account for 35% of the uncertain word count. Overall, the top 25 uncertain
words (about 8.4% of 297) make up 80% of the total uncertain word count.
    We calculate the percentage of uncertain words in all words spoken by the management
  8
      We use the August 2014 version from http://www3.nd.edu/~mcdonald/Word_Lists.html



                                                10
team9 (T), CEO or CFO, respectively, separately during the presentation part and when
answering questions from analysts:

                                                U ncertain wordsT /CEO/CF O (P res)
                 %U nctT /CEO/CF O P res =                                                               (1)
                                                  T otal wordsT /CEO/CF O (P res)

                                                U ncertain wordsT /CEO/CF O (Answ)
                 %U nctT /CEO/CF O Answ =                                                                (2)
                                                  T otal wordsT /CEO/CF O (Answ)
    The typical conference call contains 0.84% uncertain words in presentations and answers
combined (counting CEO, CFO and other management team members). CEOs appear less
vague than CFOs: Their presentations typically contain 0.67% uncertain words and the
average for answers is 0.80%, whereas for the CFO the respective numbers are 0.86% and
0.88%. Importantly, there is considerable variation in %U nctCEO/CF O Answ, as evidenced
by the standard deviation, which is high relative to the mean value for both CEOs and
CFOs. Such variation is essential to our study, which employs it to distinguish straight
from vague talkers. Also important is the fact that the correlation between %U nctP res and
%U nctAnsw is only modestly positive (0.22 for CEOs and 0.07 for CFOs). This suggests
that the language of answers is far from a mere reflection of the presentation part.10
    Figure 2 plots the time series of CEO and CFO vagueness in presentations and answers.
Intuitively, vagueness increased in the financial crisis. There is a minor downward trend
in vagueness in answers since the crisis. We include year fixed effects in all regressions to
control for common time trends. Throughout the sample period, CEOs (but not CFOs)
speak more vaguely in answers than in presentations.

       [Figure 2 about here]

    To provide a complete picture of earnings communication we also collect earnings press
releases (EPRs) from the SEC’s EDGAR system and, similarly to what we do for the
conference calls, measure the frequency of uncertain words contained in them (%UnctEPR).
The average EPR contains 1.11% of uncertain words.
   9
    This includes the CEO, CFO, and other managers present on the call.
  10
    In Figure B.1 of the Internet Appendix we provide illustrative examples of the additional insights avail-
able from analyzing presentations and answers separately. We elaborate further on this point in Section 4.




                                                     11
2.3     Other speech characteristics
Separately, we calculate negativity based on the Loughran and McDonald (2011) list of
negative words. We define %N eg as the ratio of negative words to total words, separately
for CEOs and CFOs and for both presentations and answers.11 We also calculate %N eg for
analyst questions and find that it is on average higher (1.23%) than in manager answers
(0.76% for the CEO and 0.77% for the CFO). This indicates that manager answers are
typically more upbeat than the questions that solicited them, which is consistent with the
results in Brockman, Li, and Price (2015).
    The uncertainty and negative wordlists overlap to some extent. Specifically, of the 297
uncertain words, 40 are also listed as negative.12 However, since none of these “overlap”
words are used very frequently, they only account for 2.26%, 2.50% and 1.11% of uncertain
word occurrences in presentations, answers and analyst questions respectively. Such minor
mechanical commonality is unlikely to introduce any bias when we control for negativity in
our regressions.
    We count the frequency of numbers in presentations and answers of management. Num-
bers include dollar amounts, percentages, etc. (Numbers are recorded in numeric form in the
transcripts.) We pay special attention to numbers reported with decimals and to numbers
containing commas denoting thousands, to avoid counting them as two numbers. Thus, “60
basis points”, “35.3%”, “$8 million”, “22,200” are each counted as one number.13
    %N umbers is the number of numbers per 100 words. Overall, for each 100 words spoken,
on average 1.9 numbers appear on a conference call. This is broadly in line with what Zhou
   11
      Loughran and McDonald (2016) caution against the use of positive tone or net tone because posi-
tive words too often are used to frame a negative statement. On the other hand, a measure such as
negative−positive
negative+positive , used, for example, in Price, Doran, Peterson, and Bliss (2012), has the advantage that it
adjusts for a manager’s tendency to just use more positive and negative words overall. In the main results,
we use the frequency of only negative words, but the results are robust when using a net tone measure. We
have also computed versions of the negativity measures altering the word list. For example, as in Allee and
DeAngelis (2015), we eliminated the word “question” from the list of negative words (though the frequent
use of this word may indicate more intense questioning of management by analysts), and we did not count
the (otherwise negative) word “closing” when it is followed by “remark” or “remarks”. The negativity
measures are highly correlated and exhibit similar relation to stock market responses.
   12
      Some examples are “confusing,” “doubt” and “risky.”
   13
      Careful review of a number of transcripts suggests that although our algorithm works well, it is not
perfect. For example, a reference to “the Boeing 737 and the A 320” would be counted as two numbers.
We believe the imprecision such cases introduce is likely to be small, and any systematic variation in the
usage of product numbering would presumably be picked up by industry fixed effects and other company
characteristics.


                                                     12
(2016) reports for his sample. Presentations are more number-intensive than answers: 4.3
vs 1.4 for each 100 words, respectively. Intuitively, CFOs use many more numbers: For
each 100 words in the presentation, 7 numbers are stated by the average CFO, whereas the
CEO highlights 2.8 numbers per 100 words. Both managers state far fewer numbers in the
Q&A part, consistent with the idea that in this part both the CEO and the CFO convey
important qualitative information.
    Moreover, we compute the average sentence length to serve a simple measure of Com-
plexity.14 The average sentence is somewhat longer in presentations than in answers.


3      The economic effects of vagueness: Earnings responses
Our over-arching hypothesis is that earnings news communicated by vague managers is
harder to interpret in terms of implications for firm value and hence, less informative. In
Section 3.2 we first test this hypothesis by looking at the role of overall managerial vagueness
on earnings conference calls. Later, in Section 4 we will decompose CEO and CFO vagueness
into manager-specific “vagueness style” and residual vagueness.


3.1     Empirical strategy
The key driver of investor reactions to earnings is the difference between the actually an-
nounced number and prior expectations, i.e., the earnings surprise. Given the unexpected
nature of surprises, it is likely that investors will be particularly sensitive to how the man-
agers explain them. We expect earnings surprises accompanied by vague explanations to be
less informative. Difficulties in interpreting earnings information are likely to make investors
less willing to act on it. Hence, our first hypothesis states:

     Hypothesis 1: Vagueness dampens the short-run stock price reaction to earnings, that
is, the earnings response coefficient (ERC).
  14
     Loughran and McDonald (2016) highlight that the parsing of business documents into sentences is
error prone. This is a somewhat smaller danger in the context of conference calls, which, for example,
do not contain tables. We pay special attention not to count decimal dots as sentence-ending periods. In
robustness checks, we also compute the Gunning fog index, and our results are robust to controlling for
this index instead. This fog index also uses the average sentence length, but also includes complex words.
Such words – words with more than two syllables – appear very frequently in a business context, making
the measure hard to interpret. See Loughran and McDonald (2014) for a critique.


                                                   13
    Our hypothesis implies that earnings numbers (“hard information”) and managerial
explanations (“soft information”) are complements. Testing this hypothesis is important
because an alternative story for how vagueness might affect short-run earnings response is
also plausible: Suppose that “hard” and “soft” information were in fact substitutes, not
complements. Then, in the presence of vague managerial communication, rational investors
would pay more not less attention to earnings numbers and we would observe greater ERCs.
    To test Hypothesis 1, we estimate variations of the following panel regression, which
includes Fama-French 48 industry and year fixed effects:


         CAR01i,t = αi + β1 · SurpDeci,t + β2 · %U ncti,t + β3 · %U ncti,t · SurpDeci,t
                                                                                                       (3)
          + βk · Controlski,t + F F 48i + Y eart + i,t

To ease interpretation, we standardize all explanatory variables (except SurpDec and Guid-
ance) using their full-sample means and standard deviations. The main variables of interest
are the interaction terms of vagueness and earnings surprise. Hypothesis 1 predicts β3 < 0.
    The sample for these regressions consists of all calls, in which at least one question was
asked by an analyst and for firms with enough accounting information to calculate daily
abnormal stock returns following Daniel, Grinblatt, Titman, and Wermers (1997) (DGTW).
We apply their methodology to daily returns to compute DGTW characteristic-adjusted
stock returns and express such returns in percent.15 Our dependent variable cumulates
returns over day 0 (the call date) and the following trading day. Price and returns data are
taken from CRSP.
    We consider %U nct for either management Team (T) or CEO or CFO. We run separate
regressions for CEOs and CFOs to determine whose vagueness, if at all, has a bigger effect.
    We employ analyst data from IBES and accounting data from Compustat to measure a
range of earnings and firm characteristics. We calculate earnings surprise as a percentage of
the share price. It is the difference between actual and consensus forecast earnings, divided
  15
     From each stock return we subtract the return on a portfolio of all CRSP firms matched on quintiles of
market equity, book-to-market, and prior 1-year return (thus producing a total of 125 matching portfolios).
Each of these 125 portfolios is reformed each year at the end of June based on the market equity and prior
year return (skipping one month) from the end of June of the same year, and book-to-market from the
fiscal period end of the preceding year. Book-value of equity is furthermore adjusted using the 48 industry
classifications available from Kenneth Frenchs website. The portfolios are value-weighted.



                                                    14
by the share price 5 trading days before the announcement in quarter t, multiplied by 100.
Firms performing above (below) expectations experience a positive (negative) surprise. Sub-
sequently, firms are grouped by earnings surprise decile (SurpDec), from 5 to 1 from largest
positive to smallest positive surprise, then 0 for zero surprises, and then from -1 (for the
smallest negative surprises) through -5 (for the largest negative surprises). This generates
equally sized surprise quintiles on either side of zero but, because there are more positive
than negative surprises overall, causes the unconditional mean of SurpDec to be positive
(around 0.85). This approach follows Hirshleifer, Lim, and Teoh (2009) and DellaVigna
and Pollet (2009) who show that these earnings quantiles exhibit an approximately linear
relationship with CAR01. The relationship between the earnings surprise itself and the
immediate stock response, by contrast, is monotonic but highly nonlinear (Kothari, 2001).
    We control for %U nctAnalyi,t , %N egM GR Answi,t , %N egAnalyi,t , %N umbers, and Com-
plexity. This allows us to account for other important information contained in the linguistic
features of the call that in turn proxy for differences among companies’ (and perhaps man-
agers’) communication. Moreover, the main specifications also include a binary indicator
for whether the firm provides Guidance for a given quarter (either as a point estimate or as
a range). Finally, in the full specification, all communication variables are interacted with
the earnings surprise.
    The matrix Controlsk contains further control variables. The stock return (StockRet) in
quarter t is the firm’s share-price appreciation in the elapsed quarter, that is, the difference
between the share price 5 days before the earnings announcement for quarter t and the share
price 5 days after the earnings announcement for quarter t − 1, expressed as the percentage
of the stock price 5 days after the earnings announcement for quarter t − 1. Market return
(MarketRet) is the percent value-weighted market return for the period starting 5 days after
an earnings announcement for the quarter t − 1 and ending 5 days prior to the earnings
announcement for the quarter t. Daily volatility (DailyVola) of each stock is the standard
deviation of daily returns over the previous quarter. EPS growth is the fraction by which
earnings in a quarter exceed earnings in the same quarter in the prior year. Finally, we
include the natural logarithm of total assets ln(Assets) and Tobin’s Q, which is the ratio of
the market value of assets to their book value.
    In all regressions, to account for the interdependence between observations, we cluster
standard errors by firm or by manager.


                                              15
3.2     Results
Table 2 presents the results. Column (1) shows that higher frequency of uncertain words
in the management’s communication on the conference call overall dampens the earnings
response, as hypothesized. Column (2) highlights that vagueness in answers in particular
reduces the earnings response.

    [Table 2 about here]

    It is potentially important to control for the negativity and vagueness of analysts’ ques-
tions, as well as for features of the presentation. For example, it might be that analysts
follow up particularly clear presentations with more speculative, harder-to-answer questions.
We would expect that such questions themselves contain more uncertain words, which then
may elicit greater vagueness in managers’ answers. Similarly, managers may tend to answer
more negative questions more vaguely. Column (2) controls for these factors. We do not
find any significant effect for %U nctAnaly but negativity, both in analysts’ questions and
managers’ presentations and answers, significantly reduces short-term CARs.
    Columns (3) and (4) show that the dampening effect of vagueness on the earnings re-
sponse is robust to including a broader set of speech characteristics, as well as their interac-
tions with the earnings surprise. Longer presentations, but also longer Q&A sequences signal
difficulties and are associated with negative short-term responses, though a long Q&A part
is beneficial when there is a positive earnings surprise, as seen in the significantly positive
interaction of W ordsAnsw and the earnings surprise. More numbers in the presentation
are associated with a higher immediate stock price reaction (and somewhat more so when
paired with a positive earnings surprise), while more numbers in the Q&A part have a
negative effect (and this effect is especially pronounced when there is a positive earnings
surprise).16 Sentence length (complexity) offers no explanatory power for short-term CARs.
Finally, firms which report disappointing earnings despite providing guidance get punished
more severely than non-guiding firms. This effect is so strong that firms that had provided
guidance have on average lower returns to conference calls. In robustness checks available
on request, we find that the results continue to hold when other firm characteristics (such
as the number of analysts that cover the company) are included.
  16
     Zhou (2016) also finds a positive response to quantitative information in the presentation part, though
he does not consider an interaction with the earnings surprise.


                                                    16
   Next, columns (5) to (7) study the role of vague communication by the CEO and the
CFO separately. In the full sample, the interaction term of %U nctAnsw and the earnings
surprise is negative and significant only for the CEO. However, column (7) shows that CFO
vagueness in S&P500 firms reduces the earnings response, consistent with CFOs playing a
more important role for large firms.
   In sum, the baseline findings in Table 2 substantially support Hypothesis 1 that vague-
ness in managerial communication dampens earnings responses.


4    Do managers have different styles of vagueness?
The findings so far leave open some important questions. Our basic conception is that the
way a manager speaks during a specific call is driven by (1) the “style” of the manager (if it
exists), (2) the company’s “culture” and business model, and (3) the manager’s incidental,
quarter-specific use of uncertain words. The incidental usage can depend on many factors
beyond random variation. One relevant factor is current business conditions. In turbulent
times it might simply be harder to make any definite statements about the future. Our
regressions thus far address differences among firms by including a large set of control
variables. In what follows, we aim to tease apart the three listed factors more explicitly.
    Specifically, we hypothesize that overall managerial style will be the most important
determinant of market and analyst responses. Stock market reactions to current earnings
require interpretation within the broader context. Indeed, managers, analysts, and investors
interact in settings other than conference calls. Solomon and Soltes (2015) cite survey
evidence showing that 97% of CEOs of publicly traded firms meet privately with investors.
Private conversations of analysts and management are also frequent (Green, Jame, Markov,
and Subasi, 2014; Soltes, 2014). Soltes (2014) concludes that analysts mainly seek to use
the meetings to provide access to management for their clients. The large-sample evidence
in Green, Jame, Markov, and Subasi (2014) shows that brokerage research itself benefits
from access to management through broker-hosted investor conferences. Even more intense
interactions occur at longer analyst/investor days (Kirk and Markov, 2017).
    To the extent that we in fact can identify a stable manner of managerial communication,
this vagueness style may also govern communication in these additional settings, making
it difficult for analysts and, consequently, other market participants to obtain precise in-


                                             17
formation. If, by contrast, information is only provided through earnings conference calls,
we should find that residual vagueness is the centrally important factor. Our next task,
therefore, is to provide a method for extracting each manager’s vagueness style.
    Section 4.1 discusses existing approaches to accounting for managerial style and moti-
vates our approach. Section 4.2 develops an intuitive argument for the existence of manage-
rial vagueness style. Section 4.3 gives details of how we extract vagueness style from answers.
Section 4.4 tests whether vagueness style or residual vagueness plays a more important role
dampening earnings responses.


4.1    Prior work on managerial style
    In existing empirical studies, style is made evident by the importance of a manager
fixed effect in variables related to firm policy. The main challenge in such analyses lies in
separating manager style from the effects of firm organization or culture, since both the
manager and the firm are observed simultaneously. The identification strategy spearheaded
by Bertrand and Schoar (2003) relies on managers who transition from one firm to another
during the sample period. In such cases, firm fixed effects can be included when regressing
the variables, which style is expected to influence, on manager fixed effects. The significance
of manager fixed effects indicates that the outcome variable includes a component unique
to a given manager that s/he carries over when moving across firms. It shows that style
matters. Their seminal findings show that such a component can be identified for various
measures of investment and financial policy, firm performance, and M&A activity, and have
spurred broad further inquiries using the same methodology.
    Fee, Hadlock, and Pierce (2013) argue that endogenous factors are likely to simultane-
ously produce both a manager transition and a shift in company policies. In support of their
argument, they find no evidence of significant changes in asset growth, capital expenditure
or leverage in cases of exogenous turnover, due to death, health issues or retirement. On
the other hand, they find that these policies do change if the previous CEO was forced out,
suggesting that boards are selecting managers, perhaps equipped with a certain “style”, to
execute a turnaround. This discussion highlights the difficulties of measuring manager style
from observables, which are also affected by other important stakeholders.
    We offer a methodological and a substantive contribution to this literature. We introduce
a proxy for firm culture by observing the same manager in both a well-prepared setting, the

                                              18
formal presentation, and an at least partially improvised setting, answers to questions, on
a conference call.17 This approach enables us to avoid the (limited) occurrence of manager
transitions. We confirm our results in a sample of firms that did experience managerial
turnover, in the spirit of Bertrand and Schoar (2003).


4.2     Conference call vagueness around managerial turnover events
In this section we make the case for using %U nctAnsw to extract each manager’s personal
style of vagueness, while controlling for vagueness related to the specificities of the firm’s
business model, or communication “culture”, with %U nctP res. We do so by examining the
effect of manager turnover on those two parts of earnings conference calls. We exploit two
types of turnover events.
    The first type is associated with firms that replace their CEO or CFO, thus enabling us
to compare the vagueness of the call under the old manager and the new one. The second
type of turnover is based on managers who move between firms in our sample (“mover”
CEOs or CFOs), so we can compare the vagueness of the same person on conference calls
at two different firms. If that vagueness persists, we have a good measure of personal style.


    Two different managers at the same firm: We begin by comparing the vagueness of calls
under the old CEO and the new one. If the vagueness of answers to analyst questions is
specific to the person, we would expect the %U nctAnsw under the old and new CEO to
differ, because even if the firm searches for a CEO whose style is similar, the replacement will
be imperfect. By contrast, if the language of the presentation part is a firm-characteristic
rather than a manager-characteristic, we would expect the %U nctP res to remain rather
stable despite the turnover. Two additional measures fine-tune the analysis. First, given
that managers may use more similar language in scripted than non-scripted communication,
greater similarity in %U nctP res under the old and the new manager is to be expected,
independent of corporate culture. To address this conjecture, we compare turnover firms
to similar control firms without turnover. For these “without” control firms, if we find
both %U nctP res and %U nctAnsw to be stable over time, that would reassure us that the
  17
    Dikolli, Keusch, Mayew, and Steffen (2016) capture a proxy for CEO integrity from language in CEO
shareholder letters, controlling for 10-K disclosures. In our setting, we observe the same person speaking at
the same time, once in a more prepared and well-rehearsed, once in a more improvised form.

                                                     19
effect on %U nctAnsw observed among turnover firms is indeed due to CEO replacement
and not merely the general lower persistence of unscripted communication.18 Thus, for
each firm experiencing turnover we select one control firm from the same Fama-French 17
industry group that best matches it in the observation period. The matching factors, all
measured in averages, are total assets, %U nctCEO P res and average %U nctCEO Answ over
the “old” period corresponding to the tenure of the outgoing CEO of the turnover firm. In
the majority of cases, we are able to obtain close matches.
    Second, firms that change their CEOs may disproportionately lack a stable culture.
Therefore, we also look at the language of the earnings press release, %U nctEP R, as the
piece of earnings communication arguably most removed from the specific person in charge.
If strong similarities are found in the wording of EPRs under the old and new CEO, that
would indicate a persistent communication culture even for a turnover firm.
    We focus on turnovers with at least 5 quarters of data for the old and new CEO, so
that for each turnover firm we have sufficient observations to calculate average %U nctOldM
and %U nctN ewM for the EPR as well as the presentation and answers part of conference
call. %U nctOldM corresponds to the outgoing CEO and %U nctN ewM to the incoming one, at
the same turnover firm. For “without” control firms, the old and new period is artificially
constructed using the CEO replacement date from the matching turnover firm. This ensures
that calculations for control firms are based on similar numbers of observations and calendar
periods as for turnover firms.
    In the last step, we calculate the correlation between %U nctOldM EP R and %U nctN ewM EP R
across all CEO turnover and control firms, which we denote ρOldM/N ewM EP R. In analogous
fashion, we calculate ρOldM/N ewM P res and ρOldM/N ewM Answ. We expect ρOldM/N ewM EP R
to be high in the cross-section of turnover firms. Continuing in this vein, we expect
ρOldM/N ewM P res to also be rather high and finally we expect ρOldM/N ewM Answ to be low.
Such a finding would be consistent with our previous argument that the language of answers
more accurately reflects the style of the particular CEO.

       [Table 3 about here]

       The results in Panel (a) in Table 3 support out conjectures. Among control firms, we
  18
    As an alternative benchmark we also use the other executive of the same company, who was not
replaced. For instance, in case of a CEO turnover, we construct before-after correlations for the CFO. We
obtain similarly strong results with this specification.

                                                   20
observe high ρOldM/N ewM for all three pieces of earnings communication (0.74, 0.65, and 0.70,
respectively). In particular, high ρOldM/N ewM Answ provides evidence that patterns in oral
unscripted communication can be equally stable as in the scripted or written counterpart
as long as the person answering the questions is kept constant.
    Among the 1,578 CEO turnover firms, ρOldM/N ewM Answ is low (=0.26), much lower than
among control firms (diff=-0.44). By contrast, in the presentation part the old-new corre-
lation is rather high (ρOldM/N ewM P res=0.46). Finally, ρOldM/N ewM EP R among turnover
firms is high (=0.66) and only weakly different from control firms (diff=-0.08). Given the
large sample, all these differences are significantly different from zero statistically but their
economic significance varies greatly. Similar results obtain for the 1,665 CFO turnovers
(ρOldM/N ewM Answ=0.22, ρOldM/N ewM P res=0.51, ρOldM/N ewM EP R=0.69).
    In sum, these results confirm three things. First, turnover firms still appear to have
a stable culture. Second, the language of the scripted part of the call is less sensitive to
a CEO/CFO turnover and hence more specific to the firm, than to a particular person
in charge. Third, and most important, answers seem to reflect the language of individual
CEOs/CFOs.

    Same manager at two different firms: Panel (b) of Table 3 provides a complementary
analysis by following the same manager (a “mover”) from one firm to another. In this case,
the correlations we calculate, ρOldF/N ewF , are based on the average frequency of uncertain
words in EPR, presentations and answers during the periods that the “mover” was in charge
at her old and new firm.19 Here, we would expect %U nctAnsw to be similar at the old firm
and the new (since it is the same person speaking), while %U nctP res and %U nctEP R might
well differ. The results support this idea. The correlation for the EPR, ρOldF/N ewF EP R,
is only 0.15 in the case of moving CEOs, meaning that these CEOs do not bring the EPR
style of their prior firm with them, and ρOldF/N ewF P res is also low (=0.22). By contrast,
ρOldF/N ewF Answ=0.43, suggesting that answers style travels with the CEO. Similar results
obtain for mover CFO.

    Overall, the analysis in this section supports our strategy of extracting manager style
from %U nctAnsw using %U nctP res and other factors to control for firm effects. The next
section develops the estimation procedure in more detail.
  19
    The control sample for this test consists of those firms without manager turnover, which are most
similar to the firm at which the “mover” worked in after the move.

                                                 21
4.3     Estimating manager style of vagueness
We identify manager style of vagueness with the systematic component of the frequency of
uncertain words in answers. We estimate it as the fixed effect from the following regression,
separately for CEOs and CFOs (and so MGR can be either CEO or CFO):


                            NX
                             M GR

  %U nctM GR Answi,t =              γi · M GRi,t + β1 · %U nctM GR P resi,t + β2 · %U nctAnalyi,t +
                              i=1

           + β3 · N egM GR Answi,t + β4 · N egAnalyi,t + βk · Controlskj,t + α + i,t
                                                                                                         (4)

Manager-specific vagueness (her style) is captured by the γ1,...,NM GR coefficients on the fixed
effects and denoted V agueM GR Style. The residuals, i,t , which we later denote VagueM GR Resids,
can be interpreted as deviations from style, not explained by any of control variables in-
cluded in the regression.
    We control for both linguistic markers in the call itself and a range of firm characteristics.
The matrix Controlsk is composed of the following variables: total assets, EPS growth from
same quarter the previous year, stock return over the previous quarter, daily volatility as
well as the earnings surprise and also includes the market return in each quarter. In terms
of language-related controls, we include the negativity of answers, since vagueness can be
related to the nature of news, whether it is positive or negative. To account for the fact that
the language of an answer might also depend on the wording of the question, we include
the frequency of uncertain and negative words used by analysts participating in the call.
    Importantly, based on insights from the previous section, we control for %UnctM GR Pres,
the frequency of uncertain words in presentation. This variable combines both the sys-
tematic (“culture”) and the time-varying (momentary business conditions) component of
firm-related vagueness.20 As such, we would expect it to correlate with certain observable
firm characteristics, which themselves indicate uncertainty. Results available on request
show that %U nctM GR P res, both for CEOs and CFOs, increases markedly with volatil-
   20
      In unreported results, we experiment with separating the two components by regressing %UnctPres on
firm fixed effects and recording both the coefficients on each fixed effect (the vagueness “culture” of each
firm) as well as the residuals (time-varying factors). The conclusions under this alternative approach remain
fundamentally unchanged from those reported below.


                                                     22
ity and decreases with stock- and market-level returns. Furthermore, %U nctCEO P res also
decreases with earnings surprise and earnings growth, suggesting that presentations em-
ploy more straightforward language when earnings were (unexpectedly) good. However,
we note the rather low explanatory power of these observables, which we take as evidence
that %U nctM GR P res also captures unobservable firm-specific factors affecting vagueness of
communication. This makes it a useful control when extracting manager style.
    While the main specification shown in Table 4 captures many key determinants of vague-
ness in answers (and, by including vagueness in presentations also captures common deter-
minants, even time-varying ones, that are unobservable to the researcher), it is interesting
to examine some other specifications. These are summarized in Appendix Table A.2 and
are discussed further below.

   [Table 4 about here]

    We first estimate Equation 4 leaving aside manager fixed effects to gauge how much of
the heterogeneity in %U nctAnsw can be explained with observable characteristics alone.
The results are reported in column (1) for CEOs and column (3) for CFOs. Answers at larger
firms exhibit a lower frequency of uncertain words. Overall, none of the firm characteristics
matter strongly, which we treat as another indication that the language of this part of
conference calls is more driven by personal than corporate features.
    Linguistic markers of the call are significant and have the expected effects on the fre-
quency of uncertain words in answers. Vagueness of managers in the presentation as well
as of analysts, and negative linguistic tone of managers in the answers is each highly sig-
nificantly associated with the frequency of uncertain words in manager answers. Analyst
negativity enters with a negative sign (significant only for the CEO), but the magnitude of
the coefficient is very small compared to that of negativity in answers. The R2 of 6.9% /
1.0% in columns (1) / (3) indicates that the control variables explain little.
    After CEO/CFO fixed effects are included, the R2 increases to 33.6% / 22.3%, as shown
in columns (2) / (4). Thus, the key message is that fixed effects dominate, even though we
include a large set of control variables that are tightly related to our variable of interest.
    Table B.1 in the Internet Appendix compares CEO style estimates from several al-
ternative specifications. Specifications (1) and (2) use fewer variables than our baseline
specification (3). In specification (4), we add %N egCEO P res. Finally, recall that in our


                                             23
main specification, when examining %U nctCEO Answ, we only consider %U nctP res based
on the words the CEOs themselves spoke in the presentation. In specifications (5) to (8), we
also allow for vagueness “spillovers” between the CEO and CFO, whenever both are present
in a call. In specification (6), we additionally control for frequency of uncertain words in
the earnings press release. Specification (7) adds analyst forecast dispersion before the call.
Specification (8) also includes the change in %U nctCEO P res from one call to the next.
    While some of these variables provide additional explanatory power for %U nctCEO Answ,
the main conclusion is that the fixed effects under these various specifications are very
highly correlated with the ones estimated under Equation 4. A disadvantage of the larger
specifications is that the number of observations is notably reduced. Given the similar
findings, we chose to proceed with the more parsimonious Equation 4 in order to retain the
highest possible number of observations for further analysis.
    To get a sense of the heterogeneity in manager style, we construct histograms of the co-
efficients on individual manager fixed effects estimated from Equation 4. As Figure 3 shows,
the heterogeneity is substantial for both CEOs and CFOs but somewhat more pronounced
for the latter (the 10th-90th percentile range is 0.57 for CEOs and 0.91 for CFOs).

   [Figure 3 about here]

    Moreover, the CFO distribution is also slightly shifted to the right relative to the CEO
distribution, meaning CFOs are somewhat vaguer overall. We note that no clear outliers
appear in either distribution. That is, vague style appears to progress along a continuum,
as opposed to being concentrated in two or more discrete clusters. There is an asymmetry
in the distributions however, with both exhibiting a fatter right tail, which means that
particularly vague-talking managers are more frequent than particularly straight-talking
ones. In the regressions that follow, we use a standardized version of V agueM GR Style, thus
producing mean style of 0 and standard deviation of 1.
    Additional analysis shown in Figures B.2 and B.3 in the Internet Appendix confirms
that heterogeneity in style of vagueness is not driven by industry or cohort effects. There is
some tendency for older CEOs and CFOs, as well as those in riskier industries, like finance
and oil, to speak in vaguer terms. However, differences within industries and age cohorts
dwarf those across such groupings.
    In sum, this section shows that managerial style of vagueness exists; managers differ


                                              24
substantially from each other with respect to vagueness. Moreover, these differences cannot
easily be explained by either systematic or time-varying characteristics of the firms for
which they work. We now turn to examine how managerial style of vagueness influences
participants in the investment community. For ease of exposition, we discuss results only
for CEOs first and refer to Table 9 for an examination of CFO style.


4.4    Earnings response coefficients with style
Style could matter most directly by influencing stock price reactions to information. We
are now in a position to refine the test of Hypothesis 1. Specifically, we now estimate:


CAR01i,t = αi + β1 · SurpDeci,t + β2 · V agueM GR Stylei + β3 · V agueM GR Stylei · SurpDeci,t +
          + β4 · V agueM GR Residsi,t + β5 · V agueM GR Residsi,t · SurpDeci,t +
          + βk · Controlski,t + F F 48i + Y eart + i,t
                                                                                          (5)

VagueM GR Style, is the manager’s style of vagueness estimated from the language of her an-
swers to analyst questions during earnings calls, according to Equation 4, and VagueM GR Resids
represents the residuals from that equation, i.e. deviations from style. The main variables
of interest are the two interaction terms between vague style / residual vagueness and the
earnings surprise. We standardize vague style and residual vagueness to mean zero and
standard deviation of one.
    Table 5 reports the results. As can be seen in the significantly negative coefficient on
the interaction term of VagueM GR Style with the earnings surprise in column (1), we find
substantial support for the hypothesis that a more vague style is associated with a weaker
response to earnings. Column (2) shows the results separately for S&P500 companies.
Clearly, CEO vagueness matters more in large firms. A possible interpretation is that a
single earnings number is less representative of the entire performance of a large firm, which
increases the importance of additional information communicated by the managers.
    How big are these effects? To answer that important question, note that in the regression
VagueM GR Style is standardized, so the interpretation of the coefficient on SurpDec is that
moving to the next higher decile of earnings surprise increases short-term CAR by 78 basis


                                                25
points, for CEOs at the average style of vagueness. If the CEO is straight-talking, i.e. one
standard deviations below the mean for vagueness style, CAR increases by a further 4.5
basis points for each surprise decile increment. When focusing on S&P500 firms, the effect
of a straight-talking CEO is more pronounced: close to 9 basis points for each surprise
decile increment, which equates to a roughly 13% higher earnings response coefficient (-
0.086/0.661). Overall, these results confirm our conjecture that managerial vagueness style
(which may also govern managerial communication in other settings), rather than residual,
quarter-specific vagueness, is the key determinant of stock market responses.

      [Table 5 about here]

    At first glance, it might seem puzzling that V agueCEO Style has a positive unconditional
effect on short-term CAR. To understand why this occurs, note that “just-meeting” earnings
(SurpDec = 0) appears, in fact, to disappoint the market on average: The short-term CAR
is minus 1.08 percent on average for these “just-meeting” firms. The actual mean surprise
in the sample is positive. Thus, the coefficient on V agueCEO Style does not give the effect of
vagueness at the mean surprise, but at a value somewhat below the mean surprise. Vague
CEO style cushions the otherwise negative impact of zero-surprises, consistent with how
vagueness otherwise reduces earnings response.
    To zoom in on the personal aspect of style, we estimate Equation 5 in two subsamples:

  1. firms with manager turnover during the sample period, including firms linked by a
     manager switching jobs (turnover sample)

  2. only firms linked by a manager switching jobs (mover sample)

The mover sample is equivalent to the approach used in Bertrand and Schoar (2003), thus
we need to observe a manager at Firm A, who later moves on to Firm B, where both
firms are part of the sample. Unfortunately, in our case this investigation is only possible
for CFOs, since we simply do not observe enough CEO movers.21 The turnover sample
is substantially broader, because we can also consider outgoing managers, who leave the
sample and new hires who join it. Bertrand and Schoar (2003) refrain from using this
broader pool of turnovers, because they worry it might capture a firm-period effect rather
 21
      We present CFO mover results in Table 9 in Section 6.


                                                    26
than a manager effect. We believe this is a lesser concern in our setting, where we define style
with respect to words that a manager speaks individually during earnings conference calls.
The key feature of both samples is that they allow firm fixed effects to be included alongside
style of vagueness (thus making industry fixed effects redundant). The interpretation of the
coefficient on V agueCEO Style is now the impact of the difference in style between a given
CEO and the average style of all CEOs that have worked for that firm during the sample
period. In other words, the focus is on within-firm variation in style, while effectively
controlling for any unobserved between-firm heterogeneity.
    Columns (3) and (4) of Table 5 show that the results for the full sample continue to hold
in the turnover sample: CEO style of vagueness continues to be an important determinant
of short-term earnings responses in all firms, though especially in the largest firms.
    In sum, we document that vagueness of managers reduces the short-run reaction to
earnings. It is in particular the consistent style of vagueness that plays the key role. The
results provide strong evidence that the effects of vague style are not driven by unobserved
firm heterogeneity; rather they are tied to specific persons in charge.


5     Interpreting the evidence
We have established that vague speech style by managers significantly reduces the immedi-
ate market reaction to earnings announcements. This section considers several additional
insights emerging from that finding. It presents tests that address the reasons for this weaker
response, the informativeness of earnings news, analyst responses, and whether there are
potential benefits of vague communications.


5.1    Why is there less immediate response?
The results so far strongly support Hypothesis 1. They are also consistent with the idea
that earnings communicated by vague managers prove in some fundamental way to be less
informative. If in fact they are, we would expect the weaker immediate response to be
permanent, i.e., neither increased nor reverted in the post-earnings period. But there are
two alternative possibilities, also consistent with Hypothesis 1: On the one hand, one could
imagine that earnings information from vague managers is more difficult to interpret in


                                              27
the short term but, given enough time, investors are able to figure it out. The underly-
ing explanation would be that, deep inside, earnings communicated by vague and straight
managers are equally informative, but investors under-react to vague earnings, due to e.g.
ambiguity aversion. Thus, the weaker immediate response should be followed up by more
pronounced post-earnings drift. Alternatively, it is conceivable that investors in fact over-
react to straight-talking managers initially. Thus, it could be that vagueness is, in fact, a
factor that corrects the tendency of managers to be overconfident.
    To test these competing explanations we examine the cumulative abnormal returns be-
tween 2 and 60 days following the conference call, CAR260. Thus, we conduct a regression
analogous to Equation 5, but with CAR260 as the dependent variable.


CAR260i,t = αi + β1 · SurpDeci,t + β2 · V agueM GR Stylei + β3 · V agueM GR Stylei · SurpDeci,t +
           + β4 · V agueM GR Residsi,t + β5 · V agueM GR Residsi,t · SurpDeci,t +
           + βk · Controlski,t + F F 48i + Y eart + i,t
                                                                                             (6)

If earnings coming from vague managers are fundamentally less informative, then β3 would
be insignificant. If the under-reaction explanation applies, β3 in that regression will be
positive and significant, meaning more pronounced drift for vague managers. If β3 is very
large and positive, then it is conceivable that the initial reaction reverts for straight-talking
managers, which would support the vagueness-as-a-second-best-corrective explanation. Re-
sults in column (2) of Table 6 suggest the first explanation is true. In general, we find
post-earnings drift (significantly positive coefficient on SurpDec), consistent with a large
literature on the subject, but it does not depend on the style of vagueness of the CEO,
as evidenced by the insignificant interaction of SurpDec with V agueCEO Style. Thus, the
impact of vague style on the immediate earnings response is sustained, but neither expanded
nor reduced.
    The findings above apply to the average firm. A finer test takes into account the pos-
sibility that the shareholder base across firms may well differ with respect to investment
approach and skill. Bushee (2001) and Bushee and Noe (2000) develop a methodology
for classifying institutional shareholders (defined as those filing forms 13-F), based on the
breadth and dynamics of their holdings. In particular, they differentiate between dedicated

                                                28
investors, who are loyal to a small number of firms and hence exhibit low diversification and
low turnover; quasi-indexers who follow a well-diversified buy-and-hold strategy with low
turnover; and finally transient investors, who frequently trade in and out of a large number
firms. These transient investors might merit the label “fervent.” They are interested in
whatever pieces of information they can uncover about companies; their fierce hunt makes
them best equipped to correctly interpret such information. Collins, Gong, and Hribar
(2003) find that transient investors are best able to correctly price the accruals anomaly. In
our context, we would expect them to be most apt in reading the tea leaves presented in
vague managerial talk.22
    Accordingly, we match firms in our sample to the investor classification data we obtain
from the website of Brian Bushee, and we sort firms into terciles of the transient share,
defined as the ratio of shares held by transient investors in a given quarter to total shares
outstanding.23 The average transient shares in the three terciles are 8%, 15% and 27%
respectively. Clearly fervent investors are a minority. Furthermore, transient share and
V agueCEO Style are only very weakly correlated (ρ=-0.034).
    In columns (3) to (6) of Table 6 we present the results of estimating Equation 5 (using
both CAR01 and CAR260 as dependent variable) in the lower and upper terciles, respec-
tively, of transient shares. Comparing first the coefficients on SurpDec, it is apparent that
stock prices of firms with a larger share of transient investors respond more strongly to
earnings in the short run, column (3) vs. (5). They also have weaker post-earnings drift,
column (4) vs. (6). This is suggestive evidence that transient investors pay greater attention
to company earnings and are able to price them faster and more accurately, a finding that
could be explored in other contexts. Turning to the coefficient on the interaction between
SurpDec and V agueCEO Style in the CAR01 regressions shows that it is significantly neg-
ative only among firms with a low share of transient investors. The same interaction in the
CAR260 regressions is insignificant, suggesting the initial muted response is sustained also
among firms with a low share of transient investors.
    Overall, these results suggest that earnings from vague managers are indeed fundamen-
  22
     Blau, DeLisle, and Price (2015) find that compared to investors at large, short sellers more skillfully
exploit information contained in deviations in net positive tone between the presentation and the questions
and answers parts of conference calls.
  23
     Since transient and quasi-indexer shares are positively correlated, we orthogonalize the transient terciles
by first forming them within each tercile of quasi-indexers share. The overall lower tercile of transient share
contains companies with the lowest transient share in each quasi-indexer tercile and so on.


                                                      29
tally less informative and cloudy, which stems from the fact that relatively few investors are
skilled at uncovering the true meaning behind such communication.


5.2       Informativeness of earnings calls
We use two standard measures of the overall informativeness of earnings calls: First, we
use the absolute cumulative abnormal return (ACAR01) on the conference call date plus
one day. Second, we calculate abnormal trading volume by dividing the cumulative trading
volume of a firm on the call date and the subsequent trading day24 by two times its daily
pre-call average, calculated over a window starting 45 days and ending 6 days before each
call date. To reduce skewness, we take the logarithm of the resulting ratio:
                                                                                       
                                                        T rdV olj,t:t+1
                         AbnV ol = log
                                             2 × avg(T rdV oli,t−45 : T rdV oli,t−5 )

On average, relevant information is transmitted on conference calls (Frankel, Johnson, and
Skinner, 1999). However, our second hypothesis posits a negative link between manager
vagueness and the amount of information entering the market around the conference call:

       Hypothesis 2: Vagueness makes earnings news less informative.

   We test this hypothesis by estimating the following panel regression. Hypothesis 2
predicts β2 < 0 and β3 < 0:

  "                  #
        ACAR01i,t
                         = αi + β1 · |SurpDeci,t | + β2 · V agueM GR Stylei +
        AbnV oli,t                                                                                   (7)
                         + β3 · V agueM GR Residsi,t + βk · Controlski,t + F F 48i + Y eart + i,t


Again, the alternative hypothesis holds that the provision of earnings numbers and man-
agerial communication style are, in fact, substitutes. If that were the case, investors would
find earnings announcements particularly informative (and react more strongly) for firms
where managers otherwise communicate vaguely.
  24
    We cumulate call-date and next day volume, since we do not know the exact timing of the call, in
particular whether it occurred before or after market close.

                                                       30
   The results presented in column (1) of Table 7 show a negative effect of V agueCEO Style
on the price response to earnings conference calls, as expected. The effect is sizable eco-
nomically - an increase in V agueCEO Style of one standard deviation cuts 11 basis points
from the ACAR.

   [Table 7 about here]

   To further illustrate the effect of vagueness the informativeness of earnings in the short
run, we plot abnormal trading volume over the 11-day period surrounding the call. For this
purpose, we summarize the unconditional effect of vagueness by averaging abnormal trading
volume across all calls in the sample, irrespective of the magnitude of the earnings surprise.

   [Figure 4 about here]

    As can be seen in Figure 4, abnormal trading volume generally spikes on days 0 and 1
relative to the call. However, the increase in trading volume is markedly smaller around
calls involving vague managers (those in the top quintile of the distribution of vagueness),
represented by the solid line in Figure 4, as opposed to straight-talking ones (those in the
bottom quintile, dotted line). For vague CEOs, trading volume increases by 53%, compared
to 71% straight-talking ones. The resulting difference of 18% (percentage points) is highly
statistically significant (t = 20.9). Importantly, there is no systematic difference in abnormal
trading volume further out in the event window, which suggests the impact is indeed coming
from vague communication during the earnings conference calls.
    In a multivariate setting, controlling for the magnitude of the earnings surprise in par-
ticular, the effect of V agueCEO Style on abnormal volume remains significantly negative, as
shown in column (2) of Table 7.
    In sum, these results show that investors are less willing to trade on earnings news when
the communications from managers accompanying this news is vague.


5.3    Analyst reactions to vaguely communicated earnings
Security analysts are the direct consumers of earnings conference calls. We next examine
whether they also find vaguely communicated earnings less informative. We expect analysts
covering firms with vague managers to be more uncertain about both the value of the


                                              31
company and the precision of their own previous forecasts. Significant findings in this
regard would be quite telling, since analysts are paid for processing information provided
by companies and issuing forecasts based on it. We construct two measures of analyst
reactions, one related to the timeframe and one to confidence in their forecasts.
    The first measure is ShareAnalyP ost, defined as the fraction of all analysts following
a firm, who update their forecasts within 3 days of the earnings conference call. In our
data, roughly half of all analysts who revise following the call do so in the first 3 days. The
second measure, post-announcement revision frequency, is the number of revisions after the
conference call of quarter t up to the earnings announcement of quarter t+1, divided by
the number of analysts following the firm. With respect to these two measures, our third
hypothesis states that:

   Hypothesis 3: Vague style reduces the share of analysts who respond within the first
3 days of the conference call. Forecast revision frequency is higher following calls hosted by
vague managers.

    We relate analyst variables to vagueness in a regression analogous to Equation 7. In line
with Hypothesis 3, we expect β2 , β3 < 0 for ShareAnalP ost but β2 , β3 > 0 RevF reqP ost.
Column (3) of Table 7 shows the share of analysts revising their forecasts in the first 3 days
following the call is indeed lower for calls attended by vague CEOs. Finally, column (4)
of Table 7 shows that CEO style of vagueness increases the frequency with which analysts
revise their forecasts in the following quarter.
    In sum, these results support Hypothesis 3. They suggest that the negative effect of
managerial vagueness on the informativeness of the earnings surprise for stock market par-
ticipants goes hand-in-hand with lower confidence among analysts, too.


5.4    Are there benefits of vague managers?
So far we have established that earnings communicated by vague managers delay the re-
sponses of analysts and increase their uncertainty; they also cloud the picture for the major-
ity of investors. These are major consequences but they do not explain why firms might hire
vague managers. Could vague talk bring any benefits? The answer is “yes” in a second-best
world where managers’ statements that prove to be excessive after the fact get punished.
Arguably, this issue would be more pronounced for positive statements, if things later take

                                              32
a turn for the worse. This is especially relevant given the general tendency of analysts to
issue overly optimistic forecasts (Hong and Kubik, 2003). Hence, if vague style indeed helps
tone down positive expectations, we would expect to see fewer (or less) negative earnings
surprises for vague managers.
    We test this conjecture by regressing next quarter’s earnings surprise on style of vague-
ness, residual vagueness, and the same set of control variables and fixed effects as in Table 7.


          SurpDeci,t+1 = αi + β1 · V agueM GR Stylei + β2 · V agueM GR Residsi,t +
                                                                                            (8)
                          + βk · Controlski,t + F F 48i + Y eart + i,t

In column (1) of Table 8, we do indeed find that V agueCEO Style bears a positive relationship
with earnings surprise, which suggests that firms with vaguer CEOs are more likely to exceed
than undershoot analyst expectations. An alternative explanation could be that vague CEOs
fall below expectations just as often but disappoint by less (and/or exceed expectations by
more), compared to straight-talking CEOs. In other words, the results could be driven by
different magnitudes of surprises, rather than the frequency of disappointment.

   [Table 8 about here]

    To obtain deeper insights, we calculate for each CEO the median earnings surprise
decile across all quarters she was in charge. A higher (positive) median surprise indicates
that a given CEO is more likely to exceed analyst expectations (whereas a higher average
surprise could be a mix of a few large positive and many small negative surprises). We then
regress the median surprise on the CEO’s style of vagueness (and control variables averaged
across each CEO’s tenure). In column (3) of Table 8 we again find a positive coefficient on
V agueCEO Style.
    To illustrate these results, we repeat the cross-sectional regression without V agueCEO Style
and examine the residuals. Specifically, we divide CEOs into five groups based on their style
of vagueness and consider those in the bottom quintile as straight-talkers and those in the
top quintile as vague-talkers. Finally, we draw a histogram of the regression residuals for
vague- and straight-talking CEOs separately. This gives us a distribution of the median
earnings surprise among vague- and straight-talking CEOs, after taking into account indus-
try effects and other explanatory variables included in the regression.

                                                33
    [Figure 5 about here]

As can be seen from Figure 5, vague CEOs cluster around small positive surprises. By
contrast, more of the straight talking CEOs find themselves falling just short of analyst
expectations. However, vague communication implies a modestly lower likelihood of deliv-
ering a large positive surprise. Taken together, Figure 5 would suggest that vaguer managers
have smaller absolute surprises. As columns (2) and (4) of Table 8 show, there is indeed
a significantly negative link between V agueStyle and absolute surprises. Our results are
consistent with vagueness being used as a tool to manage expectations.
    Overall, vague communication appears to help steer analysts away from making overly
optimistic predictions for future earnings, which is their natural tendency since they are
overwhelmingly on the sell side. In this respect, it serves a similar function as providing
earnings guidance. The price of vagueness, however, is that it lowers the earnings response
that we have documented.


6     The role of CFO style
Table 9 presents summary results for the role of CFO style. Panel A considers earnings
response coefficients. Consistent with the results in Table 2, column (1) of Table 9 shows that
CFO vagueness does not affect the earnings response in the full sample. However, restricting
attention to the S&P500 companies, where the CFO arguably plays a more powerful role
in overall company strategy and management than in smaller firms, CFO vagueness does
induce smaller earnings responses; see column (2). This also proves true in the turnover
sample (columns 3 and 4). Finally, columns (5) and (6) consider the Bertrand and Schoar
(2003) approach, which substantially reduces the observations available for estimation. In
exchange, however, it produces the strongest test. That test shows that when a vague
manager moves from Firm A to Firm B, the ERC of the latter drops, even after controlling
for all differences between them, both observable and unobservable (i.e. for firm fixed
effects). For the sample of mover CFOs, we obtain significance for the interaction term
between V agueCF O Style and earnings surprise even among all firms, though the effect is
still much more pronounced among S&P500 firms.
     Panel B considers other consequences of vague CFOs. Columns (7) to (10) show that,
much like for CEOs, greater CFO vagueness is associated with less informative earnings

                                              34
calls, with less pronounced analyst responses, and with higher revision frequency. Finally,
we find directionally consistent results regarding the impact of V agueCF O Style on the future
earnings surprise, though they are significant only for the absolute surprise.


7    Conclusions
A corporation’s earnings report needs to be interpreted and digested by both analysts and
the market. The conference call accompanying the reports release, predominantly conducted
by the CEO and CFO, conveys valuable information that facilitates this process. Word
choice by managers affects information processing. In particular the use of uncertain words,
such as “probably” and “maybe”, induces investors to respond less to earnings surprises.
That is especially true for managers answers to analyst questions.
    The structure of conference calls - a scripted presentation followed by a much more
improvised question and answer session - enables us to identify manager fixed effects in the
use of uncertain words, thus setting to the side explanations based on company culture and
current conditions. Managers definitely have distinctive styles. Some are straight talkers,
and are thus quite informative. Others are vague talkers, using uncertain words much more
often than their straight-talking peers. Vague talkers cloud the message. Analysts and the
stock market struggle to incorporate earnings news, respectively into earnings forecasts and
stock prices, when faced with vague talkers. A benefit of vague communication is that it
helps tamp down analyst expectations. When hiring a CEO, boards should be aware that
their decision will include the consequential choice of a particular communication style.
    These results raise matters for further study. We mention two sample questions that
are the subject of ongoing research. 1. Do managers tilt to vagueness when they have
reason to do so, for example to cushion disappointing earnings when her options are coming
due? 2. Our method for identifying style can be employed to study other speech char-
acteristics. For instance, do managers differ in their propensity to use positive/negative,
quantitative/qualitative, or other types of statements, and what are the capital market
effects, if any, of such style differences that are identified?




                                              35
References



Allee, Kristian D., and Matthew D. DeAngelis, 2015, The structure of voluntary disclosure
  narratives: Evidence from tone dispersion, Journal of Accounting Research 53, 241–274.
Bamber, Linda Smith, John Jiang, and Isabel Yanyan Wang, 2010, What’s my style? The
  influence of top managers on voluntary corporate financial disclosure., The Accounting
  Review 85, 1131–1162.
Barker, Richard, John Hendry, John Roberts, and Paul Sanderson, 2012, Can company-
  fund manager meetings convey informational benefits? Exploring the rationalisation of
  equity investment decision making by UK fund managers, Accounting, Organizations and
  Society 37, 207–222.
Beaver, William H., 1968, The information content of annual earnings announcements,
  Journal of Accounting Research (Supplement), 67–92.
Bertrand, Marianne, and Antoinette Schoar, 2003, Managing with Style: The Effect of
  Managers on Firm Policies, Quarterly Journal of Economics 118, 1169–1208.
Beyer, Anne, Daniel A. Cohen, Thomas Z. Lys, and Beverly R. Walther, 2010, The finan-
  cial reporting environment: Review of the recent literature, Journal of Accounting and
  Economic 50, 296–343.
Blau, Benjamin M., R. Jared DeLisle, and S. McKay Price, 2015, Do Sophisticated Investors
  Interpret Earnings Conference Call Tone Differently than Investors at Large, Journal of
  Corporate Finance 31, 203–219.
Botosan, Christine A., 2006, Disclosure and the cost of capital: What do we know?, Ac-
  counting and Business Research 36, 31–40.
Brochet, Francois, Lucile Faurel, and Sarah McVay, 2011, Manager-specific effects on earn-
  ings guidance: An analysis of top executive turnovers., Journal of Accounting Research
  49, 1123–1162.
Brochet, Francois, Patricia Naranjo, Gregory S. Miller, and Gwen Yu, 2017, Managers’
  Cultural Background and Disclosure Attributes, Working paper.
Brochet, Francois, Patricia Naranjo, and Gwen Yu, 2016, The capital market consequences
  of language barriers in the conference calls of non-U.S. firms, The Accounting Review 91,
  1023–1049.

                                            36
Brockman, Paul, Xu Li, and S. McKay Price, 2015, Differences in Conference Call Tones:
  Managers versus Analysts, Financial Analysts Journal 71, 24–42.

Brown, Lawrence D., Andrew C. Call, Michael B. Clement, and Nathan Y. Sharp, 2015,
  Inside the Black Box of Sell-Side Financial Analysts, Journal of Accounting Research 53,
  1–47.

Bushee, Brian, 2001, Do institutional investors prefer near-term earnings over long-run
  value?, Contemporary Accounting Research 18, 207–246.

Bushee, Brian, Ian D. Gow, and Daniel J. Taylor, 2016, Linguistic Complexity in Firm
  Disclosures: Obfuscation or Information?, Working Paper.

Bushee, Brian, and Christopher Noe, 2000, Corporate disclosure practices, institutional
  investors and stock return volatility, Journal of Accounting Research 38, 171–202.

Cohen, Lauren, Dong Lou, and Christopher Malloy, 2013, Playing Favorites: How Firms
  Prevent the Revelation of Bad News, Working paper.

Collins, Daniel W., Guojin Gong, and Paul Hribar, 2003, Investor Sophistication and the
  Mispricing of Accruals, Review of Accounting Studies 8, 251–276.

Daniel, K., M. Grinblatt, S. Titman, and R. Wermers, 1997, Measuring mutual fund per-
 formance with characteristics-based benchmarks, Journal of Finance 52, 1035–1058.

Davis, Angela K., Weili Ge, Dawn Matsumoto, and Jenny Li Zhang, 2015, The effect of
  manager-specific optimism on the tone of earnings conference calls, Review of Accounting
  Studies 20, 639–673.

DellaVigna, Stefano, and Joshua M. Pollet, 2009, Investor Inattention and Friday Earnings
  Announcements, Journal of Finance 64, 709–749.

Demers, Elisabeth, and Clara Vega, 2011, Linguistic Tone in Earnings Press Releases: News
  or Noise?, Working Paper.

Dikolli, Shane S., Thomas Keusch, William J. Mayew, and Thomas D. Steffen, 2016, Using
  shareholder letters to measure CEO integrity, Working Paper.

Druz, Marina, Ivan Petzev, Alexander Wagner, and Richard Zeckhauser, 2016, Reading
  Managerial Tone: How Analysts and the Market Respond to Conference Calls, Working
  Paper.

Dyreng, Scott D., Michelle Hanlon, and Edward L. Maydew, 2010, The effects of executives
 on corporate tax avoidance, The Accounting Review 85, 1163–1189.


                                           37
Ertugrul, Mine, Jin Lei, Jiaping Qiu, and Chi Wan, 2016, Annual report readability, tone
  ambiguity, and the cost of borrowing, Journal of Financial and Quantitative Analysis
  forthcoming.

Fee, C. Edward, Charles J. Hadlock, and Joshua R. Pierce, 2013, Managers with and without
  Style: Evidence Using Exogenous Variation., Review of Financial Studies 26, 567–601.

Fields, Thomas D., Thomas Z. Lys, and Linda Vincent, 2001, Empirical research on ac-
  counting choice, Journal of Accounting and Economics 31, 255–307.

Frankel, Richard M., Marylin F. Johnson, and Douglas J. Skinner, 1999, An Empirical Ex-
  amination of Conference Calls as a Voluntary Disclosure Medium, Journal of Accounting
  Research 37, 133–150.

Ge, Weili, Dawn Matsumoto, and Jenny L. Zhang, 2011, Do CFOs Have Style? An Empiri-
 cal Investigation of the Effect of Individual CFOs on Accounting Practices, Contemporary
 Accounting Research 28, 1141–1179.

Gow, Ian D., Steven Kaplan, David E. Larcker, and Anastasia A. Zakolyukina, 2016, CEO
 Personality and Firm Policies, Working paper.

Graham, Benjamin, and Davis Dodd, 1934, Security Analysis. (Whittlesey House New York
  and London).

Graham, John R., Campbell R. Harvey, and Shiva Rajgopal, 2005, The economic implica-
  tions of corporate financial reporting, Journal of Accounting and Economics 40, 3–73.

Green, T. Clifton, Russell Jame, and Brandon Lock, 2015, It Pays to be Extraverted:
  Executive Personality and Career Outcomes, Working Paper.

Green, T. Clifton, Russell Jame, Stanimir Markov, and Musa Subasi, 2014, Access to man-
  agement and the informativeness of analyst research, Journal of Financial Economics
  114, 239–255.

Healy, Paul M., and Krishna G. Palepu, 2001, Information asymmetry, corporate disclo-
  sure, and the capital markets: A review of the empirical disclosure literature, Journal of
  Accounting and Economics 31, 405–440.

Henry, Elaine, and Andrew J. Leone, 2016, Measuring qualitative information in capital
  markets research: Comparison of alternative methodologies to measure disclosure tone,
  The Accounting Review 91, 153–178.

Hirshleifer, David, Sonya S. Lim, and Siew Hong Teoh, 2009, Driven to Distraction: Extra-
  neous Events and Underreaction to Earnings News, Journal of Finance 64, 2289–2325.

                                            38
Hollander, Stephen, Maarten Pronk, and Erik Roelofsen, 2010, Does Silence Speak? An
  Empirical Analysis of Disclosure Choices during Conference Calls, Journal of Acconting
  Research 48, 531–563.

Hong, Harrison, and Jeffrey D. Kubik, 2003, Analyzing the Analysts: Career Concerns and
  Biased Earnings Forecasts, Journal of Finance 58, 313–351.

Hwang, Byoung-Hyoun, and Hugh Hoikwang Kim, 2016, It pays to write well, Journal of
 Financial Economics forthcoming.

Kirk, Marcus, and Stanimir Markov, 2017, Come on Over: Analyst/Investor Days as a
  Disclosure Medium, The Accounting Review forthcoming.

Kothari, S. P., 2001, Capital markets research in accounting, Journal of Accounting and
 Economics 31, 105–231.

Larcker, David F., and Anastasia A. Zakolyukina, 2012, Detecting Deceptive Discussions in
  Conference Calls, Journal of Accounting Research 50, 495–540.

Lee, Joshua, 2016, Can Investors Detect Managers Lack of Spontaneity? Adherence to
  Pre-determined Scripts during Earnings Conference Calls, The Accounting Review 91,
  229–250.

Lehavy, R., Feng Li, and K. Merkeley, 2011, The effect of annual report readability on
  analyst following and the properties of their earnings forecasts, The Accounting Review
  86, 1087–1115.

Li, Feng, 2008, Annual report readability, current earnings, and earnings persistence, Jour-
  nal of Accounting and Economics 45, 221–247.

Loughran, Tim, and Bill McDonald, 2011, When is a Liability not a Liability? Textual
  Analysis, Dictionaries, and 10-Ks, Journal of Finance 66, 35–65.

Loughran, Tim, and Bill McDonald, 2013, IPO first-day returns, offer price revisions, volatil-
  ity, and form S-1 language, Journal of Financial Economics 109, 307–326.

Loughran, Tim, and Bill McDonald, 2014, Measuring Readability in Financial Disclosures,
  Journal of Finance 69, 1643–1671.

Loughran, Tim, and Bill McDonald, 2016, Textual Analysis in Finance and Accounting: A
  Survey, Journal of Accounting Research 54, 1187–1230.

Mayew, William J., 2008, Evidence of Management Discrimination Among Analysts during
 Earnings Conference Calls, Journal of Acconting Research 46, 627–659.


                                             39
Mayew, William J., and Mohan Venkatachalam, 2012, The Power of Voice: Managerial
 Affective States and Future Firm Performance, Journal of Finance 67, 1–43.

Miller, B.P., 2010, The effects of reporting complexity on small and large investor trading,
 The Accounting Review 85, 2107–2143.

Price, S. McKay, James S. Doran, David R. Peterson, and Barbara A. Bliss, 2012, Earn-
  ings conference calls and stock returns: The incremental informativeness of textual tone,
  Journal of Banking and Finance 36, 992–1011.

Rennekamp, K., 2012, Processing fluency and investors reactions to disclosure readability,
  Journal of Accounting Research 50, 1319–1354.

Solomon, David H., 2012, Selective publicity and stock prices, Journal of Finance 67, 599–
  638.

Solomon, David H., and Eugene Soltes, 2015, What Are We Meeting For? The Consequences
  of Private Meetings with Investors, Journal of Law and Economics 58, 325–355.

Soltes, Eugene, 2014, Private interaction between firm management and sell-side analysts,
  Journal of Accounting Research 52, 245–272.

Yang, Holly I., 2012, Capital market consequences of managers’ voluntary disclosure styles,
  Journal of Accounting and Economics 53, 167–184.

You, H., and X. Zhang, 2009, Financial reporting complexity and investor underreaction to
  10-K information, Review of Accounting Studies 14, 559–586.

Zhou, Dexin, 2014, The blame game, Working Paper.

Zhou, Dexin, 2016, Good news in numbers, Working Paper.




                                            40
Figure 1: Top 25 most frequently occurring uncertain words in presentations and answers
                                            (a) Presentations




                                               (b) Answers




This figure plots the frequencies of the 25 most popular uncertain words occurring in conference calls in our
sample. Words used in presentations are shown in Panel (a) and words used in answers are shown in Panel
(b). The denominator is the count of all uncertain words across all conference call presentations or answers,
respectively.




                                                    41
      Figure 2: Frequency of uncertain words in presentations and answers over time
                                              (a) CEOs




                                              (b) CFOs




This figure plots %U nct, the frequency of uncertain in total words spoken in conference calls over time.
It shows results separately for presentations and answers. Panels (a) and (b) focus on CEOs and CFOs,
respectively.

                                                  42
                             Figure 3: Distribution of manager style
                                         (a) CEOs (N=5,982)




                                         (b) CFOs (N=6,177)




This figure shows the distribution of individual manager fixed effects estimated according to Equation 4,
Section 4.3, which represent the different styles of vagueness among managers. In total, 5,982 CEOs (upper
panel) and 6,177 CFOs (lower panel) are included. The range of the X-axis is aligned in Panels (a) and (b)
for ease of interpretation.                           43
                  Figure 4: CEO vagueness and trading around the call date




This figure illustrates the daily abnormal trading volume, taken to indicate the amount of information
entering the market, around earnings calls attended by CEOs with different levels of vague style, estimated
according to Equation 4. Abnormal trading volume is defined as the natural logarithm of the ratio of daily
trading volume (in shares) to its daily pre-event average, calculated over a window starting 45 days and
ending 6 days before each call. Since we do not know the exact timing of the call, in particular whether
it occurred before or after market close, we report the average of event days 0 and 1, rather than each of
them separately. The x-axis shows the corresponding average on day 0 (and, therefore, then shows day 2
next). The dashed line is the average for all CEOs. The solid (dotted) line is the average for CEOs in the
top (bottom) quintile of vague style.




                                                   44
 Figure 5: Distribution of median earnings surprise for straight- and vague-talking CEOs.




This figure presents a histogram of residuals from a cross-sectional regression of the median earnings sur-
prise decile on various speech characteristics and control variables listed in column (3) of Table 8, except
V agueCEO Style. The residuals are plotted for straight- and vague-talking CEOs separately. A CEO is
considered straight-talking if her style of vagueness is in the bottom quintile of the distribution among all
CEOs and vague-talking if she falls into the top quintile.




                                                    45
                                      Table 1: Conference-call sample summary

                                     Full sample                      CEO sample                        CFO sample
                             N            mean     stdev      N            mean      stdev      N            mean      stdev
N calls                    122,160                          105,626                           102,675
N firms / Calls per firm    5,096    /    23.97    17.99     4,095     /   28.86     16.48     4,044     /   29.05     16.54
   WordsCall                              5,931    2,156                   6,013     2,086                   6,044     2,094
   %UnctCall                              0.844    0.263                   0.846     0.258                   0.843     0.257
   WordsPres                              2,888    1,335                   2,941     1,297                   2,961     1,302
   %UnctPres                              0.863    0.336                   0.867     0.335                   0.864     0.333
   WordsAnsw                              3,043    1,611                   3,072     1,540                   3,083     1,542
   %UnctAnsw                              0.823    0.319                   0.825     0.316                   0.824     0.315
N calls (CEO present)      114,290                          105,626
N CEOs / Calls per CEO      9,859    /    11.59    11.78     6,057     /   17.56     11.52
   WordsCEO Pres                          1,354    833.3                   1,363     833.4
   %UnctCEO Pres                          0.666    0.391                   0.668     0.392
   %NegCEO Pres                           0.863    0.555                   0.865     0.556
   %NumbCEO Pres                          2.819    1.608                   2.840     1.609
   ComplexCEO Pres                        20.61    5.469                   20.64     5.403
   WordsCEO Answ                          1,852    1,258                   1,886     1,261
   %UnctCEO Answ                          0.790    0.405                   0.793     0.402
   %NegCEO Answ                           0.758    0.412                   0.758     0.407
   %NumbCEO Answ                          1.073    0.744                   1.077     0.739
   ComplexCEO Answ                        19.07    4.741                   19.12     4.668
N calls (CFO present)      113,071                                                            102,675
N CFOs / Calls per CFO     11,098    /    10.19    10.83                                       6,371     /   16.24     10.84
   WordsCF O Pres                         1,134    732.1                                                     1,153     735.9
   %UnctCF O Pres                         0.860    0.557                                                     0.862     0.554
   %NegCF O Pres                          0.913    0.584                                                     0.910     0.583
   %NumbCF O Pres                         6.922    6.253                                                     6.997     6.289
   ComplexCF O Pres                       20.24    6.776                                                     20.31     6.688
   WordsCF O Answ                         796.5    794.2                                                     818.9     801.3
   %UnctCF O Answ                         0.874    0.635                                                     0.877     0.628
   %NegCF O Answ                          0.720    0.568                                                     0.720     0.561
   %NumbCF O Answ                         1.563    3.066                                                     1.585     3.072
   ComplexCF O Answ                       17.40    6.382                                                     17.58     6.205
Other language variables
   AnalyWords                             1,274    832.0                   1,262     707.3                   1,276     718.9
   %UnctAnaly              118,848        1.282    0.454    103,300        1.288     0.449    100,354        1.290     0.447
   %NegAnaly                              1.255    0.467                   1.251     0.461                   1.252     0.458
   %UnctEPR                               1.228    0.554                   1.231     0.548                   1.229     0.547
Firm characteristics
   ln(Assets)                             7.343    1.874                     7.336    1.806                   7.412     1.834
   DailyVola                              0.405     0.271                   0.399    0.262                    0.395    0.259
   EPS growth (yoy)                      -0.0274    1.784                  -0.0245   1.772                   -0.0176    1.759
   Guidance                               0.175     0.380                   0.180    0.384                    0.183    0.387
   ShrTra                                 0.162    0.107                     0.163   0.105                    0.163     0.105
   StockRet                               2.191     20.19                   2.540    19.84                    2.556    19.58
   SurpDec                                0.852     3.162                   0.881    3.123                    0.906    3.101
   Tobin’s Q                              1.947     1.339                   1.947    1.334                    1.942    1.327
   MarketRet                              0.0192   0.0838   105,626         0.0213   0.0838   102,675        0.0213    0.0839
Outcomes
   AbnVol                  121,877        0.622    0.631    105,517        0.635     0.620    102,574        0.639     0.613
   CAR01(%)                 98,770       0.0608    7.041     86,174        0.113     7.065    84,427         0.115     7.018
   ACAR01 (%)               98,770        5.217    4.730     86,174        5.251     4.728    84,427         5.205     4.708
      Table 1 – continued
                                      Full sample                        CEO sample                          CFO sample
                              N            mean     stdev         N           mean      stdev         N            mean     stdev
CAR260 (%)                   96,300        0.140    15.07       84,634        0.177     14.92       82,978         0.203    14.78
RevFreqPost                 118,683        0.287    0.372      103,219        0.285     0.368      100,420         0.287    0.367
ShareAnalyPost              122,160        0.499    0.317      105,626        0.505     0.313      102,675         0.506    0.311
Summary statistics are presented for three samples relevant to our analysis. The full sample contains all conference calls for US
public firms from 2003 to 2015, obtained from Thomson Reuters Street Events. The CEO/CFO samples reflect the data we later
use to estimate CEO/CFO style. To qualify for the CEO/CFO sample, the manager must have participated (either as CEO or as
CFO) in at least 5 calls during her combined tenure (possibly at more than one firm). Firm-level call characteristics are calculated
for all participating company representatives combined. At the CEO/CFO level, the same statistics refer to the specific manager
speaking. Detailed definitions of all variables are provided in Table A.1 of the Appendix.
     Table 2: Manager vagueness and immediate earnings response: Testing Hypothesis 1

                                       Team vagueness                      CEO                CFO
                            all         all         all         all         all         all         SP500
                            (1)         (2)         (3)         (4)         (5)         (6)          (7)
SurpDec                  0.765***    0.763***    0.760***    1.024***    0.773***    0.817***    0.678***
                          (73.12)     (72.90)     (72.80)     (10.60)     (68.13)     (61.77)     (19.67)
%UnctCall                 -0.056*
                           (-1.93)
%UnctCall × SurpDec      -0.034***
                           (-3.60)
%UnctPres                            -0.078***   -0.079***   -0.083***    -0.054*    -0.062**       0.025
                                       (-2.73)     (-2.76)     (-2.89)     (-1.90)    (-2.01)      (0.37)
%UnctPres × SurpDec                    -0.005      -0.006       0.001      -0.008      -0.013       0.005
                                       (-0.54)     (-0.59)     (0.08)      (-0.85)    (-1.29)      (0.15)
%UnctAnsw                               0.009       0.013       0.009       0.020    0.074***       0.065
                                       (0.36)      (0.51)      (0.33)      (0.74)      (2.66)      (1.13)
%UnctAnsw × SurpDec                  -0.025***   -0.026***    -0.017**   -0.023***     -0.000    -0.058***
                                       (-2.98)     (-3.10)     (-2.06)     (-2.80)    (-0.05)      (-2.60)
%UnctAnaly                0.024         0.023       0.023       0.036       0.024       0.025       0.036
                          (1.04)       (0.98)      (1.01)      (1.47)      (0.95)      (0.86)      (0.60)
%UnctAnaly × SurpDec                                           -0.012     -0.014*     -0.017*     -0.043*
                                                               (-1.46)     (-1.70)    (-1.87)      (-1.83)
%NegCall                 -1.746***
                          (-18.93)
%NegPres                             -0.967***   -0.961***   -0.846***   -0.325***   -0.107***     -0.024
                                      (-14.44)    (-14.33)    (-12.30)    (-10.84)    (-11.06)     (-1.08)
%NegPres × SurpDec                                           -0.148***    -0.022**   -0.102***     -0.050
                                                               (-7.32)     (-2.44)     (-3.58)     (-0.87)
%NegAnsw                             -0.712***   -0.731***   -0.762***   -0.199***       0.003     -0.020
                                       (-8.70)     (-8.93)     (-8.98)     (-7.25)      (0.37)     (-0.88)
%NegAnsw × SurpDec                                               0.036      0.009       -0.063     -0.007
                                                                (1.33)     (0.98)      (-1.62)     (-0.13)
%NegAnaly                -0.339***   -0.340***   -0.341***   -0.325***   -0.379***   -0.440***   -0.402***
                          (-13.16)    (-13.13)    (-13.16)    (-12.12)    (-13.69)    (-14.27)     (-6.48)
%NegAnaly × SurpDec                                           -0.019**   -0.028***      -0.013     -0.014
                                                               (-2.29)     (-3.22)     (-1.37)     (-0.57)
WordsPres                                        -0.110***   -0.094***   -0.083***      -0.063     -0.007
                                                   (-3.68)     (-2.98)     (-2.62)     (-1.62)     (-0.13)
WordsPres × SurpDec                                             -0.011     -0.008        0.002     -0.028
                                                               (-1.04)     (-0.81)      (0.15)     (-1.23)
WordsAnsw                                        -0.153***   -0.172***    -0.074**    -0.096**    -0.150**
                                                   (-3.89)     (-4.09)     (-2.02)     (-2.23)     (-2.51)
WordsAnsw × SurpDec                                            0.031**    0.054***       0.018     0.049*
                                                                (2.03)     (4.20)       (1.14)     (1.90)
WordsAnaly                                        -0.085*     -0.138**   -0.232***   -0.216***     -0.073
                                                  (-1.74)      (-2.53)     (-4.47)     (-3.89)     (-0.76)
WordsAnaly × SurpDec                                          0.071***    0.069***    0.070***     -0.015
                                                                (3.85)     (4.14)       (3.95)     (-0.36)
%NumbersPres                                     0.108***     0.091***    0.235***     0.084**      0.074
                                                  (5.85)        (4.74)     (8.09)       (2.55)     (1.42)
%NumbersPres × SurpDec                                         0.015**     -0.015       0.019*     -0.008
                                                                (2.25)     (-1.53)      (1.80)     (-0.33)
%NumbersAnsw                                     -0.078**       -0.019   -0.080***     0.062**      0.072
                                                  (-2.03)      (-0.49)     (-2.80)      (2.07)     (1.42)
                 Table 2 – continued
                                               Team vagueness                      CEO                  CFO
                                   all         all         all          all         all          all          SP500
                                   (1)         (2)         (3)          (4)         (5)          (6)           (7)
%NumbersAnsw × SurpDec                                               -0.060***    -0.018*    -0.042***    -0.089***
                                                                       (-4.51)     (-1.89)     (-4.23)      (-4.73)
ComplexityPres                                            -0.013       -0.009      -0.045      -0.045       -0.051
                                                          (-1.16)      (-0.80)     (-0.90)     (-0.70)      (-0.44)
ComplexityPres × SurpDec                                               -0.004     -0.027*      -0.027        0.031
                                                                       (-0.97)     (-1.65)     (-1.25)      (0.62)
ComplexityAnsw                                            -0.009       -0.006      -0.020      -0.059        0.038
                                                          (-1.18)      (-0.73)     (-0.61)     (-1.58)      (0.50)
ComplexityAnsw × SurpDec                                               -0.003      -0.016       0.004        0.027
                                                                       (-1.17)     (-1.50)     (0.28)       (0.86)
Guidance                                                -0.453***    -0.772***   -0.729***   -0.724***     -0.349**
                                                          (-5.89)      (-9.01)     (-8.13)     (-7.72)      (-2.36)
Guidance × SurpDec                                                   0.223***    0.224***     0.211***    0.230***
                                                                       (7.26)      (7.24)      (6.54)       (3.34)
StockRet                       -0.198***    -0.197***   -0.209***    -0.213***   -0.219***   -0.204***      -0.142
                                 (-6.64)      (-6.58)     (-6.98)      (-7.12)     (-6.93)     (-5.91)      (-1.60)
EPS growth (yoy)                0.064**      0.062**     0.057**       0.051*     0.068**     0.071**       0.136*
                                 (2.30)       (2.26)      (2.07)       (1.84)      (2.34)      (2.25)       (1.79)
DailyVola                         0.049        0.043       0.046        0.025       0.007       0.017      0.255**
                                 (1.13)       (1.00)      (1.08)       (0.59)      (0.17)      (0.36)       (2.19)
ln(Assets)                      -0.061*       -0.054     0.103**      0.103**       0.034       0.070       0.148*
                                 (-1.65)      (-1.47)     (2.50)       (2.50)      (0.78)      (1.49)       (1.81)
Tobin’s Q                      -0.266***    -0.262***   -0.213***    -0.202***   -0.178***   -0.124***       0.089
                                 (-7.20)      (-7.09)     (-5.69)      (-5.41)     (-4.69)     (-3.22)      (1.26)
MarketRet                        -0.044       -0.044      -0.044       -0.042      -0.046      -0.038      -0.141**
                                 (-1.44)      (-1.44)     (-1.44)      (-1.39)     (-1.42)     (-1.09)      (-2.16)

N Obs                            91,528      91,528       91,528      91,528      83,751       71,093         14,953
Year f.e.                          Yes        Yes           Yes         Yes        Yes           Yes           Yes
Industry f.e.                      Yes        Yes           Yes         Yes        Yes           Yes           Yes
R2                                0.120      0.120         0.121       0.124      0.124         0.128         0.117
  This table presents panel regressions of the cumulative abnormal returns (CAR) over [0:1] days relative to the call
  date on vagueness, the earnings surprise, and control variables. Abnormal stock returns are computed following
  Daniel, Grinblatt, Titman, and Wermers (1997) (DGTW); see Section 3.2 for details. In columns (1) to (4), the
  measure of vagueness is the frequency on uncertain words in all words spoken jointly by management (CEOs, CFOs,
  and other managers) during each conference call. In the following columns, we differentiate between presentation
  and answers vagueness, as well as CEO and CFO vagueness. The other speech characteristics are also measured
  on either the management, or CEO, or CFO level, depending on the regression. The effect of vagueness on
  the earnings response coefficient is modeled as an interaction term with the earnings surprise. All explanatory
  variables are standardized (except SurpDec and Guidance) and defined in Table A.1 in the Appendix. The sample
  comprises all US public companies from 2003 to 2015. Column (7) uses the S&P500 companies. t-statistics shown
  in parentheses are based on standard errors clustered by firm in columns (2) to (4), by CEO in column (5), and
  by CFO in columns (6) and (7). Significance levels: * - 10%, ** - 5%, *** - 1%
       Table 3: Managerial turnover and the language of earnings conference calls


                       Panel (a): Correlation ρOldM/N ewM              Panel (b): Correlation ρOldF/N ewF
                     Two different managers at the same firm          Same manager at two different firms
                     Control    Turnover firms       Difference       Control   Movers        Difference
                       (1)           (2)                 (3)            (4)      (5)              (6)
CEOs                                  N= 1,578                                       N= 68
 %UnctEPR              0.74           0.66            -0.09 ***        0.82       0.15         0.67 ***
                                                       ( -4.80 )                               ( 5.68 )
 %UnctCEO Pres         0.65           0.46            -0.19 ***        0.61       0.22         0.39 ***
                                                       ( -7.80 )                               ( 2.78 )
 %UnctCEO Answ         0.70           0.26            -0.44 ***        0.69       0.43         0.26 ***
                                                      ( -16.86 )                               ( 2.20 )

CFOs                                  N= 1,665                                      N= 279
 %UnctEPR              0.76           0.69            -0.07 ***        0.80       0.12         0.68 ***
                                                       ( -4.25 )                               ( 11.60 )
 %UnctCF O Pres        0.76           0.51            -0.25 ***        0.80       0.19         0.61 ***
                                                      ( -12.72 )                               ( 10.79 )
 %UnctCF O Answ        0.54           0.22            -0.32 ***        0.45       0.41           0.04
                                                      ( -10.95 )                               ( 0.58 )
 Panel (a) shows correlations (ρOldM/N ewM ) between average frequency of uncertain words in the earnings
 press release (EPR) as well as the presentation and answers parts, across all “turnover” firms, where
 we observe two different managers (CEOs or CFOs) working in succession at the same firm. OldM
 corresponds to the outgoing manager and N ewM to the incoming one. For each “turnover” firm, a
 matching “control” firm from the same Fama-French 17 industry is identified, which did not experience
 a manager turnover. The matching is based on similarity of observation period, average assets as well as
 %Unct words spoken by the CEO or CFO in the presentation and answers part during the pre-turnover
 period. Average frequency of uncertain words for each “control” firm is calculated using the same
 periods that the old and new manager was in charge at the matching “turnover” firm. Only manager
 turnovers with at least five quarters of data available for the old and new manager are considered.
 Panel (b) provides a complementary analysis by following the same manager (a “mover”) from one firm
 to another. In this case, the correlation (ρOldF/N ewF ) is calculated between the average frequency of
 uncertain words in the EPR, presentation and answers at the old and new firm connected by the mover.
 Control firms in Panel (b) are matched to the firm at which the “mover” worked in after the move.
 Significance testing of the differences is based on Fisher transformations of the correlation coefficients,
 according to:

                                                F (ρ1 ) − F (ρ2 )
                                             z=q
                                                    1         1
                                                 (N1 −3) + (N2 −3)

 Significance levels: * - 10%, ** - 5%, *** - 1%



                                                    50
                   Table 4: Estimating vagueness at the manager level


                                              CEO                         CFO
                                       (1)           (2)          (3)            (4)
               %UnctPres            0.207***    0.095***        0.086***     0.059***
                                      (63.50)     (25.08)        (22.23)      (10.15)
               %UnctAnaly            0.054***   0.046***        0.055***     0.045***
                                      (19.04)     (17.31)        (11.42)       (9.10)
               %NegAnsw             0.108***     0.068***      0.038***     0.028***
                                      (32.81)     (20.76)         (9.73)       (7.05)
               %NegAnaly            -0.012***   -0.008***         -0.004       -0.004
                                      (-4.17)     (-2.68)        (-0.80)      (-0.78)
               SurpDec                 0.003        0.055          0.013       0.081
                                       (0.08)      (1.42)         (0.18)       (1.14)
               StockRet               0.012*       -0.010          0.008       0.000
                                       (1.77)     (-1.57)         (0.72)       (0.01)
               EPS growth (yoy)         0.047      -0.022         -0.118       -0.136
                                       (0.66)     (-0.33)        (-0.98)      (-1.13)
               DailyVola             0.012**     0.026***          0.000     0.022**
                                       (2.11)      (4.53)         (0.00)       (2.03)
               ln(Assets)           -0.004***   -0.021***      -0.012***    -0.024***
                                      (-4.97)     (-7.11)        (-9.52)      (-4.50)
               MarketRet               -0.013      -0.022         -0.011       -0.010
                                      (-0.80)     (-1.47)        (-0.38)      (-0.35)

               Nobs                  94,341         94,341       87,183         87,183
               Manager f.e.            No            Yes           No             Yes
               R2                     0.064         0.336         0.010          0.223
The dependent variable in columns (1) and (2) is the call-level vagueness in CEO answers
(%U nctCEO Answ).       In columns (3) and (4) it is the call-level vagueness in CFO answers
(%U nctCF O Answ). Columns (1) and (3) are estimated using OLS, columns (2) and (4) additionally
include CEO and CFO fixed effects, respectively. %U nctM GR P res controls for vagueness in commu-
nication resulting from persistent firm characteristics (such as firm culture) and time-varying business
conditions. Other explanatory variables include negativity in answers (measured separately for CEO
and CFO), negativity and the frequency of uncertain words in analyst questions as well as various firm
characteristics. All variables are defined in Table A.1 in the Appendix. Summary results of variants
of these regressions using fewer/more/different control variables are presented in Table B.1 in the Ap-
pendix. t-statistics shown in parentheses are clustered by manager. Significance levels: * - 10%, ** -
5%, *** - 1%




                                                51
Table 5: CEO vagueness style and immediate earnings response: Refining Hypothesis 1

                                               all CEOs                  turnover CEOs
                                         all firms         SP500      all firms    SP500
                                            (1)             (2)          (3)        (4)
             SurpDec                     0.785***         0.661***    0.818***    0.685***
                                          (66.46)          (23.83)     (47.89)     (19.00)

             VagueStyle                  0.125***          0.125**     0.175***     0.152*
                                           (3.89)           (2.11)      (3.54)      (1.80)
             VagueStyle × SurpDec        -0.044***        -0.086***   -0.061***   -0.103***
                                           (-4.10)          (-3.56)     (-3.90)     (-3.61)
             VagueResid                    -0.022          -0.088*      -0.043      -0.097
                                           (-0.87)          (-1.73)     (-1.22)     (-1.46)
             VagueResid × SurpDec          -0.003            0.029      -0.011       0.022
                                           (-0.35)          (1.41)      (-1.05)     (0.85)

             %UnctPres                   -0.079***         -0.035     -0.120***    -0.084
                                           (-2.73)         (-0.66)      (-2.69)    (-1.09)
             %UnctPres × SurpDec            0.000           0.026        0.005      0.017
                                           (0.04)          (1.14)       (0.35)     (0.60)
             %UnctAnaly                     0.022           0.037        0.007      0.033
                                           (0.84)          (0.65)       (0.18)     (0.43)
             %UnctAnaly × SurpDec          -0.013         -0.044**     -0.021*     -0.027
                                           (-1.52)         (-2.04)      (-1.69)    (-0.95)

             N Obs                        78,740           16,367      39,156      10,286
             Other speech (+ int.)         Yes              Yes          Yes        Yes
             Controls                      Yes              Yes          Yes        Yes
             Year f.e.                     Yes              Yes          Yes        Yes
             Industry f.e.                 Yes              Yes          No          No
             Firm f.e.                      No               No          Yes        Yes
             R2                           0.126            0.119        0.112      0.107
 This table presents panel regressions of the cumulative abnormal return (CAR) over [0:1] days relative to
 the call date on vagueness, the earnings surprise, and control variables. Columns (1) and (2) use the full
 sample of CEOs of all US public companies and S&P500 firms, respectively, from 2003 to 2015. Columns
 (3) and (4) focus on those firms, among all or from the S&P500 universe, which experienced a CEO
 turnover during the sample period. Abnormal stock returns are computed following Daniel, Grinblatt,
 Titman, and Wermers (1997) (DGTW); see Section 3.2 for details. The effect of vagueness on the
 earnings response coefficient is modeled as an interaction term of VagueStyle with the earnings surprise
 (and VagueResids with the earnings surprise). VagueStyle is the CEO’s style of vagueness estimated from
 the language of her answers to analyst questions during earnings conference calls, according to Equation
 4. VagueResids represents the residuals from Equation 4, i.e., deviations from style. In addition to the
 variables shown, all regressions control, as indicated at the bottom of the table, for the same controls
 as Table 2, column (5). All explanatory variables are standardized (except SurpDec and Guidance) and
 defined in Table A.1 in the Appendix. t-statistics shown in parentheses are based on standard errors
 clustered by manager. Significance levels: * - 10%, ** - 5%, *** - 1%.

                                                     52
Table 6: CEO vagueness style, immediate earnings response, and post-call drift: The role of investor base

                                                  all                     Low transient          High transient
                                                firms                     investor share         investor share
                                       CAR01        CAR260             CAR01       CAR260      CAR01      CAR260
                                        (1)           (2)               (3)          (4)        (5)         (6)
          SurpDec                     0.785***      0.126***           0.786***    0.178***    0.844***   0.088*
                                       (66.46)       (5.27)             (37.87)     (3.97)      (34.00)   (1.69)

          VagueStyle                  0.125***          -0.023         0.228***     -0.024      0.051     -0.030
                                        (3.89)          (-0.30)          (3.94)    (-0.18)     (0.76)     (-0.21)
          VagueStyle × SurpDec        -0.044***          0.010         -0.052***     0.033     -0.019     -0.016
                                        (-4.10)         (0.46)           (-2.95)    (0.77)     (-0.83)    (-0.35)
          VagueResid                    -0.022           0.030            0.047      0.003     -0.071      0.109
                                        (-0.87)         (0.50)           (1.16)     (0.03)     (-1.18)    (0.82)
          VagueResid × SurpDec          -0.003           0.026            0.007    0.071**      0.006      0.050
                                        (-0.35)         (1.28)           (0.51)     (1.96)     (0.33)     (1.12)

          %UnctPres                   -0.079***       -0.024            -0.023       -0.077    -0.001     0.135
                                        (-2.73)      (-0.35)            (-0.45)      (-0.63)   (-0.02)    (0.97)
          %UnctPres × SurpDec            0.000        -0.001             0.026       -0.057    -0.027     0.024
                                        (0.04)       (-0.05)            (1.48)       (-1.40)   (-1.33)    (0.52)
          %UnctAnaly                     0.022       0.157**            -0.008       0.201*     0.025     0.148
                                        (0.84)        (2.53)            (-0.17)      (1.86)    (0.41)     (1.07)
          %UnctAnaly × SurpDec          -0.013      -0.046**            -0.005     -0.104***   -0.016     0.052
                                        (-1.52)      (-2.22)            (-0.32)      (-2.82)   (-0.82)    (1.20)

          N Obs                        78,740       75,953              19,567      19,567      19,853    19,853
          Other speech (+ int.)         Yes           Yes                Yes         Yes         Yes        Yes
          Controls                      Yes           Yes                Yes         Yes         Yes        Yes
          Year f.e.                     Yes           Yes                Yes         Yes         Yes        Yes
          Industry f.e.                 Yes           Yes                Yes         Yes         Yes        Yes
          R2                           0.126        0.00376             0.148       0.0146      0.123     0.00785
  This table presents panel regressions of the cumulative abnormal return (CAR) over [0:1] days relative to the call date
  in columns (1), (3), and (5) as well as cumulative abnormal returns (CAR) over [2:60] days relative to the call date in
  columns (2), (4), and (6) on vagueness, the earnings surprise, and control variables. Columns (1) and (2) use all US public
  companies from 2003 to 2015. Columns (3) and (4) focus on firms with a low share of transient investors, following the
  classification of Bushee (2001). Lastly, columns (5) and (6) deal with firms with a high share of such investors. Investor
  classification data are available until 2013. Abnormal stock returns are computed following Daniel, Grinblatt, Titman,
  and Wermers (1997) (DGTW); see Section 3.2 for details. The effect of vagueness on the earnings response coefficient is
  modeled as an interaction term of VagueStyle with the earnings surprise (and VagueResids with the earnings surprise).
  VagueStyle is the CEO’s style of vagueness estimated from the language of her answers to analyst questions during
  earnings conference calls, according to Equation 4. VagueResids represents the residuals from Equation 4, i.e., deviations
  from style. In addition to the variables shown, all regressions control, as indicated at the bottom of the table, for the
  same controls as Table 2, columns (5)-(7), respectively. All explanatory variables are standardized (except SurpDec and
  Guidance) and defined in Table A.1 in the Appendix. t-statistics shown in parentheses are based on standard errors
  clustered by manager. Significance levels: * - 10%, ** - 5%, *** - 1%




                                                                  53
Table 7: CEO vagueness style and earnings informativeness: Testing Hypotheses 2 and 3


                                ACAR01        AbnVol     ShareAnalyPost     RevFreqPost
                                  (1)          (2)             (3)              (4)
                VagueStyle      -0.111***    -0.012***       -0.006***         0.005**
                                  (-4.46)      (-3.52)         (-2.78)          (2.27)
                VagueResid         -0.012      -0.002           0.000            0.001
                                  (-0.77)      (-1.13)         (0.55)           (1.21)
                %UnctPres           0.018    0.009***           0.000          0.003**
                                   (0.94)      (4.14)          (0.31)           (2.19)
                %UnctAnaly          0.002    0.005***           0.001            0.002
                                   (0.10)      (2.69)          (1.08)           (1.39)
                Guidance        0.212***     0.045***        0.067***         -0.016***
                                   (3.67)      (6.29)         (15.79)           (-3.64)
                SurpDecAbs       0.436***    0.047***        0.008***           -0.001
                                  (31.07)     (31.83)         (10.26)           (-0.74)

                N Obs             78,740      92,684          94,319            92,256
                Other speech        Yes        Yes             Yes                Yes
                Controls            Yes        Yes             Yes                Yes
                Year f.e.           Yes        Yes             Yes                Yes
                Industry f.e.       Yes        Yes             Yes                Yes
                R2                 0.125      0.139           0.152              0.226
  This table presents panel regressions. In column (1), the dependent variable is the absolute cumulative
  abnormal return (ACAR) over [0:1] days relative to the call date. Abnormal stock returns are computed
  following Daniel, Grinblatt, Titman, and Wermers (1997) (DGTW); see Section 3.2 for details. In column
  (2), the dependent variable is the abnormal trading volume; see Section 5.2 for details. In column (3),
  the dependent variable is ShareAnalyPost, which is the share of analysts that revises their forecasts
  within 3 days of the conference call. In column (4), the dependent variable is post-announcement
  revision frequency, the number of revisions after the conference call of quarter t up to the earnings
  announcement of quarter t+1 divided by the number of analysts. VagueStyle is the CEO’s style of
  vagueness estimated from the language of her answers to analyst questions during earnings conference
  calls, according to Equation 4. VagueResids represents the residuals from Equation 4, i.e., deviations
  from style. In addition to the variables shown, all regressions control, as indicated at the bottom of the
  table, for the same controls as Table 2, column (5). (Interactions are not included in this table.) All
  explanatory variables are standardized (except SurpDec and Guidance) and defined in Table A.1 in the
  Appendix. t-statistics shown in parentheses are clustered by manager. Significance levels: : * - 10%, **
  - 5%, *** - 1%




                                                   54
                            Table 8: Benefits of CEO vague style


                                Firm-quarter                      Cross-sectional
                           SurpDec     SurpDecAbs        MedSurpDec      MedSurpDecAbs
                             (1)           (2)              (3)               (4)
           VagueStyle       0.037**      -0.019**          0.076**           -0.027**
                             (1.98)       (-2.12)           (2.07)            (-2.01)
           VagueResid        -0.014       -0.003
                            (-1.30)       (-0.78)
           %UnctPres         0.021         0.007             -0.014           -0.012
                             (1.54)       (1.32)            (-0.35)           (-0.77)
           %UnctAnaly        0.008      -0.013***            0.057          -0.055***
                             (0.65)       (-2.72)            (1.08)           (-2.82)
           Guidance        0.445***     -0.233***          0.387***         -0.157***
                            (12.30)      (-12.37)           (13.81)          (-11.73)

           N Obs            83,162        83,162             5,975            5,975
           Other speech      Yes            Yes               Yes              Yes
           Controls          Yes            Yes               Yes              Yes
           Year f.e.         Yes            Yes                -                -
           Industry f.e.     Yes            Yes               Yes              Yes
           R2               0.0278         0.173             0.105            0.439
This table presents panel regressions in columns (1) and (2) and cross-sectional regressions in columns
(3) and (4). The dependent variable in column (1) is the earnings surprise decile next quarter and in
column (2) it is the absolute value of the earnings surprise decile next quarter. The dependent variable
in column (3) is the median earnings surprise calculated over the tenure of each manager. The dependent
variable in column (4) is the absolute value of the median earnings surprise. VagueStyle is the CEO’s
style of vagueness estimated from the language of her answers to analyst questions during earnings
conference calls, according to Equation 4. All control variables are averaged over each manager’s tenure.
In addition to the variables shown, all regressions control, as indicated at the bottom of the table, for
the same controls as Table 2, column (5). (Interactions are not included in this table.) All explanatory
variables are standardized (except SurpDec and Guidance) and defined in Table A.1 in the Appendix.
t-statistics shown in parentheses are clustered by manager in columns (1) and (2) and by Fama-French
48 industries in columns (3) and (4). Significance levels: : * - 10%, ** - 5%, *** - 1%




                                                   55
                              Table 9: The importance of CFO vagueness style


                                    Panel A: Immediate earnings response, CAR01
                                   all CFOs                       turnover CFOs                       mover CFOs
                             all firms     SP500             all firms          SP500           all firms      SP500
                                (1)         (2)                 (3)              (4)               (5)          (6)
 SurpDec                     0.821***     0.693***           0.861***          0.703***         0.892***      0.736***
                              (60.51)      (19.19)            (43.94)           (17.13)          (23.55)       (9.11)

 VagueStyle                    0.003        0.148*             0.036             0.196*           0.137       0.605***
                              (0.08)        (1.94)            (0.66)             (1.80)          (1.20)         (2.86)
 VagueStyle × SurpDec         -0.002      -0.076***           -0.016           -0.119***        -0.091**      -0.241***
                              (-0.21)       (-2.66)           (-0.83)            (-3.34)         (-2.39)        (-3.29)
 VagueResid                  0.094***        0.079           0.107***             0.050           0.069          0.009
                              (3.39)        (1.45)            (2.78)             (0.75)          (0.80)         (0.06)
 VagueResid × SurpDec         -0.003       -0.047**           -0.020            -0.059**          0.002        -0.122**
                              (-0.38)       (-2.24)           (-1.56)            (-2.27)         (0.06)         (-2.30)

 N Obs                        67,689       14,250             34,617            10,449           9,554          3,207
 Controls                       Yes         Yes                Yes               Yes              Yes            Yes
 Year f.e.                      Yes         Yes                Yes               Yes              Yes            Yes
 Industry f.e.                  Yes         Yes                 No                No               No            No
 Firm f.e.                      No           No                Yes               Yes              Yes            Yes
 R2                            0.128       0.118              0.0850            0.0797           0.0984        0.0880


                         Panel B: Informativeness and earnings surprises, all CFOs, all firms
                             ACAR01       AbnVol         ShareAnalyPost      RevFreqPost        SurpDec     SurpDecAbs
                               (7)         (8)                 (9)              (10)              (11)          (12)
 VagueStyle                  -0.087***    -0.014***          -0.004**            0.003            0.015       -0.018**
                               (-3.42)      (-4.54)           (-2.39)            (1.50)          (0.80)        (-2.13)
 VagueResid                    -0.024       -0.000            -0.001             0.001           -0.002         0.007
                               (-1.37)      (-0.03)           (-0.69)            (0.54)          (-0.19)       (1.57)

 SurpDecAbs                  0.439***     0.048***           0.008***           -0.000
                              (28.92)      (30.73)            (9.18)            (-0.15)

 N Obs                        67,689       79,117             80,469            78,818           71,041        71,041
 Controls                       Yes         Yes                Yes                Yes             Yes           Yes
 Year f.e.                      Yes         Yes                Yes                Yes             Yes           Yes
 Industry f.e.                  Yes         Yes                Yes                Yes             Yes           Yes
 Firm f.e.                      No           No                 No                No               No            No
 R2                            0.124       0.141              0.159              0.205           0.0289        0.182
This table presents panel regressions focusing on CFOs. VagueStyle is now the CFO’s style of vagueness estimated from
the language of her answers to analyst questions during earnings conference calls, according to Equation 4. VagueResids
represents the residuals from Equation 4, i.e., deviations from style. The dependent variable in columns (1) - (6) is the
abnormal return (CAR) over [0:1] days relative to the call date. Abnormal stock returns are computed following Daniel,
Grinblatt, Titman, and Wermers (1997) (DGTW); see Section 3.2 for details. Columns (1) and (2) use the full sample of
CFOs of all US public companies or S&P500 firms, respectively, from 2003 to 2015. Columns (3) and (4) focus on those
firms, which experienced a CFO turnover during the sample period. Columns (5) and (6) deal with instances, in which
the CFO of one firm moves to another firm (within the full universe or just S&P500 firms), which is equivalent to the
approach in Bertrand and Schoar (2003). Columns (7) - (12) use the full sample of CFOs of all US public companies. In
columns (7) - (10), the dependent variables are the same as in Table 7. In columns (11) and (12) the dependent variable is
the earnings surprise decile and the absolute value of the earnings surprise decile, respectively. In addition to the variables
shown, all regressions control for the same controls as Table 2, column (6). (Interactions are included in columns (1) -
(6) only.) All explanatory variables are standardized (except SurpDec and Guidance) and defined in Table A.1 in the
Appendix. t-statistics shown in parentheses are clustered by manager. Significance levels: : * - 10%, ** - 5%, *** - 1%
A     Appendix

                                  Table A.1: Definitions of variables

Outcome variables (sorted alphabetically)
AbnVol            Abnormal trading volume measured as the log ratio of trading volume over [0:1] days
                  relative to the call divided by (two times) the average daily trading volume over the 40
                  day-period ending 5 days before the call
(A)CAR01          (Absolute) Cumulative Abnormal Return over [0:1] days relative to the call. Abnormal
                  stock returns are computed following Daniel, Grinblatt, Titman, and Wermers (1997)
                  (DGTW); see Section 3.2 for details
CAR260            Cumulative Abnormal Return over [2:60] days relative to the call. Abnormal stock re-
                  turns are computed following Daniel, Grinblatt, Titman, and Wermers (1997) (DGTW);
                  see Section 3.2 for details.
MedSurpDec(Abs)   Median value of SurpDec calculated over each manager’s tenure. MedSurpDecAbs is the
                  absolute value of MedSurpDec.
SurpDec(Abs)      Deciles of percentage earnings surprise, which is itself the difference between actual
                  and consensus forecast earnings, divided by the share price 5 trading days before the
                  announcement in quarter t, multiplied by 100. Specifically, SurpDec is obtained by
                  grouping firms into five equally sized bins of positive surprise (numbered from 5 to 1,
                  from largest positive to smallest positive surprise), then 0 for zero surprises, and then
                  five equally sized bins of negative surprise from -1 (for the smallest negative surprises)
                  through -5 (for the largest negative surprises). SurpDecAbs is the absolute value of
                  SurpDec.
RevFreqPost       Post-announcement revision frequency, number of revisions after the conference call of
                  quarter t up to the earnings announcement of quarter t+1, divided by the number of
                  analysts.
ShareAnalyPost    The share of analysts that revises their forecasts within 3 days of the conference call
Style variables
VagueM GR Style       Manager’s style of vagueness, that is her fixed effect in the percentage of uncertain words
                      she used when answernig questions from analysts. Estimated according to Equation 4
                      for all CEOs and CFOs
VagueM GR Resids      Unusual vagueness of manager’s answers. Represents incidental, quarter-specific devia-
                      tions from manager style of vagueness
Other variables (sorted alphabetically)
ln(Assets)          The natural logarithm of total assets
ComplexityM GR Pres The average length of sentences spoken by the manager during the presentation part of
                    the call. Calculated separately for the CEO and CFO
ComplexityM GR Answ The average length of sentences spoken by the manager when answering questions from
                    analysts. Calculated separately for the CEO and CFO
DailyVola           Daily stock volatility computed from daily returns
EPS growth          The fraction by which earnings in a quarter exceed earnings in the same quarter in the
                    prior year
Guidance            A binary indicator equal to one if a company provided earnings guidance for a given
                    quarter, and zero otherwise



                                                   57
                             Table A.1: Definitions of variables (cont.)

Other variables cont.
MarketRet          The value-weighted market return for the period starting 5 days after an earnings an-
                   nouncement for the quarter t-1 and ending 5 days prior to the earnings announcement
                   for the quarter t
%NegM GR Pres      The percentage of negative words in all words spoken by the manager during the pre-
                   sentation part of the call. Calculated separately for the CEO and CFO
%NegM GR Answ      The percentage of negative words in all words spoken by the manager when answering
                   questions from analysts. Calculated separately for the CEO and CFO
%NegAnaly          The percentage of negative words in questions from analysts
%NumbersM GR Pres The number of numbers per 100 words mentioned by the manager during the presentation
                   part of the call. Calculated separately for the CEO and CFO.
%NumbersM GR Answ The number of numbers per 100 words mentioned by the manager when answering ques-
                   tions from analysts. Calculated separately for the CEO and CFO.
StockRet           Stock return (in percent) in quarter t, that is the difference between the share price 5
                   days before the earnings announcement for quarter t and the share price 5 days after
                   the earnings announcement for quarter t-1, divided by the stock price 5 days after the
                   earnings announcement for quarter t-1, multiplied by 100
Transient share    The ratio of shares owned by transient investors, defined as in Bushee (2001), to total
                   share outstanding
%UnctM GR Pres     The percentage of uncertain words in all words spoken by the manager during the pre-
                   sentation part of the call. Calculated separately for the CEO and CFO
%UnctM GR Answ     The percentage of uncertain words in all words spoken by the manager when answering
                   questions from analysts. Calculated separately for the CEO and CFO
%UnctAnaly         The percentage of uncertain words in questions from analysts
%UnctEPR           The percentage of uncertain words in the earnings press release
%WordsM GR Pres    Total number of words spoken by the manager during the presentation part of the call.
                   Calculated separately for the CEO and CFO
%WordsM GR Answ    Total number of words spoken by the manager when answering questions from analysts.
                   Calculated separately for the CEO and CFO
%WordsAnaly        Total number of words in questions from analysts




                                                 58
B     Internet Appendix
    In Figure B.1, we plot %U nctM GR Answ (Y-axis) versus %U nctM GR P res (X-axis) for all
CEOs and CFOs of S&P500 firms who have attended at least 5 calls (and so MGR is either
CEO or CFO).
    There is considerable variation along both dimensions but certain clusters can be dis-
cerned. Focusing on CEOs in Panel (a), the triangles, indicating Van Honeycutt of Com-
puter Sciences Corp (CSC), lie almost completely above the stars, which represent Gary
Butler of Automatic Data Processing (AUD), both technology companies. By contrast, the
stars and triangles appear quite well aligned along the X-axis. Taken together, this means
that Van Honeycutt consistently uses more uncertain words when answering analyst ques-
tions than Gary Butler, despite the fact that these two CEOs employ a similar number of
uncertain words in the presentation parts of their conference calls. Such similarity might be
expected in the case of two companies in the same industry. Applying a Wilcoxon rank sum
test, we can confirm that Van Honeycutt’s %U nctAnsw is significantly higher than Gary
Butler’s, while there is no significant difference in %U nctP res.
    Similar insights emerge from Panel (b), where we highlight CFOs of two healthcare
companies. Again, %U nctP res lies in a similar range for both but one CFO (Edward
Stiften of Express Scripts Holdings) delivers consistently more vague answers than the other
(David Elkins of Becton Dickinson). Here too, the difference in %U nctAnsw is statistically
significant, while %U nctP res are indistinguishable.
    Finally, it is interesting to observe that the points we highlight in Panel (a) are more
dispersed along the X-axis and lie almost completely to the right of those in Panel (b). To the
extent that technology companies typically face greater uncertainties, hence greater earnings
fluctuations, than companies in the healthcare sector, this suggests that %UnctPres captures
both systematic differences across firms as well as time-variation in business conditions
within firms.
    These examples illustrate that the language of answers is far from a mere reflection
of the presentation part. They suggest that treating the two independently may provide
additional insights.




                                             IA-1
Figure B.1: Distribution of the frequency of uncertain words in manager presentations and
answers in S&P500 firms
                               (a) CEOs (N=1,087; NCalls=24,518)




                               (b) CFOs (N=1,215; NCalls=26,308)




This figure plots %UnctM GR Answ versus %UnctM GR Pres for all CEOs, in Panel (a), and CFOs, in Panel (b), of
S&P500 firms, who have attended at least 5 calls between 2003 and 2015. In total, 24,518 calls involving 1,087
distinct CEOs and 26,308 calls involving 1,215 distinct CFOs are depicted.
                           Figure B.2: Manager style across industries
              (a) CEOs (N=5,982)                                     (b) CFOs (N=6,177)




This figure shows horizontal box plots of the distribution of manager style of vagueness (estimated according to
Equation 4, Section 4.3), within each of the Fama-French 48 industries. The box shows interquartile range (25-75)
with median highlighted, while the tips of the whiskers are set at 1.5 times the interquartile range (values outside
these bounds are excluded). Industries are sorted according to the median style, with the least vague shown on top.
In total, 5,982 CEOs (left panel) and 6,177 CFOs (right panel) are included.


                                                  IA-3
                           Figure B.3: Manager style across age cohorts
              (a) CEOs (N=3,264)                                      (b) CFOs (N=3,181)




This figure shows horizontal box plots of the distribution of manager style of vagueness (estimated according to
Equation 4, Section 4.3), within different age cohorts, defined by the decade of birth. The sample is limited to
managers for whom we can obtain age from Execucomp. The box shows interquartile range (25-75) with median
highlighted, while the tips of the whiskers are set at 1.5 times the interquartile range (values outside these bounds
are excluded). In total, 3,264 CEOs (left panel) and 3,181 CFOs (right panel) are included.




                                                   IA-4
          Table B.1: Comparison of different CEO style estimation approaches

                                                                                    Correlation with (3)
(1)   %UnctCEO Pres only                                                                    0.97
(2)   %UnctCEO Pres + Firm characteristics                                                  0.99
(3)   Baseline (Eq. 4)                                                                        1
(4)   Baseline + %NegCEO Pres                                                               0.98
(5)   Baseline + %UnctCF O                                                                  0.95
(6)   Baseline + %UnctCF O + %UnctEPR                                                       0.94
(7)   Baseline + %UnctCF O + %UnctEPR + DispPreCall                                         0.88
(8)   Baseline + %UnctCF O + %UnctEPR + DispPreCall + ∆%UnctCEO Pres                        0.92
 In this table we compare the individual CEO fixed effects obtained under various specifications, including
 the baseline specification from Eq. 4. The dependent variable in each specification is %UnctCEO Answ,
 the frequency of uncertain words used by the CEO when answering questions from analysts. The first
 column lists control variables used in each specification. %U nctCF O refers to the frequency of uncertain
 words in CFO presentations and answers, measured separately. ∆%U nctCEO P res is the change in the
 frequency of uncertain words in CEO presentations from the previous quarter to the current one. The
 second column presents correlations between fixed effects obtained from the baseline specification (3)
 and each of the alternative specifications.




                                                 IA-5
