                             NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                           LAGS, COSTS, AND SHOCKS:
                   AN EQUILIBRIUM MODEL OF THE OIL INDUSTRY

                                      Gideon Bornstein
                                         Per Krusell
                                       Sergio Rebelo

                                     Working Paper 23423
                             http://www.nber.org/papers/w23423


                    NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                             1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                               Cambridge, MA 02138
                           May 2017, Revised April 2019




We thank Hilde Bjornland, Mario Crucini,Wei Cui, Jésus Fernández-Villaverde, Matteo
Iacoviello, Ravi Jaganathan, Ryan Kellogg, Lutz Kilian, Markus Kirchner, Valerie Ramey, and
Rob Vigfusson for their comments. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do
not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2017 by Gideon Bornstein, Per Krusell, and Sergio Rebelo. All rights reserved. Short sections
of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that
full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Lags, Costs, and Shocks: An Equilibrium Model of the Oil Industry
Gideon Bornstein, Per Krusell, and Sergio Rebelo
NBER Working Paper No. 23423
May 2017, Revised April 2019
JEL No. Q4,Q43

                                          ABSTRACT

We use a new micro data set that covers all oil fields in the world to estimate a stochastic
industry-equilibrium model of the oil industry with two alternative market structures. In the first,
all firms are competitive. In the second, OPEC firms act as a cartel. This effort is a first step
towards studying the importance of ongoing structural changes in the oil market in a general-
equilibrium model of the world economy. We analyze the impact of the advent of fracking on the
volatility of oil prices. Our model predicts a large decline in this volatility.


Gideon Bornstein                                            Sergio Rebelo
2211 Campus Drive                                           Northwestern University
Dept. of Economics, Northwestern University                 Kellogg School of Management
3rd Floor                                                   Department of Finance
Evanston, IL 60208                                          Leverone Hall
United States                                               Evanston, IL 60208-2001
gideonbornstein2018@u.northwestern.edu                      and CEPR
                                                            and also NBER
Per Krusell                                                 s-rebelo@northwestern.edu
Institute for International Economic Studies
Stockholm University
106 91 STOCKHOLM
SWEDEN
and NBER
per.krusell@iies.su.se
1   Introduction

How important is the oil market for the world economy? Although oil shocks are often viewed as
responsible for the poor performance of many countries in the 1970s, these shocks have played a
relatively minor role in leading macroeconomic models. Because oil represents a relatively small
share of overall production costs, conventional models imply that oil shocks have a limited impact
on aggregate output.
    This conclusion has recently been challenged by Gabaix (2011), Acemoglu et al. (2012), and
Baqaee and Farhi (2017). These authors argue that shocks to sectors with a small factor share that
are highly complementary to other inputs can have a large impact on aggregate output. Baqaee
and Farhi (2017) emphasize the perils of using linearization methods to analyze macroeconomic
models with strong complementarities and use the impact of oil shocks in the 1970s as a leading
example of these perils.
    Motivated by this line of research, we revisit the workings of the oil market by proposing and
estimating a stochastic industry-equilibrium model of the oil industry. This effort is important not
only because oil shocks can be crucial determinants of macroeconomic outcomes, but also because
there is ongoing structural change in this market that merits further study. While conventional oil
production is characterized by long lags and various forms of adjustment costs, new forms of oil
production, such as fracking, are much more nimble.
    In this paper, we take a first step towards studying the importance of ongoing structural
changes in the oil market in a general-equilibrium model of the world economy. To produce
the first building block in this endeavor, we take as exogenous shocks to the demand for oil in
the world economy as well as supply disruptions. We then derive quantity, price, and investment
outcomes as a function of these shocks.
    In order to build our model on solid microeconomic foundations, we rely heavily on a new
proprietary data set compiled by Rystad Energy that contains information on production, reserves,
operational costs, and investment for all oil fields in the world. The data set includes information
about roughly 14,000 oil fields operated by 3,200 companies. We use these data to guide the
construction of our model in two ways. First, we produce micro estimates of two key model
parameters: the average lag between investment and production, and the elasticity of extraction
costs with respect to production. Second, we use the generalized method of moments (GMM)
to estimate the remaining model parameters, targeting a set of second moments for oil-related
variables.


                                                 1
       There is substantial heterogeneity across oil firms along various dimensions. We find two
sources of heterogeneity that are particularly important. The first is the different behavior of firms
that are part of the Organization of the Petroleum Exporting Countries (OPEC) and those that are
not. The second is the difference between hydraulic fracturing (fracking) and conventional oil
production. Our benchmark model features heterogeneity only in the OPEC/non-OPEC dimen-
sion. Our extended model includes firms that use conventional oil production methods as well as
fracking.
       We estimate our structural model under two alternative market structures. In the first market
structure, all firms are competitive. In the second market structure, OPEC firms act as a cartel and
non-OPEC firms are a competitive fringe. We assume that the cartel has the ability to commit and
we solve the model using the “timeless perspective” approach introduced by Woodford (1999) and
Woodford (2011) in the context of monetary policy. The dynamics of the estimated competitive and
cartel models are surprisingly similar. However, these models have different implications for the
long-run level of oil prices. Using the estimates from our competitive model and allowing OPEC
firms to act as cartel would raise the average long-run real oil price by 21 percent.
       The two estimated versions of our model share three key features. First, demand is relatively
inelastic. Second, supply is elastic in the long run because firms can invest in the discovery of new
oil fields.1 Third, supply is inelastic in the short run. This property results from several model
features: a lag between investment and production, convex costs of adjusting extraction rates, and
decreasing returns to oil investment.
       We use both versions of the model to measure the importance of demand and supply shocks
in driving prices, production, and investment. Using our competitive model, we find that supply
and demand shocks contribute equally to the volatility of oil prices but that investment in the
oil industry is driven mostly by demand shocks. The reason for this pattern is twofold. There
is a long lag between investment and production and supply shocks are short-lived relative to
demand shocks. So, investment responds much more to demand than to supply shocks. We also
find that the volatility of OPEC production firms is driven primarily by supply shocks that disrupt
the ability of these firms to extract oil. In contrast, both demand and supply shocks are important
in explaining the volatility of non-OPEC production. We obtain similar results for the cartel model
   1
       While the amount of oil is ultimately finite, we can think about this investment process as including new ways of
extracting oil as well as the development of oil substitutes, as in Adao et al. (2017). There has been a large expansion of
oil reserves during our sample period. According to the U.S. Energy Information Administration, proved oil reserves
measured in years of production have increased from roughly 30 years in 1980 to 52 years in 2015.




                                                            2
with one exception: the volatility of non-OPEC production is driven only by demand shocks.
       One interesting property of our models is that they are consistent with the high correlation
between real oil prices and real investment in the oil industry. In the literature on the cattle and
hog cycles (e.g., Ezekiel (1938) and Nerlove (1958)) this positive correlation is often interpreted
as resulting from backward-looking expectations. Investment rises when prices are high, sowing
the seeds of a future fall in prices. In our model, the high correlation between the price of oil and
investment results from the rational response of forward-looking firms. A positive demand shock
raises the price of oil above its steady-state level. As a result, it is profitable to invest in oil to
expand production and take advantage of the high oil prices. So, over time, the resulting supply
expansion brings the oil price back to its steady state level.
       As discussed above, our data allows us to document two key differences between fracking and
conventional oil production. First, it is less costly for fracking firms to adjust their level of pro-
duction in the short run, so these firms are more responsive to changes in prices. Second, the lag
between investment and production is much shorter in fracking operations than in conventional
oil production.
       We introduce fracking firms into both the competitive and cartel models to study their impact
on the dynamics of the oil market. We find that their presence leads to a large decline in the
volatility of oil prices. The reason is simple: these firms are more nimble in adjusting production
levels from existing fields and in starting production in new fields, so they can respond more
quickly to price increases.
       Our work is closely related to research on the relation between fluctuations in oil prices and
world real Gross Domestic Product. Examples include Backus and Crucini (2000), Leduc and Sill
(2004), Blanchard and Gali (2007), Kilian (2009), Bodenstein et al. (2011), and Lippi and Nobili
(2012).2 Our paper is also related to a new, emerging literature that uses micro data to shed new
light on key aspects of the oil industry (see, e.g., Kellogg (2014), Arezki et al. (2016), Anderson
et al. (2017) and Bjørnland et al. (2017)).
       The paper is organized as follows. We describe our model and the two market structures
that we consider in Section 2. In Section 3, we present our parameter estimates obtained using
both micro data and moments of key aggregate variables for the oil industry. We also discuss
the properties of the estimated models. In Section 4, we estimate the properties of the fracking
technology using micro data. We then study the implications of introducing competitive fracking
   2
       Earlier work on the impact of oil shocks on the economy generally treats oil prices as exogenous (see, e.g., Kim and
Loungani (1992), Rotemberg and Woodford (1996), and Finn (2000)).


                                                              3
firms into both versions of our model. Section 5 concludes.


2        An industry-equilibrium model

In this section, we describe our equilibrium model of the oil industry. We consider two alternative
market structures: (i) all firms are competitive; and (ii) non-OPEC firms are competitive and OPEC
firms operate as a cartel with commitment.
        Our goal is to design a parsimonious model consistent with the data that can ultimately serve
as a building block in a model of the world economy. To construct this building block, we take
the world demand for oil as exogenous. To simplify the exposition, we summarize the demand
for oil by consumers and firms around the world with a log-linear demand function.3 In this
simple demand specification, the short- and long-run price elasticities coincide. In subsection
3.2, we considered a generalization of this demand specification in which world demand can re-
spond sluggishly to price changes, so that the short-run elasticity is lower than the long-run elasti-
city. Throughout the model description, we provide brief motivations behind our assumptions on
technology. In Section 3, where we describe our rich data set, we discuss these assumptions more
explicitly.
        In our benchmark specification, we assume that the world demand for oil is given by
                                                                  −1/ε
                                                   Pt = exp(dt )Qt       ,

where Pt is the real price of oil, Qt is the quantity of oil consumed, and ε is the price elasticity of
demand. The variable dt is a stochastic demand shock that follows an AR(2) process

                                             dt = ρd1 dt−1 + ρd2 dt−2 + edt .

We choose this AR(2) specification so that demand shocks can follow a hump-shaped pattern. This
pattern allows an initial shock to contain news about a future rise in the demand for oil associated,
for example, with faster growth in China.


Non-OPEC firms.            There is a continuum of measure one of competitive non-OPEC firms. These
firms maximize their value (V N ) which is given by
                                            ∞        h                            i
                                            X                                 η
                                V N = E0          β t Pt θtN KtN − ItN − ψ θtN KtN .                                     (1)
                                            t=0
    3
        To simplify, we also abstract from growth and consider a model where production and investment are constant in
the non-stochastic steady state. In the Appendix, we discuss a version of the competitive model where production and
investment grow at a constant rate in the non-stochastic steady state, while extraction rates and prices are constant.


                                                            4
Here, ItN denotes investment, θtN the extraction rate (the ratio of production to reserves), and KtN
oil reserves.
                    η
   The term ψ θtN        KtN represents the cost of extracting oil. We assume that this cost is linear in
reserves so that aggregate production and aggregate extraction costs are invariant to the distribu-
tion of oil reserves across firms. This formulation allows us to use a representative firm to study
production and investment decisions. We assume that η > 1, so that the costs of extraction are
convex in the extraction rate. In addition, we assume that the time t + 1 extraction rate is chosen
at time t.
   We adopt a parsimonious way of modeling lags in investment by introducing exploration cap-
ital, which we denote by Xt . The timing of the realization of shocks and firm decisions is as
follows. In the beginning of the period, the demand and supply shocks are realized, a fraction λ
of the exploration capital materializes into new oil reserves, and production occurs according to
the predetermined extraction rate. At the end of the period, the firm chooses its investment and
its extraction rate for the next period. The law of motion for exploration capital is as follows

                                  N
                                                            α        1−α
                                 Xt+1 = (1 − λ)XtN + ItN         LN          .                        (2)

   Investment adds to the existing exploration capital, but only a fraction λ of the exploration
capital materializes into oil reserves in every period. Investment requires land (LN ) and exhibits
decreasing returns (α < 1). Without this feature, investment would be extremely volatile, rising
sharply when prices are high and falling deeply when prices are low.
   One interpretation of equation (2) is as follows. Suppose each firm searches for oil on a con-
tinuum of oil fields containing XtN barrels of oil uniformly distributed across fields. The probabil-
ity of finding oil is independent across oil fields and equal to λ. By the law of large numbers, each
firm finds λXtN oil reserves at time t. We pursue this interpretation when we estimate λ using our
micro data.
   Oil reserves evolve as follows

                                       N
                                      Kt+1 = (1 − θtN )KtN + λXt+1
                                                               N
                                                                   .                                  (3)

Reserves fall with oil production (θtN KtN ) and rise as exploration capital materializes into new
            N ).
reserves (λXt+1
   The notion of exploration capital embodied in equations (2) and (3) is a tractable way of in-
troducing time-to-build in investment that might be useful in other problems. This formulation



                                                     5
allows us to introduce a lag between investment and production by adding only one state variable.
The parameter λ allows us to smoothly vary the length of the lag.4
       The problem of the representative non-OPEC firm is to choose the stochastic sequences for ItN ,
 N , K N , and X N that maximize its value defined in equation (1), subject to constraints (2) and
θt+1  t+1       t+1

(3).
                                      N is
       The first-order condition for θt+1

                                                      N
                                                               η−1
                                        Et Pt+1 = ψη θt+1             + Et µN
                                                                            t+1 ,                                (4)

where µN
       t is the Lagrange multiplier corresponding to equation (3). The extraction rate at time

t + 1 is chosen at time t so as to equate the expected oil price to the sum of the marginal cost of
                 N
                     η−1
extraction, ψη θt+1       , and the expected value of a barrel of oil reserves at the end of time t + 1,
Et µN
    t+1 .

       The first-order condition for Kt+1 is
                                        nh                   η i                  o
                            µN
                             t = Et β
                                                N
                                          Pt+1 θt+1      N
                                                    − ψ θt+1              N
                                                                  + (1 − θt+1 )µN
                                                                                t+1 .                            (5)

                      N , each additional barrel of oil reserves results in additional revenue equal
For a given value of θt+1
         N and additional extraction costs equal to ψ θ N
                                                              η                  N
to Pt+1 θt+1                                               t+1 . A fraction 1 − θt+1 of the barrel of

reserves remains in the ground and has a value of βEt µN
                                                       t+1 .

       The first-order condition for Xt+1 is

                                           νtN = λµN               N
                                                   t + β(1 − λ)Et νt+1 ,                                         (6)

where νtN is the Lagrange multiplier corresponding to equation (2). The value of increasing ex-
ploration capital by one unit, νtN , has two components. A fraction λ materializes into oil reserves
and has a value µN
                 t . A fraction 1 − λ remains as exploration capital and has an expected value
     N .
βEt νt+1
       The first-order condition for It is
                                                       α−1         1−α
                                           1 = α ItN           LN          νtN .                                 (7)

This condition equates the cost of investment (one unit of output) to the marginal product of
                                                    α−1 N 1−α
investment in generating exploration capital, α ItN     L       , evaluated at the value of ex-
ploration capital, νtN .
   4
       See Rouwenhorst (1991) for a discussion of the large state space and complex dynamics associated with time-to-
build formulations.


                                                           6
OPEC firms. There is a continuum of measure one of OPEC firms. The problem for these firms
is to maximize their value (V O ), which is given by
                                            ∞                                         
                                            X                                      η
                             V   O
                                     = E0         β t Pt e−ut θtO KtO − ItO − ψ θtO KtO .                           (8)
                                            t=0

       The key difference between OPEC and non-OPEC firms is that the former are subject to a
supply shock, ut . When this shock occurs, production falls for a given level of the extraction rate.
We assume that supply shocks follow an AR(2) process

                                                  ut = ρu1 ut−1 + ρu2 ut−2 + eut ,

and that innovations to demand (edt ) and supply (eut ) are uncorrelated.
       Our motivation for assuming that only OPEC firms are subject to supply shocks is as fol-
lows. While there are supply shocks to non-OPEC producers (e.g., Canadian wildfires and Gulf
of Mexico hurricanes), these shocks seem relative small compared to the supply shocks to OPEC
producers. This view is consistent with the higher volatility of production in OPEC relative to
non-OPEC.5
       The laws of motion for exploration capital and reserves are given by

                                        O
                                                                         α        1−α
                                       Xt+1 = (1 − λ)XtO + ItO                LO          ,                         (9)
                                        O
                                       Kt+1 = (1 − e−ut θtO )KtO + λXt+1
                                                                     O
                                                                         .                                         (10)


2.1      Market structures

We consider two alternative market structures. In the first structure, both OPEC and non-OPEC
firms are competitive. In the second structure, non-OPEC firms are competitive and OPEC firms
operate as a cartel with commitment. We first discuss the problem of a competitive OPEC firm.
Then, we consider the cartel case.


2.1.1      OPEC firms are competitive

The problem of the representative competitive OPEC firm is to choose the stochastic sequences for
ItO , θt+1
       O , K O , and X O that maximize its value defined in equation (8), subject to constraints (9)
            t+1       t+1

and (10).
   5
       To investigate the potential importance of supply shocks to non-OPEC firms, we estimated a version of the com-
petitive model with uncorrelated supply shocks to both OPEC and non-OPEC firms. Despite having three more para-
meters, the statistical fit of this extended model is similar to that of the benchmark model. The variance of the supply
shock innovation is roughly 500 times lower for non-OPEC firms when compared to OPEC firms. This result suggests
that it is empirically reasonable to abstract from non-OPEC supply shocks.


                                                                 7
   The first-order conditions for the problem of OPEC firms are as follows:

                                           η−1
                Et Pt+1 e−ut+1 = ψη θt+1 O
                                                + Et µO        −ut+1
                                                                    
                                                          t+1 e        ,                        (11)
                          nh                            η
                                                          i                         o
                µO          Pt+1 e−ut+1 θt+1
                                         O        O
                                                            + (1 − e−ut+1 θt+1
                                                                           O
                                                                               )µO
                                                      
                 t = Et β                    − ψ θt+1                            t+1 ,          (12)

                νtO = λµO               O
                        t + β(1 − λ)Et νt+1 ,                                                   (13)
                          α−1 O 1−α O
                1 = α ItO      L       νt .                                                     (14)

   These first-order conditions are similar to those for non-OPEC firms. The key difference is that
production of OPEC firms is scaled by the supply shock, e−ut+1 .


Equilibrium and model solution. In equilibrium, Pt is a function of demand and supply shocks,
the aggregate level of reserves in OPEC (KO                  N
                                          t ) and non-OPEC (Kt ), and the predetermined aggreg-

ate levels of extraction rates in OPEC (θtO ) and non-OPEC (θtN ),

                                   Pt = p(dt , ut , KO    N O N
                                                     t , Kt , θt , θt ).                        (15)

Firms maximize their value subject to the laws of motion for reserves and exploration capital. Each
firm takes the law of motion for the aggregate levels of reserves, extraction rates, and exploration
capital as given and so the price process is exogenous to each individual firm. These laws of mo-
tion for the aggregate variables depend on the six aggregate state variables included in equation
(15) and the aggregate levels of exploration capital in OPEC (XO                  N
                                                               t ) and non-OPEC (Xt ).

   The oil market clears, i.e., total oil production equals total oil demand:

                                           QN    O
                                            t + Qt = Qt ,


where QN      O
       t and Qt are the aggregate quantities produced by non-OPEC and OPEC firms, respect-

ively. These quantities are given by

                                                              −ut O O
                                QN    N N
                                 t = θt Kt ,            QO
                                                         t =e    θt Kt .

   There is a continuum of measure one of identical firms within the two groups, OPEC and
non-OPEC. So, in equilibrium, the values of aggregate variables for each group coincide with the
values of the corresponding variables for the representative firm in each group.
   We solve the model using a second-order approximation around its non-stochastic steady state.




                                                    8
2.1.2      OPEC is a cartel

We now consider the case where OPEC operates as a cartel with commitment and non-OPEC firms
are a competitive fringe. Stiglitz (1976) and Hassler et al. (2010) solve for an equilibrium in which
the oil market is controlled by a monopolist that faces a demand with constant elasticity. The ver-
sion of our model in which OPEC behaves as a cartel is more challenging to solve for two reasons.
First, the cartel faces a residual demand that is endogenous and does not have constant elasticity.
Second, in our model, the extraction decision has a dynamic element because the marginal cost
function of oil at time t is a function of all past investment decisions.
    The problem of the OPEC cartel is to choose the stochastic sequences for its own quantities
{ItO , θt+1
        O , K O , X O }, the quantities and Lagrange multipliers of the non-OPEC representative
             t+1   t+1

firm {ItN , θt+1
             N , K N , X N , µN , ν N }, and the oil price, P , to maximize its value, (8). The constraints
                  t+1   t+1 t      t                         t

for this problem are the laws of motion for OPEC’s exploration capital, (9), and reserves, (10), the
demand equation

                              Pt+1 = exp(dt+1 )(e−ut+1 θt+1
                                                        O    O
                                                            Kt+1    N
                                                                 + θt+1  N −1/ε
                                                                        Kt+1 )  ,                     (16)

and the optimality conditions for non-OPEC firms. These optimality conditions, which together
with equation (16) are the implementability conditions of the cartel problem, include the laws of
motion for non-OPEC’s exploration capital, (2), and reserves, (3), and the first-order conditions
(4)-(7).
    We set up the OPEC problem as a Lagrangian and use the following notation for the Lagrange
multipliers. We denote by µO      O
                           t and νt the multipliers on constraints (9) and (10), respectively. We

denote by ϕit , i = 1, .., 7 the multipliers on the implementability constraints (16), (2), (3), (4), (5),
(6), (7), respectively.
                                                         O and dividing both sides by K O we
    Computing the first-order condition with respect to θt+1                           t+1

obtain:
                            η−1                    1  1 −ut+1
   Et Pt+1 e−ut+1 = ψη θt+1
                        O
                                 + Et µO     −ut+1                            1+ε
                                                                                 
                                       t+1 e        + Et ϕt+1 e  exp(−εdt+1 )Pt+1   .                 (17)
                                                     ε
Comparing with the analogous condition for the case in which OPEC firms are competitive, equa-
tion (11), we see that equation (17) has an additional term. This term represents the negative
impact of an increase in the cartel’s production on price.
                                                O is:
   The first-order condition with respect to Kt+1
          (                                                                                          )
            h                         η i                             O
                                                                      θt+1
 O                 −ut+1 O         O                −ut+1 O     O                               1+ε
                                                                              1                    
µt = Et β Pt+1 e        θt+1 − ψ θt+1      + (1 − e      θt+1 )µt+1 −      Et ϕt+1 exp(−εdt+1 )Pt+1    .
                                                                        ε

                                                      9
This equation also has an additional term relative to its competitive analogue, equation (12). An
increase in OPEC reserves increases production, e−ut+1 θt+1
                                                        O K O , for a given extraction rate, θ O .
                                                            t+1                               t+1

The additional term represents the decline in price associated with this production increase.
                                   O and I O are the same as in the competitive case, equations
   The first-order conditions for Xt+1    t

(13) and (14), respectively.
   The first-order condition with respect to Pt+1 is

                               ϕ1t+1 = e−ut+1 θt+1
                                               O    O
                                                   Kt+1 − ϕ4t+1 − ϕ5t+1 θt+1
                                                                         N
                                                                             .

We can think of this equation as defining ϕ1t+1 , the marginal value to the cartel of a higher oil
price at t + 1. The first component, e−ut+1 θt+1
                                             O K O , is the benefit for selling OPEC’s production
                                                 t+1

for a higher price. The second and third components, −ϕ4t+1 and −ϕ5t+1 θt+1
                                                                        N , are the costs of tight-

ening implementability constraints (4) and (5). This tightening occurs because a higher oil price
incentivizes non-OPEC to increase extraction and oil reserves.
                                   N is
   The first-order condition for Kt+1
                                                   1+ε
                                1                     
                            Et  ϕt+1 exp(−εdt+1 )Pt+1
                    ϕ2t = β                               N
                                                         θt+1 + βϕ2t+1 (1 − θt+1
                                                                             N
                                                                                 ).
                                         ε
The multiplier ϕ2t is the shadow cost of non-OPEC reserves for the OPEC cartel. This cost has two
components. First, for a given value of the non-OPEC extraction rate, a rise in reserves increases
non-OPEC production, lowering the price. Second, non-OPEC has more reserves at time t + 2.
                                  N is
   The first-order condition for Xt+1

                                        ϕ3t = λϕ2t + β(1 − λ)ϕ3t+1 .

The cost to OPEC of higher exploration capital for non-OPEC has two components. The first is
that a fraction λ of the exploration capital turns into non-OPEC reserves. The second, is that a
fraction 1 − λ is available as exploration capital at time t + 2.
                                  N is
   The first-order condition for θt+1

                                        N
                                   1+ε Kt+1
                                                                                η−2
             Et ϕ1t+1 exp(−εdt+1 )Pt+1      = ϕ2t+1 Kt+1
                                                     N
                                                         + ϕ4t+1 (η − 1)ψη θt+1
                                                                            N
               
                                                                                     .             (18)
                                         ε
                                        N , is costly as it lowers the price of oil, P
Increasing non-OPEC’s extraction rate, θt+1                                            t+1 . These costs

are represented by the left-hand side of equation (18). There are also two benefits from increasing
 N . The first is the decline in non-OPEC reserves at time t + 2. The second is the relaxation
θt+1
of implementability constraint (4), associated with an increase in non-OPEC marginal extraction
costs.

                                                     10
   The first-order condition for µN
                                  t is


                                − ϕ5t = −ϕ6t λ − (1 − θtN )ϕ5t−1 + ϕ4t−1 .                         (19)

The term −ϕ5t is the shadow cost of tightening implementability constraint (5) by raising µN
                                                                                           t , the
                                                                         N to non OPEC, ν N ,
shadow value of reserves for non-OPEC. This rise increases the value of Xt+1             t

tightening implementability constraint (6). An increase in µN              N
                                                            t also raises µt−1 thus tightening

implementability constraint (5) at time t − 1. Finally, an increase in µN
                                                                        t relaxes implementability

constraint (4) at time t − 1, because a higher marginal value of reserves at time t reduces the
incentives of non-OPEC to extract oil at time t − 1.
   The first-order condition for νtN is
                                                                        α−1
                             − ϕ6t = −ϕ6t−1 (1 − λ) − ϕ7t α ItN                L1−α
                                                                                N .                (20)

The term −ϕ6t is the shadow cost of tightening implementability constraint (6) by raising νtN , the
shadow value of exploration capital for non-OPEC. An increase in νtN also increases νt−1
                                                                                     N thus

tightening implementability constraint (6) at time t − 1. Finally, an increase in νtN tightens imple-
mentability constraint (7) because it raises the marginal return on non-OPEC investment.
   The first-order condition for ItN is

                                          (1 − α) ϕ7t νtN = ϕ3t ItN .

The multiplier ϕ7t is the shadow value of relaxing implementability constraint (7). Relaxing this
constraint allows OPEC to enforce lower investment of non-OPEC, which translates into a lower
level of non-OPEC exploration capital.


Time inconsistency. Before describing the equilibrium, it is worth discussing the time incon-
sistent nature of the cartel’s decision problem. The cartel has an incentive to promise that future
equilibrium prices will be low to reduce the return to non-OPEC investment in exploration capital.
However, once non-OPEC has low exploration capital, OPEC would like to renege on its promise
and take actions that increase oil prices.
   This time inconsistency is reflected in first-order conditions (19) and (20). When choosing the
value of non-OPEC reserves and exploration capital to non-OPEC, µN      N
                                                                 t and νt , OPEC must be

consistent with the implementability constraints at time t − 1. If OPEC could renege at time t on
its commitments, its choices need not be consistent with the implementability constraints at time
t − 1, so the Lagrange multipliers ϕ4t−1 , ϕ5t−1 , and ϕ6t−1 in equations (19) and (20) would be zero.

                                                      11
Equilibrium and model solution. In equilibrium, Pt is a function of demand and supply shocks,
the aggregate level of reserves in OPEC (KO                  N
                                          t ) and non-OPEC (Kt ), and the predetermined aggreg-

ate levels of extraction rates in OPEC (θtO ) and non-OPEC (θtN ):

                                      Pt = p(dt , ut , KO    N O N
                                                        t , Kt , θt , θt ).                               (21)

    Non-OPEC firms maximize their value subject to the laws of motion for reserves and explor-
ation capital. Each non-OPEC firm takes the law of motion for the aggregate levels of reserves,
extraction rates, and exploration capital as given and so the price process is exogenous to each
individual non-OPEC firm.
    OPEC firms maximize their value subject to the laws of motion for reserves and exploration
capital and the implementability conditions discussed above. The aggregate state of this economy
is given by {dt , ut , KO    N    O    N O N          4      5      6
                        t , Kt , Xt , Xt , θt , θt , ϕt−1 , ϕt−1 , ϕt−1 }. There are three new state variables,

ϕ4t−1 , ϕ5t−1 , ϕ6t−1 relative to the model where OPEC firms are competitive.
    The oil market clears, i.e., total oil production equals total oil demand

                                              QN    O
                                               t + Qt = Qt ,


where QN      O
       t and Qt are the aggregate quantities produced by non-OPEC and OPEC firms, respect-

ively. These quantities are given by

                                                               −ut O O
                                   QN    N N
                                    t = θt K t ,         QO
                                                          t =e    θt Kt .

    As in the competitive case, there is a continuum of measure one of identical firms within the
two groups, OPEC and non-OPEC. So, in equilibrium, the values of aggregate variables for each
group coincide with the values of the corresponding variables for the representative firm in each
group.
    We solve the model using the “timeless perspective” approach introduced in Woodford (1999)
and Woodford (2011). Under this approach, we solve for a non-stochastic steady state where
the Lagrange multipliers ϕ4t−1 , ϕ5t−1 , ϕ6t−1 are constant, and linearize the model around this non-
stochastic steady state in order to obtain a recursive, time-invariant system.
    At time zero, the values of ϕ4−1 , ϕ5−1 , ϕ6−1 all equal to zero, so OPEC’s choices at time zero do
not have to be consistent with the implementability constraints at time −1. From time zero on,
OPEC makes decisions under commitment. The timeless-perspective steady state is the rest point
of this economy absent shocks.


                                                       12
2.2      The Hotelling rule

The classic Hotelling (1931) rule emerges as a particular case of our model in which there are no
OPEC firms, λ = 0, and η = 1. When λ = 0, investment does not result in more oil reserves, so oil
is an exhaustible resource. Equation (6) implies that in this case the value of exploration capital is
zero: νtN = 0. Combining equations (4) and (5) we obtain

                                         Et (Pt+1 − ψ) = βEt (Pt+2 − ψ).

This equation is the Hotelling rule: the price of oil minus the marginal cost of production is expec-
ted to rise at the rate of interest in order to make oil producers indifferent between extracting oil
at t + 1 and at t + 2.
       For the general case where λ ≥ 0 and η ≥ 1, the marginal cost of production is ηψθtη−1 and the
difference between the price of oil and the marginal cost of production is given by
                                                         
                                  η−1                   η−1                   η
                     Et Pt+1 − ηψθt+1   = βEt Pt+2 − ηψθt+2   + βEt (η − 1) ψθt+2 .

                              η
       The term βEt (η − 1) ψθt+2 represents the marginal fall in production costs at time t + 2 from
having an additional barrel of oil reserves. When η = 1, this term is zero and we recover the
Hotelling rule.
       When λ = 0 (no more oil can be found), there is no steady state in which θt and Pt are constant.6
When the extraction rate is constant, production falls over time and, since demand is downward
sloping, the price of oil rises over time. When the price is constant, production must also be
constant and so the extraction rate must rise.7
       In our model, λ > 0 and η > 1. Because it is feasible to find more oil, there is a steady state in
which both Pt and θt are constant. Oil reserves are constant and so the quantity produced is also
constant. In the steady state, the marginal decline in production costs from an additional barrel of
oil is such that the difference between price and marginal cost remains constant:

                                    β (η − 1) ψθη = (1 − β) P − ηψθη−1 .
                                                                      


       The long-run constancy of Pt is consistent with the fact that the average annual growth rate in
   6
       When λ = 0 and η > 1 our economy resembles the model proposed by Anderson et al. (2017). Changes in the
extraction rate in our model play a similar role to drilling new wells in their model.
   7
     One way to try to make the Hotelling model consistent with a constant real oil price is to assume that the marginal
cost of extraction falls over time. However, this marginal cost has to eventually fall below zero for the price to remain
constant.



                                                           13
the real price of oil is not statistically different from zero.8 For the period 1900-2015, this average
is 0.01 with a standard error of 0.21. For the period 1970-2015, this average is 0.02 with a standard
error of 0.27. The property that average growth rates in real prices estimated over long time peri-
ods are close to zero is shared by many other commodities (Deaton and Laroque (1992), Harvey
et al. (2010) and Chari and Christiano (2014)).


3        Estimation and quantitative analysis

In this section, we estimate the structural parameters for the two versions of our model using both
micro and aggregate data. We then study the models’ quantitative properties.
        Our micro estimates are based on new proprietary data compiled by Rystad Energy that con-
tains information on production, reserves, operational costs, and investment for all oil fields in
the world. The data contains information on about roughly 14,000 oil fields operated by 3,200
companies.
        We use these data to guide the construction of our model in two ways. First, we produce micro
estimates of two key model parameters: the average lag between investment and production (1/λ)
and the elasticity of extraction costs with respect to production (η). Second, we use the generalized
method of moments (GMM) to estimate the remaining model parameters, targeting a set of second
moments for oil-related variables.
        Our analysis focuses on the period from 1970 to 2015 since until 1972, U.S. regulatory agencies
sought to keep U.S. oil prices stable by setting production targets (see Hamilton (1983), Kilian
(2014), and Fernandez-Villaverde (2017)).


Estimating λ and η with micro data.                  To estimate λ, we compute the lag between the first year
of investment and first year of production (Ti ) for every oil field in our data set. If the arrival
of production occurs according to a Poisson process, the lag between investment and production
follows a geometric distribution with mean λ. The maximum likelihood estimator for λ is:

                                                         N
                                                   λ̂ = PN          = 0.085,
                                                           i=1 Ti

where N denotes the number of oil fields.
    8
        Between 1900 and 1947, our source for the price of oil is Harvey et al. (2010). After 1947, our measure of oil prices
is the price per barrel of West Texas Intermediate. We deflate the price of oil using the U.S. consumer price index.




                                                              14
       This estimate implies that the average lag between investment and production is 12 years. Fig-
ure 1 shows the empirical distribution of this lag together with the implied geometric distribution
for our estimate of λ̂.9

                Figure 1: Empirical distribution of lags between investment and production




           Notes: This figure presents the histogram of the lag between the first year of investment and first year of
           production across all oil fields. The MLE for λ, the Poisson arrival rate of production, is 0.085. The red
           line is the implied geometric distribution for the estimated λ.



       We also use our micro data to estimate η, the parameter that controls the convexity of the
extraction costs as displayed in (1). Our estimate is based on the following regression:
                                                 
                                    C(θit , Kit )
                               ln                   = γi + η ln (θit ) + εit ,
                                       Kit
where C(θit , Kit ) denotes extraction costs. The potential presence of cost shocks, either field spe-
cific or aggregate, creates an endogeneity problem. Suppose it becomes more costly to extract
oil, so that firms reduce their extraction rates. This correlation between the cost and the rate of
extraction biases downward our estimate of η. To address this problem, we instrument the extrac-
tion rate with the one-year-ahead forecast of detrended world real GDP. This forecast is correlated
with aggregate demand and unaffected by field-specific cost shocks. Our forecast is computed
by linearly detrending the time series for world real GDP and estimating an AR process for the
   9
       Our estimate of the average production lag is higher than that reported in Arezki et al. (2016). This difference occurs
because we estimate the lag between initial investment (which includes seismic analysis and drilling wells to discover
and delineate oil fields) and production. Arezki et al. (2016) estimate the lag between oil discovery and production,
which is shorter.


                                                              15
                            Table 1: Extraction rate adjustment costs regression

                 Dep. variable: ln(prod. costs per barrel of oil reserves)
                 Variable                        (1)                 (2)                 (3)
                 ln(extraction)               8.11∗∗∗              7.69∗∗∗              13.1
                                                (1.54)              (1.54)              (9.33)

                 Oil field FE                    3                   3                   3
                 Operation year FE               3                   3                   3
                 Sample                         All               Non-OPEC            OPEC
                 IV                              3                   3                   3
                 1st   stage F-stat              22                  19                   2
                 Clusters (oil fields)        11,527                9,969              1,558
                 Observations                 174,339              146,879            27,460

       Notes: This table presents the regression results for the adjustment-cost coefficient, η. Standard errors
       are clustered at the oil-field level. The instrument used is the one-year-ahead forecast of detrended world
       real GDP. ∗∗∗ - significant at the 1 percent level.



detrended data. Choosing the number of lags using the Akaike information criterion resulted in
an AR(2) process.
   Our data includes all oil fields with positive extraction rates between 1971 and 2015. We ex-
clude the last year of oil field operation because the data for this year includes the costs of shutting
down the field, which are not related to the rate of extraction.
   Table 1 contains our slope estimates. Specifications 1 through 3 include fixed effects for oil
field and operation year. Specification 1 includes all the oil fields in our sample. Specification 2
includes only non-OPEC firms. Specification 3 includes only OPEC firms. While our instrument
is independent of oil-field-specific cost shocks, it may be correlated with aggregate supply shocks.
The Iran-Iraq war, for example, may have caused a slowdown in world GDP at the same time
as it disrupted the supply of oil in the warring countries. Perhaps as a result of this endogeneity
problem, the point estimate is statistically insignificant. We use specification 2 as our benchmark
and set η equal to the point estimate (7.7). The fact that η > 1 is consistent with the fact that the
elasticity of response of production to prices is higher for small price increases than for large price
increases (see regression 3 in Table 8).


Calibrated parameters.         We choose the ratio LO /LN so that in the steady state the market share of
OPEC production coincides with the average market share of OPEC in the data (45 percent). The


                                                             16
total amount of land (LO + LN ) is calibrated so that the steady-state extraction rate coincides with
the average extraction rate in our data (2.8 percent). In the model where OPEC is competitive,
the steady-state extraction rate is the same for OPEC and non-OPEC firms. In the version of the
model where OPEC is a cartel, the steady-state extraction rate for OPEC firms is lower from that
of non-OPEC firms. We calibrate α to match OPEC’s average extraction rate (2.2 percent).
       The parameter ψ matters only for the level of oil prices, so we normalize it to one. We set
1/β−1, the real discount rate, to 8 percent which is the real cost of capital estimated by Damodaran
(2017), which takes into account the systematic risk associated with investments in the oil industry.


GMM estimation            In the model where OPEC firms are competitive, we estimate , α, the para-
meters of the AR(2) processes for demand and supply shocks, and the variance of the two shocks
using GMM.10 In the model where OPEC is a cartel, we estimate the same set of parameters with
the exception of α, which is chosen to match OPEC’s extraction rate.
       The first column of Table 4 presents the moments targeted in our estimation. It is useful to
highlight some salient facts about the oil market that are reflected in these moments. The first fact
is that oil prices have been very volatile since the early 1970s. From 1970 to 2015, the volatility
of oil prices is higher than that of returns to the stock market or exchange rates. The standard
deviation of the annual percentage change in oil prices is 0.28 for nominal prices and 0.27 for real
prices. In contrast, the standard deviation of nominal returns to the S&P 500 is 16 percent and
the standard deviation of changes in exchange rates is roughly 10 percent. The high volatility
of commodity prices in general was aptly summarized by Deaton (1999) with the phrase “What
commodity prices lack in trend, they make up for in variance.”
       The second fact is that investment in the oil industry is very volatile. The annual standard
deviation of the growth rate of real world investment in the oil industry in the period 1970-2015
is 0.36. To put this number in perspective, this measure of volatility is 0.10 for U.S. manufacturing
and 0.07 for U.S. aggregate investment.11
       The third fact is that investment in the oil industry is positively correlated with oil prices. The
correlation between the growth rate of the price of oil and the growth rate of investment is 0.51.
Table 2 reports the correlation between the growth rate of real investment and the growth rate of
  10
       Our weighting matrix is a diagonal matrix with diagonal elements equal to the inverse of the variance of the
targeted moments.
   11
      In the period 1970–2015, the only major U.S. manufacturing sector with investment volatility similar to that of the
oil industry is Motor Vehicle Manufacturing, a sector that has struggled to compete with foreign manufacturers and
had to be bailed out by the Federal government in 2009.



                                                           17
                        Table 2: Investment and price correlation for top 20 firms

              Firm                               Headquarters        OPEC     corr(∆pt , ∆it )
              Saudi Aramco                       Saudi Arabia           3           0.31
              Rosneft                            Russia                 7           0.34
              PetroChina                         China                  7           0.36
              Kuwait Petroleum Corp (KPC)        Kuwait                 3           0.3
              NIOC (Iran)                        Iran                   3           0.06
              Pemex                              Mexico                 7           0.27
              ExxonMobil                         United States          7           0.35
              Lukoil                             Russia                 7           0.41
              Petrobras                          Brazil                 7           0.3
              PDVSA                              Venezuela              3           0.28
              Abu Dhabi NOC                      Abu Dhabi              3           0.14
              Chevron                            United States          7           0.43
              Shell                              Netherlands            7           0.34
              BP                                 United Kingdom         7           0.35
              Surgutneftegas                     Russia                 7           0.26
              South Oil Company (Iraq NOC)       Iraq                   3           0.19
              Total                              France                 7           0.04
              CNOOC                              China                  7           0.4
              Statoil                            Norway                 7           0.34
              Eni                                Italy                  7           0.04


       Notes: This table presents the correlation of investment changes and oil price changes for the top 20
       oil producers, in descending order of production. xt represents the logarithm of Xt , ∆xt is equal to
       xt − xt−1 . Pt and It represent the real price of oil and the firm’s real investment, respectively.



the real oil prices for each of the top twenty firms in the oil industry ranked according to their
total oil production in 2015. This table shows that, with a few exceptions, there is high correlation
between oil prices and firm-level investment.
   Finally, OPEC and non-OPEC firms differ in the volatility and persistence of production and
investment, as well as in the correlation of these variables with real oil prices. The production
of OPEC firms is more volatile and less persistent than that of non-OPEC firms. In addition, the
correlation between investment and prices is higher for non-OPEC firms than for OPEC firms.
These patterns are likely to be the result of supply shock to OPEC firms, such as the disruptions
in oil markets associated with the Iranian revolution and the Iran-Iraq war.




                                                           18
Model estimates            Table 3 reports our parameter estimates for both versions of the model. Our
estimate for  is 0.17 with a standard error of 0.02 for the competitive model, and 0.20 with a
standard error of 0.05 for the cartel model.12 These point estimates imply that demand is very
inelastic. For  = 0.17, a 1 percent increase in production reduces the price by 5.9 percent.
       To see why demand has to be inelastic to fit the data, it is useful to rewrite the demand function

                                                                   1
                                                   ln Pt = dt −      ln Qt .
                                                                   

Our models embed two mechanisms that generate price volatility. The first mechanism is a low
value of  that makes low production volatility consistent with high price volatility. The second
mechanism is volatile demand shocks, dt . The observed volatility and persistence of investment
and production help determine the importance of the two channels that generate volatility in Pt
and therefore identify . Volatile, persistent demand shocks are important for generating volat-
ility and persistence in investment. A positive demand shock keeps the price of oil high for an
extended period of time, creating incentives to increase investment.
       Table 3 shows that the standard errors associated with our parameter estimates are generally
small. The only parameter that is imprecisely estimated is α. In the competitive model this para-
meter has a point estimate of 0.44 with a standard error of 0.78. This imprecision results from the
small impact of local changes in the value of α on the moments implied by the model. In the cartel
case, α is calibrated to be 0.31 to match the average extraction rate of OPEC.
       An important difference between the competitive and the cartel models is the estimated pro-
cess for the supply shock. This shock is estimated to be persistent in the competitive model and to
be i.i.d. in the cartel model.
       Table 4 compares the estimated moments targeted by our GMM procedure with the population
moments implied by the two versions of our model. We see that the fit of both models is good
with most of the model population moments inside the 95 percent confidence interval of data
moments. One exception is the correlation between changes in prices and change in quantities for
OPEC firms which is negative in both models and close to zero in the data.
       As discussed in the introduction, both our models are consistent with the high correlation
between the real price of oil and real investment.


Impulse response functions. Figure 2 depicts the impulse response function for a one standard
deviation demand shock. The top and bottom row correspond to the competitive and cartel cases,
  12
       These estimates are similar to the one obtained by Caldara et al. (2017).


                                                              19
                                       Table 3: Estimated parameters

                   Parameter     Competitive model           Cartel model
                                 Estimate      (s.e.)    Estimate     (s.e.)

                                   0.17       (0.02)        0.20     (0.05)
                   α                0.44       (0.78)        0.31      (-)
                   ρd1              1.73       (0.09)        1.70     (0.06)
                   ρd2             -0.75       (0.09)        -0.72    (0.06)
                   ρu1              1.39       (0.16)        -0.06    (2.37)
                   ρu2             -0.48       (0.13)        0.00     (2.14)
                   var(edt )       0.014      (0.005)        0.023   (0.006)
                   var(eut )       0.002      (0.001)        0.002   (0.001)


        Notes: This table presents the benchmark GMM estimates of the structural parameters. Under the cartel
        specification, α is not estimated, but calibrated so that the model matches OPEC’s average extraction
        rate.



respectively. The dynamics are similar in the two models. In both models the shock follows a
hump-shaped pattern with a peak around year six. On impact, firms cannot change their extrac-
tion rates so the price increases one to one with the demand shock. In the following periods, the
price of oil increases but the magnitude of this increase is moderated by a rise in the extraction
rate. Production rises and reserves are depleted. Since the shock is very persistent, investment
rises to increase future production to take advantage of the extended period of high oil prices.
    Figure 3 depicts the impulse response function for a one standard deviation supply shock. In
the competitive model, the supply shock follows a hump-shaped pattern with a peak in year 2.
Compared to the demand shock, the supply shock is less persistent and smaller in magnitude.
Extraction rates and production rise in non-OPEC firms and fall in OPEC firms. Non-OPEC firms
increase their investment to boost production. But since the shock is short lived, the rise in in-
vestment is much smaller than the one that occurs in response to a demand shock. OPEC firms
also raise their investment but not as much as non-OPEC since in the short run OPEC firms have
higher extraction costs than non-OPEC firms.
    In the cartel model, the supply shock is i.i.d. Because firms cannot change their extraction rate
within the period, the only impact on the quantity of oil produced is the direct, negative impact
of the supply shock on OPEC production. This decline in production produces a temporary rise
in the price of oil.


                                                        20
                                 Table 4: Data and model moments

       Moment                     Data       (s.e.)         Competitive model            Cartel model
(1)    std(∆pt )                  0.273     (0.028)                0.188                      0.220
(2)    std(∆iN
             t )                  0.192     (0.024)                0.218                      0.212
(3)    std(∆iO
             t )                  0.193     (0.027)                0.215                      0.208
(4)    std(∆qtN )                 0.022     (0.003)                0.026                      0.024
(5)    std(∆qtO )                 0.069     (0.011)                0.057                      0.068
(6)    corr(∆pt , ∆iN
                    t )           0.557     (0.147)                0.738                      0.687
(7)    corr(∆pt , ∆iO
                    t )           0.362     (0.109)                0.659                      0.671
(8)    corr(∆pt , ∆qtN )          0.031     (0.069)                0.013                      0.127
(9)    corr(∆pt , ∆qtO )          0.030     (0.122)                -0.585                     -0.583
(10)   corr(∆iN
              t ,   ∆iO
                      t )         0.673     (0.096)                0.992                      0.999
(11)   corr(∆iN     N
              t , ∆qt )           0.087     (0.094)                -0.041                     -0.025
(12)   corr(∆iN     O
              t , ∆qt )           0.023     (0.112)                -0.150                     -0.008
(13)   corr(∆iO     N
              t , ∆qt )          -0.034     (0.145)                -0.035                     -0.027
(14)   corr(∆iO
              t ,   ∆qtO )       -0.226     (0.153)                -0.044                     0.013
(15)   corr(∆qtN , ∆qtO )        -0.141     (0.125)                0.026                      0.341
(16)   corr(∆pt ,∆pt−1 )         -0.027     (0.088)                -0.043                     -0.166
(17)   corr(∆iN    N
              t ,∆it−1 )          0.119     (0.135)                0.007                      0.001
(18)   corr(∆iO    O
              t ,∆it−1 )          0.311     (0.096)                0.009                      -0.001
(19)   corr(∆qtN ,∆qt−1
                    N )           0.643     (0.113)                0.291                      0.416
(20)   corr(∆qtO ,∆qt−1
                    O )           0.213     (0.211)                0.314                      -0.392
(21)   E [It / (Pt Qt )]          0.102     ( 0.016)               0.057                      0.027


   Notes: This table presents the targeted moments from the data and the model-implied moments un-
   der the benchmark specifications of the competitive and cartel models. Newey-West standard errors
   computed with 5-year lags in parenthesis. xt represents the logarithm of Xt , ∆xt is equal to xt − xt−1 .




                                                       21
                      Figure 2: Impulse response to a demand shock

                                 Panel A - competitive model




                                     Panel B - cartel model




Notes: This figure presents the impulse response functions to a one standard deviation demand shock.
The top panel corresponds to the benchmark specification of the competitive model. The bottom corres-
ponds to the benchmark specification of the cartel model. In the two right columns, the solid line refers
to non-OPEC quantities and the dashed line to OPEC quantities.




                                                 22
                      Figure 3: Impulse response to a supply shock

                                Panel A - competitive model




                                     Panel B - cartel model




Notes: This figure presents the impulse response functions to a one standard deviation supply shock
which reduces OPEC’s oil production. The top panel corresponds to the benchmark specification of the
competitive model. The bottom corresponds to the benchmark specification of the cartel model. In the
two right columns, the solid line refers to non-OPEC quantities and the dashed line to OPEC quantities.




                                                23
                        Table 5: Moments sensitivity to demand and supply shocks

   Moment               Data      (s.e.)             Competitive                                Cartel
                                           Bench.   std(dt ) = 0    std(ut ) = 0   Bench.   std(dt ) = 0   std(ut ) = 0
   std(∆pt )            0.273    (0.028)   0.188       0.136           0.131       0.220       0.147          0.164
   std(∆int )           0.192    (0.024)   0.218       0.036           0.214       0.212       0.000          0.212
   std(∆iot )           0.193    (0.027)   0.215       0.011           0.214       0.208       0.007          0.208
   std(∆qtn )           0.022    (0.003)   0.026       0.018           0.018       0.024       0.000          0.024
   std(∆qto )           0.069    (0.011)   0.057       0.054           0.018       0.068       0.064          0.024
   corr(∆qtn , ∆qto )   -0.141   (0.125)   0.026      -0.299           1.00        0.341      -0.551          1.000


        Notes: This table presents key targeted data moments and the corresponding model-implied moments
        when we shut down the supply or demand shocks. Newey-West standard errors computed with 5-year
        lags are reported in parenthesis. xt represents the logarithm of Xt , ∆xt is equal to xt − xt−1 .



   We can use our model to answer a classic question: what is the role of demand and supply
shocks? Table 5 uses the two versions of our model to answer this question. Eliminating demand
shocks lowers the volatility of prices but reduces the volatility of investment even more. Eliminat-
ing supply shocks reduces the volatility of prices, leads to a large decline in the volatility of OPEC
production, and makes OPEC and non-OPEC production perfectly correlated.
   Table 6 reports the variance decomposition of the key variables in our model to demand and
supply shocks. We see that in both models demand and supply shocks contribute roughly equally
to the variance of prices. This property results from demand and supply shocks having a similar
short-run impact on the price of oil (see Figures 2 and 3) in both models. This result is consistent
with the importance of macroeconomic performance in driving oil prices emphasized in Barsky
and Kilian (2001) and Barsky and Kilian (2004).
   Table 6 also shows that in both models the volatility of investment is predominantly driven
by demand shocks. These shocks are long-lived and so they elicit a large response of investment
(see Figure 2). In contrast, supply shocks have a much lower impact on investment because these
shocks are less persistent than demand shocks in the competitive model and not persistent at all
in the cartel model (see Figure 3).
   The volatility of production by OPEC firms is dominated in both models by supply shocks. In
the competitive model, demand and supply shocks contribute equally to the volatility of produc-
tion by non-OPEC firms. In contrast, demand shocks account for all the volatility of non-OPEC
production in the cartel model. This result reflects the i.i.d. nature of supply shocks in the cartel



                                                               24
                                         Table 6: Variance decomposition

                    Moment            Competitive                   Cartel
                                  Demand        Supply      Demand        Supply
                    ∆pt             48.0%        52.0%        55.4%        44.6%
                    ∆int            97.2%         2.8%           100%        0%
                    ∆iot            99.8%         0.2%        99.9%          0.1%
                    ∆qtn            49.5%        50.5%           100%        0%
                    ∆qto            10.3%        89.7%        11.8%        88.2%


         Notes: This table presents the variance decomposition of five key variables to demand and supply shocks
         in the two versions of the model. xt represents the logarithm of Xt , ∆xt is equal to xt − xt−1 .



model. Since extraction rates are chosen one period in advance, non-OPEC cannot respond to the
supply shock.


Impact of market structure on steady-state oil price.                   While the dynamics of the competitive
and cartel models are broadly similar, the market structure has a large impact on the steady state
values of key variables. To study these effects, we take as given the structural parameters of the
estimated competitive model and assume that OPEC acts as a cartel. We then solve for the steady
state of this cartel model.
      Table 7 compares the values of key variables in the competitive and cartel models. Because
OPEC internalizes the effect of a production increase on the price, it cuts steady-state production
relative to the competitive model by 29 percent. Non-OPEC firms increase their production by 18
percent but this increase is not large enough to compensate for the cutback in OPEC production.
As a result, the price rises by 21 percent. OPEC’s market share falls from 45 percent to 33 percent.
In the competitive model the two groups of firms have the same extraction rate. In contrast, the
extraction rate is lower in OPEC than in non-OPEC in the cartel model.


3.1    Other performance diagnoses

In this section, we evaluate whether our model is consistent with two sets of moments that were
not targeted by our estimation. The first is our estimates of the short-run elasticity of supply
obtained from micro data. The second is the volatility of one-year oil-price futures.



                                                            25
                        Table 7: Effect of market structure on the steady-state variables

                                    Price change                                    21%
                                    OPEC’s production change                       -29%
                                    Non-OPEC’s production change                    18%
                                    Competitive: OPEC’s market share                45%
                                    Cartel: OPEC’s market share                     33%
                                    Competitive: extraction rate                   2.79%
                                    Cartel: OPEC’s ext. rate                       2.64%
                                    Cartel: Non-OPEC’s ext. rate                   2.87%

           Notes: This table compares the steady-state properties of a model calibrated with the benchmark para-
           meters of the competitive model and solved under two alternative market structures: (i) all firms are
           competitive, and (ii) OPEC is a cartel and non-OPEC is a competitive fringe.



Estimating the short-run elasticity of oil supply.                  Oil producers can respond to an increase in
the market price of oil in two ways. The first is to produce more oil from oil fields in operation by
increasing the extraction rate. The second is to increase the number of oil fields in operation. We
show that the short-run elasticity of the extraction rate (the ratio of production to reserves) with
respect to an exogenous change in the price of oil is positive but small.13 We also show that the
elasticity of response of the number of oil fields in operation to an exogenous change in the price
of oil is statistically insignificant.
       Table 8 reports panel-data estimates of the elasticity of the extraction rate for a given oil field
with respect to real oil prices.14 These estimates suggest that a rise in oil prices leads to only a
slight increase in the supply of oil from a given oil field.15
       Our estimates are obtained by running various versions of the following regression

                                           ln θit = αi + β ln pt + γXit + εit ,                                         (22)

where θit denotes the extraction rate of oil field i at time t, pt is the real price of oil, and Xit
  13
       Anderson et al. (2017) estimate this elasticity to be close to zero. The difference between our results and theirs is
likely to reflect differences in data frequency: their data is monthly while ours is annual.
   14
      In our data, reserves are proven reserves, which measure the total amount of oil that can be produced from a given
field. Reserves do not change in response to changes in oil prices, so there is no mechanical impact of oil prices on
extraction rates.
  15
     An oil field generally contains many oil rigs. Production increases can result from the intensive margin (higher
production from existing oil rigs) or from the extensive margin (drilling new oil rigs). Anderson et al. (2017) use a
sample of Texas oil rigs to show that the elasticity of the intensive margin is close to zero, so production increases result
from the extensive margin.


                                                              26
                                     Table 8: Price elasticity of extraction rates


                Dep. variable: ln(extraction rate)
                Variable                           (1)          (2)         (3)          (4)           (5)
                ln(price)                        0.09∗∗∗     0.18∗∗∗      0.20∗∗∗     0.22∗∗∗       0.14∗∗∗
                                                  (0.009)     (0.030)      (0.036)     (0.042)       (0.029)

                ln(price) × 1OPEC                                         −0.14        −0.13
                                                                           (0.087)     (0.088)

                ln(price) × 1Big Firm                                                  −0.04
                                                                                       (0.081)

                ln(price) × 1|∆ ln(p)|>0.1                                                        −0.013∗∗∗
                                                                                                     (0.002)

                Oil field FE                        3           3            3           3             3
                Operation year FE                   3           3            3           3             3
                Year trend                          3           3            3           3             3
                IV                                  7           3            3           3             3
                Clusters (oil fields)            12,187      11,479       11,479      11,479        11,479
                Observations                    173,742      173,034     173,034      173,034       173,034

           Notes: This table presents estimates of the elasticity of extraction rates with respect to the price of oil.
           The data used includes all oil fields with positive extraction rates in 1971-2015, excluding the last year
           of operation. Standard errors, clustered at the oil-field level, are reported in parenthesis. The instrument
           for price is the one-year-ahead forecast of detrended world real GDP. (∗ ∗ ∗) - significant at a 1 percent
           level.



represents other controls.16 These controls include a time trend, an oil-field fixed effect, and a
fixed effect for year of operation to control for the life cycle of an oil field.17
       Specification 1 in Table 8 is a simple OLS regression. The estimated slope coefficient that results
from this regression can be biased downwards if there is technical progress that lowers the cost of
extraction, raising θit , increasing the supply of oil, and lowering pt . To address this problem, we
instrument the price of oil with our forecast of detrended world real GDP.
       Specifications 2-5 use this instrument. Our benchmark specification is regression 2, which
yields an estimate for β equal to 0.18.18 The following calculation is useful for evaluating the mag-
  16
       Our data includes all oil fields with a positive extraction rate for the period 1971-2015, excluding the last year of
operation.
  17
     See Arezki et al. (2016) and Anderson et al. (2017) for discussions of this life cycle.
  18
     This estimate is similar to the one obtained by Caldara et al. (2017) by combining a narrative analysis of episodes
of large drops in oil production with country-level instrumental variable regressions.


                                                              27
                       Table 9: Price elasticity of extraction rates in both models

                        Dep. variable: ln(extraction rate)
                        Variable      Data          (s.e.)        Competitive         Cartel
                        ln(price)     0.18          (0.03)               0.16          0.16

       Notes: This table presents estimates of the elasticity of extraction rates with respect to the price of oil
       using our data and simulated data from the two versions of our model. The instrument for price used
       in the data is the one-year-ahead forecast of detrended world real GDP. The instrument for price used in
       the model is the one-year-ahead forecast of demand, Et−1 [dt ].



nitude of this elasticity. The average extraction rate in our sample is 2.8 percent. A one standard
deviation (27 percent) increase in the price of oil raises the extraction rate from 2.8 percent to 2.9
percent, resulting only in a 5 percent production increase.
   Specification 3 includes the product of the logarithm of the price and an OPEC dummy. We
see that the response of OPEC and non-OPEC are not statistically different.
   Specification 4 includes also an interaction term that is the product of the logarithm of the price
and a dummy for firm size to investigate whether large and small firms behave differently. The
dummy is equal to one for firms that produced more than 0.5 billion barrels of oil in 2015. Total
production in 2015 was approximately 27.5 billion barrels of oil so that each large firm according
to our definition has at least a 1.8 percent market share. We find no evidence of a firm-size effect
in the response of extraction rates to changes in oil prices.
   Specification 5 includes an interaction term that is the product of the logarithm of the price
and a dummy for price changes larger than 10 percent in absolute value. The idea is to investigate
whether firms react more to large oil price changes than to small price changes. We find that the
coefficient on the interaction term is negative (−0.01) and statistically significant. This finding is
consistent with the presence of convex adjustment costs in the extraction rate, so that the elasticity
of response is higher for small price changes than for large price changes.
   These results are robust when we extend the sample to start in 1900 (see Table 16 in the ap-
pendix).
   We now discuss the implications of our two models for the analogue of the regressions repor-
ted in Table 8. We simulate data from both versions of our model and run regression 8 using the
one-year-ahead forecast of the demand shock as an instrument for the price of oil. In both models,
the elasticity of response of extraction rates to changes in oil prices is 0.16, which is within one
standard error of the point estimate for the elasticity obtained using our benchmark specification.


                                                         28
                             Table 10: Price elasticity of oil fields in operation


              Dep. variable: ln(number of operating oil fields)
              Variable                 (1)           (2)                 (3)                   (4)
              ln(price)             −0.05          −0.19               −0.09                 −0.10
                                      (0.06)        (0.13)              (0.08)                (0.07)

              Year trend               3              3                   3                     3
              IV                        7             3                   3                     3
              Dep. variable       All fields     All fields       Non-OPEC fields        OPEC fields
              Observations             45            45                  45                    45

       Notes: This table presents estimates of the elasticity of the number of oil fields in operation with respect
       to the price of oil. The dependent variable is the number of oil fields with positive extraction rates.
       Newey-West standard errors computed with 5-year lags are reported in parenthesis. The instrument for
       price is the one-year-ahead forecast of detrended world real GDP.




   We now discuss the second channel through which production can increase, which is a rise in
the number of oil fields in operation. Table 10 reports our time-series estimates of the elasticity of
the number of oil fields in operation with respect to real oil prices. Specification 1 is a simple OLS
regression where the dependent variable is the logarithm of the number of oil fields in operation
world wide and the independent variable is the logarithm of real oil prices. Specification 2 uses
our forecast of the cyclical component of world GDP as an instrument for the logarithm of real
oil prices. Specifications 3 and 4 report results for non-OPEC fields and OPEC fields, respectively.
All four specifications yield elasticity estimates that are statistically insignificant. We also find an
insignificant elasticity when we extend our sample to start in 1900 (see Table 15 in the appendix).
   Taken together, these results suggest that the number of oil fields in operation does not respond
in the short-run to changes in oil prices.


Oil price forecasts and oil futures.           Both in the data and in our models annual changes in the
price of oil are close to being i.i.d. So, in the short run, the stochastic process for oil prices is well
approximated by a random walk.
   We compare the volatility of one-year oil-price futures in the data and in our model. Our data
for oil futures covers the period from 1986 to 2015. We constructed annual real future oil prices by
averaging all the future contracts with one-year maturity within year t and deflating the average




                                                             29
by the time t consumer price index.              19   The volatility of one-year futures prices in the data is equal
to 0.2, 26 percent lower than the volatility of spot oil prices in the data. In both version of our
model, the volatility of one-year futures prices is equal to 0.16. In the competitive version of the
model, the volatility of futures prices is 14 percent lower than the volatility of spot oil prices. In
the cartel model, as in the data, futures volatility is 26 percent lower than spot prices volatility.


3.2      Dynamic demand

To simplify, we assume in our benchmark model that the demand for oil is static: the quantity
demanded at time t depends only on the price at time t. As a result, the short-run and the long-
run elasticities of demand coincide.
       In this subsection, we present a variant of our models in which the short-run and long-run
price elasticity of demand differ. This demand specification is consistent with the notion that
when oil prices are high, households and firms substitute towards other forms of energy, but it
might take time for this substitution to occur.
       Our dynamic demand specification takes the form:

                                       Pt = exp(dt ) (1 − φ)1/ξ (Qt − φQt−1 )−1/ξ ,                             (23)

where φ is the inertia parameter.
       This demand specification is similar to the one derived in the literature on deep habits (Ravn
et al. (2006) and Binsbergen (2016)). Differences between short- and long-run elasticities of de-
mand also emerge in models with endogenous technology choice, as in Leon-Ledesma and Satchi
(2016).
       All other model equations remain unchanged. The multiplicative term (1 − φ)1/ξ ensures that
the non-stochastic steady state of the model does not depend on φ. The short-run demand elasti-
city is given by
                                                  ∂ ln Qt   Qt − φQt−1
                                                          =            ξ.
                                                  ∂ ln Pt       Qt
       The long-run demand elasticity is equal to ξ, as ∂ ln Qss /∂ ln Pss = ξ, where Qss and Pss denote
the steady-state quantity and price, respectively. So, the short-run demand elasticity is lower than
the long-run demand elasticity. The local short-run demand elasticity around the non-stochastic
steady state equals (1 − φ)ξ. We denote this short-run demand elasticity by ε ≡ (1 − φ)ξ.
       We re-estimate our models via GMM, including both ε and φ as parameters to be estimated.
Table 11 reports our results. The estimated short-run demand elasticity, ε, is very similar to the
  19
       See Alquist et al. (2013) for a discussion of the properties of oil price futures.


                                                                30
                    Table 11: Estimated parameters with dynamic demand elasticity

                              Parameter        Competitive                   Cartel
                                             Estimate      (s.e.)   Estimate          (s.e.)

                              ε                 0.17      (0.03)      0.19        (0.01)
                              α                 0.53      (0.72)      0.21             (-)
                              ρd1               1.55      (0.14)      1.55        (0.003)
                              ρd2              -0.60      (0.13)     -0.59        (0.004)
                              ρu1               1.60      (0.17)      1.99        (0.008)
                              ρu2              -0.64      (0.16)     -0.99        (0.01)
                              var(edt )        0.018      (0.006)    0.037        (0.003)
                              var(eut )        0.003      (0.001)   3 × 10−6    (9 × 10−5 )
                              φ                 0.86      (0.15)      0.37        (0.01)

         Notes: This table presents the GMM estimates of the structural parameters for the two versions of our
         model with dynamic demand. φ is the demand inertia parameter. Under the cartel specification, α is
         not estimated, but calibrated so that the steady state of the model matches the average extraction rate of
         OPEC.



estimated demand elasticity in our benchmark model. The estimated value of φ is 0.86 in the com-
petitive model, indicating that the demand for oil features a high degree of inertia. The implied
long-run demand elasticity, ξ, equals 1.21, approximately 7 times higher than the short-run de-
mand elasticity. This finding suggests that the parameter ε estimated in our benchmark model is
the short-run demand elasticity. Demand is less inertial in the cartel model, the estimated value of
φ is 0.37.
      Table 12 presents the empirical and model-implied moments. Allowing the model the flexib-
ility of having a different short-run and long-run demand elasticities substantially improves the
fit of the competitive version of the model. Both the competitive and the cartel model come closer
to reproducing the price volatility observed in the data. In addition, the competitive model does
a better job than the benchmark at fitting the volatility of oil produced by OPEC firms and the
correlation of prices with investment of OPEC and non-OPEC firms.


3.3    Robustness

In this section, we discuss the results of two robustness exercises. First, we consider two alternat-
ive instruments for the price of oil. Second, we exclude from the sample two countries for which
the data might have larger measurement error (Saudi Arabia and Venezuela). The tables with our


                                                           31
                 Table 12: Data and model moments with dynamic demand elasticity

       Moment                   Data      (s.e.)         Competitive model                      Cartel model
                                                      Benchm.      Dyn. demand           Benchm.      Dyn. demand
(1)    std(∆pt )                0.273     (0.028)       0.188           0.219              0.220           0.233
(2)    std(∆iN
             t )                0.192     (0.024)       0.218           0.202              0.212           0.174
(3)    std(∆iO
             t )                0.193     (0.027)       0.215           0.213              0.208           0.217
(4)    std(∆qtN )               0.022     (0.003)       0.026           0.025              0.024           0.027
(5)    std(∆qtO )               0.069     (0.011)       0.057           0.070              0.068           0.061
(6)    corr(∆pt , ∆iN
                    t )         0.557     (0.147)       0.738           0.644              0.687           0.820
(7)    corr(∆pt , ∆iO
                    t )         0.362     (0.109)       0.659           0.357              0.671           0.515
(8)    corr(∆pt , ∆qtN )        0.031     (0.069)       0.013           0.024              0.127           0.232
(9)    corr(∆pt , ∆qtO )        0.030     (0.122)       -0.585          -0.274            -0.583          -0.366
(10)   corr(∆iN     O
              t , ∆it )         0.673     (0.096)       0.992           0.917              0.999           0.641
(11)   corr(∆iN
              t ,    ∆qtN )     0.087     (0.094)       -0.041          -0.076            -0.025          -0.036
(12)   corr(∆iN
              t ,    ∆qtO )     0.023     (0.112)       -0.150          -0.053            -0.008           0.001
(13)   corr(∆iO     N
              t , ∆qt )         -0.034    (0.145)       -0.035          -0.074            -0.027          -0.062
(14)   corr(∆iO     O
              t , ∆qt )         -0.226    (0.153)       -0.044          0.232              0.013          -0.055
(15)   corr(∆qtN ,   ∆qtO )     -0.141    (0.125)       0.026           0.054              0.341           0.375
(16)   corr(∆pt ,∆pt−1 )        -0.027    (0.088)       -0.043          -0.194            -0.166          -0.291
(17)   corr(∆iN    N
              t ,∆it−1 )        0.119     (0.135)       0.007           -0.009             0.001          -0.008
(18)   corr(∆iO    O
              t ,∆it−1 )        0.311     (0.096)       0.009           -0.004            -0.001           0.014
(19)   corr(∆qtN ,∆qt−1
                    N )         0.643     (0.113)       0.291           0.544              0.416           0.638
(20)   corr(∆qtO ,∆qt−1
                    O )         0.213     (0.211)       0.314           0.622             -0.392          -0.198
(21)   E [It / (Pt Qt )]        0.102    ( 0.016)       0.057           0.069              0.027           0.019


       Notes: This table presents the targeted moments from the data and the model-implied moments under
       both the benchmark and dynamic-demand specifications. Newey-West standard errors computed with
       5-year lags are reported in parenthesis. xt represents the logarithm of Xt , ∆xt is equal to xt − xt−1 .




                                                          32
robustness results are included in the appendix.
   In our benchmark results, we instrumented the price of oil with the forecast of detrended
real world GDP. Here we consider two alternative instruments for oil prices: copper prices, as
in Newell et al. (2016), and the IMF’s metals price index. We deflate both indexes by the U.S.
consumer price index. Tables 17 and 22 show our estimates of the elasticity of the extraction rate
with respect to prices. These estimates are still quite low (0.26 and 0.20 instrumenting with real
copper and metals prices, respectively) but are higher than our benchmark estimate (0.18).
   Tables 18 and 23 report the elasticity of the extensive margin (number of oil fields in operation)
with respect to the real price of oil. As in our benchmark results, we find that this elasticity is
statistically insignificant.
   Tables 19 and 24 contain our estimates of η obtained using real copper prices and real metals
prices as instruments. Both instruments yield a lower value of η. Our estimates of η for non-OPEC
are 7.7 in the benchmark case, 4.1 with real copper prices as an instrument, and 4.4 with real
metals prices. We re-estimated the model with these values of η and report the results in Tables
20, 21, 25, and 26. The fit of the two alternative models with η = 4.1 and η = 4.4 is only slightly
worse than the fit of the benchmark model, delivering lower price volatility than the benchmark
versions. The parameter estimates are similar across the three models. The main difference is that
demand shocks are more persistent in the models with η = 4.1 or η = 4.4 than in the benchmark
model.
   Next, we redo our analysis excluding Saudi Arabia and Venezuela from the sample. Our mo-
tivation is the possibility of larger measurement error in the data for these two countries. Table 27
shows the estimates of the elasticity of the extraction rate with respect to prices obtained using this
restricted sample. This estimate (0.22) is similar to our benchmark estimate (0.18). Table 28 reports
the elasticity of the extensive margin (number of oil fields in operation) with respect to the real
price of oil. As in our benchmark results, we find that this elasticity is statistically insignificant.
We re-estimated our structural model excluding Saudi Arabia and Venezuela from the countries
used to compute the data moments. The point estimates of the data moments are very similar to
those of the full sample and, as a result, the estimated parameters and model fit are quite similar
to those obtained in the benchmark specification (see Tables 30 and 31).




                                                  33
4         The impact of fracking

The advent of fracking is transforming the oil industry, making the U.S. once again one of the
world’s top oil producers.20 We study the quantitative impact of fracking using an extended ver-
sion of our model that incorporates fracking firms. Since our dataset includes the universe of oil
fields in operation, it allows us to compare the properties of conventional oil fields with the prop-
erties of oil fields explored using fracking. We find that fracking operations differ greatly from
conventional oil production in terms of production flexibility and lags between investment and
production. Our model implies that an expansion in the share of fracking production in total oil
production will result in a sizable decline in the volatility of oil prices.
         There are two important differences between fracking and conventional forms of oil produc-
tion. First, the lag between investment and production is much shorter for fracking operations.
Second, it is much less costly to adjust the extraction rate in fracking operations than in conven-
tional oil operations.
         Our results are consistent with the findings of Bjørnland et al. (2017). These authors use
monthly data for North Dakota to show that oil production from shale wells is much more flexible
than conventional oil production. Additional evidence consistent with the notion that fracking
operations are very flexible, comes from data compiled by Baker Hughes on the number of oil
rigs in operation in the U.S. These data are depicted, together the nominal oil price in Figure 4.
Between January 2009 and September 2014, oil prices rose from 42 to 93 dollars per barrel. During
this period, the number of oil rigs in operation increased from 345 to 1,600. Most of the new rigs
are likely to have been used in fracking operations. Between September 2014 and February 2016,
oil prices plummeted from 93 to 30 dollars per barrel. During this period, the number of oil rigs
in operation fell from 1,600 to 400.
         Figure 5 shows the distribution of the lag between investment and the first year of production
in non-conventional oil fields. Our maximum likelihood estimator of λ is 1.13, so the average
lag between investment and production is about one year. Recall that this lag is 12 years for
conventional production.
         Table 13 reports our estimates of η for fields explored with fracking obtained using the forecast
of real price of oil.21 We see that for non-conventional oil fields our estimate of η is roughly 1.95.
    20
         See Kilian (2016), Gilje et al. (2016) and Melek, Plante and Yucel (2017) for a discussion of the impact of fracking on
oil and gasoline markets.
   21
      We use the real price of oil as an instrument because fracking firms can respond within the period to supply and
demand shocks.



                                                                34
                   Figure 4: U.S. oil rigs in operation and the price of oil




Notes: This figure presents the number of oil rigs in operation (blue line, left axis) and the nominal USD
price of a barrel of oil (red line, right axis). Data source: Baker Hughes.




Figure 5: Empirical dist. of lags between investment to production - fracking fields




Notes: This figure presents the histogram of the lag between the first year of investment and first year of
production across fracking oil fields. The MLE for λ, the Poisson arrival rate of production, is 1.13. The
red line is the implied geometric distribution for the estimated λ.




                                                    35
                Table 13: Extraction rate adjustment costs regression - fracking fields

                          Dep. variable: ln(prod. costs per barrel of oil reserves)
                          Variable                                    (1)                      (2)
                          ln(extraction)                            1.95∗∗∗               7.69∗∗∗
                                                                     (0.21)                (1.54)

                          Oil field FE                                3                        3
                          Year of operation FE                        3                        3
                          Sample                             Fracking fields        All non-OPEC
                          IV                                          3                        3
                          1st   stage F-stat                          35                       19
                          Clusters (oil fields)                       952                  9,969
                          Observations                              4,940                146,879
       Notes: This table presents estimates of the adjustment-cost coefficient, η. Specification (1) includes only
       fracking fields, and the instrument used is the real price of oil. Specification (2) includes all non-OPEC
       oil fields, and the instrument used is the one-year-ahead forecast of detrended world real GDP. Standard
                                                      ∗∗∗
       errors are clustered at the oil-field level.         - significant at the 1 percent level.



In contrast, when we include all oil fields in our sample in the regression, we obtain an estimate
of η = 7.7.
   To study the impact of fracking, we include in both our models a third type of competitive
firm that produces oil using fracking. These firms have extraction costs that are less convex (η F =
1.95 < 7.7), no lag between investment and production (λF = 1), and no lag in the adjustment of
the extraction rate. We also assume that fracking firms are not subject to supply shocks.
   There is a continuum of measure one of fracking firms. The problem of the representative firm
is to maximize its value (V F ):
                                                        ∞                                  
                                           F
                                                        X
                                                                t    F F     F    F
                                                                                       F F
                                                                                    F η
                          max         V        = E0            β Pt θt Kt − It − ψ θt    Kt ,                        (24)
                 {ItF ,θt+1      t+1 }
                        F ,K F ,X F
                            t+1                         t=0

subject to

                                      F
                                                                              α        1−α
                                     Xt+1 = (1 − λF )XtF + ItF                     LF                                (25)

                                           F
                                          Kt+1 = (1 − θtF )KtF + λF Xt+1
                                                                     F
                                                                         .                                           (26)

Here, ItF denotes investment, θtF the extraction rate, XtF exploration capital, KtF oil reserves, and
LF the land available to the fracking firm.



                                                                 36
   We assume that the convexity of extraction costs is lower for fracking firms: η F < η. This
assumption does not imply that the average and marginal cost of extraction for fracking firms are
different than those of the traditional firms, as this comparison also depends on ψ F and on the
equilibrium levels of reserves and extraction rates. The optimality conditions for fracking firms
are identical to those for non-OPEC firms.
   Total production is now given by:

                                              −ut O O
                                Qt = θtN KN
                                          t +e   θt Kt + θtF KFt ,

where KFt and θtF denote the aggregate reserves and aggregate extraction rate of fracking firms,
respectively.
   These new forms of oil production are only feasible in some parts of the globe. Rystad es-
timates that they will represent 20 percent of oil production by 2050. We calibrate the amount of
land available for fracking so that in the steady state fracking represents 20 percent of global oil
production. We calibrate ψ F and ψ to be consistent with estimates of the difference between ψ F
and ψ obtained using our micro data given our point estimates of η F and η.
   Figures 6 and 7 show the impulse responses for demand and supply shocks, respectively. The
first panel corresponds to the competitive model and the bottom panel to the cartel model. The
panels for the price response also include the price response in our benchmark model without
fracking firms. We see that in both the competitive and the cartel model, fracking firms respond
much more to the shock, in terms of production, extraction and investment, than non-fracking
firms. The result is a much lower increase in the price of oil.
   Table 14 compares the implications of versions of the model with and without fracking for
some key moments. We find that the main impact of fracking is to reduce the volatility of oil prices.
In the competitive model, price volatility falls by 53 percent from 0.19 to 0.09. In the cartel model,
price volatility falls by 50 percent from 0.22 to 0.11. There is a higher correlation between prices
and quantities, and between investment and quantities in the models with fracking, reflecting the
response of fracking firms to high-frequency movements in prices. Production is less volatile in
the version of the models with fracking. This results reflects two opposing effects. The aggregate
production response to demand shocks is higher than in the model without fracking, as fracking
firms are more nimble. The aggregate production response to supply shocks is lower than in the
model without fracking, because fracking firms can respond within the period to supply shocks,
which smooths out the response of aggregate supply to these shocks.



                                                  37
                Figure 6: Impulse response to a demand shock - fracking

                                 Panel A - competitive model




                                     Panel B - cartel model




Notes: This figure presents the impulse response functions to a one standard deviation demand shock
in models with competitive fracking firms. The top panel corresponds to the competitive model. The
bottom panel corresponds to the cartel model. In the two right columns, the dashed line refers to OPEC
quantities and the solid yellow line to fracking quantities. The dashed line on the second column refers
to the price response under the benchmark specifications, which does not include fracking firms.



              Table 14: Implication of fracking on key aggregate moments

      Moment                      Competitive                      Cartel
                              Benchm.      Fracking      Benchm.         Fracking
(1)   std(∆pt )                 0.19          0.09          0.22            0.11
(2)   std(∆it )                 0.22          0.18          0.21            0.21
(3)   std(∆qt )                 0.03          0.02          0.04            0.03
(4)   corr(∆pt , ∆it )          0.70          0.79          0.69            0.85
(5)   corr(∆pt , ∆qt )          -0.50         0.42         -0.44            0.34
(6)   corr(∆qt , ∆it )          -0.11         0.40         -0.02            0.41


Notes: This table presents second moments for our benchmark specifications and for versions of our
models with fracking firms. xt represents the logarithm of Xt , ∆xt is equal to xt − xt−1 . It and Qt
represent aggregate investment and production at time t, respectively.
                                                 38
                       Figure 7: Impulse response to a supply shock - fracking

                                          Panel A - competitive model




                                             Panel B - cartel model




       Notes: This figure presents the impulse response functions to a one standard deviation supply shock
       which reduces OPEC’s oil production in models with competitive fracking firms. The top panel corres-
       ponds to the competitive model. The bottom panel corresponds to the cartel model. In the two right
       columns, the dashed line refers to OPEC quantities and the solid yellow line to fracking quantities. The
       dashed line on the second column refers to the price response under the benchmark specifications, which
       does not include fracking firms.



5   Conclusion

In this paper, we propose a parsimonious model consistent with micro data about the oil industry
which can ultimately serve as a building block in a model of the world economy.
    We leave three interesting projects for future research. The first is to develop a richer model of
firm heterogeneity. In this paper we consider only two heterogeneity dimensions, OPEC versus
non-OPEC, and conventional versus fracking producers. There are other heterogeneity dimen-
sions which result in different choices of investment and extraction rates. The second is to intro-
duce the possibility of above-ground inventories that can be used by commodity speculators to




                                                        39
respond to high-frequency changes in oil prices.22 The third is to combine our model of the oil
market with a fully-fledged model of the world economy. Such a combined model would allow
us to study the effect of energy-saving technical change and evaluate the impact of solar, wind,
and other alternative energy sources on the dynamics of the oil markets and the world economy.




References

A CEMOGLU , D., C ARVALHO , V. M., O ZDAGLAR , A. and TAHBAZ -S ALEHI , A. (2012). The network
  origins of aggregate fluctuations. Econometrica, 80 1977–2016.

A DAO , B., N ARAJABAD , B. and T EMZELIDES , T. P. (2017). Renewable technology adoption and
  the macroeconomy.

A LQUIST, R., K ILIAN , L. and V IGFUSSON , R. J. (2013). Forecasting the price of oil. In Handbook of
  economic forecasting, vol. 2. Elsevier, 427–507.

A NDERSON , S. T., K ELLOGG , R. and S ALANT, S. W. (2017). Hotelling under pressure. Journal of
  Political Economy.

A REZKI , R., R AMEY, V. A. and S HENG , L. (2016). News shocks in open economies: Evidence from
  giant oil discoveries. The Quarterly Journal of Economics.

B ACKUS , D. K. and C RUCINI , M. J. (2000). Oil prices and the terms of trade. Journal of international
  Economics, 50 185–213.

B AQAEE , D. R. and FARHI , E. (2017). The macroeconomic impact of microeconomic shocks: Bey-
  ond hulten’s theorem. Tech. rep., National Bureau of Economic Research.

B ARSKY, R. B. and K ILIAN , L. (2001). Do we really know that oil caused the great stagflation? a
  monetary alternative. NBER Macroeconomics annual, 16 137–183.

B ARSKY, R. B. and K ILIAN , L. (2004). Oil and the macroeconomy since the 1970s. The Journal of
  Economic Perspectives, 18 115–134.

B INSBERGEN , J. H. (2016). Good-specific habit formation and the cross-section of expected returns.
  The Journal of Finance, 71 1699–1732.
  22
       See Deaton and Laroque (1992), Deaton and Laroque (1996), Kilian and Murphy (2014), and Olovsson (2016) for a
discussion.


                                                          40
B JØRNLAND , H. C., N ORDVIK , F. M. and R OHRER , M. (2017). Supply flexibility in the shale patch:
  Evidence from north dakota. manuscript, Norges Bank.

B LANCHARD , O. J. and G ALI , J. (2007). The macroeconomic effects of oil shocks: Why are the
  2000s so different from the 1970s? Tech. rep., National Bureau of Economic Research.

B ODENSTEIN , M., E RCEG , C. J. and G UERRIERI , L. (2011). Oil shocks and external adjustment.
  Journal of International Economics, 83 168–184.

C ALDARA , D., C AVALLO , M. and I ACOVIELLO , M. M. (2017). Oil price elasticities and oil price
  fluctuations.

C HARI , V. and C HRISTIANO , L. (2014). The optimal extraction of exhaustible resources. Tech.
  rep., Federal Reserve Bank of Minneapolis.

D AMODARAN , A. (2017). Cost of equity and capital. Tech. rep., New York University.

D EATON , A. (1999). Commodity prices and growth in africa. The Journal of Economic Perspectives,
  13 23–40.

D EATON , A. and L AROQUE , G. (1992). On the behaviour of commodity prices. The Review of
  Economic Studies, 59 1–23.

D EATON , A. and L AROQUE , G. (1996). Competitive storage and commodity price dynamics.
  Journal of Political Economy, 104 896–923.

E ZEKIEL , M. (1938). The cobweb theorem. The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 52 255–280.

F ERNANDEZ -V ILLAVERDE , J. (2017). Energy: The mover of output,in global economic history.
  Tech. rep., University of Pennsylvania.

F INN , M. G. (2000). Perfect competition and the effects of energy price increases on economic
  activity. Journal of Money, Credit and banking 400–416.

G ABAIX , X. (2011). The granular origins of aggregate fluctuations. Econometrica, 79 733–772.

G ILJE , E., R EADY, R. and R OUSSANOV, N. (2016). Fracking, drilling, and asset pricing: Estimating
  the economic benefits of the shale revolution. Tech. rep., National Bureau of Economic Research.

H AMILTON , J. D. (1983). Oil and the macroeconomy since world war ii. Journal of Political Economy,
  91 228–248.

                                                    41
H ARVEY, D. I., K ELLARD , N. M., M ADSEN , J. B. and W OHAR , M. E. (2010). The prebisch-singer
  hypothesis: four centuries of evidence. The Review of Economics and Statistics, 92 367–377.

H ASSLER , J., K RUSELL , P. and O LOVSSON , C. (2010). Oil monopoly and the climate. The American
  Economic Review, 100 460–464.

H OTELLING , H. (1931). The economics of exhaustible resources. Journal of Political Economy, 39
  137–175.

K ELLOGG , R. (2014). The effect of uncertainty on investment: evidence from texas oil drilling. The
  American Economic Review, 104 1698–1734.

K ILIAN , L. (2009). Not all oil price shocks are alike: Disentangling demand and supply shocks in
  the crude oil market. The American Economic Review, 99 1053–1069.

K ILIAN , L. (2014). Oil price shocks: causes and consequences. Annu. Rev. Resour. Econ., 6 133–154.

K ILIAN , L. (2016). The impact of the shale oil revolution on us oil and gasoline prices. Review of
  Environmental Economics and Policy, 10 185–205.

K ILIAN , L. and M URPHY, D. P. (2014). The role of inventories and speculative trading in the global
  market for crude oil. Journal of Applied Econometrics, 29 454–478.

K IM , I.-M. and L OUNGANI , P. (1992). The role of energy in real business cycle models. Journal of
  Monetary Economics, 29 173–189.

L EDUC , S. and S ILL , K. (2004). A quantitative analysis of oil-price shocks, systematic monetary
  policy, and economic downturns. Journal of Monetary Economics, 51 781–808.

L EON -L EDESMA , M. A. and S ATCHI , M. (2016). Appropriate technology and balanced growth.
  The Review of Economic Studies.

L IPPI , F. and N OBILI , A. (2012). Oil and the macroeconomy: a quantitative structural analysis.
  Journal of the European Economic Association, 10 1059–1083.

N ERLOVE , M. (1958). Adaptive expectations and cobweb phenomena. The Quarterly Journal of
  Economics, 72 227–240.

N EWELL , R. G., P REST, B. C. and V ISSING , A. (2016). Trophy hunting vs. manufacturing energy:
  The price-responsiveness of shale gas. Tech. rep., National Bureau of Economic Research.

                                                 42
O LOVSSON , C. (2016). Oil prices in a real-business-cycle model with precautionary demand for
  oil.

R AVN , M., S CHMITT-G ROHÉ , S. and U RIBE , M. (2006). Deep habits. The Review of Economic Studies,
  73 195–218.

R OTEMBERG , J. J. and W OODFORD , M. (1996). Imperfect competition and the effects of energy
  price increases on economic activity. Journal of Money, Credit and Banking, 28 549–577.

R OUWENHORST, K. G. (1991). Time to build and aggregate fluctuations: A reconsideration. Journal
  of Monetary Economics, 27 241–254.

S TIGLITZ , J. E. (1976). Monopoly and the rate of extraction of exhaustible resources. The American
  Economic Review, 66 655–661.

W OODFORD , M. (1999). Commentary: How should monetary policy be conducted in an era of
  price stability? New challenges for monetary policy, 277316.

W OODFORD , M. (2011). Interest and prices: Foundations of a theory of monetary policy. princeton
  university press.




                                                 43
                                                  Appendix

A     Robustness Tables

A.1   Sample period starting at 1900

                         Table 15: Price elasticity of extraction rates (1900–2015)


            Dep. variable: ln(extraction rate)
            Variable                            (1)         (2)           (3)              (4)      (5)
            ln(price)                        0.06∗∗∗      0.09∗∗∗      0.12∗∗∗        0.14∗∗∗    0.16∗∗∗
                                               (0.006)     (0.008)      (0.009)        (0.01)     (0.011)

            ln(price) × 1OPEC                                         −0.21∗∗∗        −0.2∗∗∗
                                                                        (0.022)        (0.023)

            ln(price) × 1Big Firm                                                    −0.06∗∗∗
                                                                                       (0.018)

            ln(price) × 1|∆ ln(p)|>0.1                                                           −0.15∗∗∗
                                                                                                   (0.01)

            Oil field FE                         3           3            3                 3       3
            Operation year FE                    3           3            3                 3       3
            Year trend                           3           3            3                 3       3
            IV                                   7           3            3                 3       3
            Clusters (oil fields)             13,811                              13,372
            Observations                     351,442                              351,003

       Notes: This table presents estimates of the elasticity of extraction rates with respect to oil prices. The
       data includes oil fields with positive extraction rates in 1900-2015, excluding the last year of operation.
       Standard errors, clustered at the oil-field level, are reported in parenthesis. The instrument for price is
       the one-year-lagged price. (∗ ∗ ∗) - significant at a 1 precent level.




                                                           44
              Table 16: Price elasticity of oil fields in operation (1900–2015)


       Dep. variable: ln(number of operating oil fields)
       Variable                 (1)           (2)                 (3)                   (4)
       ln(price)              −0.4          −0.51               −0.18                 −0.32
                               (0.27)        (0.32)              (0.13)                (0.19)

       Year trend               3              3                   3                     3
       IV                        7             3                   3                     3
       Dep. variable       All fields     All fields       Non-OPEC fields        OPEC fields
       Observations            114            114                 114                   114

Notes: This table presents estimates of the elasticity of the number oil fields in operation with respect to
oil prices. The data used is for the period 1900-2015. The dependent variable is the number of oil fields
with positive extraction rates. Newey-West standard errors computed with 5-year lags are reported in
parenthesis. The instrument for the price is the one-year-lagged price.




                                                      45
A.2   Instrument with real copper prices

                                 Table 17: Price elasticity of extraction rates


           Dep. variable: ln(extraction rate)
           Variable                             (1)        (2)          (3)               (4)       (5)
           ln(price)                         0.09∗∗∗     0.26∗∗∗     0.31∗∗∗         0.34∗∗∗      0.22∗∗∗
                                               (0.009)    (0.018)      (0.019)        (0.021)      (0.018)

           ln(price) × 1OPEC                                        −0.25∗∗∗        −0.24∗∗∗
                                                                       (0.041)        (0.041)

           ln(price) × 1Big Firm                                                     −0.1∗∗∗
                                                                                      (0.032)

           ln(price) × 1|∆ ln(p)|>0.1                                                            −0.03∗∗∗
                                                                                                   (0.005)

           Oil field FE                          3          3            3                 3         3
           Operation year FE                     3          3            3                 3         3
           Year trend                            3          3            3                 3         3
           IV                                    7          3            3                 3         3
           Clusters (oil fields)              12,187                             11,479
           Observations                      173,742                             173,034

      Notes: This table presents estimates of the elasticity of the number oil fields in operation with respect to
      oil prices. The data used is for the period 1900-2015. The dependent variable is the number of oil fields
      with positive extraction rates. Newey-West standard errors computed with 5-year lags are reported in
      parenthesis. The instrument for the real oil price is the one-year-ahead forecast of the real price of copper.
      (∗ ∗ ∗) - significant at a one percent level.




                                                          46
                       Table 18: Price elasticity of oil fields in operation


       Dep. variable: ln(number of operating oil fields)
       Variable                      (1)            (2)                      (3)                   (4)
       ln(price)                   −0.05          −0.44                   −0.13                  −0.31
                                    (0.06)         (0.29)                   (0.10)                (0.19)

       Year trend                    3               3                       3                     3
       IV                             7              3                       3                     3
       Dep. variable          All fields        All fields       Non-OPEC fields               OPEC fields
       Observations                  45              45                      45                    45

Notes: This table presents estimates of the elasticity of the number oil fields in operation with respect to
oil prices. The dependent variable is the number of oil fields with positive extraction rates. Newey-West
standard errors computed with 5-year lags are reported in parenthesis. The instrument for the price is
the one-year-ahead forecast of the real copper price.




                      Table 19: Extraction rate adjustment costs regression

                Dep. variable: ln(prod. costs per barrel of oil reserves)
                Variable                            (1)             (2)                (3)
                ln(extraction)                   4.54∗∗∗          4.05∗∗∗            15.19∗∗
                                                   (0.22)          (0.18)             (7.72)

                Oil field FE                        3               3                  3
                Operation year FE                   3               3                  3
                Sample                             All           Non-OPEC            OPEC
                IV                                  3               3                  3
                1st   stage F-stat                 276             198                 3.4
                Clusters (oil fields)            11,527            9,969             1,558
                Observations                     174,339          146,879            27,460

Notes: This table presents estimates of the elasticity of extraction rates with respect to oil prices, η.
Standard errors are clustered at the oil-field level. The instrument used is the one-year-ahead forecast of
                            ∗∗∗
the real price of copper.         - significant at the 1 percent level.




                                                            47
                                  Table 20: Estimated parameters

                      Parameter          Competitive                   Cartel
                                     Estimate        (s.e.)       Estimate      (s.e.)

                                       0.19        (0.04)          0.20     (0.06)
                      α                 0.42        (0.85)          0.34         (-)
                      ρd1               1.86        (0.07)          1.79     (0.07)
                      ρd2              -0.86        (0.07)         -0.80     (0.08)
                      ρu1               1.56        (0.14)         -0.25     (0.79)
                      ρu2              -0.61        (0.13)         -0.02     (2.30)
                      var(edt )        0.004       (0.002)         0.011     (0.004)
                      var(eut )        0.001      (0.000. . . )    0.002     (0.001)

Notes: This table presents the GMM estimates of the structural parameters when η is obtained using the
real price of copper as an instrument. Under the cartel specification, α is not estimated, but calibrated so
that the steady-state extraction rate matches the average extraction rate for OPEC.




                                                   48
                                 Table 21: Data and model moments

       Moment                    Data     (s.e.)     Competitive model               Cartel model
                                                    Benchm.    Copper IV        Benchm.     Copper IV
(1)    std(∆pt )                 0.273   (0.028)     0.188        0.112           0.220        0.175
(2)    std(∆iN
             t )                 0.192   (0.024)     0.218        0.220           0.212        0.215
(3)    std(∆iO
             t )                 0.193   (0.027)     0.215        0.215           0.208        0.209
(4)    std(∆qtN )                0.022   (0.003)     0.026        0.027           0.024        0.026
(5)    std(∆qtO )                0.069   (0.011)     0.057        0.044           0.068        0.066
(6)    corr(∆pt , ∆iN
                    t )          0.557   (0.147)     0.738        0.723           0.687        0.602
(7)    corr(∆pt , ∆iO
                    t )          0.362   (0.109)     0.659        0.589           0.671        0.594
(8)    corr(∆pt , ∆qtN )         0.031   (0.069)     0.013        -0.008          0.127        0.079
(9)    corr(∆pt , ∆qtO )         0.030   (0.122)     -0.585       -0.491          -0.583       -0.680
(10)   corr(∆iN     O
              t , ∆it )          0.673   (0.096)     0.992        0.979           0.999        1.000
(11)   corr(∆iN
              t ,    ∆qtN )      0.087   (0.094)     -0.041       -0.004          -0.025       0.005
(12)   corr(∆iN
              t ,    ∆qtO )      0.023   (0.112)     -0.150       -0.151          -0.008       0.003
(13)   corr(∆iO     N
              t , ∆qt )         -0.034   (0.145)     -0.035       0.002           -0.027       0.003
(14)   corr(∆iO     O
              t , ∆qt )         -0.226   (0.153)     -0.044       0.004           0.013        0.012
(15)   corr(∆qtN ,   ∆qtO )     -0.141   (0.125)     0.026        -0.075          0.341        0.333
(16)   corr(∆pt ,∆pt−1 )        -0.027   (0.088)     -0.043       -0.122          -0.166       -0.333
(17)   corr(∆iN    N
              t ,∆it−1 )         0.119   (0.135)     0.007        0.028           0.001        0.018
(18)   corr(∆iO    O
              t ,∆it−1 )         0.311   (0.096)     0.009        0.031           -0.001       0.017
(19)                N )
       corr(∆qtN ,∆qt−1          0.643   (0.113)     0.291        0.434           0.416        0.533
(20)   corr(∆qtO ,∆qt−1
                    O )          0.213   (0.211)     0.314        0.523           -0.392       -0.384
(21)   E [It / (Pt Qt )]         0.102   ( 0.016)    0.057        0.049           0.027        0.029

  Notes: This table presents key targeted moments from the data and the model-implied moments under
  the benchmark specification and when η is estimated using the real price of copper instrument. Newey-
  West standard errors computed with 5-year lags are reported in parenthesis. xt represents the logarithm
  of Xt , ∆xt is equal to xt − xt−1 .




                                                    49
A.3   Instrument with real metal prices

                                Table 22: Price elasticity of extraction rates


           Dep. variable: ln(extraction rate)
           Variable                            (1)          (2)          (3)           (4)           (5)
           ln(price)                        0.09∗∗∗      0.20∗∗∗      0.24∗∗∗        0.26∗∗∗      0.22∗∗∗
                                              (0.009)     (0.014)       (0.015)       (0.016)      (0.015)

           ln(price) × 1OPEC                                         −0.23∗∗∗       −0.22∗∗∗
                                                                        (0.035)       (0.035)

           ln(price) × 1Big Firm                                                    −0.07∗∗
                                                                                      (0.027)

           ln(price) × 1|∆ ln(p)|>0.1                                                             0.04∗∗∗
                                                                                                   (0.005)

           Oil field FE                         3           3             3             3            3
           Operation year FE                    3           3             3             3            3
           Year trend                           3           3             3             3            3
           IV                                   7           3             3             3            3
           Clusters (oil fields)             12,187      11,479        11,479        11,479        11,479
           Observations                     173,742      173,034      173,034       173,034       173,034

      Notes: This table presents estimates of the elasticity of extraction rates with respect to oil prices. The
      data includes oil fields with positive extraction rates in 1971-2015, excluding the last year of operation.
      Standard errors, clustered at the oil-field level, are reported in parenthesis. The instrument for the real
      oil price is the one-year-ahead forecast of the real price of metal. (∗ ∗ ∗) [∗∗] - significant at a 1 percent
      level [5 percent].




                                                          50
                       Table 23: Price elasticity of oil fields in operation


       Dep. variable: ln(number of operating oil fields)
       Variable                  (1)           (2)                      (3)                   (4)
       ln(price)               −0.05       −0.23∗∗∗              −0.08∗∗                   −0.15∗∗∗
                                (0.06)        (0.07)                   (0.03)                (0.04)

       Year trend                3             3                        3                     3
       IV                         7            3                        3                     3
       Dep. variable         All fields   All fields        Non-OPEC fields               OPEC fields
       Observations              45            45                       45                    45

Notes: This table presents estimates of the elasticity of the number of oil fields in operation with respect
to oil prices. The dependent variable is the number of oil fields with positive extraction rates. Newey-
West standard errors computed with 5-year lags are reported in parenthesis. The instrument for the price
is the one-year-ahead forecast of real price of metals.




                      Table 24: Extraction rate adjustment costs regression

                Dep. variable: ln(prod. costs per barrel of oil reserves)
                Variable                      (1)              (2)                (3)
                ln(extraction)             4.97∗∗∗           4.35∗∗∗             33.0
                                             (0.26)           (0.21)             (37.6)

                Oil field FE                   3               3                  3
                Operation year FE              3               3                  3
                Sample                        All           Non-OPEC            OPEC
                IV                             3               3                  3
                1st   stage F-stat           243              275                0.72
                Clusters (oil fields)       11,527            9,969             1,558
                Observations               174,339           146,879            27,460

Notes: This table presents estimates the adjustment-cost coefficient, η. Standard errors are clustered at
                                                                                                        ∗∗∗
the oil-field level. The instrument used is the one-year-ahead forecast of the real price of metals.          -
significant at the 1 percent level.




                                                       51
                                   Table 25: Estimated parameters

                       Parameter         Competitive                   Cartel
                                      Estimate       (s.e.)       Estimate      (s.e.)

                                       0.19        (0.04)          0.21     (0.07)
                       α                0.42        (0.84)          0.33         (-)
                       ρd1              1.84        (0.08)          1.78     (0.06)
                       ρd2              -0.85       (0.08)         -0.79     (0.06)
                       ρu1              1.54        (0.14)         -0.16     (0.75)
                       ρu2              -0.60       (0.13)          0.00     (2.08)
                       var(edt )        0.005       (0.003)        0.012     (0.004)
                       var(eut )        0.001     (0.000. . . )    0.002     (0.001)

Notes: This table presents the GMM estimates of the structural parameters when η is estimated using
the real price of metals as an instrument. Under the cartel specification, α is not estimated, but calibrated
so that the steady state of the moel matches the average extraction rate of OPEC.




                                                   52
                              Table 26: Data and model moments

       Moment                   Data      (s.e.)     Competitive model         Cartel model
                                                     Benchm.      Metal IV   Benchm.    Metal IV
(1)    std(∆pt )                0.273    (0.028)         0.188     0.120      0.220       0.175
(2)    std(∆iN
             t )                0.192    (0.024)         0.218     0.220      0.212       0.215
(3)    std(∆iO
             t )                0.193    (0.027)         0.215     0.215      0.208       0.209
(4)    std(∆qtN )               0.022    (0.003)         0.026     0.027      0.024       0.026
(5)    std(∆qtO )               0.069    (0.011)         0.057     0.046      0.068       0.067
(6)    corr(∆pt , ∆iN
                    t )         0.557    (0.147)         0.738     0.726      0.687       0.617
(7)    corr(∆pt , ∆iO
                    t )         0.362    (0.109)         0.659     0.600      0.671       0.608
(8)    corr(∆pt , ∆qtN )        0.031    (0.069)         0.013     -0.008     0.127       0.089
(9)    corr(∆pt , ∆qtO )        0.030    (0.122)         -0.585    -0.506     -0.583     -0.660
(10)   corr(∆iN     O
              t , ∆it )         0.673    (0.096)         0.992     0.981      0.999       1.000
(11)   corr(∆iN
              t ,    ∆qtN )     0.087    (0.094)         -0.041    -0.009     -0.025      0.002
(12)   corr(∆iN
              t ,    ∆qtO )     0.023    (0.112)         -0.150    -0.153     -0.008      0.002
(13)   corr(∆iO     N
              t , ∆qt )        -0.034    (0.145)         -0.035    -0.003     -0.027     -0.000
(14)   corr(∆iO     O
              t , ∆qt )        -0.226    (0.153)         -0.044    -0.003     0.013       0.011
(15)   corr(∆qtN ,   ∆qtO )    -0.141    (0.125)         0.026     -0.061     0.341       0.350
(16)   corr(∆pt ,∆pt−1 )       -0.027    (0.088)         -0.043    -0.113     -0.166     -0.297
(17)   corr(∆iN    N
              t ,∆it−1 )        0.119    (0.135)         0.007     0.026      0.001       0.017
(18)   corr(∆iO    O
              t ,∆it−1 )        0.311    (0.096)         0.009     0.028      -0.001      0.015
(19)                N )
       corr(∆qtN ,∆qt−1         0.643    (0.113)         0.291     0.414      0.416       0.528
(20)   corr(∆qtO ,∆qt−1
                    O )         0.213    (0.211)         0.314     0.495      -0.392     -0.374
(21)   E [It / (Pt Qt )]        0.102    ( 0.016)        0.057     0.050      0.027       0.028

Notes: This table presents key targeted moments from the data and the model-implied moments under
the benchmark specification and when η is estimated using the real price of metals as an instrument.
Newey-West standard errors computed with 5-year lags are reported in parenthesis. xt represents the
logarithm of Xt , ∆xt is equal to xt − xt−1 .




                                                    53
A.4   Excluding Saudi Arabia and Venezuela from the sample

                                 Table 27: Price elasticity of extraction rates


            Dep. variable: ln(extraction rate)
            Variable                             (1)           (2)       (3)         (4)           (5)
            ln(price)                          0.11∗∗∗      0.22∗∗∗    0.19∗∗∗     0.16∗∗∗      0.19∗∗∗
                                                (0.009)      (0.032)    (0.036)     (0.42)        (0.03)

            ln(price) × 1OPEC                                           0.16∗       0.16∗
                                                                        (0.10 )     (0.10)

            ln(price) × 1Big Firm                                                   0.11
                                                                                    (0.09)

            ln(price) × 1|∆ ln(p)|>0.1                                                         −0.01∗∗∗
                                                                                                 (0.002)

            Oil field FE                          3              3        3           3            3
            Operation year FE                     3              3        3           3            3
            Year trend                            3              3        3           3            3
            IV                                    7              3        3           3            3
            Clusters (oil fields)              11,893       11,195     11,195      11,195       11,195
            Observations                      167,848       167,150    167,150    167,150      167,150

      Notes: This table presents estimates of the elasticity of extraction rates with respect to oil prices. The
      data includes oil fields with positive extraction rates in 1971-2015, excluding the last year of operation
      and oil fields in Saudi Arabia and Venezuela. Standard errors, clustered at the oil-field level, are reported
      in parenthesis. The instrument for the price is the one-year-ahead forecast of detrended world real GDP.
      (∗ ∗ ∗) [∗] - significant at a 1 percent [10percent] level.




                                                            54
                      Table 28: Price elasticity of oil fields in operation


       Dep. variable: ln(number of operating oil fields)
       Variable                (1)           (2)                      (3)                   (4)
       ln(price)             −0.03         −0.22                   −0.09                  −0.13
                              (0.08)        (0.18)                   (0.08)                (0.11)

       Year trend              3              3                       3                     3
       IV                       7             3                       3                     3
       Dep. variable       All fields    All fields       Non-OPEC fields               OPEC fields
       Observations            45            45                       45                    45

Notes: This table presents estimates for the elasticity of the number of oil fields in operation when we
exclude oil fields in Saudi Arabia and Venezuela. The dependent variable is the number of oil fields
with positive extraction rates. Newey-West standard errors computed with 5-year lags are reported in
parenthesis. The instrument for the price is the one-year-ahead forecast of detrended world real GDP.




                     Table 29: Extraction rate adjustment costs regression

               Dep. variable: ln(prod. costs per barrel of oil reserves)
               Variable                      (1)             (2)                (3)
               ln(extraction)             6.88∗∗∗          7.69∗∗∗            4.21∗∗∗
                                            (1.09)          (1.54)             (0.83)

               Oil field FE                  3               3                  3
               Operation year FE             3               3                  3
               Sample                       All           Non-OPEC            OPEC
               IV                            3               3                  3
               1st   stage F-stat            56              53                 2.5
               Clusters (oil fields)      11,243            9,969             1,274
               Observations               168,388          146,879            21,509

Notes: This table presents estimates of the adjustment-cost coefficient, η, when we exclude oil fields in
Saudi Arabia and Venezuela. Standard errors are clustered at the oil-field level. The instrument used is
the one-year-ahead forecast of detrended world real GDP. ∗∗∗ - significant at the 1% level.




                                                     55
                                  Table 30: Estimated parameters

                      Parameter         Competitive             Cartel
                                      Estimate    (s.e.)   Estimate      (s.e.)

                                       0.16     (0.03)      0.21     (0.08)
                      α                 0.43     (0.77)      0.29         (-)
                      ρd1               1.74     (0.09)      1.70     (0.06)
                      ρd2               -0.76    (0.09)     -0.72     (0.06)
                      ρu1               1.50     (0.10)     -0.10     (2.48)
                      ρu2               -0.56    (0.10)      0.00     (1.84)
                      var(edt )         0.016    (0.006)    0.023     (0.006)
                      var(eut )         0.002    (0.001)    0.002     (0.002)

Notes: This table presents the GMM estimates of the structural parameters when the targeted moments
and η are computed excluding observations on Saudi Arabia and Venezuela. Under the cartel specific-
ation, α is not estimated, but calibrated so that steady state extraction rate matches OPEC’s average
extraction rate.




                                                 56
                                    Table 31: Data and model moments

             Moment                     Data      (s.e.)        Competitive model    Cartel model
      (1)    std(∆pt )                  0.273    (0.028)              0.188              0.218
      (2)    std(∆iN
                   t )                  0.192    (0.024)              0.226              0.217
      (3)    std(∆iO
                   t )                  0.208    (0.031)              0.220              0.212
      (4)    std(∆qtN )                 0.022    (0.003)              0.026              0.024
      (5)    std(∆qtO )                 0.076    (0.016)              0.052              0.073
      (6)    corr(∆pt , ∆iN
                          t )           0.557    (0.147)              0.800              0.690
      (7)    corr(∆pt , ∆iO
                          t )           0.360    (0.120)              0.708              0.672
      (8)    corr(∆pt , ∆qtN )          0.031    (0.069)              0.030              0.158
      (9)    corr(∆pt , ∆qtO )          -0.025   (0.104)              -0.540             -0.569
      (10)   corr(∆iN
                    t ,    ∆iO
                             t )        0.626    (0.108)              0.986              0.999
      (11)   corr(∆iN
                    t ,    ∆qtN )       0.087    (0.094)              -0.041             -0.024
      (12)   corr(∆iN
                    t ,    ∆qtO )       -0.065   (0.112)              -0.202             -0.007
      (13)   corr(∆iO
                    t ,    ∆qtN )       -0.067   (0.138)              -0.036             -0.026
      (14)   corr(∆iO
                    t ,    ∆qtO )       -0.357   (0.246)              -0.068             0.015
      (15)   corr(∆qtN ,   ∆qtO )       -0.126   (0.089)              0.012              0.328
      (16)   corr(∆pt ,∆pt−1 )          -0.027   (0.088)              -0.037             -0.133
      (17)   corr(∆iN    N
                    t ,∆it−1 )          0.119    (0.135)              0.008              0.001
      (18)   corr(∆iO    O
                    t ,∆it−1 )          0.252    (0.110)              0.010              -0.002
      (19)                N )
             corr(∆qtN ,∆qt−1           0.643    (0.113)              0.339              0.420
      (20)   corr(∆qtO ,∆qt−1
                          O )           0.349    (0.154)              0.395              -0.401
      (21)   E [It / (Pt Qt )]          0.102    ( 0.016)             0.056              0.026

Notes: This table presents key targeted moments from the data and the model-implied moments when
observations from Saudi Arabia and Venezuela are excluded. Newey-West standard errors computed
with 5-year lags are reported in parenthesis. xt represents the logarithm of Xt , ∆xt is equal to xt − xt−1 .




                                                           57
B      Balanced growth path

In the non-stochastic steady state of our models, oil production is constant. In this section, we
extend the competitive version of our model so that it features a balanced growth path. Along the
non-stochastic balanced growth path, the levels of production, reserves, and exploration capital, as
well as investment and production costs, grow at a constant rate, while prices and extraction rates
are constant. The model features investment-specific technological progress as well as growth in
oil demand.
     The difference between the balanced growth model and our benchmark model narrows down
to two equations, the law of motion for exploration capital and the demand function. The law of
motion for exploration capital is given by

                        i
                                                                α         1−α
                       Xt+1 = (1 − λ)Xti + At Iti                     Li             ,     i ∈ {O, N } .                         (27)

In our benchmark model At = 1 for all t. Here, instead, we assume that At grows at a constant
rate gA so that
                                                     ln At+1 = ln At + gA ,

for all t. The demand function is given by

                                                                         −1
                                             Pt = exp dAR2   exp (dgt ) Qt  ,
                                                           
                                                       t                                                                         (28)

where dAR2
       t   is a stochastic demand component that follows an AR(2) process, which corresponds
to dt in our benchmark model. The second demand component, dgt , grows at a constant rate gd so
that
                                                         dgt+1 − dgt = gd ,

                                                                                                                      1
for all t. To ensure the existence of a balanced growth path, we assume that gd =                                  (1−α) gA .    As
we show below, this assumption implies that prices and extraction rates are constant along the
non-stochastic balanced growth path.
     The Bellman equation of each firm is
                                                                               η
                                                         −u                θ
                                                                                     K + βEV K 0 , X 0 , θ0 , A0 , u0 ; Ω0 ,
                                                                                                                          
    V (K, X, θ, A, u; Ω) =       max             P θKe        −I −ψ                                                              (29)
                             {K 0 ,X 0 ,θ0 ,I}                            θss
                                   s.t.          K 0 = (1 − θe−u )K + λX 0 ,

                                                 X 0 = (1 − λ)X + AI α L1−α ,




                                                                58
where u = 0 for non-OPEC firms.23 The variable Ω denotes the aggregate state of the economy,
which consists of the aggregate level of reserves and exploration capital of non-OPEC and OPEC
firms, the current extraction rates chosen by OPEC and non-OPEC firms, the state of the stochastic
supply and demand shocks, and the level of investment technology A and demand dg . To make
the value function stationary over time we need to normalize it.
                                                                           1
       Let the scaled variable Z̃ = egt Z, where g =                      1−α gA ,    and let Ṽ (·) = egt V (·). The scaled Bellman
equation is given by
                                                                                           η
                               
                                                                  −u                   θ                                                
        Ṽ K̃, X̃, θ, u; Ω̃ =             max               P θK̃e     − I˜ − ψ                  K̃ + eg βEṼ K̃ 0 , X̃ 0 , θ0 , u0 ; Ω̃0 ,
                                     {K̃ 0 ,X̃ 0 ,θ0 ,I˜}                             θss

                                             s.t.           K̃ 0 = e−g (1 − e−u θ)K̃ + λX̃ 0 ,

                                                            X̃ 0 = e−g (1 − λ)X̃ + e−g I˜α L1−α ,

where Ω̃ is the aggregate state of the economy, which contains the scaled aggregate levels of OPEC
and non-OPEC reserves and exploration capital, the extraction rates of OPEC and non-OPEC,
and information about the stochastic processes of the AR(2) demand and supply shocks. As we
confirm below, the scaled value function above and the scaled variables are constant in the non-
stochastic steady state.
       The first-order conditions (FOCs) for the firms’ problem are given by:
                                                                          0 η 
                        0            g     0 0 −u0    −g      0 −u0 0        θ
                     [K̃ ]   µ1 = βe E P θ e       + e (1 − θ e )µ1 − ψ            ,                                                          (30)
                                                                            θss
                      [X̃ 0 ]        µ2 = λµ1 + β(1 − λ)Et µ02 ,                                                                              (31)
                                                   1−α
                       ˜
                      [I]           1 = e−g α L/I˜        µ2 ,                                                                                (32)
                                                                 h        0         0
                                                                                          i
                                            η−1
                      [θ0 ]         ηψ θ0       (θss )−η K̃ 0 = E (P 0 e−u − e−g e−u µ01 ) K̃ 0 ,
                                          
                                                                                                                                              (33)

These are the first-order conditions for both OPEC and non-OPEC firms, where u = u0 = 0 for
non-OPEC firms.


Non-stochastic steady state.                    Consider the non-stochastic steady state. Rearranging the FOCs,
we have

                                                                           θP − ψ
                                                              µ1 = βeg                .                                                       (34)
                                                                         1 − β(1 − θ)
  23
       For ease of notation we have omitted the superscripts for OPEC and non-OPEC firms, and use primed variables to
denote a variable in the following period.




                                                                          59
The second FOC can be written as
                                                    λ
                                        µ2 =                µ1 .                             (35)
                                               1 − β(1 − λ)
Substituting into the third FOC, we have
                                     !1−α
                                  I˜                   λ
                                          = e−g α              µ1 .                          (36)
                                  L               1 − β(1 − λ)

The last FOC simplifies to

                                       ηψ (θ)−1 = P − e−g µ1 .                               (37)

The aggregate demand equation in the non-stochastic steady state is
                                          g                     − 1
                                    P = edt θN K N + θO K O             .                    (38)

Since gd = 1 g, we can simplify the aggregate demand equation to
                                                          − 1
                                                              
                                     P = θN K̃ N + θO K̃ O      .                            (39)

Finally, the laws of motion for productive and exploration capital imply
                                      1       α
                             X̃ = g
                                               I˜ (L)1−α ,                                   (40)
                                 e − (1 − λ)
                                     eg           λ        α
                             K̃ = g                        I˜ (L)1−α .                       (41)
                                 e − (1 − θ) eg − (1 − λ)
Combining equations (34) and (37) we get
                                                           θP − ψ
                                    P − ηψ (θ)−1 = β                  .                      (42)
                                                         1 − β(1 − θ)
Rearranging we get                                        
                                                   1−β
                                (1 − β)P =             +β η−β ψ,                             (43)
                                                    θ
or simply
                                                      β
                                    P = ηψ (θ)−1 +       (η − 1)ψ .                          (44)
                                                     1−β
Given P , there is a single value of θ that solves the equation above. This property implies that
in the non-stochastic steady state, the extraction rate is the same (θN = θO ) for OPEC and non-
OPEC firms. Using the equation above together with equations (34) and (36), we can pin down
the investment to land ratios for OPEC and non-OPEC firms.
                                   !1−α
                                I˜             αλ        β
                                        =                    (η − 1)ψ .                      (45)
                                L         1 − β(1 − λ) 1 − β

                                                    60
Substituting into the demand function we get
   h                                 i−                               h                             i    α
                                                   eg θ
       ηψ (θ)−1 +    β                                                               β
                                                              λ               αλ                         1−α
                                                                                                               LN + LO .
                                                                                                                      
                    1−β (η   − 1)ψ         =   eg −(1−θ)   eg −(1−λ)       1−β(1−λ) 1−β (η   − 1)ψ                         (46)

   This equation implicitly pins down the equilibrium rate of extraction along the non-stochastic
balanced growth path. Using the equilibrium extraction rate, we can find all other endogenous
variables using the equations above. Thus, there exists a balanced growth path equilibrium along
which oil prices and extraction rates are constant over time and the levels of reserves, exploration
capital, and production, as well as investment and production costs grow at a constant rate, g =
 1
1−α gA .




                                                                  61
