                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES


              MONETARY POLICY THROUGH PRODUCTION NETWORKS:
                    EVIDENCE FROM THE STOCK MARKET

                                          Ali Ozdagli
                                         Michael Weber

                                      Working Paper 23424
                               http://www.nber.org/papers/w23424

                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Ave
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     May 2017


We thank Enghin Atalay (discussant), David Baqaee (discussant), Susanto Basu, Daniele Bianchi
(discussant), John Campbell, Vasco Carvalho, Anna Cieslak (discussant), Gabe Chodorow-Reich,
Larry Christiano, Marty Eichenbaum, Jose Fillat, Mark Garmaise, Mark Gertler, Basile Grassi
(discussant), Dan Greenwald, Lars Hansen, Sam Hartzmark, Bernard Herskovic (discussant),
Simon Gilchrist, Michael Gofman, Narayana Kocherlakota, Oleksiy Kryvtsov, Sydney
Ludvigson, Hanno Lustig, Emanuel Moench, Atif Mian, Rick Mishkin, Stefan Nagel, Lubos
Pastor, Paolo Pasquariello (discussant), Carolin Pflueger (discussant), David Romer, Eric
Swanson, Yinan Su, Alireza Tahbaz-Salehi (discussant), Stijn Van Nieuwerburgh (discussant),
Paul Whelan (discussant), Toni Whited, and conference and seminar participants at AEA 2017,
Adam Smith Asset Pricing Workshop 2016, Asset Prices and the Macro Economy Conference,
Banco Central de Colombia, Bank of Canada, Bank for International Settlements, Banque de
France, 2016 Barcelona Summer Forum, 2016 Cambridge-Inet Confernece on Firms in
Macroeconomics, Chicago, Columbia University, Chinese University Hong Kong, City
University Hong Kong, Duke-UNC Asset Pricing Conference, EAFIT University, Econometric
Society NASM 2016, 2016 Ghent Workshop on Empirical Macroeconomics, HKUST, ESMT/
HU Berlin, Insper, NBER Monetary Economics, NBER SI Impulse and Propagation, PUC-Rio,
SED 2016, Texas Finance Festival, UCLA Anderson, University of Michigan, and Ozyegin
University for valuable comments. Weber gratefully acknowledges financial support from the
University of Chicago, the Neubauer Family Foundation, and the Fama-Miller Center. The views
expressed in this paper are the authors and do not necessarily reflect those of the Federal Reserve
Bank of Boston, the Federal Reserve System, the Federal Open Market Committee (FOMC), or
the National Bureau of Economic Research. We thank Will Cassidi, Menaka Hampole and
Stephen Lamb for excellent research assistance.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2017 by Ali Ozdagli and Michael Weber. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to
exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.
Monetary Policy through Production Networks: Evidence from the Stock Market
Ali Ozdagli and Michael Weber
NBER Working Paper No. 23424
May 2017
JEL No. E12,E31,E44,E52,G12,G14

                                        ABSTRACT

Monetary policy shocks have a large impact on stock returns in narrow windows around press
releases by the Federal Reserve. We use spatial autoregressions to decompose the overall effect
of monetary policy shocks into a direct effect and an indirect (network) effect. We attribute
50%-85% of the overall effect to indirect effects. The decomposition is a robust feature of the
data and we confirm large indirect effects in realized cash-flow fundamentals. A simple model
with intermediate inputs guides our empirical strategy. Our findings indicate that production
networks might be an important propagation mechanism of monetary policy to the real economy.


Ali Ozdagli
Federal Reserve Bank of Boston
Research Department
600 Atlantic Avenue, Boston, MA 02210
ali.ozdagli@bos.frb.org

Michael Weber
Booth School of Business
University of Chicago
5807 South Woodlawn Avenue
Chicago, IL 60637
and NBER
michael.weber@chicagobooth.edu
                                  I     Introduction
       Understanding how monetary policy affects the broader economy necessarily
entails understanding both how policy actions affect key financial markets, as well as
how changes in asset prices and returns in these markets in turn affect the behavior
of households, firms, and other decision makers. Ben S. Bernanke (2003)


A growing literature in macroeconomics argues microeconomic shocks might
propagate through the production network and contribute to aggregate fluctuations.
In this paper, we study theoretically and empirically whether the production
network and the input-output structure of the U.S. economy are also an important
propagation mechanism of aggregate shocks in the context of monetary policy.1 For
example, expansionary monetary policy shocks may directly increase the demand
for goods of firms. These firms increase their purchases of intermediate goods in
order to meet the higher demand. Since the input into their production is the
output of firms in other sectors, the producers of intermediate inputs themselves
have to increase production, which results in an increase in demand for goods of
sectors further upstream in the production network. Therefore, a natural question is
whether and to which extent higher-order demand effects through intermediate-input
linkages contribute to the real effects of monetary policy. We attribute 50%–85% of
the overall reaction of stock returns to monetary policy shocks to indirect network
effects.
       We use stock returns as a laboratory to test for the importance of network effects,
because central banks directly and immediately affect financial markets through
interest rates, which then influences households’ consumption decisions and firms’
investment decisions.2 We merge stock price data for individual firms from NYSE
   1
      As mentioned by Acemoglu, Akcigit, and Kerr (2015), “the role of the input-output and the
geographic networks in the propagation of industry-level (micro) shocks suggests that these networks
may also be playing a role in the amplification of macro shocks –such as aggregate demand, monetary
and financial shocks– which appears a generally understudied area.”
    2
      Bernanke and Kuttner (2005) show an unanticipated 25-basis-point decrease in the federal
funds rate leads to an increase in the CRSP value-weighted index of more than 1% within minutes
of the FOMC announcement. Bjørnland and Leitemo (2009) use structural VARs to identify the
effect of monetary policy shocks on stock returns, and find values as high as 2.25%.


                                                 2
Trade and Quote (taq) with the data from the benchmark input-output tables of the
Bureau of Economic Analysis (BEA) and identify monetary policy shocks as changes
in futures on the federal funds rates, the main policy instrument of the Fed. A simple
model of production with intermediate inputs in the spirit of Acemoglu, Carvalho,
Ozdaglar, and Tahbaz-Salehi (2012) guides our empirical analysis.
    We use spatial autoregressions to decompose the overall effect of monetary
policy shocks on stock returns in narrow time windows around press releases of
the Federal Open Market Committee (FOMC) into direct effects and higher-order
network effects. We find large indirect effects that are robust to different sample
periods, event windows, and types of announcements. Our results are similar for
industry-demeaned returns and when we account for the possibility of other common
shocks in the same event window.
    Within the context of our model, we interpret monetary policy shocks as demand
shocks. Consistent with this interpretation, we provide evidence that measured direct
effects of monetary policy are larger for industries selling most of the industry output
directly to end-consumers compared to other industries. The bigger importance of
direct-demand effects for these industries is consistent with our model’s intuition
that indirect-demand effects should be less important for industries “close to end-
consumers.”
    Our baseline findings indicate higher-order demand effects might account for a
substantial fraction of the overall effect of monetary policy shocks on stock returns.
We further support this argument by analyzing similar network effects in ex-post
realized fundamentals, such as sales or operating income. Indirect effects make up
60% of the impact effect of monetary policy shocks on fundamentals, a result robust
to different measures of fundamentals and weighting schemes. The indirect response
increases up to seven quarters after the monetary policy shocks but loses statistical
significance after eight quarters.
    Our model implies industries with higher average profitability should have lower
sensitivities to monetary policy shocks due to a leverage effect. When we add
measures of average industry profitability and their interaction with the monetary
policy shock, we find supportive evidence for this prediction. Firms in industries with


                                           3
average profitability have a sensitivity to monetary policy shocks that is reduced by
55% relative to our baseline analysis. Crucially, after we account for differences in the
sensitivity to monetary policy shocks due to profitability, we still find indirect effects
constitute about 80% of the overall responsiveness of industry returns to monetary
shocks.
     A major concern regarding our analysis is that we mechanically assign a large
fraction of the overall effect of monetary policy shocks to indirect effects as we regress
industry returns on a weighted average of industry returns. Because the empirical
input-output matrix is sparse and few big sectors are important suppliers to the
rest of the economy (see Acemoglu et al. (2012) and Gabaix (2011)), we construct
a pseudo input-output matrix with these two characteristics. Using this pseudo
input-output matrix, we find indirect effects account now for only 18% compared
to more than 80% in our baseline estimation, suggesting a mechanical correlation
between industries does not drive our main results.
     Finally, we show our empirical results on the relative importance of direct versus
indirect effects are consistent with data we simulate from a dynamic model with
nominal frictions. Specifically, we simulate data from the model under different
assumptions regarding structural parameters, run our baseline specifications on
simulated data using the actual input-output matrix as the spatial-weighting matrix,
and perform the decomposition into indirect and direct effects. Across different
specifications, we find indirect effects constitute 70% to 80% of the overall effect.
     Our findings indicate production networks might not only be important for the
propagation of idiosyncratic shocks, but might also be a propagation mechanism of
monetary policy to the real economy. The network effects we document in firm and
industry fundamentals indicate monetary policy shocks affect the real economy at
least partially through demand effects and not only through changes in risk premia,
consistent with findings in Bernanke and Kuttner (2005) and Weber (2015).

A.     Related Literature
     A growing literature in macroeconomics argues microeconomic shocks might
propagate through the production network and contribute to aggregate fluctuations.


                                            4
The standard view is that idiosyncratic shocks are irrelevant, because the law of
large numbers applies (Lucas (1977)). However, recent work by Gabaix (2011) and
Acemoglu et al. (2012) building on Long and Plosser (1983) and Horvath (1998)
shows that the law of large numbers does not readily apply when the firm-size
distribution or the importance of sectors as suppliers of intermediate inputs to the
rest of the economy is fat-tailed (see Figure A.1 in the Online Appendix). Pasten,
Schoenle, and Weber (2017a) extend their analysis to allow for heterogeneity in
price stickiness across sectors and identify a frictional origin of aggregate fluctuations.
Acemoglu, Akcigit, and Kerr (2015) and Barrot and Sauvagnat (2016) show networks
are empirically important for aggregate fluctuations as well as for the propagation
of federal spending, trade, technology, and knowledge shocks. Kelly, Lustig, and
Van Nieuwerburgh (2013) study the joint dynamics of the firm-size distribution and
stock return volatilities, and Herskovic, Kelly, Lustig, and Van Nieuwerburgh (2016)
and Herskovic (2015) study the asset-pricing implications.3
     We also relate to the large literature investigating the effect of monetary shocks
on asset prices. In a seminal study, Cook and Hahn (1989) use an event-study
framework to examine the effects of changes in the federal funds rate on bond
rates using a daily event window. They show changes in the federal funds target
rate are associated with changes in interest rates in the same direction, with larger
effects at the short end of the yield curve. Bernanke and Kuttner (2005)—also
using a daily event window—focus on unexpected changes in the federal funds target
rate. They find that an unexpected interest-rate cut of 25 basis points leads to
an increase in the CRSP value-weighted market index of about 1 percentage point.
Gürkaynak, Sack, and Swanson (2005) focus on intraday event windows and find
effects of similar magnitudes for the S&P500. Pasquariello and Vega (2007) study
the importance of order flow on price formation in bond markets on FOMC and
other macro announcement days. Neuhierl and Weber (2017) show that changes in
long-term federal funds futures relative to changes in short-term federal funds futures
are powerful in moving markets.
   3
     Other recent contributions to this fast-growing literature are Acemoglu, Ozdaglar, and Tahbaz-
Salehi (2017); Atalay (2015); Baqaee (2016); Bigio and La’O (2016); Carvalho and Gabaix (2013);
Carvalho and Grassi (2015); and Baqaee and Farhi (2017).


                                                5
    Besides the effect on the level of the stock market, researchers have recently
also studied cross-sectional differences in the response to monetary policy. Ehrmann
and Fratzscher (2004) and Ippolito, Ozdagli, and Perez (2017), among others, show
that firms with large bank debt and low cash flows, as well as small firms and firms
with low credit ratings, high price-earnings multiples, and Tobin’s q, show a higher
sensitivity to monetary policy shocks, which is in line with bank-lending, balance-
sheet, and interest-rate channels of monetary policy. Gorodnichenko and Weber
(2016) show that firms with stickier output prices have more volatile cash flows and
higher conditional volatility in narrow event windows around FOMC announcements.
    We make the following three contributions to the literature. First, we provide
evidence that production networks are also an important propagation channel for
aggregate demand shocks. The existing literature so far has focused exclusively
on the propagation of micro (supply) shocks. In production-based models, supply
shocks travel downstream from suppliers to customers, whereas demand shocks
travel upstream in the production network. Second, we show that higher-order
demand effects are responsible for a large part of the overall effect of monetary
policy shocks on the stock market. Our findings open up novel avenues to develop
asset-pricing theories based on the network feature of the economy. Third, we make
a methodological contribution and use methods from spatial econometrics—spatial
autoregressions—to study questions in macroeconomics and finance.


                              II    Framework
    Firms increase their purchases of intermediate goods when they face increased
demand for their production good in models with intermediate production. The input
into production is the output of firms in other sectors. The producers of intermediate
inputs themselves have to increase production to satisfy the increased demand for
their goods, which results in higher demand for the output of other sectors.
    Expansionary monetary policy shocks, therefore, directly increase the demand
for goods of firms selling to consumers, but also lead indirectly to higher-order
demand effects through increased demand for intermediate inputs, which can
rationalize the large and cross-sectionally heterogenous effects of monetary policy

                                          6
shocks on stock market returns. This section first discusses how we measure monetary
policy shocks and then demonstrates how we identify direct and indirect effects using
spatial autoregressions (SARs).4 Section III shows how the SAR specification arises
naturally from a model of production networks.

A.      Monetary Policy Shocks
       Identification of unanticipated, presumably exogenous shocks to monetary policy
is central to our analysis. In standard macroeconomic contexts (e.g., structural
vector autoregressions), one may achieve identification by appealing to minimum
delay restrictions whereby monetary policy is assumed to be unable to influence
the economy (e.g., real GDP or unemployment rate) within a month or a quarter.
However, asset prices are likely to respond to changes in monetary policy within
minutes.
       To address this identification challenge, we employ an event-study approach in
the tradition of Cook and Hahn (1989) and more recently Bernanke and Kuttner
(2005). Specifically, we examine the behavior of returns and changes in the Fed’s
policy instrument in narrow time windows around FOMC press releases when the
only relevant shock (if any) is likely due to changes in monetary policy. To isolate the
unanticipated part of the announced changes in the policy rate, we use federal funds
futures, which provide a high-frequency market-based measure of the anticipated
path of the federal funds rate.
       We calculate the surprise component of the announced change in the federal
funds rate as
                                      D      0          0
                              vt =       (f ft+∆t+ − f ft−∆t− ),                               (1)
                                     D−t
                                                             0
where t is the time when the FOMC issues an announcement, f ft+∆t+ is the federal

                                               0
funds futures implied rate shortly after t, f ft−∆t− is the federal funds futures implied


rate just before t, and D is the number of days in the month. The D/(D − t) term
adjusts for the fact that the federal funds futures settle on the average effective
overnight federal funds rate.
   4
    Denbee, Julliard, Li, and Yuan (2014) use SARs to study systemic liquidity risk in the Sterling
interbank market.


                                                7
B.       Spatial Autoregressions
     We use methods from spatial econometrics to decompose the overall stock
market reaction into a direct demand effect and higher-order effects. The spatial
autoregressive model is given by

                                    yt = βvt + ρW 0 yt + εt ,                     (2)

which implies the data-generating process

                          yt = (In − ρW 0 )−1 βvt + (In − ρW 0 )−1 εt
                             N
                          εt ∼ (0, σ 2 In ).

y is a vector of n industry returns around FOMC press releases, v is a vector of
monetary policy shocks, and W 0 is a row-normalized spatial-weighting matrix. W
corresponds to the BEA input-output matrix, which we describe in section IV.
     We can interpret parameter estimates in linear regression models as partial
derivatives of the dependent variable with respect to the independent variable. The
interpretation of parameters in a spatial model is less straightforward, because they
incorporate information from related industries (or neighboring regions in a spatial
application). We can see the complication more clearly when we re-write equation
(2) as

                                    y = S(W 0 )v + V (W 0 )ε,

where we omit time subscripts for brevity and

                  S(W 0 ) = V (W 0 )β                                             (3)
                  V (W 0 ) = (In − ρW 0 )−1 = In + ρW 0 + ρ2 (W 0 )2 + . . .      (4)

     To illustrate, we focus on a simple example with three industries. We can
expand the data-generating process to
                                                               
         y1           S(W 0 )11 S(W 0 )12 S(W 0 )13             v
                                            
      y3  = S(W 0 )21 S(W 0 )22 S(W 0 )23  ×  v  + V (W 0 )ε,
                                            
                   0         0         0
       y3      S(W )31 S(W )32 S(W )33             v



                                               8
where S(W 0 )ij denotes the ij th element of the matrix S(W 0 ).
     We focus on industry 1,

                   y1 = S(W 0 )1,1 v + S(W 0 )1,2 v + S(W 0 )1,3 v + V (W 0 )1 ε,    (5)

where V (W 0 )i denotes the ith row of matrix V (W 0 ).
     We see from equation (5) that the response of returns to a monetary policy
shock v in industry 1 (y1 ) depends on the reaction of other industries to the same
shock. In particular, S(W 0 )1,1 gives the reaction of industry 1 to the monetary policy
shock, v, as if it were the only industry directly affected by the monetary policy
shock. S(W 0 )1,2 , instead, gives the reaction of industry 1 to the monetary policy
shock as if industry 2 were the only industry directly affected by the shock. This
entry of the matrix measures the spillover or indirect effect of monetary policy on
industry 1 through intermediate input linkages, that is, the demand of industry 2 for
goods industry 1 produces. Similarly, S(W 0 )1,3 measures the higher-order demand
effect originating from industry 3. Therefore, S(W 0 )1,1 gives the direct effect of the
monetary policy shock, v, whereas S(W 0 )1,2 and S(W 0 )1,3 give the indirect effects due
to industry 1’s exposure to industry 2 and industry 3 through input-output networks.
     The overall response of industries to monetary policy shocks depends on the
input-output matrix W , which governs the response of industry returns to monetary
policy shocks via its effect on intermediate-input production; the parameter ρ, which
determines the strength of spillover effects; and the parameter β. The diagonal
elements of S(W 0 ) contain the direct effect of monetary policy shocks on industry
returns, and the off-diagonal elements present indirect effects. We follow Pace and
LeSage (2006) and define three scalars to measure the overall, direct, and indirect
effects:
     Average direct effect:         the average of the diagonal elements of S(W 0 ):
1
n
  tr(S(W 0 )),   where tr is the trace of a matrix.
     Average total effect: the sum across the ith row of S(W 0 ) represents the total
impact on industry i from the monetary policy shock. n of these sums exist, which
we represent by the column vector cr = S(W 0 )ιn , where ιn is a vector of ones. We
define the average total impact then as n1 ι0n cr .


                                                 9
     Average indirect effect: the difference between the average total effect and the
average indirect effect.
     The definition of average direct and indirect effects corresponds to average
partial derivatives. The average direct effect also includes spillover effects of other
industry returns on own industry returns and therefore results in conservative
estimates of network effects.
     We estimate the following empirical specification to assess whether monetary
policy might result in higher-order demand effects:

                      rt = β0 + β1 × vt + ρ × W 0 × rt + errort ,                  (6)
                                                                              −
where rt is a vector of industry returns, rt = (rit )N
                                                     1 in the interval [t − ∆t ,t +

∆t+ ] around event t, vt is the monetary policy shock defined above, and W is the
industry-by-industry input-output table from the BEA. We estimate the model using
maximum likelihood. We bootstrap standard errors, sampling events at random, and
re-estimate the model 500 times for samples with the same number of events as our
empirical sample.


           III      The Benchmark Network Model
     This section develops a static model with intermediate inputs in which money
has heterogeneous effects on stock prices of firms. The simplicity of the model allows
us to focus on the propagation of (demand) shocks to the real economy via input-
output linkages and motivates our empirical specification. We discuss in section VI
a dynamic version of the model and estimate our baseline empirical specification on
model-simulated data.

A.     Firms and Consumers
     Our setup follows closely Acemoglu et al. (2015) and Carvalho (2014) but
allows for labor in production and adds money to the economy. We also introduce
wage stickiness to get real effects of monetary policy.        We have a one-period
model with variable inputs that each firm can purchase from other firms, including
itself. Therefore, net income determines the stock price. Moreover, the firm has


                                          10
a predetermined fixed nominal obligation. We are agnostic about the origin of the
fixed costs, but they might include rent payments, or payments of nominal debt.
    Firm i’s objective is to maximize profits πi , by choosing homogeneous labor,
l, and intermediate inputs, xij from firms i = 1 . . . N , given prices, {pi }N
                                                                              i=1 for the

goods produced by these firms, and the overall pre-determined wage rate, w,
                                                 N
                                                 X
                   πi = max pi yi −                    pj xij − wli − fi                with    (7)
                                                 j=1
                                   N
                                                 !α
                                          ω
                                   Y
                   yi = liλ              xijij         ,                                        (8)
                                   j=1

where yi is the output of firm i, λ and α are the factor shares, and ωij is the share
of input from firm j in the production of firm i such that N
                                                           P
                                                             j=1 ωij = 1.

    We see in the first-order conditions of the firm a larger factor share in the
production function leads to larger spending on that factor,

                                      αωij Ri = pj xij ,                                        (9)
                                            λRi = wli ,                                        (10)

where Ri ≡ pi yi is the revenue of the firm, and ωij corresponds to the entries of
the input-output matrix, W . A substitution of the first-order conditions into the
objective function gives

                                  πi = (1 − α − λ)Ri − fi .                                    (11)

    The representative consumer maximizes utility
                                                   N
                                                   X
                                          max               log(ci )                           (12)
                                                   i=1

subject to the budget constraint
                           N
                           X                  N
                                              X               N
                                                              X            N
                                                                           X
                                 p i ci = w            li +         πi +         fi .          (13)
                           i=1                   i=1          i=1          i=1

We assume fixed costs are a transfer from firms to consumers, and consumers
passively supply labor to firms and collect income from wages, profits, and fixed
costs.



                                                       11
       The first-order condition is
                      w N
                                   PN
                                                      (1 − α) N
                        P                                    P
                          i=1 li +   i=1 (πi + fi )              i=1 Ri
                 ci =                               =                   ,                    (14)
                                  N pi                      N pi
where the second equality follows from equations (10) and (11).
       The goods-market-clearing condition is
                         N                                     PN
                                         (1 − α) N           α  j=1 ωji pj yj
                                                P
                         X                              R
                                                     i=1 i
               y i = ci +     xji ⇒ yi =                   +                  ,              (15)
                          j=1
                                               N p i              p i

which simplifies to
                                            PN                   N
                                               i=1   Ri          X
                            Ri = (1 − α)                  +α           ωji Rj .              (16)
                                               N                 j=1

Equation (16) shows that shocks to consumer demand, captured by the first term,
can affect the revenues of firm i and then propagate through the production network,
captured by the second term. The role of the production networks depends on both
the size of the customer industries, Rj , and the importance of firm i as a supplier to
these customer industries, α ∗ wji .
       Define W = [ωij ] as the matrix of intermediate input shares and R = (R1, ..., RN )0
as the vector of revenues, which leads to
                                                  P    
                                                            N
                                                      Ri /N i=1
                                                     ..
                                                           
                      (I − αW 0 )R = (1 − α)                                            .   (17)
                                                           
                                                      .     
                                              P        
                                                 N
                                                 i=1 Ri /N
                                                                                  N ×1


B.       Money Supply and Equilibrium Network Effects
       We assume intermediate inputs are financed through trade credit, whereas
consumption goods are purchased with cash.5 Therefore, money supply determines
prices through the following cash-in-advance constraint:
                               N
                               X                          N
                                                          X
                                      pi ci = (1 − α)           Ri = M,                      (18)
                                i=1                       i=1

  5
      See Cooley and Hansen (1989).




                                                12
where M is money supply. Combining equation (18) with the goods-market-clearing
condition (17), we get
                                                 
                                              M/N
                                             . 
                             (I − αW 0 )R =   . 
                                             .                        ≡ m.                (19)
                                              M/N
                                                                N ×1
                               0                           0
       Define π ≡ (π1, ..., πN ) and f ≡ (f1, ..., fN ) . We get
                                                                −1
                      π = (1 − α)R − f = (I − αW 0 )                 (1 − α)m − f,          (20)

which we can log-linearize to get
                                                    −1
                              π̄π̂ = (I − αW 0 )         (1 − α)m̄M̂ .6                     (21)

       Define β ≡ (β1, ..., βN )0 with
                                                (1 − α)m̄
                                         βi =             .                                 (22)
                                                    π̄i
Then,
                                                          −1
                                     π̂ = (I − αW 0 )          β M̂ .                       (23)

Note we can rewrite the reaction of the deviation of net income as

                                   π̂ = β × M̂ + α × W 0 × π̂,                              (24)

which has the form of a spatial autoregression (see equation (2)).
       The changes in net income, that is, the stock returns of firms, react to money
shocks M̂ and the reaction of its customers, W 0 × π̂.


IV        Data
A.       Bureau of Economic Analysis Input and Output Tables
       This section discusses the benchmark input-output (IO) tables that the BEA
at the United States Department of Commerce publishes, as well as how we employ
these tables to create an industry-to-industry matrix of dollar trade flows.7
   6
     Throughout, let x̄ be the deterministic steady-state value, and x̂ be the log deviation from
steady state so that x = x̄ exp (x̂) ≈ x̄ (1 + x̂).
   7
     Pasten, Schoenle, and Weber (2017b) use similar data.


                                                 13
      The BEA produces benchmark input-output tables, which detail the dollar flows
between all producers and purchasers in the United States. Purchasers include
industrial sectors, households, and government entities. The BEA constructs the IO
tables using Census data that are collected every five years. The BEA has published
IO tables every five years beginning in 1982 and ending with the most recent tables
in 2012.
      The IO tables consist of two basic national accounting tables: a “make” table
and a “use” table.     The make table shows the production of commodities by
industries. Rows present industries, and columns present commodities each industry
produces. Looking across columns for a given row, we see all commodities a given
industry produces. The sum of the entries adds up to the industry’s output. Looking
across rows for a given column, we see all industries producing a given commodity.
The sum of the entries adds up to the output of that commodity.
      The use table contains the uses of commodities by intermediate and final users.
The rows in the use table contain the commodities, and the columns show the
industries and final users that utilize them. The sum of the entries in a row is the
output of that commodity. The columns document the products each industry uses
as inputs and the three components of “value added”: compensation of employees,
taxes on production and imports less subsidies, and gross operating surplus. The
sum of the entries in a column adds up to industry output.
      We utilize the IO tables for 1992, 1997, and 2002 to create an industry network
of trade flows. The BEA defines industries at two levels of aggregation, detailed and
summary accounts. We use the summary accounts in our baselines analysis to create
industry-by-industry trade flows at the four-digit IO industry aggregation. Results
are similar if we use the detailed data.
A.1     Industry Aggregations
      The 1992 IO tables are based on the 1987 SIC codes, the 1997 IO tables are
based on the 1997 NAICS codes, and the 2002 IO tables are based on the 2002 NAICS
codes. The BEA provides concordance tables between SIC and NAICS codes and
IO industry codes. We follow the BEA’s IO classifications with minor modifications
to create our industry classifications for the subsequent estimation. We account for

                                           14
duplicates when SIC and NAICS codes are not as detailed as the IO codes. In some
cases, different IO industry codes are defined by an identical set of SIC or NAICS
codes. For example, for the 2002 IO tables, a given NAICS code maps to both
Dairy farm products (010100) and Cotton (020100). We aggregate industries with
overlapping SIC and NAICS codes to remove duplicates.
A.2     Identifying Supplier-to-Customer Relationships
      We combine the make and use tables to construct an industry-by-industry matrix
that details how much of an industry’s inputs are produced by other industries.
      We use the make table (M AKE) to determine the share of each commodity
c that each industry i produces.       We call this matrix share (SHARE), which
is an industry-by-commodity matrix. We define the market share of industry i’s
production of commodity c as


                       SHARE = M AKE           (I × M AKE)−1
                                                          i,j ,                (25)

where I is a matrix of ones with suitable dimensions.
      We multiply the share and use table (U SE) to calculate the dollar amount that
industry i sells to industry j. We label this matrix revenue share (REV SHARE),
which is a supplier industry-by-consumer industry matrix:


                        REV SHARE = (SHARE × U SE).                            (26)

      We use the revenue-share matrix to calculate the percentage of industry j’s
inputs purchased from industry i, and label the resulting matrix SU P P SHARE:


               SU P P SHARE = REV SHARE            ((M AKE × I)−1   >
                                                               i,j ) .         (27)

SU P P SHARE corresponds to the theoretical W matrix of section III and its
empirical counterpart in section II.




                                          15
B.      Federal Funds Futures
       Federal funds futures started trading on the Chicago Board of Trade in October
1988. These contracts have a face value of $5,000,000. Prices are quoted as 100 minus
the daily average federal funds rate as reported by the Federal Reserve Bank of New
York. Federal funds futures face limited counterparty risk due to daily marking to
market and collateral requirements by the exchange.
       The FOMC has eight scheduled meetings per year and, starting with the first
meeting in 1995, most press releases are issued around 2:15 p.m. ET. Table A.1 in the
online appendix reports event dates, time stamps of the press releases, actual target
rates changes, and expected and unexpected changes for a tight (30 minutes) and
wide (60 minutes) event windows. We obtained these statistics from Gorodnichenko
and Weber (2016).

C.      Event Returns
       We sample returns for all common stock trading on NYSE, Amex, or Nasdaq for
all event dates. We link the CRSP identifier to the ticker of the NYSE taq database
via historical CUSIPs (an alphanumeric code identifying North American securities).
NYSE taq contains all trades and quotes for all securities traded on NYSE, Amex,
and the Nasdaq National Market System. We use the last trade observation before
the start of the event window and the first trade observations after the end of the
event window to calculate event returns. For the five event dates for which the press
release was issued before the start of the trading session (all intermeeting releases in
the easing cycle starting in 2007; see Table A.1 in the online appendix), we calculate
event returns using closing prices of the previous trading day and prices at 10:00
a.m. of the event day.8 We exclude 0 event returns to make sure stale returns do not
drive our results. We aggregate individual stock returns to industry returns following
the BEA industry definition. We have on average 61–71 industries, depending on
whether we use SIC or NAICS codes for the aggregation. We calculate both equally
   8
    Intermeeting policy decisions are special in several respects, as we discuss later. Markets might
therefore need additional time to incorporate fully the information contained in the FOMC press
release into prices. In a robustness check, we calculate event returns using opening prices on the
event date. Result do not change materially.



                                                 16
weighted and value-weighted industry returns. We use the market cap at the end of
the previous trading day or calendar month.
       Our sample period ranges from February 2, 1994, the first FOMC press release
in 1994, to December 16, 2008, the last announcement in 2008, for a total of 129
FOMC meetings. We exclude the rate cut of September 17, 2001—the first trading
day after the terrorist attacks of September 11, 2001. Our sample starts in 1994
because our tick-by-tick stock price data are not available before 1993, and the
FOMC changed the way it communicates its policy decisions. Prior to 1994, the
market became aware of changes in the federal funds target rate through the size and
the type of open-market operations of the New York Fed’s trading desk. Moreover,
most of the changes in the federal funds target rate took place on non-meeting days.
With the first meeting in 1994, the FOMC started to communicate its decision by
issuing press releases after every meeting and policy decision. Therefore, the start of
our sample eliminates almost all timing ambiguity (besides the nine intermeeting
policy decisions). The increased transparency and predictability makes the use
of our intraday identification scheme more appealing, because our identification
assumptions are more likely to hold.
       Figure A.2 in the Online Appendix is a scatterplot of CRSP index event
returns versus monetary policy shocks for a 30 minutes event window.9 This figure
shows a clear negative relation between monetary policy shocks and stock returns
on regular FOMC meetings and on policy reversal dates in line with Bernanke
and Kuttner (2005) and Gürkaynak et al. (2005).                    The scatterplot, however,
also documents anything that goes on intermeeting announcement days: negative
(positive) monetary policy shocks induce positive and negative stock market reactions
with about equal probabilities. Faust et al. (2004) find monetary policy surprises
do have predictive power for industrial production on intermeeting announcement
days.     They argue the FOMC must have strong incentives to pursue a policy
action on unscheduled meetings, because the maximum time span to the next
regular meeting is only six weeks. They conclude the FOMC might have superior
information on intermeeting event days. The stock market reaction to monetary
  9
      All results are identical for a event window of 60 minutes.


                                                  17
policy announcements is therefore less of a reaction to monetary policy shocks than
it is to news about the state of the economy. We control for intermeeting policy
actions in section V because our predictions are only for exogenous monetary policy
shocks.


                        V      Empirical Results
A.     Aggregate Stock Market
     We first document the effects of monetary policy shocks on the return of the
CRSP value-weighted index. Table 1 reports results from regressing returns of the
CRSP value-weighted index in the 30-minute event window around the FOMC press
releases on monetary policy surprises for different sample periods. Column (1) shows
a federal funds target rate that is 1 percentage point higher than expected leads
to a drop in stock prices of roughly 3 percentage points. The reaction of stock
returns to monetary policy shocks is somewhat muted compared to the results in
the literature, and the explanatory power is rather weak. Restricting our sample
period to 1994-2004, we can replicate the results of Bernanke and Kuttner (2005),
Gürkaynak et al. (2005), and others: a 25 bps unexpected cut in interest rates leads
to an increase of the CRSP value-weighted index of more than 1.4%. Monetary
policy shocks explain close to 50% of the variation in stock returns in a 30-minute
event window for this sample period. In column (3), we find a lower responsiveness
of stock returns on monetary policy shocks for a sample ending in 2000, but this
sample also only includes 50 observations. We will focus for most of our analysis
on the 1994–2004 sample to compare our results with results in the literature and
sidestep any concerns related to the Great Recession and the zero-lower bounds on
nominal interest rates. We discuss the robustness of our findings to different sample
periods below.

B.    Baseline
     Panel A of Table 2 presents results for the baseline specification (equation (6))
in which we regress event returns at the industry level on monetary policy surprises
(column (1)) and a weighted average of industry returns (columns (2)–(4)). We

                                         18
report bootstrapped standard errors in parentheses. Federal funds rates that are 25
bps higher than expected lead to an average drop in industry returns of 1 percentage
point, consistent with the result for the overall market (column (1)). We see in
column (2) that the estimates for β as well as for ρ are highly statistically significant
for equally weighted industry returns. Economically, a negative estimate of β means
tighter-than-expected monetary policy leads to a drop in stock returns. The positive
estimate of ρ means this effect is propagated through the production network: higher-
than-expected federal funds rates result in a drop in industry returns, which leads
to an additional drop in industry returns through spillover effects. Magnitudes of
point estimates are similar for value-weighted returns, independent of whether we use
the previous month or previous trading day market capitalization to determine the
weights. In the following, we use value-weighted returns with market capitalizations
from the end of the previous months as weights.
     The positive and statistically significant point estimates of ρ indicate part of
the responsiveness of stock returns to monetary policy shocks might be due to
higher-order network effects. Panel B of Table 2 decomposes the overall effect of
monetary policy shocks on stock returns into direct and indirect effects according to
the decomposition of section II. Network effects are an important driver of the overall
effect of -3.5% to -4.4%. Indirect effects account for roughly 80% of the overall effect
of monetary policy shocks on stock returns.

C.    Additional Results
     We only used the 1992 BEA input-output tables in Table 2 to construct the
spatial-weighting matrix. In Table 3, we also use the 1997 and 2002 BEA tables.
Column (1) only uses the 1997 input-output tables, and column (2) only uses the 2002
input-output tables, whereas column (3) employs a time-varying spatial-weighting
matrix. We use the 1992 tables until 1997, the 1997 tables until 2002, and the
2002 tables afterwards. Point estimates for the networks parameter ρ are highly
statistically significant and vary between 0.60 and 0.67. Economically, the estimates
of Table 3 imply that between 53% and 61% of the overall effect of monetary policy
shocks comes from higher-order demand effects. In the following tables, we will focus


                                           19
on a constant spatial-weighting matrix using the 1992 input-output tables, which is
fully predetermined with respect to our empirical sample.

D.        Subsample Analysis
     The sensitivity of stock returns to monetary policy shocks varies across types
of events and shocks and might influence the importance of higher-order demand
effects. Table 4 contains results for different event types. Column (1) focuses on
reversals in monetary policy, such as the first increase in federal funds rates after a
series of decreasing or constant rates. We see that reversals lead to a larger impact
of monetary policy shocks on stock returns. The point estimate for β almost triples
compared to the overall sample (see column (3) of Table 2) with a similar point
estimate for ρ of 0.77. A federal funds rate that is 1 percentage point higher than
expected leads to an average drop in industry returns of 6.9%. Higher-order demand
effects account for more than 70% of this overall sensitivity.
     We see in column (2) that monetary policy has no effect on stock returns on
unscheduled intermeeting dates, consistent with Figure A.2 in the Online Appendix
and results in the literature. Changes in target rates on unscheduled meetings might
signal news about the state of the economy. The stock market might react to the
news component rather than the monetary policy surprise.
     Empirically, monetary policy has become more predictable over time because
of increased transparency and communication by the Fed and a higher degree of
monetary policy smoothing (see Figure A.3 in the Online Appendix). Many policy
shocks are small in size. To ensure these observations do not drive the large effects
of higher-order demand effects, we restrict our sample to events with shocks larger
than 5 basis points in absolute value in column (3). Economic significance remains
stable when we exclude small policy surprises. Statistical significance is sparse for
the estimate of β, which might be due to reduced power as we lose more than 70% of
our sample. Nevertheless, the indirect effect still constitutes about 80% of the total
effect.
     We see in columns (4) and (5) the response of stock returns to monetary policy
shocks is asymmetric. Tighter-than-expected monetary policy has a weaker effect


                                          20
on stock returns compared to looser-than-expected monetary policy. A federal funds
rate that is 1 percentage point lower than expected leads to an average increase in
industry returns of more than 5%, which is highly statistically significant, with 80%
due to network effects. The effect of tighter monetary policy in column (4) is not
statistically significant, which is unlikely due to lower power, because both sample
sizes are similar in size.

E.     Robustness
     We focus on industry returns, and the empirical input-output matrix has non-
zero entries on the diagonal, which means, for example, that a car manufacturer uses
tires in the production process. One concern is that those within-industry demand
effects are largely responsible for the importance of network effects. In column (1)
of Table 5, we constrain the diagonal entries of the input-output matrix to zero but
ensure intermediate input shares still add up to 1. By construction, we now associate
a larger part of the overall effect of monetary policy shocks on stocks returns of 4%
with direct demand effects (see series expansion in equation (4)). However, indirect
effects still make up more than 50% of this overall effect. The result is reassuring.
Even if we bias our specification against finding network effects, we still attribute
economically large parts of the overall stock market reaction to higher-order effects.
     We constrain the sensitivity of different industries to monetary policy shocks
to be equal across industries. Industries might differ in their sensitivities because
of differences in their cyclicality of demand or durability of output (see D’Acunto,
Hoang, and Weber (2017)). In column (2) of Table 5, we look at industry-adjusted
returns to control for those systematic differences. We first regress industry returns
on an industry dummy and then use the industry-demeaned returns as the left-hand-
side variable in equation (6). The adjustment has little impact on point estimates,
overall response to monetary policy shocks, and relative importance of direct and
indirect effects.
     In column (3), we study market-adjusted returns. By construction, we now no
longer find a statistically significant reaction of average industry returns to monetary
policy shocks (β is no longer statistically significant), because all industries together


                                           21
constitute the market. However, we do find that industries whose customers are more
responsive to monetary policy shocks relative to the overall response of the market
are also more responsive to monetary policy shocks. In fact, the estimate for ρ is
close to the estimate in our baseline analysis.
     We estimate our baseline model for a sample of scheduled events from 1994 to
2008 in column (4). The point estimate for ρ is identical to the estimate for a sample
ending in 2004, and the overall responsiveness of the stock market to monetary policy
shocks is similar as well. Indirect effects contribute more than 73% to the overall
effect of 4.27%.
     We also estimated specifications allowing for heteroskedastic error terms.
Estimates of ρ are around 0.70, and we assign 70% of the overall effect of monetary
policy shocks to indirect effects. For the sake of brevity, we do not report these
results.

F.    Placebo Test
     Empirically, we find networks are important for the propagation of monetary
policy shocks to the stock market. The effect survives a series of robustness checks,
such as looking at industry-adjusted returns and focusing on different event types
and sample periods. One major concern, however, is that we mechanically find a
large estimate of ρ, and hence, network effects, as we regress industry returns on a
weighted average of industry returns. We construct a pseudo input-output matrix
to see whether we mechanically attribute large parts of the stock market sensitivity
to monetary policy shocks to network effects.
     The empirical input-output matrix is sparse and few sectors are important
suppliers to the rest of the economy (see Figure A.1 in the Online Appendix and
Acemoglu et al. (2012) and Gabaix (2011)). We create a pseudo input-output matrix
with those two features. Specifically, we condition on the number of non-zero entries
in the empirical input-output matrix and draw random numbers from a generalized
Pareto distribution with a tail index parameter of 2.94068 and a scale parameter
of 0.000100821. We estimate these parameter values by minimizing the squared
distance between the empirical and estimated distribution function using the 1992


                                          22
input-output matrix .
     We see in column (1) of Table 6 that part of the effect of monetary policy shocks
on stock returns that we attribute to indirect effects might be due to a bias in our
estimation. However, we also see this bias is most likely small. We estimate a ρ of
0.21, which is more than four times smaller than our baseline estimate of 0.87. The
decomposition of the overall effect into direct and indirect effects assigns only 17%
of the total effect of monetary policy shocks on the stock market to indirect effects,
compared to more than 80% for our baseline estimate (see column (3) Table 2).
     Constructing a pseudo-spatial-weighting matrix by drawing random numbers
from a fitted distribution might alter the sector-size distribution or destroy linkages
across sectors. Columns (2) and (3) of Table 6 therefore take the actual input-output
matrix and only permute the columns and rows, respectively. Even in cases in which
we keep economic linkages across sectors intact, we still find point estimates of ρ
that are only 40% of our baseline estimate and indirect effects constituting less than
40% of the overall response of industry returns to monetary policy shocks. These
results suggest the particular structure of the input-output linkages is the main factor
resulting in high indirect effects of monetary policy.

G.     Model-Implied Sensitivities and Heterogeneity
     So far, we have estimated a constant exposure of industry returns to monetary
policy shocks. Industries might have heterogeneous sensitivities to changes in interest
rates. In fact, the model we develop in section III predicts a lower sensitivity of
                                                                                (1−α)m̄
industry returns for industries that are on average more profitable: βi =          π̄i
                                                                                        .
In addition to the robustness checks we report above addressing the issue of
heterogeneity in industry sensitivities, we now want to test the prediction of the
model directly and check whether imposing a constant beta across industries biases
our baseline findings.
     We first calculate firm-level measures of profitability as net sales minus costs of
goods sold scaled by total assets, using annual balance sheet-data from Compustat.
We then value-weight each firm-level observation by the market capitalization of the
firm at the end of the calendar year to get an annual measure of industry profitability.


                                          23
Lastly, we take the average across the years in our sample to arrive at the empirical
counterpart of the average profitability the model implies.
    To see whether we indeed find a lower sensitivity of returns to monetary policy
shocks for industries with higher profitability, we add the level of profitability and
the interaction of it with our monetary policy shock to our baseline estimation,

       rit = β0 + β1 × vt + β2 × profi + β3 × profi × vt + ρ × W 0 × rt + εit .

    We see in column (1) of Table 7 that contractionary monetary policy shocks
result in a drop in industry returns (β1 < 0), which gets propagated through the
production network (ρ > 0), but we also see the response of returns to monetary
policy shocks is less pronounced for industries with higher average profitability
(β3 > 0). The average industry profitability is not associated with returns in a
30-minutes window around FOMC press releases (β2 = 0). The indirect effect is still
the main driver of the overall sensitivity to monetary policy shocks (Panel B). We
only report the decomposition for the sensitivity to monetary policy shocks, which
means the results in Panel B hold for an industry with an average profitability of
0. In unreported results, we find that an industry with the mean average industry
profitability in our sample of 16.67% has an exposure to monetary policy shocks that
is reduced by 55.30% compared to the results in Panel B.
    Imposing a constant beta across industries might bias upwards our estimate of
ρ. Simulations are a simple way to see whether our assumption biases the point
estimates. Specifically, we assume industries have a heterogeneous sensitivity to
monetary policy shocks, which is constant over time. We take our baseline estimate
for β of around -0.60 (see Table 2), assume industry betas are equally distributed
on an interval from -0.80 to -0.40, that is, β1,i ∼ U [−0.80, −0.40] ∀i, and impose
the baseline estimate for ρ. We then simulate industry returns to monetary policy
shocks as

                       rit = β0 + β1,i × vt + ρ × W 0 × rt + εit ,

taking the actual input-output matrix as given. We assume the residuals are normally
distributed with a mean of 0 and standard deviation equal to the standard deviation



                                           24
of the residual of a regression of market returns on monetary policy shocks on the
event days.
     Column (2) of Table 7 reports the results of estimating our baseline SAR model
on simulated data. Imposing a constant beta across industries seems to bias the
estimated monetary policy shock exposure (β) downwards, but crucially for us, has
no impact on the estimate of ρ. The results from this simulation suggest imposing a
constant beta to monetary policy shocks across industries can hardly explain large
indirect effects of monetary policy shocks on industry returns.

H.     Identification through Heteroskedasticity
     Section V.G. allows for potential heterogeneity in the sensitivity of monetary
policy shocks across industries, but it still ignores shocks other than monetary
policy shocks that can generate cross-sectional correlation of returns. Our 30-minute
event window is sufficiently narrow, alleviating concerns of another shock occurring
contemporaneously.
     Nevertheless,     we   perform   an   additional   robustness   check   using   a
heteroskedasticity-based estimator in the spirit of Rigobon and Sack (2003)
and returns in the same 30-minutes window on the day before an FOMC meeting.
Because these pre-event dates are in the FOMC blackout period, monetary policy
is unlikely to drive any movements in stock prices during the 30-minute window on
the pre-event dates.
     If we denote rt as the vector of returns on the event date t and rt− as the vector
of returns on the pre-event date, we can rewrite the SAR model as

                                rt = βvt + ρW 0 rt + εt
                               rt− = ρW 0 rt− + εt− .

     Under the assumption that the covariance of the shocks attributable to news
other than monetary policy remains the same in event and pre-event dates (see
Rigobon and Sack (2003)), the following moment restrictions identify ρ and β:
                              h 0i        h    0
                                                 i
                            E εt εt = E εt− εt− ,
                               E [εt vt ] = 0.


                                           25
The first equation yields N (N + 1) /2 moment restrictions and the second equation
yields N moment restrictions for a total of N (N + 3) /2 moment restrictions for N
industries.
       If we were to use all these moment conditions, we could not estimate the two-
step GMM approach, because the second step would require inverting a singular
covariance matrix.10 Therefore, we follow a more parsimonious approach and take the
cross-sectional average for each of the two equations, giving us an exactly identified
model.
       We see in column (3) of Table 7 that our baseline finding remains the same.
Industry returns decrease in response to contractionary monetary policy shocks, and
this decrease is propagated through the production network. We see in Panel B that
higher-order network effects are responsible for 85% of the total effect.

I.     Closeness to End-Consumers
       We interpret monetary policy shocks as demand shocks.                  Our theory has
predictions for the relative importance of direct and indirect effects as a function of
closeness to end-consumers. The response of industries that sell most of their output
directly to consumers should have most of their overall responsiveness to monetary
policy shocks coming from direct effects. On the contrary, the sensitivity of input
producers, such as the oil sector, should mainly originate due to indirect effects.
We follow Saito, Nirei, Carvalho, and Tahbaz-Salehi (2015) to create an empirical
proxy for the closeness to end-consumers, using data from the BEA. Specifically, we
sort industries into layers by the fraction of output sold directly and indirectly to
end-consumers.11 We assign an industry to layer 1 if it sells more than 90% of its
output to consumers. Layer 2 consists of industries not in layer 1 and selling more
than 90% of their output to consumers directly or indirectly through industries using
the output of industries in layer 2 as input in the production of their output. The
higher-order layers are defined accordingly. We label industries in layers 1–4 “close
to end-consumers.” Industries in layers 5–8 are “far from end-consumers.”
  10
     The weighting matrix in the second stage is the inverse of the square matrix with dimension
N (N + 3) /2 and rank equal to min(N (N + 3) /2, T ) = T , where T is the number of time periods.
  11
     Section II in the online appendix details the procedure.



                                               26
     Table 8 reports our decomposition in direct and indirect effects for both sets
of industries. In column (1), we re-estimate our SAR model of equation (6) for
industries close to end-consumers and report the decomposition. Column (2) repeats
the analysis for industries far from end-consumers. In our baseline analysis, we assign
only 30% of the effect of monetary policy shocks on stock returns to direct effects.
The share of the direct effect increases to about 55% for industries that sell most
of the output directly (or indirectly via inputs in production) to end-consumers.
The direct share drops to only 25% for industries whose outputs are mainly used
as intermediate inputs. The higher relevance of direct effects for industries closer
to end-consumers provides supportive evidence for monetary policy affecting stock
returns through changes in demand and intermediate production.

J.    Fundamentals
     Our baseline findings in Table 2 indicate that higher-order network effects might
be responsible for up to 80% of the reaction of stock returns to monetary policy
shocks. We argue that demand effects account for the propagation of monetary
policy shocks through the production network. Demand effects suggest we should
see similar network effects in ex-post realized fundamentals such as sales or operating
income. For a sample similar to ours, Bernanke and Kuttner (2005) find cash-flow
news is as important as news about future excess returns in explaining the reaction
of the overall stock market to monetary policy shocks.
     Data on cash-flow fundamentals are only available at the quarterly frequency,
and detecting network effects in fundamentals might be difficult. We add shocks vt
in a given quarter and treat this sum as the unanticipated shock to match the lower
frequency following Gorodnichenko and Weber (2016). We denote the quarterly
shock with ṽt . We also construct the following measure of change in profitability
between the previous four quarters and quarters running from t + H to t + H + 3:
                         1
                           Pt+H+3           1
                                              Pt−1
                         4   s=t+H saleis − 4  s=t−4 saleis
             ∆saleit,H =                                    × 100,           (28)
                                      T Ait−1
where sale is net sales at the quarterly frequency, T A is total assets, and H can be
interpreted as the horizon of the response. We create similar measures for operating



                                          27
income OI. We use four quarters before and after the shock to address seasonality
in sales and operating income and scale by total assets to normalize the change.
We construct measures at the sector level, equally and value-weighting cash-flow
fundamentals and total assets. Using these measures of profitability, we estimate the
following modification of our baseline specification:

                 ∆salet,H = β0 + β1 × ṽt + ρ × W 0 × ∆salet,H + errort .                    (29)

       Higher-order network effects correspond to about 60% of the impact effect of
monetary policy shocks on stock returns across different measures of fundamentals
and weightings (Horizon H = 0, Table 9).12 The indirect response increases up
to seven quarters (H = 3) after the monetary policy shock and loses statistical
significance after eight quarters.
       The network effects we document in firm and industry fundamentals indicate
that monetary policy shocks affect the real economy at least partially through
demand effects, consistent with findings in Bernanke and Kuttner (2005) and Weber
(2015).


VI        Dynamic Model: Simulation
       Our static benchmark model predicts a SAR structure in stock returns around
monetary policy announcements and we empirically attribute a large fraction of the
overall stock market response to indirect effects. Our analysis shows that indirect
effects are a robust feature of the data. Even if our robustness checks might have
missed a confounding factor driving our findings, we can abstract from such factors in
a theoretical model and assess whether the size of the indirect effect is quantitatively
rationalizable in a calibrated model in which the network structure is the only source
of comovement across sectors. We sketch the central differences between the static
model of section III and the dynamic model that we bring to the data and provide
details in section I of the online appendix.
  12
    The impact response includes the quarter of the monetary policy shocks and the following three
quarters relative to the four quarters before the FOMC meeting.




                                               28
A.     Economic Environment
     Firms produce goods using labor and intermediate inputs with a CES production
function that flexibly accommodates perfect substitution across factors, a Cobb-
Douglas, or a Leontief production function. The profit function of firms is identical
to the benchmark model.
     Combining the goods-market clearing-condition with the cash-in-advance
constraint for consumption goods gives the following equation for revenues:
                                                    N
                                                    X
                             Ri = (M/N ) +                [αθj ωji Rj ] ,
                                                    j=1

where θi is the share of intermediate inputs in production of industry i, determined
endogenously in equilibrium.
                                                              PN
     This model changes the relationship between                 i=1   Ri and M , and the network
structure affects the reaction of the aggregate stock market to monetary policy
through θi .
     Wages are set dynamically,

                                wt = ψwt−1 + (1 − ψ) wt∗ ,                                   (30)

where wt∗ is the equilibrium wage under flexible wages and we can interpret ψ as a
degree of wage stickiness.
     Money-supply growth is mean-reverting as in Cooley and Hansen (1989),

                                   ∆m̂t = ρ∆m̂t−1 + ut .                                     (31)

     The deviations of net income are
                                             N
                                   m̄       X   p̄i x̄ji           
                           R̂i =       m̂ +                θ̂j + R̂j ,                       (32)
                                   R̄i      j=1
                                                 p̄i ȳi

where p̄i x̄ji /p̄i ȳi is the share of industry i’s revenues from industry j. A larger value
of this term implies industry j is a more important customer of industry i. Monetary
policy affects industry i through industry j via two channels: first, via the effect of
higher revenues of industry j, R̂j ; second, via an additional effect from θ̂j , which
captures the change in relative importance of intermediate inputs for industry j.
The more industry j shifts from labor towards intermediate inputs, the more it will


                                               29
affect the revenues of its suppliers. The online appendix shows how we can rewrite
this equation as a function of the state variables of this system, m̂t and ŵt , after
solving for θ̂ as a function of R̂t .
     Preferences are
                                               ∞           N
                                                                            !
                                               X           X
                        U ({ci,t+s }) = Et            δs         log (ci,t+s ) ,   (33)
                                                s=0        i=1

which results in the “nominal stochastic discount factor” (see Campbell (2000)),
                                              ci,t   pi,t      mt
                             SDFt+s = δ                    =δ      ,               (34)
                                             ci,t+s pi,t+s    mt+1
where the second equality comes from the cash-in-advance constraint. Therefore, the
market value of industry i, with profit stream {πi,t }, is
                                        ∞
                                                         !
                                       X       mt
                           Vi,t = Et       δs      πi,t+s .                        (35)
                                       s=0
                                              mt+s
     We show in the online appendix that stock prices have a spatial structure that
is closely tied to the one for revenues. We solve for the log-linearized version of the
market values using the method of undetermined coefficients.

B.     Calibration
     We calibrate the model to the data and perform a battery of robustness checks.
δ = 0.99, which corresponds to a 1 percent interest rate per quarter. We calibrate
the parameter for the curvature of the production function, α, to a value of 0.85,
using the operating profit margin, 1 − α, of 0.15 in Compustat data (EBITDA /
Sales ratio). We set the autocorrelation and standard deviation of money growth
to ρ = 0.5 and σ = 0.01 following Cooley and Hansen (1989). We calibrate the
parameter for wage stickiness, ψ, to a value of 0.2 to capture the autocorrelation of
nominal wage growth during the time period 1964–2016 (see discussion in the online
appendix). We set r = −0.5 and η = 0.1, so that we have an average labor share
of 0.4 and the elasticity of substitution between intermediate inputs and labor is
smaller than the elasticity of substitution between different intermediate inputs. We
normalize all zi to 1, and we set m/w in steady state to 1.




                                                 30
C.    Simulation Results
     Table 10 presents point estimates for β and ρ as well as the fraction of the
indirect effect from running our baseline SAR regression on simulated data from the
dynamic model. We estimate the model both for industry sales and stock prices.
     In our benchmark calibration, a contractionary monetary policy shock results
in a drop in sales and stock prices (β < 0). This drop is propagated through
the production network (ρ > 0).       Interestingly, the point estimates for ρ and
the fractions of indirect effects are very similar to our empirical estimates across
specifications. The findings are robust across calibrations. In particular, neither
the properties of the processes for money-supply growth and wages, nor variations
in fundamental parameters result in large changes in the fraction of the indirect
effect. The robustness of the measured indirect effect to various parameterizations
suggests our SAR framework is robust to relaxing the assumptions in the benchmark
static model, and indirect effects originating from intermediate input linkages are an
important driver of the sensitivity of industry returns to monetary policy shocks.


                    VII       Concluding Remarks
     Monetary policy has a large and immediate effect on financial markets. A federal
funds rate that is 25 basis points lower than expected leads to an increase in the
aggregate stock market of more than 1%. We document that intermediate input
linkages across sectors introduce higher-order demand effects that are responsible for
a large fraction of the overall effect of monetary policy on financial markets. We
motivate our empirical analysis in a simple model of production in which firms use
intermediate inputs as a production factor.
     A recent literature in macroeconomics shows idiosyncratic shocks are important
for aggregate fluctuations. So far, however, no evidence exists on whether networks
are also important for the propagation of macro shocks, such as monetary policy
shocks and demand shocks more generally.
     We use the stock market response of industries to monetary policy shocks as
a laboratory to test whether production networks matter for the propagation of


                                         31
monetary shocks. Around 70% of the responsiveness of the stock market to monetary
shocks comes from higher-order demand effects. The effects are robust to different
sample periods, event types, and alternative robustness tests. Direct effects are larger
for industries selling most of the industry output directly to end-consumers compared
to other industries, consistent with the intuition that indirect demand effects should
be less important for industries “close to end-consumers.” We document similar
network effects in ex-post realized fundamentals such as sales or operating income.
    Our findings indicate production networks might not only be important for the
propagation of idiosyncratic shocks, but might also be a propagation mechanism of
monetary policy to the real economy. The importance of networks for the propagation
of monetary policy shocks raises interesting questions for future research: Which are
the central sectors for the propagation of monetary policy shocks? How does optimal
monetary policy look in this framework? Can monetary policy fully stabilize the
economy? Should monetary policy target specific sectors?




                                          32
References
Acemoglu, D., U. Akcigit, and W. Kerr (2015). Networks and the macroeconomy:
  An empirical exploration. NBER Macro Annual (forthcoming).
Acemoglu, D., V. M. Carvalho, A. Ozdaglar, and A. Tahbaz-Salehi (2012). The
  network origins of aggregate fluctuations. Econometrica 80 (5), 1977–2016.
Acemoglu, D., A. Ozdaglar, and A. Tahbaz-Salehi (2017). Microeconomic origins of
  macroeconomic tail risks. The American Economic Review 107 (1), 54–108.
Atalay, E. (2015). How important are sectoral shocks? Unpublished Manuscript,
  University of Wisconsin.
Baqaee, D. R. (2016). Cascading failures in production networks. Unpublished
  Manuscript, LSE .
Baqaee, D. R. and E. Farhi (2017). The macroeconomic impact of microeconomic
  shocks: Beyond Hulten’s theorem. Technical report, National Bureau of Economic
  Research.
Barrot, J.-N. and J. Sauvagnat (2016). Input specificity and the propagation
  of idiosyncratic shocks in production networks. The Quarterly Journal of
  Economics 131 (3), 1543–1592.
Bernanke, B. S. and K. N. Kuttner (2005). What explains the stock market’s reaction
  to Federal Reserve policy? The Journal of Finance 60 (3), 1221–1257.
Bigio, S. and J. La’O (2016). Financial frictions in production networks. National
  Bureau of Economic Research, Working Paper (22212).
Bjørnland, H. C. and K. Leitemo (2009). Identifying the interdependence between
  US monetary policy and the stock market. Journal of Monetary Economics 56 (2),
  275–282.
Campbell, J. Y. (2000). Asset pricing at the millennium. The Journal of
  Finance 55 (4), 1515–1567.
Carvalho, V. and X. Gabaix (2013). The great diversification and its undoing. The
  American Economic Review 103 (5), 1697–1727.
Carvalho, V. M. (2014). From micro to macro via production networks. The Journal
  of Economic Perspectives 28 (4), 23–47.
Carvalho, V. M. and B. Grassi (2015). Large firm dynamics and the business cycle.
  Unpublished Manuscript, University of Cambridge.
Cook, T. and T. Hahn (1989). The effect of changes in the federal funds rate target
  on market interest rates in the 1970s. Journal of Monetary Economics 24 (3),
  331–351.
Cooley, T. F. and G. D. Hansen (1989). The inflation tax in a real business cycle
  model. The American Economic Review 79 (4), 733–748.
D’Acunto, F., D. Hoang, and M. Weber (2017). The effect of unconventional fiscal
  policy on consumption expenditure. Unpublished manuscript.
Denbee, E., C. Julliard, Y. Li, and K. Yuan (2014). Network risk and key players:
  A structural analysis of interbank liquidity. Unpublished Manuscript.

                                        33
Ehrmann, M. and M. Fratzscher (2004). Taking stock: Monetary policy transmission
  to equity markets. Journal of Money, Credit, and Banking 36 (4), 719–737.
Faust, J., E. T. Swanson, and J. H. Wright (2004). Do Federal Reserve policy
  surprises reveal superior information about the economy?           Contributions to
  Macroeconomics 4 (1), 1–29.
Gabaix, X. (2011). The granular origins of aggregate fluctuations. Economet-
  rica 79 (3), 733–772.
Gorodnichenko, Y. and M. Weber (2016). Are sticky prices costly? Evidence from
  the stock market. The American Economic Review 106 (1), 165–199.
Gürkaynak, R. S., B. P. Sack, and E. T. Swanson (2005). Do actions speak louder
  than words? International Journal of Central Banking 1 (1), 55–93.
Herskovic, B. (2015).       Networks in production: Asset pricing implications.
  Unpublished manuscript, UCLA.
Herskovic, B., B. T. Kelly, H. Lustig, and S. Van Nieuwerburgh (2016). The common
  factor in idiosyncratic volatility: Quantitative asset pricing implications. Journal
  of Financial Economics 119 (2), 249–283.
Horvath, M. (1998). Cyclicality and sectoral linkages: Aggregate fluctuations from
  independent sectoral shocks. Review of Economic Dynamics 1 (4), 781–808.
Ippolito, F., A. K. Ozdagli, and A. Perez (2017). The transmission of monetary
  policy through bank lending: The floating rate channel. Unpublished Manuscript.
Kelly, B., H. Lustig, and S. Van Nieuwerburgh (2013). Firm volatility in granular
  networks. National Bureau of Economic Research, Working Paper .
Long, J. B. and C. I. Plosser (1983). Real business cycles. The Journal of Political
  Economy 91 (1), 39–69.
Lucas, R. E. (1977). Understanding business cycles. In Carnegie-Rochester conference
  series on public policy, Volume 5, pp. 7–29. Elsevier.
Neuhierl, A. and M. Weber (2017). Monetary policy slope and the stock market.
  Unpublished manuscript, University of Chicago Booth School of Business.
Pace, R. K. and J. P. LeSage (2006). Interpreting spatial econometric models. In
  North American Meeting of the Regional Science Association International.
Pasquariello, P. and C. Vega (2007). Informed and strategic order flow in the bond
  markets. Review of Financial Studies 20 (6), 1975–2019.
Pasten, E., R. Schoenle, and M. Weber (2017a). Nominal rigidity and the
  idiosyncratic origin of aggregate fluctuations. In Unpublished Manuscript.
Pasten, E., R. Schoenle, and M. Weber (2017b). Production networks, nominal
  rigidities, and the propagation of shocks. Unpublished manuscript.
Rigobon, R. and B. Sack (2003). Measuring the reaction of monetary policy to the
  stock market. The Quarterly Journal of Economics 118 (2), 639–669.
Saito, Y., M. Nirei, V. Carvalho, and A. Tahbaz-Salehi (2015). Supply chain
  disruptions: Evidence from Great East Japan Earthquake. mimeo.
Weber, M. (2015). Nominal rigidities and asset pricing. Unpublished manuscript.


                                         34
 Table 1: Response of the CRSP VW Index to Monetary Policy Shocks
This table reports the results of regressing returns of the CRSP value-weighted index in a 30-minute
event window bracketing the FOMC press releases on the federal funds futures based measure of
monetary policy shocks, vt . The return of the CRSP value-weighted index is calculated as a weighted
average of the constituents’ return in the respective event window, where the market capitilization
of the previous trading day is used to calculate the weights. The full sample ranges from February
1994 through December 2008, excluding the release of September 17, 2001, for a total of 129
observations. Standard errors are reported in parentheses.

                                      full sample        till 2004      till 2000
                                           (1)              (2)            (3)
                 Constant                 -0.08          -0.12**           -0.05
                                         (0.07)           (0.06)          (0.07)
                 vt                     -3.28***         -5.64***       -3.54***
                                         (0.72)           (0.64)         (0.94)

                 R2                     13.83%           45.10%          22.31%
                 Observations             129              92              50
                 Standard errors in parentheses
                 ∗p < 0.10, ∗ ∗ p < 0.05, ∗ ∗ ∗p < 0.01




                                                  35
    Table 2: Response of Industry Returns to Monetary Policy Shocks
This table reports the results of regressing industry returns in a 30-minute event window bracketing
the FOMC press releases on the federal-funds-futures-based measure of monetary policy shock, vt
(column (1)), and an input-output network-weighted average of industry returns (columns (2)–(4))
(see equation (6)). The full sample ranges from February 1994 through December 2004, excluding
the release of September 17, 2001, for a total of 92 observations. Standard errors are reported in
parentheses.

                                  OLS                   SAR: 1992 tables
                                                equally    previous      previous
                                               weighted month Mcap day Mcap
                                   (1)             (2)             (3)             (4)
                                           Panel A. Point Estimates
        β                     −3.96∗∗∗         −0.63∗∗∗       −0.58∗∗∗         −0.60∗∗∗
                               (0.11)           (0.23)         (0.18)           (0.20)
        ρ                                        0.82∗∗∗        0.87∗∗∗          0.86∗∗∗
                                                (0.04)         (0.03)           (0.03)
        Constant              −0.07∗∗∗         −0.01          −0.01            −0.01
                               (0.01)           (0.01)         (0.01)           (0.01)

        adj R2                  14.39%           7.20%          14.43%          14.23%
        Observations             7,873           7,873           7,873            7,873
        Log-L                                    -7,361          -4,732          -4,714


                                            Panel B. Decomposition
        Direct Effect                          −0.92∗∗∗       −0.90∗∗∗         −0.91∗∗∗
                                                (0.30)         (0.27)           (0.27)
        Indirect Effect                        −2.60∗∗∗       −3.46∗∗∗         −3.41∗∗∗
                                                (0.70)         (0.78)           (0.78)
        Total Effect                           −3.52∗∗∗       −4.35∗∗∗         −4.32∗∗∗
                                                (0.95)         (0.99)           (0.98)
        Standard errors in parentheses
        ∗p < 0.10, ∗ ∗ p < 0.05, ∗ ∗ ∗p < 0.01




                                                36
     Table 3: Response of Industry Returns to Monetary Policy Shocks
This table reports the results of regressing industry returns in a 30-minute event window bracketing
the FOMC press releases on the federal-funds-futures-based measure of monetary policy shock, vt ,
and an input-output network-weighted average of industry returns (see equation (6)). The full
sample ranges from February 1994 through December 2004, excluding the release of September 17,
2001, for a total of 92 observations. Standard errors are reported in parentheses.

                       SAR: 1997 tables           SAR: 2002 tables          SAR: time-varying
                             (1)                        (2)                        (3)
                                            Panel A. Point Estimates
 β                          −1.67∗∗∗                  −1.18∗∗∗                   −1.42∗∗∗
                             (0.39)                    (0.31)                     (0.37)
 ρ                            0.60∗∗∗                   0.67∗∗∗                     0.67∗∗∗
                             (0.06)                    (0.05)                      (0.07)
 Constant                   −0.04 ∗ ∗                 −0.03 ∗ ∗                  −0.03 ∗ ∗
                             (0.02)                    (0.01)                     (0.01)

 adj R2                       10.77%                     7.14%                     12.43%
 Observations                  9,153                     9,130                      8,771
 Log-L                        -9,416                    -10,211                    -8,091


                                            Panel B. Decomposition
 Direct Effect              −1.94∗∗∗                  −1.39∗∗∗                   −1.74∗∗∗
                             (0.45)                    (0.36)                     (0.43)
 Indirect Effect            −2.23∗∗∗                  −2.18∗∗∗                   −2.53∗∗∗
                             (0.72)                    (0.56)                     (0.80)
 Total Effect               −4.17∗∗∗                  −3.56∗∗∗                   −4.27∗∗∗
                             (1.09)                    (0.86)                     (1.10)
 Standard errors in parentheses
 ∗p < 0.10, ∗ ∗ p < 0.05, ∗ ∗ ∗p < 0.01




                                                37
Table 4: Response of Industry Returns to Monetary Policy Shocks
(conditional on event type)
This table reports the results of regressing industry returns in a 30-minute event window bracketing
the FOMC press releases on the federal-funds-futures-based measure of monetary policy shock, vt ,
and an input-output network-weighted average of industry returns (see equation (6)) for different
event types. The full sample ranges from February 1994 through December 2004, excluding the
release of September 17, 2001, for a total of 92 observations. Standard errors are reported in
parentheses.

                                                            Large        Positive     Negative
                          Reversals     Intermeetings       Shocks       Shocks        Shocks
                            (1)              (2)              (3)          (4)           (5)
                                           Panel A. Point Estimates
   β                      −1.57∗∗∗          0.10          −0.61∗        −0.24        −0.80∗∗∗
                           (0.42)          (0.56)          (0.21)        (0.21)       (0.28)
   ρ                        0.77∗∗∗         0.91∗∗∗         0.86∗∗∗       0.91∗∗∗      0.85∗∗∗
                           (0.03)          (0.03)          (0.03)        (0.05)       (0.02)
   Constant                 0.03            0.08            0.00        −0.01        −0.03∗
                           (0.04)          (0.11)          (0.02)        (0.02)       (0.02)


   adj R2                  54.71%           -1.91%          28.22%        1.19%        20.54%
   Observations              676              681            2,230         2,995         3,600
   Log-L                    -581             -755            -1,645       -1,580        -2,374


                                            Panel B. Decomposition
   Direct Effect          −2.18∗∗∗          0.13          −0.93 ∗ ∗ −0.40            −1.19∗∗∗
                           (0.54)          (0.88)          (0.29)    (0.31)           (0.39)
   Indirect Effect        −4.76∗∗∗          0.96          −3.43∗∗∗ −2.28             −4.11∗∗∗
                           (0.73)          (3.94)          (0.70)   (1.91)            (1.09)
   Total Effect           −6.94∗∗∗          1.13          −4.36∗∗∗ −2.69             −5.30∗∗∗
                           (1.16)          (4.79)          (0.94)   (2.13)            (1.45)
   Standard errors in parentheses
   ∗p < 0.10, ∗ ∗ p < 0.05, ∗ ∗ ∗p < 0.01




                                                38
Table 5: Response of Industry Returns to Monetary Policy Shocks
(robustness)
This table reports the results of regressing industry returns in a 30-minute event window bracketing
the FOMC press releases on the federal-funds-futures-based measure of monetary policy shock, vt ,
and an input-output network-weighted average of industry returns (see equation (6)). The full
sample ranges from February 1994 through December 2004, excluding the release of September 17,
2001, for a total of 92 observations. Standard errors are reported in parentheses.

                                zero            industry-          market-           1994–
                            diagonal W          demeaned          demeaned            2008
                                 (1)               (2)               (3)               (4)
                                           Panel A. Point Estimates
     β                       −1.92∗∗∗           −0.62∗∗∗            0.23          −0.79∗∗∗
                              (0.53)             (0.18)            (0.14)          (0.22)
     ρ                          0.52∗∗∗           0.85∗∗∗           0.84∗∗∗         0.82∗∗∗
                               (0.06)            (0.03)            (0.04)          (0.01)
     Constant                −0.03                                                −0.02
                              (0.02)                                               (0.01)

     adj R2                    14.59%             14.30%            3.47%           14.81%
     Observations                7,873             7,873             7,873          10,166
     Log-L                      -6,882            -4,719            -4,702           -3,907


                                            Panel B. Decomposition
     Direct Effect           −1.95∗∗∗           −0.94∗∗∗                          −1.14∗∗∗
                              (0.53)             (0.25)                            (0.31)
     Indirect Effect         −2.02∗∗∗           −3.27∗∗∗                          −3.13∗∗∗
                              (0.57)             (0.72)                            (0.79)
     Total Effect            −3.97∗∗∗           −4.21∗∗∗                          −4.27∗∗∗
                              (1.00)             (0.93)                            (1.09)
     Standard errors in parentheses
     ∗p < 0.10, ∗ ∗ p < 0.05, ∗ ∗ ∗p < 0.01




                                                39
Table 6: Response of Industry Returns to Monetary Policy Shocks
(pseudo)
This table reports the results of regressing industry returns in a 30-minute event window bracketing
the FOMC press releases on the federal-funds-futures-based measure of monetary policy shock, vt ,
and an input-output network-weighted average of industry returns (see equation (6)). The full
sample ranges from February 1994 through December 2004, excluding the release of September 17,
2001, for a total of 92 observations. Standard errors are reported in parentheses.

                                                         permute         permute
                                       pseudo W            rows            rows
                                          (1)               (2)             (3)
                                           Panel A. Point Estimates
                β                      −3.16∗∗∗         −2.52∗∗∗        −2.34∗∗∗
                                        (0.84)           (0.72)          (0.68)
                ρ                        0.21∗∗∗          0.37∗∗∗         0.41∗∗∗
                                        (0.04)           (0.07)          (0.07)
                Constant               −0.06∗           −0.05∗          −0.04∗
                                        (0.03)           (0.03)          (0.02)

                adj R2                   14.59%           14.59%          14.59%
                Observations              7,873             7,873          7,873
                Log-L                    -7,180            -7,027         -7,009


                                            Panel B. Decomposition
                Direct Effect          −3.17∗∗∗         −2.54∗∗∗        −2.36∗∗∗
                                        (0.85)           (0.72)          (0.68)
                Indirect Effect        −0.84∗∗∗         −1.48∗∗∗        −1.63∗∗∗
                                        (0.24)           (0.42)          (0.47)
                Total Effect           −4.00∗∗∗         −4.02∗∗∗        −4.00∗∗∗
                                        (1.01)           (1.01)          (1.01)
                Standard errors in parentheses
                ∗p < 0.10, ∗ ∗ p < 0.05, ∗ ∗ ∗p < 0.01




                                                 40
Table 7: Response of Industry Returns to Monetary Policy Shocks
(heterogeneity)
This table reports the results of regressing industry returns in a 30-minute event window bracketing
the FOMC press releases on the federal-funds-futures-based measure of monetary policy shock, vt ,
and an input-output network-weighted average of industry returns (see equation (6)). The full
sample ranges from February 1994 through December 2004, excluding the release of September 17,
2001, for a total of 92 observations. Standard errors are reported in parentheses. The GMM
estimation requires a balanced panel of industries.

                                   Model-implied                             GMM
                                   Heterogeneity          Simulation        Estimate
                                        (1)                  (2)               (3)
                                           Panel A. Point Estimates
            β1                       −1.37∗∗∗             −1.31∗∗∗          −0.37∗∗∗
                                      (0.45)               (0.27)            (0.12)
            ρ                           0.86∗∗∗             0.78∗∗∗           0.91∗∗∗
                                       (0.03)              (0.01)            (0.03)
            β2                       −0.01
                                      (0.12)
            β3                          4.56∗∗∗
                                       (1.71)
            Constant                 −0.01                −0.06 ∗ ∗         −0.02∗
                                      (0.02)               (0.02)            (0.01)

            adj R2                     14.73%                3.07%
            Observations                7,863                7,873             6,900
            Log-L                       -4,673              -10,545


                                            Panel B. Decomposition
            Direct Effect            −2.08∗∗∗             −1.82∗∗∗          −0.64∗∗∗
                                      (0.65)               (0.37)            (0.17)
            Indirect Effect          −7.59∗∗∗             −4.09∗∗∗          −3.65∗∗∗
                                      (2.58)               (0.79)            (0.90)
            Total Effect             −9.68∗∗∗             −5.91∗∗∗          −4.30∗∗∗
                                      (3.11)               (1.16)            (0.97)
            Standard errors in parentheses
            ∗p < 0.10, ∗ ∗ p < 0.05, ∗ ∗ ∗p < 0.01



                                                 41
Table 8: Response of Industry Returns to Monetary Policy Shocks by
Closeness to Consumers
This table reports the results of regressing industry returns in a 30-minute event window bracketing
the FOMC press releases on the federal-funds-futures-based measure of monetary policy shock, vt ,
and an input-output network-weighted average of industry returns (see equation (6)) for industries
sorted on closeness to consumers. The full sample ranges from February 1994 through December
2004, excluding the release of September 17, 2001, for a total of 92 observations. Bootstrapped
standard errors are reported in parentheses.

                                             Close to               Far from
                                           End-consumer           End-consumer
                                                (1)                    (2)

                Direct Effect                 −2.37∗∗∗               −1.08∗∗∗
                                               (0.66)                 (0.29)
                Indirect Effect               −2.74∗∗∗               −3.07∗∗∗
                                               (0.80)                 (0.70)
                Total Effect                  −5.10∗∗∗               −4.12∗∗∗
                                               (1.39)                 (0.97)

                Direct Effect [%]              46.32%                 26.11%
                Indirect Effect [%]            53.68%                 73.89%
                Standard errors in parentheses
                ∗p < 0.10, ∗ ∗ p < 0.05, ∗ ∗ ∗p < 0.01




                                                42
Table 9: Response of Industry Cash flow Fundamentals to Monetary Policy
Shocks
This table reports the results of regressing future cash flow fundamentals at the quarterly frequency
on a quarterly federal-funds-futures-based measure of monetary policy shocks, vt and an input-
output network-weighted average of the industry cash flow fundamentals (see equation (29)). The
sample ranges from Q1 1994 through Q4 2004 for a total of 60 observations. Standard errors are
reported in parentheses.

 Horizon                   0          1          2         3         4         5         6         7       8
                                               Panel A. Value-weighted Sales
                               ∗∗         ∗
 Direct Effect          1.28        1.45      1.76∗∗     1.82∗     1.68      1.43      1.36      1.31    1.46
                        (0.61)      (0.75)    (0.87)    (0.99)    (1.13)    (1.26)    (1.36)    (1.49)   (1.66)
 Indirect Effect        1.87∗∗      2.13∗     2.38∗∗     2.61∗     2.35      2.18      1.94      1.86    2.25
                        (0.89)      (1.10)    (1.18)    (1.42)    (1.57)    (1.91)    (1.95)    (2.11)   (2.56)

                                              Panel B. Equally-weighted Sales
 Direct Effect          0.96∗∗      1.08∗∗    1.23∗∗     1.25∗     1.10      0.95      0.88      0.83    0.74
                        (0.42)      (0.48)    (0.57)    (0.68)    (0.74)    (0.83)    (0.91)    (0.98)   (1.07)
 Indirect Effect        1.65∗∗      1.86∗∗    2.02∗∗     2.02∗     1.80      1.55      1.42      1.28    1.15
                        (0.72)      (0.83)    (0.95)    (1.10)    (1.21)    (1.35)    (1.46)    (1.53)   (1.65)

                                       Panel C. Value-weighted Operating Income
 Direct Effect          0.36∗∗      0.43∗∗∗   0.46∗∗    0.43∗∗     0.39∗     0.32      0.25      0.30    0.35
                        (0.14)      (0.16)    (0.19)    (0.21)    (0.23)    (0.26)    (0.28)    (0.29)   (0.33)
 Indirect Effect        0.57∗∗      0.68∗∗∗   0.70∗∗    0.65∗∗     0.57∗     0.48      0.39      0.45    0.54
                        (0.23)      (0.26)    (0.30)    (0.32)    (0.33)    (0.39)    (0.44)    (0.44)   (0.51)

                                     Panel D. Equally-weighted Operating Income
 Direct Effect          0.31∗∗∗     0.35∗∗∗   0.36∗∗∗   0.34∗∗    0.32∗∗     0.25      0.24      0.19    0.18
                        (0.10)      (0.12)    (0.14)    (0.15)    (0.16)    (0.17)    (0.19)    (0.20)   (0.22)
 Indirect Effect        0.59∗∗∗     0.65∗∗∗   0.67∗∗∗   0.60∗∗    0.58∗∗     0.51      0.45      0.37    0.33
                        (0.20)      (0.22)    (0.26)    (0.26)    (0.29)    (0.35)    (0.35)    (0.38)   (0.38)
 Standard errors in parentheses
 ∗p < 0.10, ∗ ∗ p < 0.05, ∗ ∗ ∗p < 0.01




                                                 43
           Table 10: Direct and Indirect Effects from Simulated Data
This table reports estimates from estimating our baseline specification on simulated data from the
model (see equation (6)). The first row reports the results from our benchmark calibration and
each subsequent row reports the results from changing one parameter. Monetary-policy shocks are
multiplied by −1 so that a positive value corresponds to a contractionary shocks. We simulate each
model calibration 50 times for 1000 quarters and report the means and standard deviations.

                                    Results for Stock Prices                  Results for Sales
 Benchmark       Variation           β        ρ      % Indirect           β         ρ     % Indirect
                                   -0.16      0.84       75.45%         -0.14     0.86      78.14%
                                  (0.01)    (0.01)                     (0.01)    (0.01)
 η = 0.1         η = 0.2           -0.11      0.89       81.17%         -0.11     0.89      81.89%
                                  (0.00)    (0.00)                     (0.00)    (0.00)
 α = 0.85        α = 0.7           -0.16      0.84       75.00%         -0.15     0.85      77.12%
                                  (0.01)    (0.01)                     (0.01)    (0.01)
 r = −0.5        r = −0.25         -0.23      0.77       66.94%         -0.12     0.88      80.02%
                                  (0.01)    (0.01)                     (0.01)    (0.01)
 m/w = 1         m/w = 2           -0.16      0.84       75.82%         -0.14     0.86      78.32%
                                  (0.01)    (0.01)                     (0.01)    (0.01)
 ρ = 0.5         ρ = 0.75          -0.16      0.84       75.57%         -0.13     0.87      78.72%
                                  (0.01)    (0.01)                     (0.00)    (0.00)
 σ = 0.01        σ = 0.02          -0.16      0.84       75.39%         -0.14     0.86      78.11%
                                  (0.01)    (0.01)                     (0.01)    (0.01)
 ψ = 0.2         ψ = 0.4           -0.16      0.84       75.39%         -0.14     0.86      77.56%
                                  (0.01)    (0.01)                     (0.01)    (0.01)
 δ = 0.99        δ = 0.98          -0.16      0.84       75.54%         -0.14     0.86      78.05%
                                  (0.01)    (0.01)                     (0.01)    (0.01)




                                               44
                             Online Appendix:
    Monetary Policy through Production Networks:
          Evidence from the Stock Market
                            Ali Ozdagli and Michael Weber

                                    Not for Publication


I    Dynamic Model
    Our empirical model is motivated by our static benchmark model with stylized
assumptions. A natural question is whether our SAR approach provides reliable
estimates of direct and indirect effects in a dynamic model with more flexible
assumptions. Therefore, we replace the production function with a CES function
of the form

                            yi = zi [ηXir + (1 − η)lir ]α/r ,                     (A.1)
                                  N
                                       ω
                                 Y
                            Xi =      xijij ,                                     (A.2)
                                       j=1

with α < 1 and r ≤ 1, with r = 1 leading to perfect substitution, r = 0 to Cobb-
Douglas, and r = −∞ to Leontief production function. Since variable inputs are
likely more substitutable with each other than with labor, r < 0.
    Note that the marginal product of input, xij , is
              ∂yi
                     = zi αη [ηXir + (1 − η)lir ]α/r−1 Xir ωij x−1
                                                                ij
              ∂xij
                                                                 Xir
                     = ωij zi αη [ηXir + (1 − η)lir ]α/r                    x−1
                                                           ηXir + (1 − η)lir ij
                                        ηXir
                     = ωij yi α                    x−1 ,
                                  ηXir + (1 − η)lir ij
and the FOC w.r.t. this input is
                    ∂yi                          ηXir
                 pi        = pj ⇒ ωij α                      pi yi = pj xij       (A.3)
                    ∂xij                   ηXir + (1 − η)lir
                           ⇒ ωij αθi pi yi = pj xij ,                             (A.4)

                                              1
where
                                                   ηXir
                                   θi ≡                                                   (A.5)
                                             ηXir + (1 − η)lir
is the share of intermediate inputs in production. Note that this is a constant number
with Cobb-Douglas production function (r = 0).
    Also note that the marginal product of labor is
                 ∂yi
                     = zi α (1 − η) [ηXir + (1 − η)lir ]α/r−1 lir−1
                 ∂li
                               (1 − η) lir
                     = yi α                  l−1 = α (1 − θi ) yi li−1 ,
                            ηXir + (1 − η)lir i
which leads to the FOC w.r.t. labor,
                                              ∂yi
                                                  pi= w,
                                              ∂li
                                  α (1 − θi ) pi yi = wli .

    Using these FOCs, the profit function then becomes
                                N
                                X
                 πi = pi yi −         pj xij − wli − fi = (1 − α) pi yi − fi ,            (A.6)
                                j=1

which is the same as in the benchmark model. Accordingly, the consumption-good
demand, from the FOC of the household, becomes
                      PN                     PN
                       i=1 (πi + wli + fi )       (1 − αθi ) Ri
                 ci =                       = i=1               .                         (A.7)
                              N pi                 N pi
    In this scenario, the goods market clearing condition becomes
                                      N
                                      X
                    yi = ci +               xji
                                      j=1
                              PN                                  PN
                                 i=1 (1 − αθi ) Ri                   j=1   ωji αθj Rj
                          =                        +                                  ,
                                      N pi                                 pi
which, together with the cash-in-advance constraint for consumption goods, gives
the following equation:
                                                           N
                                                           X
                          Ri = (M/N ) +                          [αθj ωji Rj ] .
                                                           j=1

    To summarize, the solution of this model is given by the following equations

                                                       2
in yi , xij , li , Xi , θi , pi , or equivalently yi , xij , li , Xi , θi , Ri (w is pre-determined due to
wage stickiness):
                               N
                               X
        Ri = (M/N ) +                [αθj ωji Rj ] (One redundant due to Walras Law),
                               j=1
                       ηXir
         θi   ≡                   ,
                ηXir + (1 − η)lir
                N
                     ω
                Y
        Xi    =   xijij ,
                  j=1
                ωij αθi Ri    ωij αθi Ri
        xij =              =              yj (FOC),
                     pj           Rj
                α (1 − θi ) Ri
         li   =                (FOC),
                        w
                                                 −α/r α/r α
         yi   = zi [ηXir + (1 − η)lir ]α/r = zi θi   η Xi .

     We can rewrite the first equation in matrix form as before:
                                                  
                                            M/N
                                               . 
                                                  
                      (I − αW 0 D(θ))R =  ..          = m,                                       (A.8)
                                           
                                                  
                                            M/N
                                                                 N ×1

where D(θ) is a diagonal matrix with diagonal entries consisting of θ1 , ..., θN .

A.      Dynamic Wages, Monetary Policy, and Simulation
        Equations
     Throughout the equations below, let x̄ be the deterministic steady state and x̂
be the log-devation so that xt = x̄ exp (x̂t ) ≈ x̄ (1 + x̂t ).
     We expand the equilibrium conditions above with a dynamic wage equation that
captures wage stickiness,



                                     wt = ψwt−1 + (1 − ψ) wt∗ ,                                    (A.9)

where wt∗ is the equilibrium wage under flexible wages and hence is proportional to




                                                    3
money supply. If we log-linearize this equation, we get

                        w̄ŵt = ψ w̄ŵt−1 + (1 − ψ) w̄∗ ŵt∗ , or

                          ŵt = ψ ŵt−1 + (1 − ψ) m̂t ,

where the second line uses the steady state condition w̄ = w̄∗ and the fact that wt∗
is proportional to money supply. Furthermore, we impose mean-reverting money
supply growth as in Cooley and Hansen (1989),

                                 ∆m̂t = ρ∆m̂t−1 + ut .                            (A.10)

    After log-linearizing the equilibrium conditions and imposing mean-reverting
money supply, we get the following:
                                                        
                  R̄            0   θ̄R̄                0   θ̄R̄
             D         R̂t − αW D         R̂t = m̂t + αW D       θ̂t
                 m̄                  m̄                      m̄
                                         
                                    ˆ
                  θ̂t + D 1 − θ̄ r lt − X̂t = 0

                 X̂t − θ̂t − W ŷt − (I − W ) R̂t = 0
                                      α
                                ŷt + θ̂t − αX̂t = 0
                                      r       !
                                      θ̄
             ŵt + ˆlt − R̂t + D              θ̂t = 0
                                      1 − θ̄
                               ŵt − (1 − ψ) m̂t = ψ ŵt−1

                                           ∆m̂t = ρ∆m̂t−1 + ut .

    D (x̄) denotes a diagonal matrix of which diagonal elements are the elements of
vector x̄ = (x̄i )N
                  i=1 . This set of linear equations is easy to simulate because it has a

recursive form. In particular, we can first simulate the last two equations and then
solve for the endogenous variables using the remaining system of linear equations.
    Another way to write the first equation is by noting that the log-linearized




                                           4
equation is
                                            N
                                            X                             
                       R̄i R̂i = m̄m̂ +           αwji θ̄j R̄j θ̂j + R̂j
                                            j=1
                                            N
                                  m̄       X   αwji θ̄j R̄j            
                          R̂i   =     m̂ +                    θ̂j + R̂j
                                  R̄i      j=1
                                                 R̄i
                                            N
                                  m̄       X   p̄i x̄ji           
                          R̂i   =     m̂ +                θ̂j + R̂j ,
                                  R̄i      j=1
                                                p̄i ȳi

which is quite intuitive. Note that p̄i x̄ji /p̄i ȳi is the share of industry j’s revenues from
industry i. The greater this value is, the more important industry j is for industry
i. In terms of how the effect of monetary policy on industry j impacts on industry
i, there are two channels. The first one is the effect of higher revenues of industry
j, R̂j . The second one is the additional effect from θ̂j , which captures the change in
relative importance of intermediate inputs for industry j: the more industry j shifts
towards intermediate inputs, the more it will affect the revenues of its suppliers. In
other words, the network effects from industry j to industry i will be modified by
how the monetary policy affects the relative importance of intermediate inputs in
industry j’s production.
     The last equation can be written in matrix form as

                                   R̂ = W̃ R̂ + β m̂ + W̃ θ̂,                           (A.11)

where βi = m̄/R̄i and W̃ij = p̄i x̄ji /p̄i ȳi . We can rewrite this equation as a function
of the state variables of this system, m̂t and ŵt , after solving θ̂ as a function of R̂t .
Therefore, we get
                                    r                        −1
              θ̂t = − (1 − α)            D 1 − θ̄ I − αW D θ̄      W R̂t
                                 (1 − r)
                                    r                        −1
                       + (1 − α)         D 1 − θ̄ I − αW D θ̄      ŵt ,
                                 (1 − r)




                                                  5
which leads to
                                                               
                         (1 − α) r                     −1
            R̂ = W̃ I −            D 1 − θ̄ I − αW D θ̄      W R̂
                          (1 − r)
                         (1 − α) r                        −1
                 +β m̂ +           W̃ D 1 − θ̄ I − αW D θ̄      ŵt .
                          (1 − r)
Note that the second term in square brackets multiplying R̂ suggests that the
additional effect from the change in the use of intermediate inputs will amplify
network effect because r < 0, that is, the elasticity of substitution between
intermediate inputs and labor is smaller than the elasticity of substitution between
different intermediate inputs. Of course, our SAR framework is much simpler than
this, although for sufficiently large values of α or for values of r sufficiently close
to zero, it should provide a reasonable approximation. In order to see how far
our estimates of indirect effects diverge from the true indirect effects due to these
additional complications, we use the SAR regressions on this simulated model.

B.    Reaction of Stock Prices to Policy Surprises
     Now, the preferences are given by
                                             ∞           N
                                                                          !
                                             X           X
                      U ({ci,t+s }) = Et            δs         log (ci,t+s ) ,   (A.12)
                                              s=0        i=1

which leads to the “nominal stochastic discount factor” (see Campbell (2000)), i.e.,
the discount factor used to discount nominal cash-flows, at time t + s:
                                            ci,t   pi,t      mt
                          SDFt+s = δ                     =δ      ,               (A.13)
                                           ci,t+s pi,t+s    mt+1
where the second equality comes from the cash-in-advance constraint. Therefore, the
market value of the industry i, with profit stream {πi,t }, will be given by
                                  ∞
                                                      !
                                 X       m   t
                   Vi,t = Et         δs        πi,t+s
                                        m  t+s
                               " s=0
                                 ∞
                                                                    #
                                X        m  t
                        = Et         δs        ((1 − α) Ri,t+s − f ) .
                                s=0
                                        m t+s


     Using Rt = [I − αW 0 D (θt )]−1 mt = S (W ; θt ) mt , we can write this in matrix



                                               6
                0
form, where Vt = (Vi,t )N
                        i=1 :
                    "∞                                                 #
                       X         mt
          Vt = Et            δs      ((1 − α) S (W ; θt+s ) mt+s − f )
                        s=0
                                mt+s
                    "∞                                              #
                       X                                      m t
              = Et           δ s (1 − α) S (W ; θt+s ) mt − f
                        s=0
                                                              mt+s
                                "∞                  #         "∞             #
                                                                      s mt
                                 X                              X
                                      s
              = (1 − α) Et           δ S (W ; θt+s ) mt − Et        δ       f ,
                                 s=0                            s=0
                                                                       mt+s
where the first component gives the expected present value of profits and the second
term gives the expected present value of nominal obligations. Stock prices have
a spatial-weighting matrix structure that is closely tied to the one for revenues.
In particular, for the benchmark model where S (W ; θt ) = S (W ), this expression
simplifies to
                                              "∞            #
                           1−α                 X       mt
                      Vt =     S (W ) mt − Et      δs      f .                      (A.14)
                           1−δ                 s=0
                                                      mt+s

     The method of undetermined coefficients offers the simplest way to solve for the
log-linearized version of market values. The pre-dividend stock value is


                             ∞
                                                  !
                             X       mt
                Vi,t = Et        δs      πi,t+s
                             s=0
                                    mt+s
                                                ∞
                                                                         !!
                                   mt         X        mt+1
                    = πi,t + Et δ      Et+1        δs         πi,t+s+1
                                  mt+1                m t+s+1
                                             s=0
                                   mt
                    = πi,t + Et δ      Vi,t+1 .
                                  mt+1
Log-linearize and use πi,t = (1 − α) Ri,t − f , which gives π̄π̂i,t = (1 − α) R̄i R̂i,t ,
                                                                       
                V̄i V̂i,t = (1 − α) R̄i R̂i,t + Et δ V̄i V̂i,t+1 − ∆m̂t+1 .           (A.15)

     By the method of undetermined coefficients, we have

                            V̂i,t = smi m̂t + s∆mi ∆m̂t + swi ŵ,t                  (A.16)

and we can plug in this expression into last equation, along with the solution for R̂i,t



                                              7
which has the form

                               R̂i,t = rmi m̂t + rwi ŵt

                                ŵt = (1 − ψ) m̂t + ψ ŵt−1

                              ∆m̂t = ρ∆m̂t−1 + ut ,

where rmi and rwi can be calculated using equilibrium conditions. The resulting
expression can be solved for smi , s∆mi , and swi to obtain V̂i,t . The immediate reaction
of stock prices to monetary policy surprises is then given by
                                
                   V̂i,t − Et−1 V̂i,t = (smi + s∆mi + (1 − ψ) swi ) ut .                (A.17)

C.     Calibrating Wage Stickiness, ψ
     We want to find corr(yt , yt−1 ) for the following process:

                                yt = ψyt−1 + (1 − ψ) xt

                                xt = ρxt−1 + ut .

     This process satisfies the following equations:

                cov (yt , yt−1 ) = ψvar (yt−1 ) + (1 − ψ) cov (yt−1 , xt )

                  cov (yt , xt ) = ψcov (yt−1 , xt ) + (1 − ψ) var (xt )

                      var (yt ) = ψcov (yt , yt−1 ) + (1 − ψ) cov (yt , xt ) ,

which we can simplify using the fact that yt follows a covariance-stationary process,

                cov (yt , yt−1 ) = ψvar (yt ) + (1 − ψ) cov (yt−1 , xt )

                  cov (yt , xt ) = ψcov (yt−1 , xt ) + (1 − ψ) var (xt )

                      var (yt ) = ψcov (yt , yt−1 ) + (1 − ψ) cov (yt , xt ) ,

which we can solve for cov (yt , yt−1 ), given var (xt ) and var (yt ).
     After some algebra, the equations become
                                 1                               (1 − ψ)2
  cov (yt , yt−1 ) = ψvar (yt ) + var (yt ) − cov (yt , yt−1 ) −          var (xt ) .   (A.18)
                                 ψ                                  ψ



                                              8
We can simplify further to
                                                                           !
                          cov (yt , yt−1 )   1     1  (1 − ψ)2 var (xt )
      corr (yt , yt−1 ) =                  =     ψ+ −                          .   (A.19)
                            var (yt )        2     ψ     ψ     var (yt )

    Using corr (∆ŵt , ∆ŵt−1 ) = 0.47 from the autocorrelation of the quarterly growth
rate of nominal earnings in the data, var (∆m̂t ) = 0.01/ (1 − 0.52 ) = 0.013 and
var (∆ŵt ) = 0.01 in the data, we get
                                                             !
                                   1       1  (1 − ψ)2 4
                            0.47 =       ψ+ −                    ,                 (A.20)
                                   2       ψ     ψ     3
which gives ψ = 0.2.




                                                 9
                II      Closeness to End-Consumer
    The section details the construction of our empirical proxy for closeness to end
consumers. We first define a matrix, Cij , which is the dollar amount that sector i
pays j to purchase goods from j, ∀ (i, j) ∈ (households, industry 1 to industry n).
The matrix D is a (n + 1) × (n + 1) matrix and takes the form

                                         
                                      0 µ
                                   D=    ,                                 (A.21)
                                      0 γ
where µ is dollar amount of household consumption spending and γ is defined as
dollar amount of intermediate input purchases from industry i to industry j. In
order to construct µ, we use the BEA USE table to extract the amount of personal
consumption expenditure. Personal consumption expenditure P is a C × 1 vector
where C are commodities. We multiply the MAKE table by P and then standardize it
by the total commodity output to transform P into the dollar amount that households
buys from industry i,


                                                1
                           µ = (M AKE ∗ P ) ∗ PC                .            (A.22)
                                                     i=1   Ci
    We define Γ as an n × n matrix of intermediate input purchases that industry j
makes from industry i. Γ corresponds to the REVSHARE matrix in Section IV (see
equation 26).
    Next, we column normalize C in order to obtain sales shares.

                                                            
                                                           >
                                                      0 µ̂
                        C c.n = C ∗ diag(C ∗ 1)−1   =                      (A.23)
                                                      0 Γ̂
    We then define steps to end consumer, S, as follows:




                                         10
                             S = (1 − Γ̂> )−1

                                = .... + (Γ̂> )2 µ̂ + Γ̂> µ̂ + µ̂                  (A.24)

                                = 1.
    The first step, µ̂, is the percentage of sales from i to the household as a percentage
of total industry i’s sales. The second step, Γ̂> µ̂ + µ̂, is the percentage of sales from
industry i to j then to the household. In the limit, the expansion approaches 1.




                                             11
Figure A.1: Production Network corresponding to US Input-Output Data




     This figure plots the empirical input-output relationship in the U.S. using data
     from the benchmark input-output tables of the Bureau of Economic Analysis for
     the year 1997. Source: Figure 3 of Acemoglu et al. (2012).




                                           12
Figure A.2: Return of the CRSP value-weighted index versus Monetary
Policy Shocks (tight window)



                                               5                                                                                 FOMC meeting
                                                                                                                                 Reversals
                                                                                                                                 Intermeeting
 CRSP VW return (in percent) { 30 min window




                                               4


                                               3
                                                                                                                08/17/07
                                               2       04/18/01
                                                                                 10/15/98      10/08/08             03/11/08
                                               1


                                               0


                                               -1


                                               -2


                                               -3       01/22/08


                                               -4


                                               -5



                                                -0.5         -0.4         -0.3          -0.2         -0.1   0              0.1          0.2
                                                                    Monetary Policy Shock (in percent) { 30 min window

                                                    This figure is a scatterplot of the percentage returns on the CRSP value-weighted
                                                    index versus the federal funds futures based measure of monetary policy shocks
                                                    calculated according to equation (1) for a 30 minutes event window. The full
                                                    sample ranges from February 1994 through December 2008, excluding the release
                                                    of September 17, 2001, for a total of 129 observations. We distinguish between
                                                    regular FOMC meetings, turning points in monetary policy, and intermeeting press
                                                    releases.




                                                                                                13
                   Figure A.3: Time Series of Federal Funds Target Rate

          7
                                                                                             FFR Target


          6



          5



          4
Percent




          3



          2



          1




          1994                         1999                        2004                        2009


              This figure plots the time series of the federal funds target rate from 1994 to 2009.




                                                       14
                         Table A.1: Monetary Policy Surprises

This table reports the days of the FOMC press releases with exact time stamps as well as the actual
changes in the Federal Funds Rate further decomposed into an expected and an unexpected part. The
latter component is calculated as the scaled change of the current month federal funds future in an half
hour (tight) window and one hour (wide) window bracketing the release time according to equation 5
in the main body of the paper.

                                Unexpected Change (bps)              Expected Change (bps)
   Release       Release         Tight            Wide                Tight           Wide               Actual
    Date          Time          Window           Window              Window          Window            Change (bps)
  04-Feb-94     11:05:00       16.30            15.20                8.70            9.80                   25.00
 22-Mar-94      14:20:00        0.00             0.00               25.00           25.00                   25.00
 18-Apr-94      10:06:00       15.00            15.00               10.00           10.00                   25.00
 17-May-94      14:26:00       11.10            11.10               38.90           38.90                   50.00
   06-Jul-94    14:18:00       −5.00            −3.70                5.00            3.70                    0.00
 16-Aug-94      13:18:00       12.40            14.50               37.60           35.50                   50.00
  27-Sep-94     14:18:00       −9.00            −9.00                9.00            9.00                    0.00
 15-Nov-94      14:20:00       12.00            12.00               63.00           63.00                   75.00
  20-Dec-94     14:17:00      −22.60           −22.60               22.60           22.60                    0.00
  01-Feb-95     14:15:00        6.20             6.20               43.80           43.80                   50.00
 28-Mar-95      14:15:00       −1.00             0.00                1.00            0.00                    0.00
 23-May-95      14:15:00        0.00             0.00                0.00            0.00                    0.00
   06-Jul-95    14:15:00      −11.20            −7.40              −13.80          −17.60                  −25.00
 22-Aug-95      14:15:00        3.40             3.40               −3.40           −3.40                    0.00
  26-Sep-95     14:15:00        3.00             4.00               −3.00           −4.00                    0.00
 15-Nov-95      14:15:00        4.00             5.00               −4.00           −5.00                    0.00
  19-Dec-95     14:15:00       −9.00           −10.30              −16.00          −14.70                  −25.00
  31-Jan-96     14:15:00       −3.00            −3.00              −22.00          −22.00                  −25.00
 26-Mar-96      11:39:00        1.00             1.00               −1.00           −1.00                    0.00
 21-May-96      14:15:00        0.00             0.00                0.00            0.00                    0.00
   03-Jul-96    14:15:00       −7.20            −6.60                7.20            6.60                    0.00
 20-Aug-96      14:15:00       −2.80            −2.80                2.80            2.80                    0.00
  24-Sep-96     14:15:00      −12.00           −12.00               12.00           12.00                    0.00
 13-Nov-96      14:15:00       −1.80            −1.80                1.80            1.80                    0.00
  17-Dec-96     14:15:00        1.10             0.00               −1.10            0.00                    0.00
  05-Feb-97     14:15:00       −3.70            −3.00                3.70            3.00                    0.00
 25-Mar-97      14:15:00        4.00             4.00               21.00           21.00                   25.00
 20-May-97      14:15:00       −9.90            −9.90                9.90            9.90                    0.00
   02-Jul-97    14:15:00       −2.10            −1.10                2.10            1.10                    0.00
 19-Aug-97      14:15:00        0.00             0.00                0.00            0.00                    0.00
  30-Sep-97     14:15:00        0.00             0.00                0.00            0.00                    0.00
 12-Nov-97      14:15:00       −4.20            −4.20                4.20            4.20                    0.00
                                                15
                                                                                            continued on next page
                  Table A.1: Continued from Previous Page


                          Unexpected Change (bps)    Expected Change (bps)
 Release      Release      Tight       Wide           Tight      Wide             Actual
  Date         Time       Window      Window         Window     Window          Change (bps)
 16-Dec-97    14:15:00     0.00       0.00            0.00      0.00              0.00
 04-Feb-98    14:12:00     0.00       0.00            0.00      0.00              0.00
31-Mar-98     14:15:00    −1.00      −1.00            1.00      1.00              0.00
19-May-98     14:15:00    −2.60      −2.60            2.60      2.60              0.00
  01-Jul-98   14:15:00    −0.50      −0.50            0.50      0.50              0.00
18-Aug-98     14:15:00     1.20       1.20           −1.20     −1.20              0.00
 29-Sep-98    14:15:00     5.00       6.00          −30.00    −31.00            −25.00
 15-Oct-98    15:15:00   −24.20     −24.20           −0.80     −0.80            −25.00
17-Nov-98     14:15:00    −6.90      −5.80          −18.10    −19.20            −25.00
 22-Dec-98    14:15:00     0.00      −1.70            0.00      1.70              0.00
 03-Feb-99    14:12:00     0.60       0.60           −0.60     −0.60              0.00
30-Mar-99     14:12:00    −1.00       0.00            1.00      0.00              0.00
18-May-99     14:11:00    −1.20      −1.20            1.20      1.20              0.00
 30-Jun-99    14:15:00    −3.00      −4.00           28.00     29.00             25.00
24-Aug-99     14:15:00     3.50       3.00           21.50     22.00             25.00
 05-Oct-99    14:12:00    −4.20      −4.20            4.20      4.20              0.00
16-Nov-99     14:15:00     7.50       9.60           17.50     15.40             25.00
 21-Dec-99    14:15:00     1.60       1.60           −1.60     −1.60              0.00
 02-Feb-00    14:15:00    −5.90      −5.90           30.90     30.90             25.00
21-Mar-00     14:15:00    −4.70      −4.70           29.70     29.70             25.00
16-May-00     14:15:00     4.10       3.10           45.90     46.90             50.00
 28-Jun-00    14:15:00    −2.50      −2.00            2.50      2.00              0.00
22-Aug-00     14:15:00    −1.70       0.00            1.70      0.00              0.00
 03-Oct-00    14:12:00     0.00      −0.60            0.00      0.60              0.00
15-Nov-00     14:12:00    −1.00      −1.00            1.00      1.00              0.00
 19-Dec-00    14:15:00     6.50       6.50           −6.50     −6.50              0.00
 03-Jan-01    13:13:00   −39.30     −36.50          −10.70    −13.50            −50.00
 31-Jan-01    14:15:00     3.50       4.00          −53.50    −54.00            −50.00
20-Mar-01     14:15:00     7.10       5.60          −57.10    −55.60            −50.00
18-Apr-01     10:54:00   −43.80     −46.30           −6.20     −3.70            −50.00
15-May-01     14:15:00    −9.70      −7.80          −40.30    −42.20            −50.00
 27-Jun-01    14:12:00    10.50      11.00          −35.50    −36.00            −25.00
21-Aug-01     14:15:00     1.60       1.60          −26.60    −26.60            −25.00
 02-Oct-01    14:15:00    −3.70      −3.70          −46.30    −46.30            −50.00
06-Nov-01     14:20:00   −15.00     −15.00          −35.00    −35.00            −50.00
 11-Dec-01    14:15:00    −0.80       0.00          −24.20    −25.00            −25.00
                                     16
                                                                       continued on next page
                 Table A.1: Continued from Previous Page


                         Unexpected Change (bps)    Expected Change (bps)
 Release     Release      Tight       Wide           Tight      Wide             Actual
  Date        Time       Window      Window         Window     Window          Change (bps)
 30-Jan-02   14:15:00     2.50       1.50           −2.50     −1.50              0.00
19-Mar-02    14:15:00    −2.60      −2.60            2.60      2.60              0.00
07-May-02    14:15:00     0.70       0.70           −0.70     −0.70              0.00
 26-Jun-02   14:15:00     0.00       0.00            0.00      0.00              0.00
13-Aug-02    14:15:00     4.30       4.30           −4.30     −4.30              0.00
 24-Sep-02   14:15:00     2.00       2.50           −2.00     −2.50              0.00
06-Nov-02    14:15:00   −20.00     −18.80          −30.00    −31.20            −50.00
 10-Dec-02   14:15:00     0.00       0.00            0.00      0.00              0.00
 29-Jan-03   14:15:00     1.00       0.50           −1.00     −0.50              0.00
18-Mar-03    14:15:00     2.40       3.60           −2.40     −3.60              0.00
06-May-03    14:15:00     3.70       3.70           −3.70     −3.70              0.00
 25-Jun-03   14:15:00    13.50      12.50          −38.50    −37.50            −25.00
12-Aug-03    14:15:00     0.00       0.00            0.00      0.00              0.00
 16-Sep-03   14:15:00     1.10       1.10           −1.10     −1.10              0.00
 28-Oct-03   14:15:00    −0.50      −0.50            0.50      0.50              0.00
 09-Dec-03   14:15:00     0.00       0.00            0.00      0.00              0.00
 28-Jan-04   14:15:00     0.50       0.00           −0.50      0.00              0.00
16-Mar-04    14:15:00     0.00       0.00            0.00      0.00              0.00
04-May-04    14:15:00    −1.20      −1.20            1.20      1.20              0.00
 30-Jun-04   14:15:00    −0.50      −1.50           25.50     26.50             25.00
10-Aug-04    14:15:00     0.70       1.50           24.30     23.50             25.00
 21-Sep-04   14:15:00     0.00       0.00           25.00     25.00             25.00
10-Nov-04    14:15:00    −0.80       0.00           25.80     25.00             25.00
 14-Dec-04   14:15:00    −0.90       0.00           25.90     25.00             25.00
 02-Feb-05   14:17:00    −0.54       0.00           25.54     25.00             25.00
22-Mar-05    14:17:00     0.00      −0.50           25.00     25.50             25.00
03-May-05    14:16:00     0.00      −0.56           25.00     25.56             25.00
 30-Jun-05   14:15:00    −0.50       0.00           25.50     25.00             25.00
09-Aug-05    14:17:00    −0.71      −0.71           25.71     25.71             25.00
 20-Sep-05   14:17:00     3.00       4.50           22.00     20.50             25.00
01-Nov-05    14:18:00    −0.52      −0.52           25.52     25.52             25.00
 13-Dec-05   14:13:00     0.00       0.00           25.00     25.00             25.00
 31-Jan-06   14:14:00     0.50       0.50           24.50     24.50             25.00
28-Mar-06    14:17:00     0.50       0.50           24.50     24.50             25.00
10-May-06    14:17:00     0.00      −0.75           25.00     25.75             25.00
 29-Jun-06   14:16:00    −1.00      −1.50           26.00     26.50             25.00
                                    17
                                                                      continued on next page
                 Table A.1: Continued from Previous Page


                         Unexpected Change (bps)    Expected Change (bps)
 Release     Release      Tight       Wide           Tight      Wide          Actual
  Date        Time       Window      Window         Window     Window       Change (bps)
08-Aug-06    14:14:00    −4.77      −4.77            4.77      4.77            0.00
 20-Sep-06   14:14:00    −1.50      −1.50            1.50      1.50            0.00
 25-Oct-06   14:13:00    −0.50      −0.50            0.50      0.50            0.00
 12-Dec-06   14:14:00     0.00       0.00            0.00      0.00            0.00
 31-Jan-07   14:14:00     0.00      −0.50            0.00      0.50            0.00
21-Mar-07    14:15:00     1.67       0.00           −1.67      0.00            0.00
09-May-07    14:15:00     0.00      −0.71            0.00      0.71            0.00
 28-Jun-07   14:14:00     0.00       0.00            0.00      0.00            0.00
07-Aug-07    14:14:00     0.65       1.30           −0.65     −1.30            0.00
10-Aug-07    09:15:00     1.50       3.00           −1.50     −3.00            0.00
17-Aug-07    08:15:00     4.62      15.00           −4.62    −15.00            0.00
 18-Sep-07   14:15:00   −20.00     −21.25          −30.00    −28.75          −50.00
 31-Oct-07   14:15:00    −2.00      −2.00          −23.00    −23.00          −25.00
 11-Dec-07   14:16:00     3.16       3.16          −28.16    −28.16          −25.00
 22-Jan-08   08:21:00   −46.67     −45.00          −28.33    −30.00          −75.00
 30-Jan-08   14:14:00   −11.00     −11.00          −39.00    −39.00          −50.00
11-Mar-08    08:30:00     8.68       7.11           −8.68     −7.11            0.00
18-Mar-08    14:14:00    10.00      10.00          −85.00    −85.00          −75.00
30-Apr-08    14:15:00    −6.00      −6.50          −19.00    −18.50          −25.00
 25-Jun-08   14:09:00    −1.50      −1.00            1.50      1.00            0.00
05-Aug-08    14:13:00    −0.60      −0.50            0.60      0.50            0.00
 16-Sep-08   14:14:00     9.64      11.25           −9.64    −11.25            0.00
 08-Oct-08   07:00:00   −12.95     −13.30          −37.05    −36.70          −50.00
 29-Oct-08   14:17:00    −3.50      −3.50          −46.50    −46.50          −50.00
 16-Dec-08   14:21:00   −16.07     −24.15          −83.93    −75.85         −100.00




                                     18
