                               NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                   FINANCIAL INTERMEDIATION IN PRIVATE EQUITY:
                      HOW WELL DO FUNDS OF FUNDS PERFORM?

                                        Robert S. Harris
                                         Tim Jenkinson
                                        Steven N. Kaplan
                                        Ruediger Stucke

                                       Working Paper 23428
                               http://www.nber.org/papers/w23428


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     May 2017




This research has been supported by the UAI Foundation and the Private Equity Research
Consortium. We thank Burgiss for supplying data and especially James Bachman and Julia
Bartlett. We also thank Wendy Hu and William Waller for excellent research assistance and we
thank Arthur Korteweg, Peter Cornelius, and participants at the January 2017 American Finance
Association conference and at various other seminars for helpful suggestions. Harris has invested
in private and public equities and has held a board position for funds investing in public equities.
Kaplan has invested in and consulted to buyout and venture capital funds of funds. Jenkinson has
consulted to limited partners, and has held board positions in private equity-backed portfolio
companies and in a fund investing in private equity. He also has invested in private and public
equities. Stucke participated in this research during his time at Oxford University; the views and
opinions expressed in this article are those of the author and do not necessarily reflect views of
his current employer. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily
reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2017 by Robert S. Harris, Tim Jenkinson, Steven N. Kaplan, and Ruediger Stucke. All rights
reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit
permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Financial Intermediation in Private Equity: How Well Do Funds of Funds Perform?
Robert S. Harris, Tim Jenkinson, Steven N. Kaplan, and Ruediger Stucke
NBER Working Paper No. 23428
May 2017
JEL No. G20,G23

                                          ABSTRACT

This paper focuses on funds of funds (FOFs) as a form of financial intermediation in private
equity (both buyout and venture capital). After accounting for fees, FOFs provide returns equal to
or above public market indices for both buyout and venture capital. While FOFs focusing on
buyouts outperform public markets, they underperform direct fund investment strategies in
buyout. In contrast, the average performance of FOFs in venture capital is on a par with results
from direct venture fund investing. This suggests that FOFs in venture capital (but not in buyouts)
are able to identify and access superior performing funds.


Robert S. Harris                                 Steven N. Kaplan
University of Virginia                           Booth School of Business
Darden School of Business                        The University of Chicago
100 Darden Boulevard                             5807 South Woodlawn Avenue
Charlottesville, VA 22903                        Chicago, IL 60637
HarrisR@darden.virginia.edu                      and NBER
                                                 steven.kaplan@chicagobooth.edu
Tim Jenkinson
University of Oxford                             Ruediger Stucke
Said Business School                             Warburg Pincus LLC
Park End Street                                  450 Lexington Ave
Oxford OX1 1HP                                   New York, NY 10017
UK                                               ruediger.stucke@warburgpincus.com
tim.jenkinson@sbs.ox.ac.uk
1. Introduction

   This paper analyses funds of funds (FoFs) as a form of financial intermediation in private

equity. While there is a large literature on direct fund investing in private equity, there is scant

evidence on FoFs which themselves invest in these direct funds. Compared to hedge funds or

publicly traded stocks, private equity investments in direct funds are illiquid, not easily scaled

and have high search and monitoring costs. By pooling capital across investors, FoFs create a

second level of intermediation that potentially provides specialized investment skills,

diversification and lower cost services (e.g. due to economies of scale) for investors wanting

exposure to private equity.    Against these advantages must be weighed the additional fees

charged by the FoF manager.

   We benchmark FoF performance, net of their fees, against both public equity markets and

strategies of direct fund investment. Our research takes advantage of detailed, fund-level cash

flows and the net asset values of unrealized investments, from Burgiss on both FoFs and direct

funds. The returns obtained by investors in direct funds have previously been analyzed by Harris,

Jenkinson and Kaplan (2014 and 2016), but this is the first paper to consider the returns achieved

by FoFs using such detailed data. We also have information on the number and type of direct

funds that are included in FoFs, which enables us to understand the types of portfolios they create

for their investors, and to benchmark the performance of FoF against randomly selected

portfolios of direct funds. As with previous research on private equity, we distinguish between

buyout and venture capital (VC) investments.

   We find that FoFs – both in buyout and VC – have generated returns equal to or above those

from investing in public equities over the entire sample period. Harris, Jenkinson and Kaplan

(2014) find that direct funds have out-performed public markets over the same sample period,

and so the extra layer of financial intermediation does not reverse this finding. As a result,


                                                                                                  1
exposure to private equity through FoFs would have increased returns relative to public equities,

although investors would have borne illiquidity costs associated with private equity investing.

These higher returns are after accounting for fees that occur at both the FoF and direct fund level.

Our measures of FoF performance are through year-end 2012 and cover FoFs that started in years

1987 through 2007.

   When we compare FoFs to direct fund investing, we find significantly lower returns for FoFs

that focus on buyouts or are generalist funds compared with portfolios formed by “random”

direct fund investing in similar direct funds. In contrast, FoFs in VC perform roughly on a par

with portfolios of direct funds, even after the additional fees. Moreover, strategies for investing

in direct funds may be constrained by limits on fund access or manager selection skills. We show

that VC FoFs often outperform direct investing handicapped by these limitations. In addition,

given the highly-dispersed nature of direct fund returns in venture, VC FoFs create more risk

reduction through diversification than is the case for buyouts. In general, our results suggest that

FoFs focusing on VC provide more advantages than those investing in buyout funds.

   The remainder of the paper is structured as follows. In Section 2, we discuss the role of FoFs

as financial intermediaries in private equity as well as related research on the performance of

direct private equity funds. In Section 3, we explain our metrics of performance and data. In

Section 4, we study FoF performance, both in absolute terms and relative to investments in public

equity. In Section 5, we look at the types of portfolios formed by FoFs and compare their

performance to single direct funds. In Section 6, we compare FoFs to strategies of direct fund

investing by forming synthetic FoFs (portfolios of direct funds) as performance benchmarks; we

also examine the effects of aggregate capital flows on FoF performance. In Section 7, we

consider the impact of constraints on direct fund investing, in particular the limited ability of

investors to access the funds run by managers with good prior performance. In Section 8, we


                                                                                                  2
provide rough estimates of the internal costs that would be necessary to justify the use of the

different types of FoFs given our results.         We summarize our results and discuss their

implications in Section 9.


2. Financial intermediation by funds of funds in private equity

   There is a large literature in economics on financial intermediaries. The explanations for

intermediation typically depend on either transactions costs or information advantages.1

Transactions costs arguments rely on the intermediary’s ability to pool capital and supply lower

cost services (e.g. due to economies of scale). Other explanations cite advantages that an

intermediary can provide due to superior information.

   In private equity, the first level of intermediation occurs with the formation of direct funds.

Rather than investing directly in individual companies, investors become limited partners (LPs)

in a direct private equity fund set up by a private equity manager which acts as the general

partner (GP) of the fund. In turn, the “direct” fund makes the investments in companies. The GPs

are the active managers of the fund’s resources and supply expertise, effort and networks to make

and structure investments in their portfolio companies, participate in value creation by those

firms, and manage the realization of the investments. GPs supply a small part of the capital and

receive management fees and a fraction of the profits (“carried interest”) from the investments in

the underlying companies. Though terms vary across funds, a typical fee structure is “2 and 20” –




   1
     See Fang, Ivashina and Lerner (2015) for a brief overview of financial intermediation and selected
references.



                                                                                                     3
the GP gets an annual management fee of 2% of committed capital (usually less than 2% in the

case of a large buyout fund, and sometimes more than 2% in the case of a small VC fund) and

receives 20% of the gains when the fund exits its investments.2

   LP investments in direct funds are illiquid, relatively undiversified, not easily scaled, and have

high search and monitoring costs.3 Given the costs and frictions in direct fund investment, FoFs

provide a second level of intermediation. GPs set up a FoF to provide specialized expertise and

services for investing in direct funds.4 The end investor becomes an LP in the FoF, which in turn

is an LP in direct funds. Most FoFs are “primary” and make capital commitments to direct funds

when those funds are raising capital.5 In contrast, “secondary” FoFs provide liquidity to LPs by

purchasing their existing interests in one or more direct funds. In this paper we focus on primary

FoFs.

   To provide valuable intermediation, a FoF must create a profile of return and risk that is better

than investors can otherwise achieve. Potential advantages offered by a FoF must, however, be

weighed against their extra layer of fees. Mirroring fee structures for direct funds, FoFs charge

annual management fees on capital and often take a carried interest. Surveys suggest that FoFs

charge management fees of around 1% (or less) annually with a carried interest of 5%.6 As a


   2
     In practice, the definition of management fees and carried interest involves several complications. For
instance, the management fee is typically levied on committed (not invested) capital during the “investment
period” and then remaining invested capital thereafter. And carried interest may not be paid unless a minimum
hurdle rate (such as an internal rate of return of 8%) is exceeded. For more information on the economics of
private equity funds see Metrick and Yasuda (2010) and Robinson and Sensoy (2013).
   3
     In light of these issues, the U. S. government restricts private equity fund investments to qualified
investors who meet wealth thresholds and are deemed able to bear the risks and illiquidity of the asset class.
   4
      The firm that creates a FoF (e.g. HarbourVest Partners, LLC) is typically a registered investment adviser under
the Investment Advisers Act of 1940.
    5
      Some primary FoFs will also participate in co-investment opportunities offered by GPs, which incur
much lower (or zero) management fees and carried interest, thereby offsetting some of the costs of using a
FoF.
   6
     Based on surveys of FoFs, Dow Jones (2010) report a median (mean) management fee of 1% (.94%).
About two-thirds of all FoFs charged management fees in the range of 76 to 100 basis points and about three-
fourths scale down the fee in the later years of the fund. For primary FoFs, the median (mean) carried interest


                                                                                                                   4
comparison, Fang, Ivashina and Lerner (2015) report that large institutional investors, who can

take advantage of economies of scale in-house, have annual costs of investing in direct funds of

about 0.11% of committed capital.

   In 1979, Adams Street Partners established the first private equity FoF for institutional

investors. Thirty years later, FoFs accounted for about 12% of the capital raised by private equity

funds during the decade ending 2009.7 While each FoF is different, three benefits are frequently

cited by LPs.

   The first potential benefit is cost-effective diversification. Unlike investing in public equity,

investors cannot purchase low cost, well-diversified portfolios across the private equity asset

class or its sub-components. Moreover, direct funds often have substantial minimum investment

levels (often $5 million for an institutional client) as well as limitations on the maximum

investment by any LP. Some institutional portfolios are too small to provide cost effective

diversification across direct funds, including across company life cycles, sectors, vintage years

and geography. Such an investor might use a FoF to effectively “scale up” and participate in

more and larger funds than would be possible with its investment base alone. Conversely, a

larger investor can use a FoF to “scale down” its allocation to invest across a variety of direct

funds in smaller pieces than it would normally consider.                     Primary FoFs make capital

commitments to a number of direct funds spanning a number of vintage years. As part of



is 5% (5.2%) and four-fifths had carried interest of less than 10%. Secondary FoFs, on average, charged
slightly higher carried interest with a median (mean) of 6% (6.9%). For the vast majority of FoFs, carried
interest is subject to a preferred return, most often in the range of 8%; that is the GP does not participate in
profits until after the preferred return is earned. Dow Jones conducted this survey for a number of years but
has not continued the publication after 2010. Informal evidence suggests that fees and carried interest have
fallen on FoF in recent years (after the end of our sample period).
   7
     These figures come from Harris, Jenkinson and Stucke (2010) based on Preqin fundraising data. The 12%
figure includes both primary and secondary FoFs. For each year in that decade, FoFs accounted for over 10%
of capital raised. Since 2009, FoF fundraising has fallen to a lower percentage. For instance, Preqin (2013)
reports FoF fundraising at 8% in 2010, 7% in 2011 and 6% in 2012.



                                                                                                              5
providing these diversification services, the FoF may be able to take advantage of economies of

scale in areas such as fund administration and liquidity management.

  A second service provided by FoFs is fund selection and monitoring. Some investors (e.g.

smaller institutions or those unable to provide competitive compensation) may find it cost

prohibitive, or impossible, to employ the necessary expertise and people to perform the required

due diligence and to make informed decisions on direct funds. FoFs serve as an intermediary to

provide the expertise that can be particularly important when dealing in geographies, industries or

sectors in which the investor has limited or no experience.

  A third potential advantage of FoFs is the ability to gain access into otherwise unattainable

investments. The conventional wisdom for investors in direct private equity funds is to invest in

partnerships that have performed well in the past – so-called top quartile funds.             This

conventional wisdom is based on the belief that performance in private equity persists across

direct funds for the same partnership. Top-performing GPs may choose to limit direct fund size

rather than raise fees, and established FoFs may have privileged access as a result of investing in

earlier funds. Similarly, some investors are offered co-investment opportunities to invest

additional funds directly into particular portfolio companies, typically with no fees or carried

interest charged (see Fang, Ivashina and Lerner, 2015, and Braun, Jenkinson and Schemmerl,

2017). FoFs may – due to their relationships with the GPs and experience in executing such

investments – be offered more such opportunities.

   A survey of LP investors (Preqin, 2014) finds that the most cited reason for investing in

private equity FoFs is diversification (63% of respondents). Other factors noted by respondents

are manager expertise (37%), access to specific markets (34%), lack of resources (32%), access

to specific funds (26%), size of portfolio (16%) and lack of experience (13%). Clearly, these




                                                                                                 6
cited reasons are not mutually exclusive, but match closely the three main potential roles we

identify for FoFs.

   Past research on FoFs in other alternative asset classes, such as hedge funds, often questions

the value of their performance.8          However, the higher illiquidity costs and information

asymmetries in private equity relative to hedge funds may lead to higher intermediary benefits for

private equity FoFs than in the hedge fund industry. To date there is scant research on FoFs in

private equity.9

   Other research on private equity suggests that factors affecting value created by FoFs as

intermediaries may differ between venture capital and buyout funds, and may have changed over

time as the private equity industry has developed. Lerner, Schoar and Wongsunwai (2007) study

LP investments in direct funds from 1991 to 1998 and find that FoFs have relatively poor

performance.       At the same time, they find that endowment investors (notably educational and

other nonprofit institutions) earn private equity returns superior to those of other institutional

investors. They attribute this result to endowments having advantages in evaluating and gaining

access to private equity funds compared to other institutional investors.

   These relationships may have changed. Sensoy, Wang and Weisbach (2014) study fund

investments in the 1990s and 2000s, and report that endowments do no better (in fact worse) than

   8
      Brown, Goetzmann and Liang (2004) find that individual hedge funds dominate FoFs on an after-fee
return or Sharpe ratio basis. Fung et al. (2008) study hedge fund FoFs over the decade 1995 to 2004 and find
that the average FoF delivers alpha only in the period between October 1998 and March 2000. They do find,
however, that a subset of FoFs consistently delivers alpha. Ang et al. (2008) argue that FoFs need to be
compared to direct fund portfolios that would be available to investors in the absence of FoFs and conclude
that hedge FoF performance justifies the extra layer of fees. However, as an illustration of the important
differences between hedge funds and private equity, in studying illiquid assets Cornelius et al (2013)
explicitly exclude hedge funds and limit their focus to private equity and real assets.
   9
     Preqin and other industry sources provide useful reports on private equity FoFs. Gresch and von Wyss
(2011) study a small sample of private equity FoFs using Preqin data but are unable to calculate PMEs.
Studying IRRs and multiples of investment capital, they compare FoFs to investments in single direct funds
and conclude that the low dispersion of FoF returns makes them attractive compared to direct funds of the
same vintage year. They do not look at portfolios of direct funds nor do they control for vintage year
differences between FoFs and the direct funds in which they invest.



                                                                                                          7
other institutional investors in the later vintage years (1999-2006). The outperformance of

endowments in the 1990s was largely due to greater access to top-performing VC funds. They

point to the “general maturing of the industry” as a wide array of investors (in addition to

endowments) have gained experience with private equity. If more institutional investors have

developed the skills and relationships to pursue private equity investing, the value proposition of

a FoF may appeal to fewer investors than in earlier periods. Moreover, a wide array of

consultants and advisors compete with FoFs to supply services to investors.10

   Consistent with the results in Sensoy, Wang and Weisbach (2014), recent research shows that

the persistence of GP performance has weakened over time for buyout funds. Kaplan and Schoar

(2005) find that direct funds in both buyout and venture capital had significant performance

persistence in earlier years (before 2001). More recently, however, Harris, Jenkinson, Kaplan

and Stucke (2014) find that while persistence has persisted in venture capital, it has eroded for

buyout funds after 2000. Because direct buyout funds have become a larger part of private equity

investments, this drop in persistence may have eroded any “access value” offered by buyout

FoFs.11


3. Measures of performance and data

   We compare FoFs to two alternative forms of investments. The first is public equities. Unlike

private equity investments, public markets provide investors with liquid, cost-effective ways to

create diversified portfolios. Thus, for investors without the capabilities to navigate direct fund

investing, the public equity route is a potentially attractive alternative to a FoF.

   10
       Recently, some providers have offered products constructed as diversified portfolios of public stocks
that they claim track private equity performance. It is too early to tell how these will perform and how widely
they will be used. They do, however, offer potential competition to FoFs.
   11
      One caveat to the Sensoy et al. findings is that the data set they use, unlike the one we use in this paper, may
not include performance results for the top performing VC partnerships in the latter part of the sample. In recent
years, top VC GPs have avoided LPs who make their performance results public.


                                                                                                                    8
   We use the public market equivalent (PME) from Kaplan and Schoar (2005), which compares

an investment in a private equity fund to an equivalently timed investment in the relevant public

market index. The PME calculation discounts (or invests) all cash distributions to, and any

residual value of, the fund at the public market total return and divides the resulting value by the

value of all cash contributions discounted (or invested) at the public market total return.12 The

PME can be viewed as a market-adjusted multiple of invested capital (net of fees). A PME of

1.30, for example, implies that at the end of the fund’s life, investors ended up with 30% more

than they would have if they had invested in the public markets. Sorensen and Jagannathan

(2015) note that the Kaplan-Schoar PME measure provides a valid economic performance

measure regardless of the risk of the underlying private equity investments.13

   A second alternative to FoFs is to invest directly into private equity funds. Benchmarking

FoFs against direct funds brings up the inevitable question of what direct fund portfolio investors

could create on their own. If each investor could readily and cost-effectively navigate direct fund

investing, the economic rationale for a FoF would disappear.14 Our approach is to compare an

actual FoF’s PME against a distribution of PMEs for synthetic FoFs. These synthetic FoFs are

formed as portfolios of randomly chosen direct funds drawn from the set of all direct funds which

fit a set of investment criteria. The FoF is matched to the investment criteria using its vintage

year and investment focus (e.g. buyout or venture capital). Such synthetic FoFs capture

diversification benefits absent in single direct funds. As an example, we match a FoF that

specializes in buyouts against synthetic FoFs from a “naïve” investment strategy of randomly

picking direct funds that have the same strategy (i.e. buyout) and are spread over a number of

   12
     Harris, Jenkinson and Kaplan (2014) provide more detailed discussion of PMEs and the role of residual
Net Asset Values when funds are not fully liquidated.
   13
        Their model assumes investors have log-utility preferences.
   14
        Ang, Rhodes-Kropf and Zhao (2008) discuss the general issue and study FoFs investing in hedge funds.



                                                                                                               9
vintage years. The PME of each of these synthetic FoFs is calculated resulting in a distribution of

PMEs.

   Because all our performance measures are net of fees, FoFs would, on average, have lower

returns than direct funds unless they can create above average performance in their direct fund

investments by choosing better performing funds. For a given investor, these results shed light

on the tradeoff in using FoFs given the investor’s capabilities and feasible alternative investment

strategies.

   To conduct our analysis we use data on fund-level, timed cash flows and fund valuations from

Burgiss. This research-quality database was first used by Harris, Jenkinson and Kaplan (2014),

and is sourced from a broad base of over 200 institutional investors, who use Burgiss’ systems

for audit and performance measurement. The data is cross-checked for accuracy by comparing

the records of different investors in the same fund.

   Our data measure performance through December 31, 2012. We restricted our study to FoFs

with vintage years in 2007 and earlier. This allows five years for the FoF to make investments

prior to our analysis of performance. Few commercial providers have such detailed, high-quality

data, although they often have large samples of self-reported IRRs and investment multiples.15

   There are 294 primary FoFs for which Burgiss assign a vintage year of 2007 and earlier.16

Burgiss categorizes private equity FoFs as buyout, venture capital or generalist.17 The generalist


   15
      Harris, Jenkinson and Kaplan (2014) provide a more detailed discussion of the advantages of Burgiss
data, the nature of other data sets and how the data sets compare. That research’s conclusions lead us to doubt
that Burgiss data have an overall positive or negative bias in terms of performance.
   16
      Burgiss classifies a vintage year as the year in which a fund first draws capital from its LPs. Burgiss
also provides the geographic focus of the fund, Of the 294 funds, 222 focus on North America with most of
the rest focusing on Europe.
   17
       Burgiss produced a new private capital classification system in 2016, with equity FoF being classified as
venture capital, expansion capital or generalist. Previously, buyouts had been included in a slightly broader
‘corporate finance’ category, which included some debt-equity hybrid investments (such as mezzanine and distressed
debt). In this paper, we use the current classification.


                                                                                                               10
category has a mix of corporate finance and venture capital. As we report later, one interesting

finding is that FoFs tend to provide diversification not only across funds within a particular

investment class, but often diversify across classes as well. For instance, some FoFs that

predominately invest in buyout funds also include some VC fund investments.

   As part of our comparison of FoF performance, we also use cash flows for the direct funds in

the Burgiss database (through vintage year 2012). We state all cash flows in US dollars. Our data

do not contain the names of the FoFs or the underlying direct funds. While we cannot link a FoF

to the specific direct funds in which it invests, we have some information on portfolio

composition through year-end 2012 for a subset of our FoF sample. These holdings data include

the count and weight (percent of committed capital) of the underlying direct funds in each of the

FoFs by vintage year and sub-asset class.


4. Fund of fund absolute performance and performance relative to public markets

   Table 1 compares Burgiss data to a FoF sample drawn from Preqin, an alternative commercial

data source. While Preqin has summary performance data for a larger number FoFs, it does not

have cash-flow data needed to compute PMEs for more than a modest subset.18 As a result,

Table 1 reports two metrics widely used by funds and investors to gauge absolute performance.

The first measure is the LP’s annualized internal rate of return (IRR) based on fund contributions

and distributions. The distributions include the estimated value of any unrealized investments (or

residual value) as of the last reporting date. The second measure is the multiple of invested

capital (MOIC), also referred to as the ratio of total value to paid in capital (TVPI). The


   18
       Preqin’s data is largely derived from Freedom of Information Act requests, where investors provide
information on cash invested, realizations and net asset values on a quarterly basis. It is, therefore, a quarterly
aggregation of the cash flows, rather than the individual, timed cash-flows in the Burgiss data. Preqin reports
the first fund of funds in vintage year of 1979 but typically has only one observation per vintage year until the
late 1980s and hits double digits only in 1997.



                                                                                                                11
multiple’s numerator is the sum of all fund distributions and the value of unrealized investments.

The denominator is the sum of all fund contributions by LPs. Given the relatively short history of

the FoF industry, it is only in the late 1990s that individual vintage years have more than a few

observations. This makes it impossible to provide reliable vintage year averages for earlier years.

The first vintage year that has coverage in the Burgiss data is 1987, but 1997 is the first year with

more than three observations.

   Table 1 shows that the absolute performance measures are similar across the two samples. For

FoFs with vintage years 1997-2007, the sample average IRR is 6.7% for the Burgiss sample and

7.2% for Preqin. Sample average TVPIs for this period are also similar for the two groupings,

respectively 1.31 and 1.27. Medians and averages of vintage year figures confirm the similarity

across samples. Thus across our sample period, Table 1 shows our set of FoFs from Burgiss have

performance consistent with that of the larger Preqin sample for which detailed cash flow data are

not available. A notable feature in Table 1 is the high absolute performance in the early days of

the FoF industry: IRRs and money multiples are much higher for funds started prior to 1997.

   Of more interest than these absolute return measures is performance relative to pubic markets.

Figure 1 plots the overall distribution of PMEs for FoFs using the Burgiss sample.19 Panel A

shows that FoFs have outperformed the broad market average as measured by the S&P 500.

Across all FoFs in the Burgiss sample, the average PME using the S&P 500 is 1.13 which is

significantly above one (p-value < 0.01). The median PME is 1.08. Panel B charts PMEs against

the Russell 2000, an index for smaller publicly traded firms which is sometimes used by LPs as a

benchmark. PMEs against the Russell 2000 are generally lower than those using the S&P 500 but

   19
      We cannot compute PMEs for the Preqin sample since detailed cash flow data are unavailable. Given
the similar absolute performance measures by vintage year shown in Table 1 for the Preqin and Burgiss
samples, we would expect the Preqin sample to have PMEs very similar to those shown in Figure 1. Harris,
Kaplan and Jenkinson (2014) show the close empirical relationship between absolute measures of
performance and PMEs.



                                                                                                     12
remain above 1.0 on average. Across all funds of funds, the average is 1.04 (statistically greater

than 1.0 at the 0.08 level). The median is 1.0.

   Table 2 segments the PMEs by vintage year. The average PME using the S&P 500 is one or

above in each vintage year shown. Median figures display a similar pattern of outperformance.

PMEs are especially high in the early years, with an average PME of 1.49 in the 1997 vintage and

1.59 for earlier years. PMEs using the Russell 2000 are, since 1996, lower (especially for the

1998 and 1999 vintage years for which the average PME is below 0.90) and, like those using the

S&P 500, display strong outperformance in the early vintage years.

   It is worth mentioning that the top quartile of FoFs have PMEs (relative to the S&P 500)

above 1.0 in every vintage year. As with investing directly, this suggests that it would be

desirable to be able to choose and access top performing FoFs, particularly if that performance

persists.

   Earlier research (Harris, Jenkinson and Kaplan, 2014) documents that direct VC funds

performed exceptionally well for vintages in the 1990s, but then saw a dramatic drop. Table 3

segments our FoF sample into three categories: buyout, generalist and VC. Due to the limited

number of observations in some years, we aggregate over vintage-year groupings. Using the S&P

500, Panel A of Table 3 shows that all three FoF categories have mean PMEs significantly above

one. Moreover, Table 3 echoes the findings for direct VC funds that show dramatic shifts in

venture performance over time.

   For VC FoFs, Panel A reports a mean PME of 1.16 over the entire sample (significantly

different from one at the 0.02 level). The performance is exceptionally strong for the vintages

prior to 1998 with a mean (median) PME of 2.02 (2.00). This drops off dramatically thereafter:

for the next four vintages (1998-2001) the average PME is below 0.90. Such trends reflect FoF

investments in direct funds from a number of vintage years after the FoF’s launch. Panel A also


                                                                                               13
shows that the median PME for venture FoFs is 1.01, well below the mean. This gap reflects the

variability of returns in VC investing—a topic to which we return later.

  Panel A also displays that buyout FoFs have outperformed the S&P 500. The mean PME for

buyout FoFs is 1.14 over the sample period (significantly different from one at the 0.01 level);

the median is 1.11. Buyout FoF mean and median PMEs are consistently above 1.0 over the

sample period, but less so at the end of the sample period (from 2004 onward). This pattern

echoes the findings that direct buyout funds show PMEs well above 1.0 before 2006, but close to

1.0 since 2006 (see Harris, Jenkinson and Kaplan (2014 and 2016)). Generalist FoFs (which

invest in both venture and buyout) have a mean PME of 1.10 (significantly different from one at

the 0.01 level) against the S&P 500 and a time pattern of results closer to buyout than to venture.

The median PME figure for generalists is 1.09.

  Panel B of Table 3 replicates Panel A using the Russell 2000 as a benchmark. Consistent with

the overall sample results shown earlier, PMEs against the Russell 2000 are lower for the sample:

means of 1.04 for buyouts, 0.98 for generalist and 1.12 for venture. Only the mean PME for

buyouts is still significantly different from one (at 0.02 level). Median PME values are also

lower in Panel B.

  Overall, Figure 1, Table 2 and Table 3 indicate that, historically, FoFs have provided returns

above those of the S&P 500. FoFs have also, on average, had returns equal or above the Russell

2000 though the margin of outperformance is narrower. This outperformance is after fees since

all performance measures are based on the net-of-fee cash flows to LPs. In addition, Table 2

shows that the high absolute performance in the early years of the industry (IRRs and MOICs in

Table 1) also corresponds to higher performance relative to public markets.




                                                                                                14
   A more complete analysis of FoF benefits to investors requires comparison of FoF and direct

fund performance, which we turn to in the next section. It does appear, however, that on average,

FoFs have historically provided returns higher than those in public markets.


5. Funds of funds and direct fund investing

   As a first step in comparing FoFs and direct funds, Table 4 presents simple regressions to

investigate performance differences between FoFs and single direct funds. Fund performance,

using data from both individual FoFs and individual direct funds, is regressed against a zero-one

dummy variable which equals 1 for a FoF and 0 for a direct fund. All regressions incorporate

vintage year fixed effects.

   Panel A measures performance relative to the S&P 500. Regression I includes all FoFs and

direct funds. The coefficient, equal to -0.07, significant at the 0.05 level, indicates that the

average PME for FoFs is almost 7% less than the comparable PME for direct funds. Regressions

II through IV segment the sample. Regression II includes only buyout funds (both FoF and

direct) and hence compares funds investing in this sub-asset class. Regression III includes only

VC funds while regression IV includes generalist FoFs and all direct funds. FoFs who are

generalists (regression IV) or specialize in buyouts (regression II) have significantly lower PMEs

than direct funds – 11% to 12% less. In contrast, VC FoFs (regression III) have PMEs that are

not statistically different from those achieved by direct VC fund investing.20 The results in Panel

B for the Russell 2000 are nearly identical, both qualitatively and quantitatively.

   The differences in Table 4 across FoF categories are striking. They suggest that VC FoFs

perform quite differently from FoFs in other areas of private equity. Yet Table 4 compares single



   20
      Regressions, not shown, find that PMEs for FoFs focusing outside North America were not significantly
different from the rest of the sample.



                                                                                                        15
FoFs to single direct funds. This approach fails to capture the main reasons, as noted earlier,

many LPs say they invest in FoFs – namely diversification.

   The diversification benefits delivered by FoFs depend on the nature of the underlying

variability in direct fund performance. To illustrate, Figure 2 plots the distribution of PMEs

(against the S&P 500) for our sample of direct funds. Across direct buyout funds, Panel A shows

a standard deviation of 0.55. For direct VC funds, Panel B shows a more dispersed distribution

with a standard deviation of 1.78. The higher standard deviation for VC reflects higher variation

across funds in the same vintage year as well as more variation over time in performance. Panel

B also displays a pronounced gap of 0.37 between mean and median PMEs. Direct VC funds

thus have much more dispersed performance with the mean boosted upwards by the spectacular

performance of very successful funds. In contrast, the spread between mean and median PMEs

for direct buyout funds (Panel A) is only 0.08. The contrast between Panels A and B suggests a

more important role for FoFs in venture capital to diversify across direct funds and vintage years,

and, potentially, to gain access to the top-performing direct funds.

   FoFs diversify across funds and show, as expected, smaller dispersion in performance than

single direct funds. Moreover, the reduction in dispersion is much more pronounced in venture

than in buyout. Across our sample of venture FoFs, the standard deviation of PMEs against the

S&P 500 is 0.57, about one-third of the comparable value (1.78) for direct VC funds; and for

venture FoFs the gap between mean and median PME is 0.15, less than half the gap for direct VC

funds. For buyout FoFs, the standard deviation of PMEs is 0.24, about half the value (0.55) for

direct buyout funds; and the gap between the mean and median is 0.03 compared to 0.08 for

direct buyout funds. Overall the figures show, not surprisingly given the higher underlying

variability in direct venture fund performance, that venture FoFs have higher dispersion in




                                                                                                16
performance than FoFs focusing on buyout. That said, venture FoFs appear to provide larger risk

reduction benefits relative to single funds than do FoFs focusing on buyout.

   The natural benchmarks for FoFs are portfolios of direct funds, not single direct funds. What

types of portfolios do FoF managers create for their LPs? To address this question, we use

detailed information on portfolio composition, which is available for a subset of our sample. The

first block of columns in Table 5 summarizes results for all 190 FoFs for which we have portfolio

information. The columns show patterns of diversification across funds and vintage years. The

mean (median) number of direct funds held is 25.6 (22.5). Moreover, FoFs commit, on average,

18.6% of their capital to direct funds in their first year (i.e. their vintage year).21 The average for

year 2 is 32.9%. By the end of year 3, on average almost 80% of the capital is committed, and by

year 4 over 90%.

   The subsequent columns in Table 5 report the results for the FoF categories. FoFs focusing on

buyouts tend to hold fewer funds that do generalists or VC FoFs. This appears consistent with

higher benefits of diversification in venture because of the underlying variability of returns.

There are similar patterns of vintage year diversification across buyout, generalist and VC FoFs.

   As would be expected, buyout FoFs commit the vast majority of their capital to direct buyout

funds: 87.2% of capital for the median fund. Many buyout FOFs have meaningful allocations to

direct funds investing in mezzanine, distressed debt and special situations; the mean allocation of

16.6% is quite close to the 75th percentile value of 17.6%. Furthermore, a minority of FoFs with

a buyout focus have a smattering of investment in real assets and venture capital.




   21
       Sometimes primary FOF make commitments to direct funds that are in later rounds of closing their fund. In
this instance, the FOF will have a position in a direct fund from a prior vintage year. In our sample these were small
figures, typically well less than 10 % of the FOF. In the figure for year 1 reported in Table 1 we have accumulated all
direct funds in that or prior vintage years.


                                                                                                                   17
   FoFs classified as generalists have, as expected, more broadly diversified portfolios in terms

of sub-asset classes. On average, about 55% of generalists’ portfolios are allocated to buyout,

35% to various stages of VC and the remainder is spread across real assets, mezzanine, distressed

debt, special situations and other. As with buyout FoFs, there is variation across generalists’

portfolios: a fourth of these FoFs have buyout exposures of 65.4% or above and a fourth have

exposures no larger than 45.4%. Similarly, there is variation in how the generalists deploy capital

not allocated to buyout.

   FoFs classified as VC invest, on average, over 85% of their capital in direct VC funds, with

about half of that (40.3%) in early stage direct funds. Direct VC funds pursuing a balanced

approach (i.e. investments across different stages) represent 37.8% of the FoFs’ capital, on

average, while late stage direct venture funds make up less than 10% of capital. Since “balanced”

direct funds have a mix of early and late stage, our figures suggest that over half of capital, on

average, is in early stage VC.

   While VC FoFs, as expected, place most of their capital in venture, Table 5 shows a potential

“style drift” towards buyout for some FoF managers. Over three quarters of all venture FoFs

have some capital in buyout, the average allocation is 15.2%, and over a fourth have buyout

allocations above 20%. We say potential because it is always possible that some funds pursue

strategies that are a mix of venture and buyout. Funds that invest in growth equity – like Oak

Investment Partners and Summit Partners – are particularly difficult to classify. While a VC FoF

may consider such funds as venture, it is possible that Burgiss classifies them as buyout.22

   Behind the average figures, FoFs vary in the number of direct funds they hold and the speed

with which they deploy capital. Looking at the first block of columns in Table 5, about a fourth


   22
      We replicated Table 5 for FoFs started prior to 2000 and again for those started after 2000. For both subsets,
patterns of holdings were similar to those reported in Table 5.


                                                                                                                 18
of FoFs have 15 or fewer direct funds, another fourth of the sample have over 32 funds.

Apparently, some FoFs focus on a relatively small set of funds that they expect to be high

performing. Other FoFs appear to behave more like index funds, spreading their capital across a

large number of direct funds (occasionally over 50). In terms of capital deployment, one fourth

of FoFs have commitments to year 1 of 5.7% or less; and another one fourth have commitments

to year 1 of 24.5% or higher.        For vintage years 5 and onwards, the median value for

commitments is only 2% but some FOFs are still in an investment mode as shown by 75th

percentile value of 12.2% (aggregated over all the vintage years beginning with year 5).

   In summary, portfolios created by FoFs hold, on average, 20 to 30 direct funds and commit the

vast majority of their capital to four vintage years. While general categorizations of FoFs (e.g.

buyout, generalists or venture capital) are useful, they do not always capture style differences in

terms of the portfolios FoFs actually form.


6. Comparing funds of funds to strategies of direct fund investing

   To compare FoFs to direct fund investing, we create synthetic FoFs (portfolios of direct funds)

as performance benchmarks. These synthetic portfolios are comprised of randomly selected

funds that satisfy a specified investment policy for a sub-asset strategy (e.g. buyout or VC) and

diversify across a number of funds and vintage years. As an example, a “naïve” benchmark

strategy for a FoF in buyout could be investing only in direct buyout funds and spreading that

investment over four vintage years to create portfolios of 20 direct buyout funds (5 direct funds

per vintage year beginning with the vintage year of the FoF). We create 10,000 synthetic FoFs

that fit that strategy, resulting in a distribution of PMEs for these synthetic portfolios. We start




                                                                                                 19
with this type of naïve strategy and later adjust it based on characteristics of FoF portfolios

(Table 5) or limitations on investment opportunities.23


6.1 FoF performance relative to naïve benchmarks

   Figure 3 illustrates a “naïve” benchmark distribution created for an individual FoF classified

as buyout and having a 2005 vintage year. The synthetic portfolios contain 20 direct buyout funds

spread over vintage years 2005-2008. Figure 3 shows that the mean PME for that benchmark

strategy was 1.16. If an actual FoF had a PME of 1.18, this would imply an excess PME of .02

(1.18-1.16). That same PME would fall in the 60th percentile of performance. We repeat this

process for each FoF in the sample to get a distribution of excess performance measures.

   Figure 4 shows the distribution of excess PMEs comparing FoFs to the naïve direct investing

strategy. Buyout FoFs are matched against portfolios of direct buyout funds, VC FoFs against

direct venture funds and generalists against a mix of buyout (60%) and venture (40%). Panel A

of Table 6 summarizes the results (using the S&P 500 as the benchmark index). For all FoFs, the

mean excess PME is -0.06, which is significantly negative at the 1% level. Both buyout and

generalist FoFs also have significantly negative average PMEs of -0.06 and -0.10 respectively.

In contrast, the mean excess PME for venture FoFs is +0.02 and is not significantly different

from zero.

   Percentile values across the groupings reveal the same patterns through a different, but

interesting, lens. The average buyout FoF would have been in the 32nd percentile of the synthetic

   23
      Our data do not enable us to match a FoF with the exact direct funds in which it invests. We do, however, have
information on the profiles of the portfolios of direct funds formed (e.g. number of funds). We did simulations both
with and without replacement. The two approaches provided almost identical results in terms of performance
benchmarks and lead to the same conclusions about FoF performance. We report results with replacement. As
expected, the synthetic portfolios have much lower dispersion than single direct funds and the gap between mean and
median performance is drastically reduced. For instance, for the “naïve” buyout (venture) strategy, the gap between
mean and median PME is typically less than 0.01 (0.10) in a vintage year and the vintage year average for the gap is
0.01 (0.049).


                                                                                                                20
funds. The average generalist FoF did not fare much better, being in the 35th percentile. However,

the average VC FoF would have been in the 49th percentile of synthetic funds, suggesting that

managers of VC FoF, on average, largely “earn their fees” by their choice of, and access to, the

direct funds. The percentile figures also provide insight on the benefits of diversification created

by VC FoFs compared to single direct funds. If we benchmark single direct VC funds (not FoFs)

against the naïve synthetic portfolios, the mean ranking is the 39th percentile—well below the 49th

percentile value for VC FoFs. Buyout direct funds, on the other hand, have a mean rank of the

50th percentile against a naïve strategy—well above the comparable figures for buyout and

generalists FoFs. These differences in patterns for VC and buyout FoFs show the large

importance of diversification in venture investing where outsized returns on some investments

play a key role.


6.2 FoF performance relative to informed benchmarks

   Panel B of Table 6 mirrors Panel A, but takes advantage of our holdings data to “inform” the

direct fund benchmark with a mix of sub-asset classes and number of funds reflecting average

portfolios that FoFs actually create. FoFs with a buyout focus are benchmarked against a blend of

20 direct funds, buyout (80%) and other corporate finance (mezzanine, special situations and

distressed debt) funds (20%). For FoFs classified as VC, we benchmark against 28 direct funds,

80% venture and 20% buyout. In the case of generalist FoFs we weight buyout at 60% and VC at

40% across 28 funds. The excess PME performance results in Panel B are essentially the same as

those in Panel A. VC FoFs perform on a par with direct fund investing but buyout and generalists

FoFs perform significantly worse than the direct fund strategy24. If we use the Russell 2000 as the


   24
     There is some downward shift in the percentile ranking of VC FoFs. This is because adding buyout funds in the
informed strategy reduces the dispersion of the synthetic fund distributions against which VC FoFs are benchmarked.


                                                                                                                21
benchmark portfolio, the Excess PME for VC FoFs are hardly affected at all, but for buyout and

generalist FoFs the Excess PME is usually worse by about 0.01 – 0.02, and the percentile

positions fall from the low 40s to the high 30s. These results are also available in an internet

appendix, Table IA1). The general patterns observed in Table 6 are the same if we calculate

excess PME relative to the median, rather than mean, returns (see appendix Table IA2).25

   For the 190 FoFs for which we have holdings information (summarized in Table 5), we create

even more refined benchmarks using FoF-specific (rather than average) figures on number of

funds and allocations across vintage years and sub-asset classes.                       We form synthetic FoFs

assuming an investor can mimic an individual FoF’s allocation strategy but selects direct funds

randomly. These “FoF-level” benchmarks arguably provide a stronger test of FoF fund selection

skills since they assume that an investor can match a FoF’s abilities at vintage year

diversification and sub-asset allocation. Table 7 shows that across all FoFs, the mean excess

PME is -0.05 and significantly negative, against these benchmarks. As in earlier tables, however,

there are differences across FoF categories. Venture FoFs provide returns on a par with the

benchmarks, providing a mean (median) excess PME of -0.02 (0.00), not significantly different

This is true for every vintage year and is expected since the performance of buyout funds is not as variable as it is for
VC funds. The poorer performing VC FoFs thus drop in their percentile scores. In contrast, the percentile rankings of
the stellar performing individual VC FoFs do not shift appreciably since they were already very high and cannot go
much higher. The net result is that the average percentile ranking of VC FoFs is lower against the informed
distribution, even though the mean excess PME is virtually unchanged.
   25
      We also performed a number of further analyses. First, we examined whether the results have changed over
time. We repeated the analysis in Table 6 separately for FoFs formed in or prior to 2000 and those formed
afterwards. For both periods, buyout FoFs, generalist FoFs and FoFs overall had negative excess PMEs. VC FoFs
had a small positive excess PME in the earlier years and zero thereafter, but the difference is not significant. Overall,
the sub-period results echo the conclusions for the entire period. Second, we tested for significant links between a
FOF’s excess PMEs (using the benchmarks in Table 6) and other details of how it structured its portfolio. We
examined the number of direct funds, speed of deploying capital across vintage years and a FoF’s degree of
specialization across sub-asset class (e.g. whether a buyout FoF specialized in buyout or had some allocation to
mezzanine). Both regressions and partitions (quartiles) of the data failed to reveal any significant patterns. Results
are available upon request.




                                                                                                                     22
from zero. Generalist funds have significantly negative performance relative to the benchmarks.

While performance results for buyout FOFs are negative, there are mixed results in terms of

statistical significance: the mean excess PME is not significantly different from zero but the

average percentile value is significantly below 0.50. In summary Table 7 echoes earlier findings:

on average, generalist and buyout FoFs underperform direct investing strategies, but venture

FoFs do not.


6.3 Do FoFs add value by timing their investments?

   We next examine whether FoFs pursue a timing strategy by overweighting “good” vintage

years of direct funds. Prior research shows that performance is higher (lower) for direct funds

that start in periods of smaller (greater) aggregate capital flows into private equity, and that this

effect is more pronounced in venture capital than in buyout. A contrarian timing strategy might

take advantage of this pattern.

   We use aggregate capital flows as indicators of the likely quality of vintage year performance.

Following prior research (see Harris, Jenkinson and Kaplan (2014, 2016)), we measure fund

flows into the industry based on capital committed to U.S. funds – segmented into VC and non-

venture (primarily buyout). We use annual estimates from Private Equity Analyst for the current

and previous vintage years. This sum provides an (imperfect) estimate of the amount of capital

available to fund deals.26 To compare these capital flows over a long period of time, we deflate

the two-year capital commitments by the total value of the U.S. stock market (CRSP total market

index) at the beginning of the vintage year. We assign vintage years into quartiles based on those



   26
       Another method would be to estimate the “dry powder” – capital committed that has not been invested – for
buyouts and VC separately, by year back to the mid-1990s. However, such estimates are only available for recent
years.



                                                                                                             23
flows. Due to the inverse relationship between flows and performance, our top (fourth) quartile

expected performance years are ones with the lowest capital flows.

   To measure vintage year timing, we estimate the amount by which FoFs over- or under-weight

vintage years compared to a “standard” allocation. To illustrate, suppose a FoF started in 1998

and had a policy to commit equal amounts of capital across four years; the standard allocation

would be 25% per year. If the FoF actually allocated 30% in vintage year 1999 (year two for the

FOF), then that year would be over-weighted by 5% (30%-25%= 5%). These weights sum to

zero over the life of the FoF.   We apply these weights to our measure of vintage year quality.

Continuing our example, suppose that 1999 was a good vintage year for direct fund performance

(which we designate as 4 reflecting fourth quartile). The product of the over-weighting and

vintage year quality (0.2 = 0.05 x 4) measures the positive effect of over-weighting that good

year. Summing over all vintage years for the FoF we get a summary measure of timing ability.

The measure is expected to be zero if the FoF has no timing ability and will be positive (negative)

if the FoF systematically over-weights (under-weights) the better vintage years during its life.

   To implement the approach, we use the average from Table 5 to estimate “standard” vintage

year allocations by FoF category. The actual allocations are those of the individual FoF thus

restricting our analysis to the 190 FOFs for which we have holdings data. In our calculations, we

apply venture flows to characterize year quality for VC FoFs and the non-venture flows for

buyout and generalist FoFs.

   For venture FoFs, the mean value of timing is -0.04, which is not significantly different from

zero at the 10% level (p-value is 0.30). The median is also -0.04. This suggests that venture FoFs

do not benefit from timing skills, relative to the standard allocation. Similar results are found for

generalists FoF, which have a statistically insignificant mean (median) value of 0.02 (0.00). In

contrast, for buyout FoFs the mean value of timing is -0.11, which is significantly different from


                                                                                                   24
zero at the 1% level. The median is -0.07. This suggests that, on average, buyout FoFs are

actually hurt by their timing.27

   Given the difficulty of estimating an expected allocation to a vintage year, we do not draw

strong conclusions from this analysis. The analysis, however, does not find any evidence of

superior timing abilities among FoF managers. If anything, they suggest FoF managers focusing

on buyout are, on average, prone to overweight high volume direct fund years, which contributes

to their under-performance of synthetic benchmark portfolios.


6.4 Is performance related to aggregate capital flows into private equity?

   Prior research has found that increased aggregate capital commitments to direct buyout and

VC funds are related to subsequent performance, especially for VC funds. In essence, large

infusions of capital into private equity challenge the ability of direct funds to create value for

their investors. In this section we examine how FoF performance is affected by capital flows. In

addition to examining the scale of capital flows into private equity, we study the proportion of

capital raised by FoFs, which may affect FoFs’ ability to select and gain access to high

performing direct funds. For instance, if the pool of talented FoF managers is limited, increases in

FoF fund raising may lead to performance declines. We limit the analysis to vintage years from

1993 onwards when our data have more substantial coverage of FoFs.

   To measure aggregate fund flows into private equity, as described in the prior section of the

paper, we use capital commitments from Private Equity Analyst (PEA) for the current and

previous vintage years, scaled by the total value of the stock market. PEA data allow us to

   27
       We repeated this analysis assuming a standard allocation of spreading capital equally over four years. The
results are very similar and conclusions unchanged. We also repeated the analysis using two alternative definitions
of year quality. One was the actual percentage value of the capital flows, not grouped into vintage year quartiles. The
other was vintage year quartiles based on the mean PME of direct funds from that vintage year (i.e. the actual ex-post
average performance for venture and non-venture separately). In each instance, the results are similar and the
conclusions about timing unchanged.


                                                                                                                   25
identify aggregate capital flows according to a venture/non-venture classification. Since the latter

is dominated by flows into buyout funds, the analysis in this section focusses on two categories

(venture and buyout) separately.

   Over the 1993-2007 period, the two-year total capital commitments to venture funds average

0.32% (median of 0.27%) of the stock market value. The two-year capital commitments to

buyout funds are higher with an average of 0.85% (median of 0.80%). There are quite different

patterns in venture and buyout. For instance, venture capital commitments peaked in vintages

2000 and 2001 at about 0.7% and plummeted thereafter. Buyout capital commitments, on the

other hand, peaked at over 2% in the vintage year 2007.

   We also estimate the size of capital flowing through FoFs relative to aggregate capital flows.

Again, we do this separately for venture and buyout, using data from PEA and Burgiss28. The

relative size of capital flowing through FoFs also differs between venture and buyouts. In

venture, FoFs account for an average of 17.63% (median of 17.35%) of the capital for venture

investing. In contrast, FoFs play a smaller role in buyouts: the average is 9.86% (median of

10.72%). Again, the two groupings also show different patterns over time. For instance, in

venture capital the ratio peaked at over 30% in the 2006 and 2007 vintages. For buyouts, the peak

was in 1999 and 2000 at over 15%29.

   Table 8 produces estimates of the impact of capital flows on our estimates of excess PMEs.

Separately for VC and buyouts, we regress the average annual excess PME on total capital

   28
       Since PEA does not report subcategories of FoF capital, we estimated the amounts going to venture and
buyouts using percentages derived from Burgiss data. We applied the percentage split to the PEA figure on total
capital raised by FoFs to create dollar estimates of funds raised by FoFs targeted at direct funds in venture and
buyouts. Finally, these dollar figures are compared to PEA total commitments (not just those from FoFs). The ratio
of two year sums (current and previous vintage years) provides an estimate of the proportion of the capital for
investment in a sector (venture or buyout) that comes from FoFs. Note that while we have estimates of annual total
capital commitments we do not have FoF specific data on fund size.
    29
       For the 1993-2007 period, the time series correlation between the two metrics of capital flows (i.e., the size of
flows relative to the stock market and the proportion of capital represented by FoFs) is essentially zero for venture
(correlation of 0.03) and is 0.25 for non-venture.


                                                                                                                    26
commitments and on the percent of capital going through FoFs. We test for the sensitivity of

results using two different time periods to define capital flow variables. The first uses the

variables explained earlier for the FoF’s vintage year. To reflect FoF investments over a number

of vintages, the second measure takes a four-year average beginning with the FoF’s vintage year.

In general, while we find a negative coefficient on total capital committed, echoing findings from

earlier research (e.g. Kaplan and Schoar (2005), Harris, Jenkinson and Kaplan (2014, 2016)), the

coefficients are not statistically significant. We also find that the proportion of capital, for VC

and buyouts separately, raised by FoFs has a negative impact on FoF performance, but only for

one of the VC models is the effect statistically significant.

   Overall, then, the results in Table 8 do not uncover strong, statistically significant patterns in

the effects of capital flows on how FoFs perform compared to direct funds. Given the aggregate

time-series nature of our analysis, the limited history of the FoF industry and the inherent

measurement difficulties, perhaps it is not surprising that no strong patterns emerge.


7. Limitations on direct fund investing

   The direct fund investing strategies in the prior section assumed that an investor could

randomly select any direct fund that satisfied a selected vintage year and sub-asset class profile.

In practice, however, the ability to identify top performing funds and, more importantly, the

ability to gain access to some of them, is inherently difficult and may be limited (as illustrated by

research on performance persistence: Kaplan and Schoar (2005), Korteweg and Sorensen (2017)

and Harris, Jenkinson, Kaplan and Stucke (2014)). These constraints are likely to be particularly

relevant for smaller investors or those who have little or no experience of investing in private

equity, for whom employing a FoF manager is the obvious alternative to building an internal

capability and constructing a portfolio of direct fund investments.



                                                                                                  27
   FoFs often cite improved fund access and selection as important sources of value to their

investors. Such features may be especially valuable in venture capital where the distribution of

fund returns is highly dispersed (see Figure 3) and where it is likely that access to top funds is

more restricted. To illustrate the importance of having top-performing funds in a portfolio, we

create synthetic FoFs, as before, but impose limitations on the set of direct funds to be used. We

then compare FoFs to these new benchmarks. We consider four hypothetical scenarios in which

either the synthetic FoF does not have access to a fund or has a reduced chance of being in the

fund (either due to access or selection skill).

   Panel A of Table 9 excludes the single top performing (as measured by PME) direct buyout

fund in each vintage year and the single top-performing venture fund for the vintage year. The

results are striking. While buyout and generalist FoFs still underperform, venture capital FoFs

now show an average positive excess PME of 0.10 (significant at the 5% level). This positive

performance attests to the outsized effects on returns in venture capital from a small number of

very successful funds. Panel B excludes the top deciles of buyout and venture funds for each

vintage year and shows that, overall, FoFs outperform this handicapped direct investing—an

average excess PME of 0.07 (significant at the 1% level). This is driven by the performance of

venture capital FoFs which have an average excess PME of 0.20 which places the average

venture FoF in the top quartile of the constrained synthetic FOF distribution.

   Panels C and D of Table 9 do not eliminate any direct funds but simply change the probability

of investing in a high performing fund. In Panel C, the probability that a synthetic FoF invests in

a top-decile fund is reduced to half that of being in other funds. Panel D halves the probability for

the entire top quartile of direct funds. In both panels, venture FoFs outperform direct fund




                                                                                                  28
investing while buyout and generalist FoFs do not. In Panel D, the excess PME for venture FoFs

is 0.15, which is significant at the 1% level.30

   Clearly the strategies presented in Table 9 are hypothetical and some require perfect

knowledge of what funds will be top performers. They do illustrate, however, that differences in

fund access and selection skills can have a dramatic impact on the relative merits of FoFs and

direct fund investing, especially in venture capital. Since the probability of new investors gaining

access to top-performing VC funds is extremely low, these constrained benchmarks are

particularly relevant and strengthen the case for employing an additional layer of intermediation.


8. The implicit costs of FoFs

   In this section, we use our results on PMEs to provide rough estimates of the amount of

internal costs related to direct investing that would be necessary to justify the use of the different

types of FoFs.

   As shown in Section 5, our findings indicate that VC FoFs earn their fees (compared to direct

investing) under the assumption that investors in direct funds can randomly access the pools of

VC funds. VC FoFs more than earn their fees if investors in direct funds are restricted in their

access to top performing funds (as illustrated by the positive excess PMEs in Table 9).

   In contrast, buyout and generalist do not earn their fees if investors in direct funds can

randomly access the relevant pool of funds. Our estimates in Table 6 indicate that buyout and

generalist FoFs generate excess PMEs of -0.05 and -0.10, respectively. We can obtain a rough

estimate of the annual internal costs (or fees) that would lower a PME by those amounts.




   30
      All the synthetic fund strategies matched against FOFs in Table 9 have mean PMEs above unity across vintage
years. For instance, for Panel D the mean (median) value of the synthetic fund PME for buyout is 1.13(1.11), for
generalist is 1.16(1.10) and for venture is 1.12 (1.02).


                                                                                                              29
   To do this we create a hypothetical portfolio that results from direct investing and calculate

two PMEs: one without any internal costs and one adjusted downward for internal costs. We then

see what amount of internal costs would result in a difference of -.05 (or -.10) in the two PME

figures. The resulting cost figure thus has the same PME impact on the investor as investing in a

FoF with an excess PME of -.05 (or -.10). We make the following assumptions: (1) the internal

investor invests an equal amount in direct funds in each of the first four years; (2) each direct

fund invests an equal amount in companies in each of the fund’s first four years; (3) investments

in companies are outstanding for five years; (4) internal costs are the same each year; and (5)

internal costs reduce the numerator of the PME calculation. The resulting synthetic fund life,

therefore, is thirteen years. We implicitly assume that the internal investor can pay enough to

recruit suitable staff to implement this strategy and can randomly access the relevant pool of

funds.

   An excess PME of -0.05 over the thirteen-year life of the synthetic FoF would correspond to

an expense (internal cost) of roughly 0.38% per year if the public markets were flat over the life

of the fund. If the public markets appreciate, then the expenses needed to lower the PME by 0.05

would be higher because they are effectively discounted by the public market return. Under the

assumption that public markets appreciate by 8% per year, similar to the appreciation since 2000,

this would correspond to an expense of 0.47% per year. At 0.38% (0.47%) per year, an investor

could afford to spend $380 ($470) thousand per $100 million invested in private equity to create

a direct capability instead of investing in buyout FoFs.

   Similarly, an excess PME of -0.10 over the thirteen-year life of the synthetic FoF would

correspond to an expense of 0.77% per year if the stock market were flat. If the public markets

appreciate by 8% per year, this would correspond to 0.94% per year. At 0.77% (0.94%) per year,




                                                                                               30
an investor could afford to spend $770 ($940) thousand per $100 million invested in private

equity to create a direct capability instead of investing in generalist FoFs.

   Because creating an internal or direct investing capability has a large fixed cost component,

the attractiveness of doing so likely increases with the scale of an investor’s commitment to the

private equity asset class. Moreover, smaller investors may be unable to invest in a sufficient

number of direct funds to create diversification benefits.




                                                                                              31
9. Conclusions

   In this paper, we benchmark FoF performance (net of all management and performance fees)

against both public equity markets and strategies of direct fund investment. Our research takes

advantage of detailed, fund-level cash flows from Burgiss on both FoFs and direct funds. We also

provide information on the types of portfolios that FoFs form. Our measures of FoF performance

are through year-end 2012 and cover FoFs that were raised between 1987 through 2007.

   We find that FoFs provide returns equal to or above those from investing in public equities.

Thus, exposure to private equity through FoFs would have increased realized returns relative to

public equities for investors. This is true even after accounting for fees that occur at both the FoF

and direct fund level. This result reflects the general out-performance, relative to public equities,

of buyout funds throughout the sample period, and by VC funds in much of the sample period

except for the Internet bust.

   In comparison to portfolios of direct funds, we find that overall – across all types of private

equity – FoFs have lower returns than do portfolios of direct funds. This lower performance is

significantly different from zero for FoFs that focus on buyouts or are generalist. In contrast,

FoFs in VC perform roughly on a par with portfolios formed by “random” direct fund investing

even after fees. Moreover, strategies for investing in direct funds may be constrained by limits

on fund access or manager selection skills. We show that FoFs in venture capital often out-

perform direct investing handicapped by these limitations – which are likely to be particularly

relevant to investors without a long track record of investing in successful VC funds. Given that

such funds typically limit access to new investors, some established VC FoF managers are able to

provide their investors access to top-performing funds. Therefore, the evidence suggests that VC

FoF managers are more likely, through fund selection or access, to overcome their additional




                                                                                                  32
layer of fees than are buyout FoFs. In addition, our analysis suggests that VC FoFs create more

risk reduction through diversification than is true in buyout.

   Our results suggest that for non-VC FoFs, both the amount of money committed to FoF

managers and the fees charged by them might come under pressure. Indeed, according to Private

Equity Analyst, commitments to FoFs have represented only 5% of total commitments to buyout

and VC funds from 2013 to 2016 compared to over 10% between 2000 and 2007. And, although

direct evidence on the fees and profit shares charged by FoF managers is hard to obtain,

discussions with industry practitioners suggests that these, too, have been on a downward trend in

recent years.

   Our results also are broadly consistent with recent research on the persistence of GP

performance. Harris, Jenkinson, Kaplan and Stucke (2014) find that the performance of direct

venture funds has been persistent over time while performance persistence of direct buyout funds

has attenuated in recent years. Our finding that FoFs focusing on buyouts underperform direct

fund investing (likely because of the additional FoF fees) suggests that buyout FoFs as a group

are unable to choose direct funds that will outperform. This, in turn, is consistent with a lack of

persistence in buyout funds.

   In contrast, the result that venture FoFs perform as well as the average direct venture fund

(despite the additional FOF fees) is consistent with the ability of some venture FoFs to choose

and gain access to direct venture funds that will outperform. This is consistent with persistence

in VC returns. However, disentangling the extent to which FoF managers can add value as a

result of superior access to managers that LPs would find it difficult to invest in directly, or

whether FoFs add value by choosing between (generally) available managers, remains an

important topic for future research.




                                                                                                33
References

Ang, A., M. Rhodes-Kropf and R. Zhao, 2008, Do Funds-of-Funds Deserve their Fees-on-Fees?

       Journal of Investment Management, Vol. 6, No. 4, 34-58.

Braun, R., T. Jenkinson and C. Schemmerl, 2017, Adverse Selection and the Performance of

       Private Equity Co-Investments. Working paper, available at https://ssrn.com/abstract-

       2871458.

Brown, S., W. Goetzmann and B. Lang, 2004, Fees on Fees in Funds of Funds. Journal of

       Investment Management.

Cornelius, P., T. Meyer, C. Diller and D. Guennoc, 2013, Mastering Illiquidity: Risk

       Management for Portfolios of Limited Partnership Funds. Wiley.

Dow Jones, 2010. Private Equity Funds: State of the Market.

Fang, L., V. Ivashina and J. Lerner, 2015, The Disintermediation of Financial Markets: Direct

       Investing in Private Equity. Journal of Financial Economics, 116,160-178.

Fung, W., D. Hsieh, N. Naik and T. Ramadorai, 2008, Hedge Funds: Performance, Risk and

       Capital Formation. Journal of Finance, Vol. LXIII, No. 4.

Gresch, N. and R. von Wyss, 2011, Private Equity Funds of Funds vs. Funds: A Performance

       Comparison. The Journal of Private Equity, Vol. 14, No. 2, 43-58.

Harris, R., T. Jenkinson, and R. Stucke, 2010, A White Paper on Private Equity Research. UAI

       Working Paper.

Harris R., T. Jenkinson and S. Kaplan, 2014, Private Equity Performance: What do we Know?

       Journal of Finance, 69 (5), 1851-1882.

Harris, R., T. Jenkinson and S. Kaplan, 2016, How Do Private Equity Investments Perform

       Compared to Public Equity? Journal of Investment Management 14, 1-24.

Harris, R., T. Jenkinson, S. Kaplan and R. Stucke, 2014, Has Persistence Persisted in Private


                                                                                          34
       Equity? Evidence from Buyout and Venture Capital Funds. Working paper, SSRN

       2304808.

Kaplan, S. N., and A. Schoar, 2005, Private Equity Returns: Persistence and Capital flows.

       Journal of Finance 60, 1791-1823.

Korteweg, A. and M. Sorensen, 2017. Skill and Luck in Private Equity Performance. Journal of

       Financial Economics, forthcoming.

Lerner, J., A. Schoar and W. Wongsunwai, 2007, Smart Institutions, Foolish Choices? The

       Limited Partner Performance Puzzle. Journal of Finance 62:731-64.

Metrick, Andrew, and Ayako Yasuda, 2010, The Economics of Private Equity Funds. Review of

       Financial Studies 23: 2303-2341.

Preqin, 2014, The 2013 Preqin Private Equity Fund of Funds Review.

Robinson, David T., and Berk Sensoy, 2013, “Do Private Equity Fund Managers Earn Their

       Fees? Compensation, Ownership, and Cash Flow Performance,” Review of Financial

       Studies, 26, 2760-97.

Sensoy, B., Y. Wang and M. Weisbach, 2014, Limited Partner Performance and the Maturing of

       the Private Equity Industry. Journal of Financial Economics 112, 320-343.

Sorensen, M. and R. Jagannathan, 2015, The Public Market Equivalent and Private Equity

       Performance. Financial Analysts Journal 71, 43-50.




                                                                                         35
Figure 1. This figure plots the histogram of the Public Market Equivalents (PMEs) for the 294
funds of funds in our sample. The sample covers the period 1987 to 2007. The top panel reports
the PMEs using the S&P 500 as the benchmark portfolio. The bottom panel reports the PMEs
using the Russell 2000 as the benchmark portfolio. The solid (dashed) vertical line in each panel
denotes the sample mean (median).




                                                                                              36
Figure 2. This figure plots the histogram of the Public Market Equivalents (PMEs) relative to the
S&P 500 for the direct funds in our sample. The sample covers the period 1987 to 2007. The top
panel reports the PMEs for buyout funds. The bottom panel reports the PMEs for venture capital
funds. The solid (dashed) vertical line in each panel denotes the sample mean (median).




                                                                                              37
Figure 3. This figure plots the histogram of S&P 500 PMEs for the synthetic naive buyout funds
of funds for vintage year 2005. These synthetic portfolios are formed by the procedure outlined in
the text. The dashed vertical line denotes the sample mean. The solid vertical line denotes the
PME for an example fund of funds in our sample.




Figure 4. This figure plots the histogram of the Excess PME for the 294 funds of funds in our
sample. Excess PME is measured relative to the synthetic naive funds of funds. These synthetic
portfolios are formed by the procedure outlined in the text. The sample covers the period 1987 to
2007. The solid (dashed) vertical line denotes the sample mean (median).



                                                                                               38
Table 1
This table presents average and median internal rates of return (IRR) and investment multiples (total value
to paid in, TVPI) for all funds of funds (FoFs) in the Burgiss database and in Preqin. IRR and TVPI
numbers are as of December 2012.

                              Number of FoFs     IRR Average      IRR Median       TVPI Average     TVPI Median
Vintage                      Burgiss Preqin    Burgiss Preqin   Burgiss Preqin   Burgiss Preqin   Burgiss Preqin

1996 and earlier              14       44       25.4    28.7     15.6    24.5     3.02    2.48     2.27    2.48
1997                          8        11       22.5    14.6     10.7    6.9      1.76    1.36     1.60    1.36
1998                          17       18       4.2     6.2      5.7     6.1      1.27    1.38     1.35    1.38
1999                          18       29       4.4     4.0      4.0     3.6      1.26    1.24     1.27    1.24
2000                          25       35       6.7     7.2      5.4     6.5      1.45    1.33     1.36    1.33
2001                          14       47       10.4    9.4      10.8    9.7      1.56    1.54     1.63    1.54
2002                          9        25       9.9     10.6     10.3    9.6      1.50    1.55     1.47    1.55
2003                          23       35       9.6     8.4      9.6     8.0      1.45    1.43     1.49    1.43
2004                          25       45       5.5     7.7      6.0     6.7      1.28    1.34     1.28    1.34
2005                          35       70       5.0     7.0      5.3     5.5      1.24    1.24     1.24    1.24
2006                          60       82       5.5     5.6      5.3     5.2      1.23    1.19     1.21    1.19
2007                          46       102      5.9     6.0      6.2     6.2      1.19    1.18     1.18    1.18

1987-2007                     294      543      7.6      9.1     6.2      6.8     1.39    1.28     1.27    1.28
1997-2007                     280      499      6.7      7.2     6.0      6.4     1.31    1.27     1.26    1.27

Vintage year average 97-07                      8.1      7.9     7.2      6.7     1.38    1.34     1.37    1.34




                                                                                                              39
Table 2
This table presents average and median PME (public market equivalent) figures based on the S&P 500
and the Russell 2000 total return indices for all funds of funds (FoFs) in the Burgiss database.

                             Number             PME S&P 500                  PME Russell 2000
Vintage Year                 of FoFs   P25    Average Median   P75    P25    Average Median     P75

1996 and earlier               14      0.90    1.59    1.11    2.01   0.96    1.85     1.04     2.49
1997                           8       0.79    1.49    1.34    1.74   0.65    1.31     0.99     1.44
1998                           17      1.02    1.11    1.22    1.30   0.77    0.86     0.92     1.03
1999                           18      1.00    1.08    1.09    1.23   0.76    0.86     0.85     1.00
2000                           25      0.93    1.17    1.11    1.20   0.82    0.98     0.93     1.04
2001                           14      0.99    1.26    1.25    1.46   0.92    1.13     1.11     1.31
2002                           9       1.17    1.22    1.20    1.26   1.08    1.12     1.10     1.16
2003                           23      1.10    1.22    1.24    1.30   1.02    1.14     1.16     1.22
2004                           25      0.97    1.10    1.11    1.19   0.91    1.04     1.05     1.12
2005                           35      1.04    1.07    1.07    1.13   0.96    1.00     1.01     1.06
2006                           60      0.96    1.05    1.03    1.11   0.89    0.99     0.98     1.05
2007                           46      0.95    1.00    0.98    1.05   0.89    0.94     0.94     0.99

1987-2007                     294      0.97    1.13    1.08    1.22   0.89    1.04     1.00     1.09
1997-2007                     280      0.97    1.11    1.08    1.20   0.89    1.00     0.99     1.09

Vintage year average 97-07             0.99    1.16    1.15    1.27   0.88    1.03     1.00     1.13




                                                                                                       40
Table 3
This table presents average (Avg) and median (Med) of PMEs for buyout, generalist, and venture capital
funds of funds in Burgiss. Panel A reports PMEs relative to the S&P 500 and Panel B reports PMEs
relative to the Russell 2000.



Panel A: PME S&P 500

                    Buyout Focus      Generalist Focus          VC Focus               All FoFs
Vintage Year   N        Avg Med      N     Avg Med         N      Avg Med         N      Avg Med

≤ 1997          4      1.38   1.42    8    1.06    0.93    10     2.02   2.00    22     1.55    1.26
1998/99        11      1.20   1.23   18    1.11    1.15     6     0.88   0.81    35      1.1    1.16
2000/01        16      1.46   1.39   13    1.16    1.13    10     0.85   0.84    39      1.2    1.13
2002/03        15      1.25   1.24    9    1.22    1.20     8     1.17   1.16    32     1.22    1.23
2004/05        26      1.08   1.10   16    1.07    1.07    18     1.09   1.13    60     1.08     1.1
2006/07        63      1.04   1.03   23    1.03    0.99    20     1.01   0.99    106    1.03    1.01

1987-2007      135     1.14   1.11   87    1.10    1.10    72     1.16   1.01    294    1.13    1.08
1997-2007      132     1.14   1.11   83    1.09    1.10    65     1.07   0.99    280    1.11    1.08

Panel B: PME Russell 2000

                 Buyout Focus         Generalist Focus       VC Focus                  All FoFs
Vintage Year   N     Avg Med         N     Avg Med         N   Avg Med            N      Avg Med

≤ 1997          4      1.32   1.24    8    1.03    0.84    10     2.29   2.09     22    1.66    1.11
1998/99        11      0.92   0.99   18    0.88    0.87     6     0.69   0.62     35    0.86    0.86
2000/01        16      1.24   1.25   13    1.00    0.97    10     0.74   0.74     39    1.03    0.97
2002/03        15      1.16   1.17    9    1.12    1.10     8     1.10   1.08    32     1.14    1.16
2004/05        26      1.02   1.02   16    1.01    1.01    18     1.03   1.05    60     1.02    1.03
2006/07        63      0.97   0.95   23    0.97    0.94    20     0.96   0.94    106    0.97    0.95

1987-2007      135     1.04   1.02   87    0.98    0.98    72     1.12   0.95    294    1.04    1.00
1997-2007      132     1.04   1.02   83    0.97    0.98    65     0.98   0.94    280    1.00    0.99




                                                                                                   41
Table 4
This table reports regression results where the dependent variable measures the PME (public market
equivalent) of a fund relative to the S&P 500 (Panel A) and the Russell 2000 (Panel B). The sample
includes both direct funds and funds of funds for the period 1987-2007. The sample includes 294 funds of
funds (135 buyout, 87 generalist, and 72 venture capital) and 1,828 direct funds (880 venture capital and
948 non-venture (primarily buyout)). Fund of Funds is a binary variable equal to 1.0 when the fund is a
fund of funds and equal to 0.0, otherwise. Column I includes all funds, Column II includes funds
classified as buyout, Column III includes funds classified as venture capital, and Column IV includes
funds classified as generalist. Vintage year effects are fixed. *, **, *** denotes significance at the 10, 5
and 1 percent levels, respectively.


Panel A: PME using S&P 500


                      All Funds of Funds      Buyout Focus             VC focus            Generalist
Intercept                   1.35***               1.22***              1.49***               1.34***
Fund of Funds               -0.07**              -0.11***               -0.01               -0.12***

Observations                 2,122                 1,083                 952                  1,915

R-Squared                     0.06                 0.09                  0.14                 0.05
Adj. R-Squared                0.05                 0.07                  0.12                 0.04

Panel B: PME using Russell 2000



                      All Funds of Funds      Buyout Focus             VC focus            Generalist
Intercept                   1.40***               1.19***              1.61***               1.39***
Fund of Funds                -0.06*              -0.10***               -0.002              -0.13***

Observations                 2,122                 1,083                 952                  1,915

R-Squared                     0.08                 0.07                  0.17                 0.08
Adj. R-Squared                0.07                 0.05                  0.15                 0.07




                                                                                                         42
Table 5
This table gives information on the portfolio composition of funds of funds. It presents the patterns of investments into primary direct funds by
funds of funds in the Burgiss database for which detailed information on the underlying portfolio is available. We distinguish fund investments
across the vintage year of direct funds (i.e., a fund of funds’ investment year) and sub-asset class. The sample covers the period 1987 to 2007.
Figures represent the percentage of a fund of fund’s capital committed to primary direct funds for the lower quartile (P25), average (mean),
median, and upper quartile (P75). Mezz/DD/SS includes mezzanine, distressed debt and special situations as identified by Burgiss.

                    All Funds of Funds (n=190)            Buyout (n=83)                  Generalist (n=54)              Venture Capital (n=53)
                  P25     Avg      Med      P75   P25     Avg     Med      P75     P25    Avg       Med      P75    P25     Avg     Med       P75

Number of Funds   15.0    25.6    22.5     32.0   14.0    21.4    19.0    28.0    16.0    30.2     26.0      35.0   18.0    27.6    26.0     35.0

Year 1             5.7    18.6    13.2     24.5    6.0    18.5    13.3    24.5     5.3    19.9     14.2      25.9    5.4    17.5     9.6     22.7
Year 2            19.0    32.9    31.2     44.8   18.4    32.1    32.0    43.8    20.6    35.9     34.5      48.1   19.0    31.1    27.7     42.4
Year 3            12.6    26.7    27.0     37.8   12.9    27.2    26.8    36.8     6.6    22.4     24.3      33.8   17.9    30.1    31.4     41.3
Year 4              --    12.1    8.8      19.8     --    11.5     8.1    18.4      --    13.0     11.5      22.7    0.4    12.0     8.3     21.8
Year 5+             --     9.8    2.0      12.2     --    10.7     1.9    14.6      --     8.9     4.3       12.2     --    9.2      1.4     11.1

Buyout            20.8    52.3    54.7     84.4   76.5    76.2    87.2    94.3    45.4    55.1     54.7      65.4    3.1    12.1     8.9     21.0
Mezz/DD/SS         --      8.7    0.5       7.7    --     16.6     4.9    17.6      --     5.1     4.1        7.7     --    0.1       --      --
Real Assets        --      1.1     --        --    --     1.0       --      --      --     1.9      --        3.7     --    0.3       --      --
VC Early           --     16.9    9.4      30.2    --     1.7       --     3.4     5.4    17.4     15.1      26.9   27.9    40.3    41.2     49.1
VC Balanced        --     15.7    9.7      25.7    --     2.1       --     3.4     8.9    14.7     14.2      20.3   29.7    37.8    37.9     46.0
VC Late            --      3.8    0.3       5.8    --     0.8       --      --      --     2.9     1.7        5.2    3.6    9.4      7.4     13.7
Other              --      1.5     --        --    --     1.5       --      --      --     3.0      --         --     --     --       --      --
Table 6
This table reports summary statistics for performance metrics of Funds of Funds PMEs relative to Synthetic Funds of Funds PMEs. The benchmark
portfolio for the calculation of PME is the S&P 500. Excess PME is the difference in the Fund of Funds PME and the mean PME of the Synthetic
Funds of Funds in the same strategy and vintage year. Percentile PME is the percentile of the Fund of Funds PME in the distribution of Synthetic
Funds of Funds PMEs in the same strategy and vintage year. Panel A constructs synthetic funds of funds based on the naive strategy outlined in the
text. Panel B constructs synthetic funds of funds based on the informed strategy outlined in the text. For the averages, we report the significance of
the test of the hypothesis that Excess PME equals 0.0 and Percentile PME equals 50.0. *, **, *** denotes significance at the 10, 5 and 1 percent
levels, respectively.

Panel A: Naïve Synthetic Funds of Funds

                     All Funds of Funds (n=294)            Buyout (n=135)                   Generalist (n=87)                Venture Capital (n=72)
                   P25     Avg      Med      P75    P25     Avg     Med      P75     P25     Avg       Med      P75    P25       Avg     Med       P75

Excess PME        -0.15 -0.06*** -0.07       0.03   -0.16 -0.06*** -0.08     0.01    -0.16 -0.10*** -0.09       0.02   -0.08     0.02    -0.03    0.06
Percentile PME      6     37***    27         69      3     32***    14       58       6     35***    26         63      22       49       49      74

Panel B: Informed Synthetic Funds of Funds

                     All Funds of Funds (n=294)            Buyout (n=135)                   Generalist (n=87)                Venture Capital (n=72)
                   P25     Avg      Med      P75    P25     Avg     Med      P75     P25     Avg       Med      P75    P25       Avg     Med       P75

Excess PME        -0.16 -0.05*** -0.06       0.03   -0.15 -0.05*** -0.07     0.02    -0.17 -0.10*** -0.09       0.03   -0.13     0.01    -0.04    0.04
Percentile PME      4     35***    19         67      3     34***    17       60       3     32***    17         67      9       42*       41      73




                                                                                                                                                     44
Table 7
This table analyses performance of funds of funds where we have detailed holdings data. It reports summary statistics for performance metrics of
Funds of Funds PMEs relative to Synthetic Funds of Funds PMEs. The benchmark portfolio for the calculation of PME is the S&P 500. Excess
PME is the difference in the Fund of Funds PME and the mean PME of the Synthetic Funds of Funds in the same strategy and vintage year.
Percentile PME is the percentile of the Fund of Funds PME in the distribution of Synthetic Funds of Funds PMEs in the same strategy and vintage
year. Synthetic funds of funds are constructed using the Fund of Fund-level benchmarking strategy outlined in the text. For the averages, we report
the significance of the test of the hypothesis that Excess PME equals 0.0 and Percentile PME equals 50.0. *, **, *** denotes significance at the 10,
5 and 1 percent levels, respectively.

                    All Funds of Funds (n=190)             Buyout (n=83)                   Generalist (n=54)                  Venture Capital (n=53)
                  P25     Avg      Med      P75    P25     Avg      Med     P75     P25     Avg       Med      P75    P25         Avg      Med       P75

Excess PME       -0.12   -0.05***   -0.03   0.04   -0.11   -0.01   -0.03   0.03    -0.20   -0.12***   -0.06    0.03   -0.12      -0.02     0.00    0.09
Percentile PME     15      43***      39     67      17    42**      37     66       10     38***       28      63      21         48       57      72




                                                                                                                                                       45
Table 8
This table analyses the effect of aggregate capital flows into private equity on FoF returns. The table
reports regression results where the dependent variable measures PMEs of FoF relative to synthetic FoF.
The benchmark portfolio for the calculation is the S&P 500. Excess PME is the difference between the
FoF PME and the mean PME of the synthetic FoF in the same strategy and vintage year. Excess PMEs are
then averaged by vintage year. Total Funds Raised/Stock Market Capitalization is calculated by summing
the capital commitments to all private equity funds, separately for venture and buyouts (as estimated by
Private Equity Analyst) in the current and previous vintage years, and then taking the ratio of this sum to
the aggregate U.S. stock market value at the start of the current vintage year. Percent of Funds Raised by
FoFs is calculated by summing the capital commitments to FoFs (as estimate by Private Equity Analyst)
in the current and previous vintage years and dividing by the sum of capital commitments to all private
equity funds (as estimated by Private Equity Analyst) in the current and previous vintage years. *, **, ***
denote significance at the 10, 5, and 1 percent levels respectively.

Panel A: Buyout Funds
                                                         Single Year Flows               4-yr average flows
                                                   I             II        III      IV            V         VI
Intercept                                         0.04         0.33        0.40     0.00        0.29       0.52
Total Funds Raised/Stock Market Capitalisation   -7.48                     -7.8    -2.76                 -14.77
Percent of Funds Raised by FoFs                                -2.98      -2.97                -2.46      -3.05

Number of observations                            14            13         13       14          13         13

R-squared                                         0.01         0.40       0.42      0.00        0.10      0.17
Adjusted R-squared                               -0.07         0.35       0.30     -0.08        0.01      0.00
Panel B: Venture Capital Funds
                                                         Single Year Flows               4-yr average flows
                                                   I             II        III      IV            V         VI
Intercept                                         0.10        0.36*      0.74**     0.05        0.36     0.78**
Total Funds Raised/Stock Market Capitalisation   -20.77                  -72.91    -3.95                 -68.04
Percent of Funds Raised by FoFs                                -1.32    -1.95***               -1.21      -2.03

Number of observations                            17            12         12       17          12         12

R-squared                                         0.00         0.14       0.42      0.00        0.10      0.18
Adjusted R-squared                               -0.06         0.05       0.30     -0.07        0.01      0.00




                                                                                                                 46
Table 9
This table analyzes the fund of funds performance relative to constrained direct investing. It reports summary statistics for performance metrics of
Funds of Funds PMEs relative to Synthetic Funds of Funds PMEs. The benchmark portfolio for the calculation of PME is the S&P 500. Excess
PME is the difference in the Fund of Funds PME and the mean PME of the Synthetic Funds of Funds in the same strategy and vintage year.
Percentile PME is the percentile of the Fund of Funds PME in the distribution of Synthetic Funds of Funds PMEs in the same strategy and vintage
year. Panel A constructs synthetic funds of funds based on the naive strategy outlined in the text excluding the direct fund with the highest PME in
each strategy-vintage year pair. Panel B constructs synthetic funds of funds based on the naive strategy outlined in the text excluding the direct
funds in the top decile of PME in each strategy-vintage year pair. Panel C constructs synthetic funds of funds based on the naive strategy outlined
in the text with the direct funds in the top decile of PME in each strategy-vintage year pair half as likely to be selected into the synthetic fund of
funds as direct funds not in the top decile. Panel D constructs synthetic funds of funds based on the naive strategy outlined in the text with the
direct funds in the top quartile of PME in each strategy-vintage year pair half as likely to be selected into the synthetic fund of funds as direct funds
not in the top quartile. For the averages, we report the significance of the test of the hypothesis that Excess PME equals 0.0 and Percentile PME
equals 50.0. *, **, *** denotes significance at the 10, 5 and 1 percent levels, respectively.



Panel A: Excluding Top Performing Direct Fund

                    All Funds of Funds (n=294)              Buyout (n=135)                    Generalist (n=87)            Venture Capital (n=72)
                   P25     Avg      Med P75           P25    Avg Med P75               P25      Avg Med P75             P25     Avg     Med P75

Excess PME     -0.11        0.00    -0.03    0.07    -0.12 -0.03* -0.05       0.04    -0.12 -0.05* -0.04       0.08    -0.05    0.10*     0.03    0.13
Percentile PME   8         44***     37       82       4   37*** 20            72       8    42**   36          81      30      59**       66      90

Panel B: Excluding Top Decile of Direct Funds

                    All Funds of Funds (n=294)              Buyout (n=135)                    Generalist (n=87)            Venture Capital (n=72)
                   P25     Avg      Med P75           P25    Avg Med P75               P25      Avg Med P75             P25     Avg     Med P75

Excess PME     -0.04 0.07*** 0.04            0.15    -0.06 0.03*      0.00    0.10    -0.05    0.03    0.04    0.15     0.02 0.20*** 0.09         0.24
Percentile PME 23     60***   70              98      14     53        49      96      23      58*      66      98       60   76***   91           99
Table 9 (continued)




Panel C: Reweighted Top Decile of Direct Fund

                  All Funds of Funds (n=294)              Buyout (n=135)             Generalist (n=87)              Venture Capital (n=72)
                 P25     Avg Med         P75      P25      Avg Med       P75     P25  Avg       Med    P75       P25    Avg      Med      P75

Excess PME     -0.09     0.00    -0.02    0.09    -0.11   -0.02 -0.04     0.05   -0.10    -0.04   -0.04   0.08   -0.04   0.10*   0.03    0.13
Percentile PME 11         47      44       83       6     41*** 27         78     11       45      43      82     37     61***    67      88

Panel D: Reweighted Top Quartile of Direct Fund
                  All Funds of Funds (n=294)              Buyout (n=135)                 Generalist (n=87)          Venture Capital (n=72)
                 P25     Avg Med         P75      P25      Avg Med       P75     P25      Avg       Med    P75   P25    Avg      Med      P75

Excess PME     -0.07 0.04**      0.01     0.11    -0.09    0.01   -0.02   0.07   -0.08    0.00    -0.01   0.11   -0.01 0.15*** 0.07      0.17
Percentile PME 21     54**        59       88      12       48     39      85     21       53      57      86     53    69***   79        89




                                                                                                                                            48
