                               NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                      THE CAUSES AND COSTS OF MISALLOCATION

                                         Diego Restuccia
                                        Richard Rogerson

                                       Working Paper 23422
                               http://www.nber.org/papers/w23422


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     May 2017




Diego Restuccia is a Professor of Economics and a Canada Research Chair, University of
Toronto, Toronto, Canada and a Research Associate at the National Bureau of Economic
Research, Cambridge, Massachusetts. Richard Rogerson is the Charles and Marie Robertson
Professor of Public and International Affairs, Woodrow Wilson School, Princeton University,
Princeton, New Jersey and a Research Associate at the National Bureau of Economic Research,
Cambridge, Massachusetts. The authors thank the editors Enrico Moretti, Gordon Hanson, and
Tim Taylor for useful comments. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not
necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.˛

At least one co-author has disclosed a financial relationship of potential relevance for this
research. Further information is available online at http://www.nber.org/papers/w23422.ack

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2017 by Diego Restuccia and Richard Rogerson. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not
to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.
The Causes and Costs of Misallocation
Diego Restuccia and Richard Rogerson
NBER Working Paper No. 23422
May 2017
JEL No. E0,E1,O0,O1,O4,O5

                                           ABSTRACT

Why do living standards differ so much across countries? A consensus in the development
literature is that differences in productivity are a dominant source of these differences. But what
accounts for productivity differences across countries? One explanation is that frontier
technologies and best practice methods are slow to diffuse to low income countries. The recent
literature on misallocation offers a distinct but complementary explanation: low income countries
are not as effective in allocating their factors of production to their most efficient use. We provide
our perspective on three key questions. First, how important is misallocation? Second, what are
the causes of misallocation? And third, beyond the direct cost of lower contemporaneous output,
are there additional costs associated with misallocation?A summary of our answers is as follows.
Misallocation appears to be a substantial channel in accounting for productivity differences
across countries, but the measured magnitude of the effects depends on the approach and context.
Researchers have not yet found a dominant source of misallocation; instead, many specific
factors seem to contribute a small part of the overall effect. Beyond the static cost of
misallocation, we believe that the dynamic effects of misallocation on productivity growth are
significant and deserve much more attention going forward.


Diego Restuccia
Department of Economics
University of Toronto
150 St. George Street
Toronto, ON M5S 3G7
CANADA
and NBER
diego.restuccia@utoronto.ca

Richard Rogerson
Woodrow Wilson School of
Public and International Affairs
323 Bendheim Hall
Princeton University
Princeton, NJ 08544
and NBER
rdr@princeton.edu
Why do living standards differ so much across countries? This is one of the long-standing
questions in economics. A consensus in the development literature is that differences in
productivity are a large, if not necessarily the dominant, source of these differences.1 But what
accounts for productivity differences across countries? One explanation is that frontier
technologies and best practice methods are slow to diffuse to low income countries. The recent
literature on misallocation, which is the focus of this article, offers a distinct but
complementary explanation: low income countries are not as effective in allocating their
factors of production to their most efficient use.

Casual empiricism suggests that both slow diffusion and misallocation are potentially relevant.
A visit to any less-developed country reveals that much production, whether in agriculture,
manufacturing, or services, seems to use outdated methods. But many studies and anecdotes
detail how corruption, regulation, or direct government involvement distort the allocation of
resources from their most efficient use, especially in poorer economies. More generally, the
notion that the allocation of inputs across establishments is an important component of
aggregate productivity is reinforced by studies in the United States and elsewhere that find
reallocation of inputs from less to more productive establishments to be an important
component of aggregate productivity growth.2

Three key questions arise. First, how important is misallocation as a source of aggregate
productivity differences across countries? Second, what are the main causes of misallocation?
Third, beyond the direct cost of lower contemporaneous output, are there additional costs
associated with misallocation? In this article, we provide our perspective on these three
questions. It is not our intention to survey the literature and, as a result, we inevitably neglect
many important references and contributions. We instead refer the reader to available survey
articles of this literature, for instance Restuccia and Rogerson (2013) and Hopenhayn (2014).

Potential Sources of Misallocation

The nature of misallocation on which we focus is quite specific. Economists routinely study
distortions that affect resource allocations along many dimensions, but we are specifically
interested in distortions that affect the allocation of inputs across producers of a given good.
For example, in the context of the standard neoclassical growth model, a proportional tax on
income will distort household decisions regarding consumption and labor supply, and hence
may be described as causing misallocation along these margins. But this sort of misallocation,
affecting the amounts of capital and labor used in production, is not the sort of misallocation
we emphasize. Instead, we are interested in situations in which the allocation of a given


1
  The finding is that even after adjusting for differences in the quantity and quality of factors of production such as
capital and labor, poor countries produce much less output per worker than rich countries, and this difference
accounts for much of the variation in income per capita across countries. Early contributions making this point
include Klenow and Rodriguez-Clare (1997), Prescott (1998), and Hall and Jones (1999). See also the surveys of
Caselli (2005) and Jones (2016).
2
  See, for example Bailey et al. (1992) and Foster et al. (2008).

                                                          2
amount of capital and labor across heterogeneous producers is distorted. This would happen,
for example, when different producers of the same good are taxed at different rates.

An example will serve to fix ideas and facilitate exposition. Aggregate output is produced by
many heterogeneous producers that differ in their individual levels of productivity.3
Specifically, assume there are N potential producers of a homogeneous good and that producer
i has a production function 𝑦! = 𝐴! ⋅ 𝑓(ℎ! , 𝑘! ), where 𝑦! is output, ℎ! is labor input, 𝑘! is capital
input, f is a strictly increasing and strictly concave production function, and variation in 𝐴!
reflects differences in productivity across producers. Assume also that there is a fixed cost for
any producer who operates, measured in units of output and denoted by c. Given an aggregate
amount of labor and capital, denoted by H and K respectively, there is a unique choice of which
producers should operate and how labor and capital should be allocated across them in order
to maximize total output net of fixed operating costs.

Three conceptually distinct channels will affect the amount of output, and hence the overall
level of productivity. The first channel, which we call the technology channel, reflects the values
of the producer-level productivity 𝐴! ; if all of the 𝐴! are larger, output will be greater. The
second channel, which we call the selection channel, reflects the choice of which producers
should operate. The third channel is the misallocation channel and reflects the choice of how
capital and labor are allocated among those producers that operate. Conceptually, selection
effects are a special case of misallocation, but from an empirical perspective we do not observe
potential producers who do not operate, making it more difficult to measure selection effects
without additional structure. An important theme in our discussion is that these three channels
are not independent: any policy or institution that distorts the allocation of resources across
producers—creating misallocation—will potentially generate additional effects through both
the selection and technology channels.

In our example, output maximizing choices have the following form: a threshold rule
determines which producers operate (that is, producers operate if the productivity level
A>Abar) and conditional upon operation, producers with higher values of 𝐴! will be allocated a
greater amount of labor and capital. The efficient allocation will induce a distribution of
producer sizes. More specifically, the allocation of inputs that maximizes output will equate the
marginal products of labor and capital across all producers with positive inputs. Thus, thinking
about factors that interfere with equalization of marginal products is a useful way to identify
possible sources of misallocation.

Many articles, spanning the fields of development economics, industrial organization, labor
economics, finance, international economics, and others have documented specific sources of
misallocation in particular contexts.4 They serve to impress upon us the pervasiveness of
3
  As summarized in Syverson (2011), large dispersion of productivity even within narrowly defined industries is a
robust feature of reality.
4
  A list of studies on misallocation in specific areas could be extremely long, but we highlight a few examples. In the
micro-development literature, Banerjee and Duflo (2005) document credit market imperfections among
manufacturers in India. De Mel et al. (2008) establish wedges between the marginal product of capital and

                                                          3
misallocation. Rather than provide a laundry list of very specific potential sources of
misallocation, we instead emphasize three general categories of factors.

First, misallocation may reflect statutory provisions, including features of the tax code and
regulations. Specific examples would include provisions of the tax code that vary with firm
characteristics (such as the size or age of the firm), tariffs applied to narrowly defined
categories of goods, labor market regulations such as employment protection measures,
product market regulations that restrict size or limit market access, and land regulations. Even a
regulation that applies uniformly to all firms within an industry may generate misallocation
within the industry. For example, a given employment protection measure will differentially
affect expanding and contracting firms.

Second, misallocation may reflect discretionary provisions made by the government or other
entities (such as banks) that favor or penalize specific firms. Such provisions are often referred
to as “crony capitalism” or even “government corruption.” Examples are subsidies, tax breaks
or low interest rate loans granted to specific firms, unfair bidding practices for government
contracts, preferential market access, or selective enforcement of taxes and regulations.

Third, misallocation may reflect market imperfections. Examples include monopoly power,
market frictions, and enforcement of property rights. A producer with monopoly power may
produce less than the efficient level but charge a higher markup. A highly productive firm with
little collateral may not be able to access enough capital to produce at the efficient level. Bloom
et al. (2013) suggests that the size of highly productive firms in India is restricted by the inability
to delegate management outside of the family on account of poor enforcement of property
rights. Lack of land titling may affect the allocation of land.

There are three messages that we want the reader to take away from this overview. First, the
set of plausible underlying sources of misallocation is wide-ranging. Second, many sources are
very narrow in scope—being particular to specific sectors, types of firms, or even regions. And
third, many of these sources, especially those reflecting discretionary provisions, are not
amenable to systematic measurement. This combination makes life challenging for any
researcher interested in assessing the aggregate importance of misallocation.

Measuring Misallocation: Methodology




borrowing rates among small producers in Sri Lanka using experimental methods. Besley and Ghatak (2010) survey
work on property rights and misallocation. In industrial organization, Olley and Pakes (1996) study regulation in
the US telecommunications industry and find an important role for misallocation. Caballero et al (2008) document
“zombie lending” practices in Japan, a process by which banks continue to extend credit to poorly performing
businesses in order to avoid writing down bad loans. Heckman and Pages (2004) summarize work on the effects of
labor market regulations using micro data from Latin America and the Caribbean. Guner et al. (2008) document the
effects of product market regulation in Japan and India. Redding and Melitz (2014) summarize the literature on
trade barriers and misallocation.

                                                       4
Misallocation seems pervasive. But is it quantitatively important? To address the question of
whether misallocation is an important source of cross-country differences in total factor
productivity, the literature has adopted two main approaches, that we label as the direct and
the indirect approaches.

The essence of the direct approach is to focus on specific sources of misallocation and to assess
their consequences. One source of information is quasi-natural experiments that shed light on a
particular source of misallocation. While some studies have successfully followed this path, as a
practical matter the scope for this type of assessment seems to be somewhat limited. As a
result, the typical study employing the direct approach seeks to measure the source of
misallocation and assess its quantitative effects via a structural model. This approach has a long
tradition in public finance as a way to measure the distortions from various taxes. Of course, a
researcher must be aware that details of the structural model may have important effects on
the findings. However, we stress that evaluating the extent of misallocation necessarily requires
computing a counterfactual—how much additional output could be generated by reallocating
inputs among producers. One cannot entirely avoid structure in answering this question.

But the direct approach faces another challenge. Implementing it requires quantitative
measures of the underlying source of misallocation. If statutory provisions are the key source of
misallocation, then this is perhaps not a problem. But, if the most important sources of
misallocation reflect discretionary provisions, then measurement may be very difficult. Even if
regulation is an important source of misallocation in aggregate, the highly specialized and
complex nature of regulation within specific industries may still make it very difficult to develop
and analyze an appropriate structural model.

In contrast, the indirect approach seeks to identify the extent of misallocation without
identifying the underlying source of the misallocation. As noted earlier in our simple example,
the efficient allocation of inputs equates marginal products across all active producers. Thus,
directly examining variation in marginal products provides the opportunity to measure the
amount of misallocation without specifying the underlying source of misallocation. This
approach also requires some structure, but unlike the direct approach it does not require
specifying a full model. In our simple example, given cross-section data on output, labor and
capital, it is sufficient to specify the production function f in order to directly compute the
implied amount of misallocation. To see why, note that data on y, k and h for each producer
and a production function f, we can infer the 𝐴! . Given a production function f and the 𝐴! , we
can directly solve for the allocation of inputs among producers that would maximize output.
Comparing this to actual output provides an assessment of the extent of misallocation. Note
that because this exercise takes the set of producers as given, it does not address selection. So
even though selection effects are conceptually akin to what we have called misallocation, this
procedure will only isolate the misallocation effect.

Although the indirect approach requires less structure than the direct approach, it faces one
key challenge. In more general frameworks, efficient allocations need not entail equality of
marginal products across producers at every point in time. If inputs are chosen before the

                                                5
realization of producer-specific shocks, or if there are adjustment costs then this condition need
not hold. And measurement error in firm-level data will lead us to infer variation in marginal
products across producers even when none truly exists. We later discuss these issues in more
detail.

How Important is Misallocation? Results Using the Indirect Approach

In Restuccia and Rogerson (2008), we used a version of the Hopenhayn (1992) industry
equilibrium model calibrated to match features of the US economy to explore the extent to
which misallocation caused by firm-specific taxes and subsidies would impact aggregate total
factor productivity. These firm-specific taxes and subsidies were hypothetical, but chosen as a
representation of the many different factors that might generate misallocation. In one of our
scenarios, termed correlated distortions, high-productivity establishments are systematically
taxed and low-productivity establishments are systematically subsidized. We showed that this
can substantially depress total factor productivity. One key message from this research is that
for misallocation to have large effects, it needs to systematically depress inputs at high
productivity producers. It follows that studies identifying misallocation among relatively small
and less productive enterprises may not be particularly relevant in terms of assessing aggregate
effects.

The Indirect Approach

Whereas in Restuccia and Rogerson (2008) we analyzed misallocation from hypothetical policy
distortions, Hsieh and Klenow (2009) noted that the extent of misallocation could be estimated
given appropriate micro data and some structure. Their procedure essentially follows the
strategy described in the previous section, but in a setting where each firm produces a distinct
variety of goods that are valued by consumers according to a constant elasticity of substitution
aggregator. Each producer behaves as a monopolistic competitor when deciding its level of
output, but markets for labor and capital are competitive. The implied demand structure is
important because it allows the authors to infer total factor productivity when the data
includes only total revenue (as opposed to physical output).

When Hsieh and Klenow (2009) apply their method to four-digit manufacturing industries in
China, India, and the United States, they find large effects of misallocation on total factor
productivity. In particular, if misallocation were eliminated, total factor productivity in
manufacturing would increase by 86-110 percent in China, 100-128 percent in India, and 30-43
percent in the United States. Taken at face value, these results indicate that misallocation is
quantitatively important, even in a high-income economy like the United States, and that it is
an important factor in accounting for productivity differences across rich and poor countries.
These estimates are for the manufacturing sector, not the overall economy. Available evidence
suggests that cross-country differences in manufacturing productivity tend to be much smaller
than aggregate productivity differences. Hsieh and Klenow (2009) estimated that total factor
productivity differences in manufacturing between the United States and China and India


                                                6
during the relevant period are on the order of 130 and 160 percent respectively, in contrast to
total factor productivity differences on the order of 300 and 600 percent at the aggregate level.
We note that these productivity losses from misallocation assume that all dispersion in revenue
marginal products across producers within a sector is the result of distortions or institutions
that can be acted upon by policy. To the extent that some differences need not reflect
misallocation due to policies, their estimates overstate the total amount of misallocation. We
return to this issue later.

Although the Hsieh and Klenow (2009) approach measures misallocation without identifying
the source of the misallocation, their analysis does nonetheless allow them to examine how the
extent of misallocation is correlated with various observables. For example, state ownership in
China is intimately related with misallocation, in that state-owned firms are much larger than
efficiency would dictate. Another important finding is that high productivity producers are too
small in all three economies, but that the size of this effect is stronger in China and India than in
the United States. Bento and Restuccia (2017) corroborate this finding for a larger set of
developing countries: the extent to which more productive plants face greater implicit taxes is
strongly related to GDP per capita across countries.

Limitations of the Indirect Approach

The indirect approach essentially assumes a production structure and then uses the data to
estimate wedges in the first-order conditions that characterize an efficient allocation. This
approach interprets the wedges as reflecting distortions to efficient allocations. But related to
our earlier discussion, there are good reasons to be wary of this interpretation. We discuss
three specific reasons that we believe are potentially significant. We note that Hsieh and
Klenow (2009) acknowledged and attempted to address each of them.

The first issue concerns the nature of heterogeneity in production functions across producers.
With enough freedom to choose heterogeneous production functions across producers, data
on inputs and outputs would not allow one to infer differences in marginal products. But what
about some restricted and seemingly reasonable degrees of heterogeneity? For example, the
benchmark results in Hsieh and Klenow (2009) assume all producers within a sector use the
same Cobb-Douglas production function. It follows that capital-to-labor ratios are equal for all
producers in an efficient allocation, implying that any variation in capital-to-labor ratios will be
interpreted as misallocation. An alternative interpretation is that producers use different
production methods so that capital shares in the Cobb-Douglas production function are
heterogeneous across producers. In the extreme, all differences in capital-to-labor ratios reflect
heterogeneity in producer-level production functions, rather than misallocation. Hsieh and
Klenow (2009) show that although this alternative interpretation implies less misallocation, the
effects on productivity remain large. This result implies that the dominant sources of distortions
act symmetrically on labor and capital so that the capital to labor ratio is roughly unaffected by
distortions.



                                                 7
The second issue we consider is adjustment costs. A voluminous literature estimates substantial
adjustment costs for both labor and capital at the individual producer level.5 This raises the
possibility that marginal products of capital and labor in production differ across producers
because of adjustment costs and transitory firm-specific shocks. Being mindful of this issue,
Hsieh and Klenow’s preferred interpretation of their findings is to focus on the differences in
misallocation across economies, rather than the levels per se. The idea is that some amount of
“base level” misallocation is appropriately understood as the result of adjustment costs or
some other misspecification, and that a reasonable starting point is to assume that this level is
the same across economies. This moderates their estimates of the amount of misallocation: if
China and India were to reduce misallocation to the level found in the United States, total
factor productivity in manufacturing in those countries would increase by 31-51 percent and
40-59 percent, respectively. While smaller than the earlier values, it remains true that
misallocation can account for almost half of the observed total factor productivity differences in
manufacturing.

But is it reasonable to argue that all economies have some common level of measured
misallocation that should be ignored in this context? Asker et al. (2014) argue that the answer
to this question is no. They show that observed differences in the dispersion of marginal
revenue products can be consistent with efficient allocations if there are adjustment costs on
capital, coupled with transitory firm-level shocks that are more variable in poorer countries.
While we believe that this study serves as an important cautionary note regarding the indirect
approach, two remarks are important. First, it is necessary to ask why idiosyncratic shocks are
more variable in poorer countries—if the higher variability of shocks reflects greater variability
in the policy environment then it seems appropriate to interpret the higher dispersion of
marginal revenue products in poorer countries as reflecting misallocation. Second, it highlights
the need to examine misallocation using panel data at the establishment level, instead of cross-
section data. If measured misallocation is due to adjustment costs, it will generate specific time-
series patterns. More generally, with panel data, researchers could carry out the indirect
approach on specifications that explicitly include adjustment costs. David and Venkateswaran
(2016) carry out exactly this type of analysis using panel data from China under the assumption
that capital adjustment costs are convex. While adjustment costs and idiosyncratic policy
distortions can both generate the cross-sectional dispersion in the marginal product of capital
across firms, they have opposing effects on the autocorrelation of investment. Using dynamic
moments from their panel data set, the authors show that most of the cross-sectional variation
in marginal revenue products is due to policy distortions with a relatively minor share due to
adjustment costs. This result appears robust to considering non-convex adjustment costs since
at the annual frequency inaction due to fixed costs is estimated to be minor. But more analysis
of this type using panel data is an important priority for future research.

Third, the higher dispersion of marginal products in China and India could reflect greater
amounts of measurement error in these countries relative to the United States. Hsieh and
Klenow (2009) carry out several calculations to assess this possibility, that while not conclusive,

5
    See, for example, Cooper and Haltiwanger (2006), Bloom (2009) and the survey in Bond and Van Reenen (2007).

                                                         8
do not support such an interpretation. Recent work by Bils et al (2017) goes much further. They
use the panel component of the data sets for India and the United States used in Hsieh and
Klenow (2009) to estimate measurement error in each country and infer the extent of
differences in productivity due to misallocation after accounting for measurement error. They
have three main findings. First, measurement error accounts for a substantial amount of the
dispersion in marginal revenue products. Second, the contribution of measurement error is
becoming more important over time in the United States but is relatively stable in India. And
third, after accounting for measurement error, the contribution of misallocation to
understanding productivity differences between India and the United States is very similar to
what Hsieh and Klenow (2009) found in their original analysis, that is manufacturing TFP gains
of 40-60% in India relative to the United States.

While progress is being made in extending the indirect method to address the limitations
discussed, we also think it is useful to develop alternative approaches. For example, Bartlesman
et al. (2013) focus on the covariance between firm size and productivity, and how it is affected
by firm-specific taxes and subsidies. They assume a specification that implies cross-sectional
differences in marginal products even in an efficient allocation, and calibrate their model so
that moments of the US cross-sectional data on revenue productivity dispersion and
employment are consistent with efficiency. They use the calibrated model to assess the amount
of misallocation in manufacturing in a sample of seven other economies—the United Kingdom,
France, Germany, Netherlands, Romania, Hungary, and Slovenia—during the 1990s. Rather
than inferring the actual distortions faced by each firm in their dataset, they infer a statistical
representation of distortions that matches salient moments of the data. Relative to the United
States, they find that the effect of misallocation on total factor productivity ranges from 3
percent in Germany to 12 percent in Romania. Their limited choice of countries was dictated by
the desire to have data that was consistently collected across countries, so drawing broad
conclusions about difference across countries is not possible. But studies like this open the
possibility of comparing the estimates of misallocation for a given country based on different
methods.

Further Indirect Evidence on Misallocation in Different Countries and Sectors

The analysis in Hsieh and Klenow (2009) found important effects of misallocation within
manufacturing in China and India relative to the United States. A variety of studies have
extended this finding to other countries and other sectors. Busso et al. (2013) carry out a
comparable analysis of manufacturing in ten Latin American countries and conclude that
differences in misallocation between these economies and the United States is an important
source of total factor productivity gaps in manufacturing. Kalemli-Ozcan and Sorensen (2014)
study misallocation of capital among private manufacturing firms in 10 African countries. Their
sample also includes firms from India, Ireland, Spain, and South Korea that can be used as
benchmarks. Subject to the caveat of small sample sizes, they find that capital misallocation in
Africa is significantly higher than in developed countries, though not as severe as in India.



                                                9
The above results all pertain to the manufacturing sector. Relatively few papers have addressed
misallocation in the service sector. Busso et al. (2013) includes analysis of specific service
sectors, such as retail, and finds that misallocation in services sectors are much larger than in
manufacturing. De Vries (2014) finds very large misallocation in the retail sector in Brazil. Dias
et al. (2016a) studies misallocation in manufacturing and services in Portugal and also finds that
misallocation is much larger in services. One limitation of these studies is that they do not
include a benchmark, such as the US economy. If misallocation measures for the US economy
are also larger in service sectors than in manufacturing, then it is not clear if misallocation
differences are indeed more severe in service sectors. Also, an important caveat is that output
in a number of relevant service sectors such as education, health care, and banking, is likely to
be very poorly measured.

The agricultural sector is of particular importance in comparing the world’s richest and poorest
economies since this is where productivity gaps are greatest and a large share of labor in poor
countries is allocated to agriculture (Gollin et al. 2002; Restuccia et al. 2008). Caselli (2005)
reports that differences in output per worker, expressed in terms of the ratio of countries in the
90th percentile to the 10th percentile of the income distribution, were 22 at the aggregate level,
4 in nonagriculture, and 45 in agriculture.

Adamopoulos and Restuccia (2014) document a long list of policies and institutions in the
agricultural sector in developing countries that can potentially create misallocation. They also
document striking differences in the distribution of farm sizes across countries with the typical
operational land scale of a farm in poor countries being only two to three percent of the
operational size in rich countries. The authors develop a model of agriculture and non-
agriculture extended to produce a non-degenerate endogenous distribution of farms sizes in
agriculture, and consider abstract representations of distortions to match the observed
distribution of farm sizes across countries. They find that the misallocation created by farm-size
distortions can account for much of the farm size and productivity differences in agriculture
between rich and poor countries. Additionally, they show that the implied farm-size distortions
are consistent with data on within-country variation in crop-specific price distortions and their
correlation with farm size.

Restuccia and Santaeulalia-Llopis (2017) study misallocation across household farms in Malawi.
They have data on the physical quantity of outputs and inputs as well as measures of transitory
shocks and so are able to measure farm-level total factor productivity. They find that the
allocation of inputs is relatively constant across farms despite large differences in measured
total factor productivity, suggesting a large amount of misallocation. In fact, they found that
aggregate agricultural output would increase by a remarkable factor of 3.6 if inputs were
allocated efficiently. Their analysis also suggests that institutional factors that affect land
allocation are likely playing a key role. Specifically, they compare misallocation within groups of
farmers that are differentially influenced by restrictive land markets. Whereas most farmers in
Malawi operate a given allocation of land, other farmers have access to marketed land (in most
cases through informal rentals). Using this source of variation, Restuccia and Santaeulalia-Llopis
find that misallocation is much larger for the group of farmers without access to marketed land:

                                                10
specifically, the potential output gains from removing misallocation are 2.6 times larger in this
group relative to the gains for the group of farms with marketed land.

Other studies also document misallocation in agriculture. For instance, Adamopoulos et al.
(2017) study the case of China between 1993-2002, where the land market is severely
restricted by the “household responsibility system.” Land ownership and allocation decisions
reside with the collective village and use rights of land are distributed uniformly among
household members registered in the village. While there are no explicit restrictions on land
rental in China, fear of redistribution leads to implicit “use it or lose it” rules. In this context,
farm operational scales are essentially limited to the use rights of land for each household and
hence, not surprisingly, the authors find that land allocations are unrelated to farm
productivity. In particular, eliminating misallocation in this context is found to increase
agricultural productivity by a factor of 1.84-fold, with 60 percent of this gain arising from
reallocation of factors across farms within villages. Exploiting the panel dimension of the data
to remove potential transitory variation in farm productivity, the authors show that reallocation
gains are still substantial, representing 81-86 percent of the cross-sectional productivity gains.

Chen et al. (2017) study the case of Ethiopia, where the current land market institutions are the
result of a long history of divisive land relationships and conflicts. Land ownership resides with
the state and local authorities allocate land-use rights equally among households controlling for
soil quality and household size. Using detailed micro household-level data, the authors
document substantial misallocation of land and other factors of production in the agricultural
sector. An efficient reallocation of inputs can increase aggregate agricultural productivity by a
factor of 2.4, with 75 percent of this increase derived from reallocation within zones (counties)
in Ethiopia. The authors also exploit regional variation in the extent of rented land due to
differential implementation of a land certification program that started in the early 2000s. Even
though most rentals still occur between family members and relatives, they found that regions
with more land rentals have significantly less misallocation: a 1 percentage point higher share
of land rental is associated with a 0.8 percentage point decrease in the efficiency gain from
reallocation.

Misallocation over Time

The results described so far have focused on differences in misallocation across countries at a
point in time. It is also of interest to ask whether changes in misallocation over time within a
country are an important source of changes in productivity over time. This is akin to connecting
misallocation with growth accounting.

The literature has identified changes in misallocation as an important component of low-
frequency movements in productivity in three contexts. Chen and Irrazabal (2015) show that
misallocation decreased during Chile’s decade long period of growth following the crisis of the
early 1980s, and was an important part of productivity growth during this time. Fujii and
Nozawa (2013) show that capital misallocation in manufacturing became more pronounced
after 1990 in Japan, a period characterized by poor productivity growth. And Gopinath et al.

                                                 11
(2015) find increased capital misallocation and roughly constant labor misallocation in Southern
European countries subsequent to these countries joining the Euro in 1999, a period of slower
productivity growth in these countries. Note that changes in total factor productivity over time
tend to be much smaller than differences in the cross-section, so even modest changes in
misallocation can play a dominant role in the context of the time series changes observed in the
data.6

A promising avenue for further study is to focus on changes in misallocation during periods in
which important policy or regulatory changes occurred that one might reasonably believe have
important effects on misallocation. Hsieh and Klenow (2009) took a first step in this direction.
They found a decrease in misallocation in China during the period of 1998 to 2005, a finding
consistent with the view that various reforms enacted during this period served to lessen the
importance of distortions. Interestingly, despite widespread reform in other sectors, land
market institutions have remained essentially the same in China, and Adamopoulos et al. (2017)
found that misallocation in the agricultural sector in China has remained roughly constant for
the period of study (1993-2002).

Hsieh and Klenow (2009) found that misallocation in India worsened over the period from 1987
to 1994, a result which seems puzzling given the nature of reforms enacted there. One
important reform during this time was the elimination of the license “raj” system, a system of
controls on the entry of firms into the manufacturing sector. Bollard et al. (2013) pursued this
further and found that although this period witnessed rapid productivity growth for their
sample of very large firms, little of the productivity growth was due to changes in misallocation.
There are of course multiple interpretations of this finding; perhaps the raj system is not an
important source of misallocation among large firms, or perhaps it is not even an important
source of misallocation overall. Alternatively, as noted earlier, the indirect method might not be
isolating true misallocation. A recurring theme in this work is the need to reconcile results
based on differing approaches.

The research by Bartleseman et al. (2013) described earlier also included a time series
component. They found that misallocation decreased over the period of the 1990s in the
transition economies of Eastern Europe. This finding is also consistent with the notion that
increased market reforms were leading to less misallocation, but the extent of the change is
somewhat modest, increasing productivity by a few percentage points.

Several papers have assessed changes in misallocation over the business cycle, typically
focusing on fairly dramatic episodes such as crises or protracted recessions. Oberfield (2013)
studies misallocation in Chile during the crisis of the early 1980s, Sandleris and Wright (2014)
examine misallocation in Argentina during its crisis in the early 2000s, and Ziebarth (2015)

6
  See also Reis (2013) and Dias et al. (2016b) for the case of Portugal, and Calligaris (2015) for Italy. Ziebarth (2013)
is an interesting analysis of long-run changes in the context of the United States. In particular, he found that
                                                              th
misallocation levels among US manufacturers in the late 19 century were similar to those in present-day India
and China.

                                                           12
assessed misallocation during the US Great Depression. All of these authors find that
misallocation increased sharply in each of these episodes and accounted for a large part of
measured drops in aggregate total factor productivity. However, in our view changes in
misallocation measures at business cycle frequency need to be treated with extreme caution.
As emphasized earlier, these measures can be heavily influenced by adjustment costs that may
give rise to factor hoarding. To us it remains very much an open question of whether true
misallocation of resources increases during these episodes.

Causes of Misallocation: The Direct Approach

The broad message that emerges from the many studies that employ the indirect approach is
that misallocation is an important source of productivity differences across countries. But what
is the underlying source of this misallocation? To answer this question we discuss the efforts to
isolate causes of misallocation using the direct approach. Our goal is to assess the aggregate
importance of misallocation attributed to several categories of distortions, particularly with an
eye toward asking whether we can isolate factors that might generate effects of the magnitude
found using the indirect method. In this regard, the current state of this literature is somewhat
disappointing. The existing literature has identified some factors that can account for large
effects of misallocation in agriculture. But it has yet to identify any particular factor that can
account for the magnitudes of misallocation found in manufacturing.

Regulation

One of the earliest studies of misallocation due to regulation is the analysis of firing costs in
Hopenhayn and Rogerson (1993). Firing costs are an adjustment cost created by policy, and the
resulting variation in marginal products therefore reflects true misallocation. Using a
quantitative version of the model in Hopenhayn (1992), these authors find that firing costs
equal to one year’s wages will lead to steady-state productivity losses of roughly 2 percent.7
While these effects are comparable to a year of productivity growth for a typical country, they
are nonetheless small relative to the magnitude of cross-country differences that we offered as
the key motivating observation for the misallocation literature.

A potentially broader category of policies, what Guner et al. (2008) call “size-dependent
policies”, reflects measures that implicitly levy higher taxes on firms that are larger in terms of
sales, labor or capital. Examples include regulations that only become effective beyond some
employment threshold, outright restrictions on the number of employees, or restrictions on the
amount of physical space that a retail establishment may operate. They analyze simple but
abstract versions of such policies, and find that while they can have large effects on the number



7
 Lagos (2006) studies a Mortensen-Pissarides matching model to study how labor market policies such as
unemployment insurance and employment protection affect productivity via selection effects. He finds that
changes in the replacement rate and firing costs decrease aggregate total factor productivity on the order of 2-3
percent.

                                                        13
of firms and the firm size distribution, they have relatively small effects on total factor
productivity.8

A large literature in development economics has studied duality and informality as a source of
low productivity in poor countries (Lewis, 1954; Rauch, 1991; La Porta and Shleifer, 2014). This
literature is a natural predecessor to quantitative studies of misallocation, as one of its key
ideas is that development requires the reallocation of resources out of subsistence and
informal activities into “modern” activities. Busso et al. (2012) study the relation between
productivity and informality in Mexico using detailed micro data. They exploit a precise
definition of informality based on the institutions and laws that regulate relations between
workers and firms, which in the case of Mexico involves the asymmetric regulation of salaried
and non-salaried workers, and separate notions of informality and illegality. Using these
definitions the authors document productivity, size, and misallocation distributions for each
group. Controlling for firm size and legal status, informal firms are much less productive than
formal firms, yet command a large share of resources and hence contribute significantly to low
productivity in Mexico. While this study documents the correlation between informality and
productivity, an important limitation is that it does not address causation. Related to this issue,
Leal (2014) calibrates a model using data from Mexico that assumes firms can avoid regulation
by choosing to hire capital below a certain threshold. His model accounts for the large share of
activity in the informal sector but he finds that making enforcement uniform would only
increase total factor productivity by slightly more than 4 percent.9

Government regulation can also hinder the reallocation of individuals across space. Hsieh and
Moretti (2015) study misallocation of individuals across 220 US metropolitan areas from 1964
to 2009. They document a doubling in the dispersion of wages across US cities during the
sample period. Using a model of spatial reallocation, they show that the increase in wage
dispersion across US cities represents a misallocation that contributed to a loss in aggregate
GDP per capita of 13.5 percent. They argue that across-city labor misallocation is directly
related to housing regulations and the associated constraints on housing supply. Fajgelbaum et
al. (2015) study how the spatial allocation of workers and firms responds to US state taxes.
They find that eliminating tax dispersion across US states produces modest increases in output,
but note that this in part reflects the fact that dispersion in taxes across US states is not so
large. Tombe and Zhu (2015) provide direct evidence on the frictions of labor (and goods)
mobility across space and sectors in China and quantify the role of these internal frictions and
their changes over time on aggregate productivity. The reduction of internal migration frictions
is key and together with internal trade restrictions account for about half of the growth in China
between 2000 and 2005.


8
  In related work, Garcia-Santana and Pijoan-Mas (2014) study the quantitative effect of small-scale reservation
laws in India, a form of firm-size restriction. In a calibrated version of their model using plant-level data for India,
eliminating these laws increases manufacturing output by almost 7% and manufacturing TFP by 2%. Also, Gourio
and Roys (2014) and Garicano et al. (2016) study the effects of size-dependent labor regulations using plant-level
data from France where firms with 50 or more employees face substantial additional labor regulations.
9
  See also D’Erasmo and Moscoso Boedo (2012).

                                                           14
Market activity can also be regulated via state-owned enterprises. The misallocation of
resources in manufacturing between private and state-owned enterprises in China is a key
source of productivity losses in the analysis of Song et al (2011). More recently, Brandt et al.
(2013) study the importance of misallocation within the non-agricultural sector across state and
non-state enterprises and across provinces over time in China. They find that misallocation
reduces non-agricultural total factor productivity by an average of 20 percent for the period
1985-2007. More than half of this productivity loss is due to within province misallocation of
capital between state and non-state sectors. While across province distortions remain fairly
constant over time and there is a reduction in the share of state-owned enterprises over time,
the authors find increased state/non-state capital misallocation between 1998 and 2007. We
are not aware of comparable studies for countries other than China.


Property Rights

A long tradition in development economics emphasizes property rights as a key institution
shaping resource allocation and productivity (Besley and Ghatak 2010). Land reforms are
common in developing countries (De Janvry 1981; Banerjee 1999; Deininger and Feder 2001)
and represent an important example. They are often associated with a limit on farm size and
restrictions on land markets so as to redistribute land from large landholders to landless and
smallholder households. Adamopoulos and Restuccia (2015) study an example of such a
comprehensive land reform in the Philippines using a quantitative model and panel micro data
on farms that covers the period before and after the reform. They find that the reform
substantially reduced farm size and agricultural productivity (reductions of 34 and 17 percent,
respectively). The negative productivity effect reflects both a selection effect and a
misallocation effect. Full enforcement of the farm size cap would have doubled the reduction in
agricultural productivity.10

Trade and Competition

The effect of trade policy on aggregate productivity has been studied through the lens of
models that extend the work of Eaton and Kortum (2002) and Melitz (2003). The key point is
that tariffs and other forms of trade protection distort the allocation of resources across
heterogeneous producers. Several studies provide model based estimates of these effects.11 An
early example is Eaton et al. (2011), who studied the effect of a 10 percent reduction in trade
costs for all countries. Caliendo and Parro (2015) study the effects of NAFTA using this type of
model. These studies find modest productivity effects.12 But importantly, other studies have


10
   Similarly, de Janvry et al. (2015) study a land reform in Mexico in the 1990s in which farmers were given
ownership certificates of land, removing the pre-existing link between land rights and land use, and show
substantial labor and land reallocations associated with the reform.
11
   See Kehoe et al (2016) for a survey.
12
   Waugh (2010) uses a version of the Eaton and Kortum (2002) model to infer trade barriers using data on
observed trade flows and finds that eliminating trade restrictions substantially reduces cross-country income and

                                                        15
tackled the issue of trade liberalization and productivity directly by studying episodes of trade
reform and viewing them as quasi-natural experiments. Two early examples are Pavcnik (2002)
and Trefler (2004).13 Pavcnik (2002) studies productivity changes in a micro-level panel data set
for Chile during an episode of substantial reductions in trade barriers that exposed plants to
foreign competition. She isolates the contribution of trade to productivity growth by exploiting
the variation in outcomes between plants in the import competing/export oriented sectors and
plants in the non-traded sector. She finds that productivity increased by 19 percent and that
roughly two-thirds of this was due to reallocation of resources from less to more productive
producers. Trefler (2004) studies the Canada-United States Free Trade Agreement and similarly
exploits the heterogeneity in affected sectors. He finds productivity increases in excess of 15
percent for both shrinking (i.e., import competing) sectors as well as expanding (i.e., exporting)
sectors.

Khandelwal et al (2013) study another specific episode of trade reform—the elimination of
export quotas on Chinese textile and clothing by the United States, the European Union, and
Canada in 2005. While export quotas allocated via market arrangements generate standard
misallocation effects on aggregate productivity, their empirical analysis shows that the quota
removal generated larger effects because the government had allocated quotas to less
productive state-owned enterprises. They find that more than 70 percent of the overall
productivity gain is due to quota misallocation whereas the remaining 30 percent is due to
standard misallocation from eliminating the quotas.

Trade policy may also affect misallocation via its effect on competition, which is often proxied
by markups. Edmond et al. (2015) calibrate a model to Taiwanese manufacturing data and find
that moving from autarky to free trade decreases markup heterogeneity and leads to an
increase in total factor productivity of slightly more than 12 percent.14

Financial and Informational Frictions

Financial market imperfections are perhaps the single most studied source of misallocation. The
positive correlation between financial market development and output per capita is a robust
empirical finding (Levine 1997). The literature on financial market development and economic
development is too large to discuss in any detail.15 We focus on papers in this literature that
have quantified the misallocation of capital across producers due to credit constraints. This
literature has generated a range of estimates, some of them quite large.



productivity disparity. Tombe (2015) similarly argues that trade barriers are an important determinant of cross-
country differences in productivity.
13
   Other examples include Bernard et al (2006) for the United States, Fernandes (2007) for Colombia, and Topalova
and Khandelwal (2011) for India. See also the discussion in Holmes and Schmitz (2010).
14
   Epifani and Gancia (2011) show that dispersion of markups across manufacturing industries is significantly
greater in poorer countries than in richer countries, but did not assess what this implies for cross-country
differences in productivity.
15
   See, for instance, Buera et al. (2015) for a survey of the broader related literature on financial development.

                                                       16
Consistent with our earlier warning about the importance of model features, it is now well
understood that the effects depend in an important way on such features, specifically the scope
for individuals to accumulate assets in order to grow out of financial constraints. This in turn is
heavily influenced by the persistence of productivity (or demand) at the producer level. As the
literature has made more attempts to model this feature and discipline it using micro data, the
resulting effects of capital misallocation on total factor productivity have diminished. For
example, Midrigan and Xu (2014) find that the magnitude of this effect is no more than about
10 percent (see also Buera et al. 2011; Greenwood et al. 2013; Moll 2014). Gopinath et al.
(2015) found that a large part of the increased misallocation of capital in Mediterranean
countries after 1999 is accounted for by financial frictions, but the magnitude of the effect is on
the order of a 3 percent drop in total factor productivity.

Other relevant market frictions include imperfect information, imperfect insurance, and
imperfect enforcement of contracts. For example, David et al. (2016) identify information
frictions combining production and stock market data of firms and find that these types of
frictions can reduce aggregate productivity by 7-10 percent in China and India. Imperfect
insurance and credit restrictions have also played prominently in development economics (Udry
2012).16 Caselli and Gennaioli (2013) study the effects of poor contract enforcement as it
affects management of family run firms, and shows that the effects on aggregate total factor
productivity can be substantial.

Summary

Studies using the direct approach often find sources of misallocation that reduce total factor
productivity, but even taken together, the effects from these studies are small compared to the
indirect effects noted earlier. One possibility is that the indirect effects estimated earlier are
overestimates of the extent of differences in misallocation. Alternatively, it is possible that the
aggregate effects are the result of many different individual factors, each of which contributes a
small part, so that we will never isolate a single dominant factor. Or perhaps the existing
analyses of direct effects, based on relatively simple models and somewhat generic treatments
of potential sources of misallocation, may not adequately capture the full extent of frictions
that are present in less developed counties.

Additional Consequences of Misallocation

The policies and institutions that distort firm-level choices of labor and capital at a point in
time, thereby generating misallocation are also likely to affect entry and exit decisions as well
as firm-level investments that influence future productivity. These effects operate via the
selection and technology channels discussed earlier and represent consequences beyond those
estimated using the indirect method.


16
  Munshi and Rosenzweig (2016) emphasize risk and differential insurance arrangements between rural and urban
sectors in restricting labor mobility, therefore potentially generating labor misallocation across space.

                                                     17
There is a growing body of work emphasizing the broader consequences of misallocation in
settings with selection and/or technology effects. All of the previously noted empirical studies
of trade liberalizations using producer level data find an important role for both selection
effects and producer level productivity gains. Bustos (2011) specifically finds that producers in
Argentina invest more in technology upgrading in response to trade liberalizations.17 Selection
effects are featured prominently in the theoretical analysis of Melitz (2003). More recently
these models have been extended to allow for endogenous plant level productivity responses
as well.18 In the financial frictions literature, the bulk of productivity effects are due to distorted
occupational choice decisions (highly productive entrepreneurs that do not operate, as in Buera
et al. 2011) and technology investment (Midrigan and Xu 2014). In the agricultural sector, land
institutions that prevent the reallocation of land to best uses also acts as a deterrent for highly
productive farmers who may instead choose to work outside of agriculture (Adamopoulos et al.
2017). In the context of labor market regulations, Da Rocha et al (2016b) study the effect of
firing costs on productivity in a model that includes an endogenous choice for innovation, and
find that the dynamic effects on productivity are substantial, increasing the total factor
productivity loss from around 2 percent due to static misallocation to an overall effect of 4
percent for firing costs equivalent to one year’s wages. Peters (2016) studies a model of
innovation in which limited competition leads to heterogeneity in markups, and shows that the
dynamic effect of markup heterogeneity is more than four times larger than the static
misallocation effects.

From a modeling point of view, the key issue is to extend the simple static model of
heterogeneous producers that we outlined earlier to a dynamic setting that includes
endogenous decisions that influence future productivity. Restuccia (2013) provides an early
example of using such a model to analyze the consequences of hypothetical distortions. He
assumes there are ex ante investments in productivity when a new establishment is created;
higher ex ante investments yield higher productivity establishments in expectation. In this
setting, implicit taxes on higher productivity establishments lower the incentive for ex ante
investments in productivity and hence lower the overall distribution of establishment-level
productivities. He uses this framework to shed light on the productivity gap between Latin
America and the United States.19 Another recent paper along these lines is Hsieh and Klenow
(2014) on the life cycle of manufacturing plants in India, Mexico and the United States. Their
analysis is motivated by the empirical observation that older plants in India and Mexico are
much less productive relative to young plants than is the case in the United States. Given this
difference in relative productivities, it is efficient that older plants in India and Mexico are
relatively small compared to their counterparts in the United States. They show that, in

17
   Bloom et al. (2016) provide similar evidence for firms in Europe. Aw et al (2011) estimate a structural model of
trade and R&D investment using data on Taiwanese electronics producers and find in simulations that trade
liberalizations increase producer-level productivity via increased R&D investment.
18
   See for example, Costantini and Melitz (2008), Caliendo and Rossi-Hansberg (2013), Rubini (2014), and Mayer et
al (2017).
19
   Many other contributions have recognized the feedback from misallocation to the determination of firm-level
productivity levels; see Hopenhayn (2016), Da-Rocha et al. (2016a) and the references therein.


                                                        18
analyses including life-cycle investment in productivity improvements at the establishment
level, the greater implicit taxes faced by more productive establishments in India and Mexico
can potentially account for a large share of the differences in productivity gradients with age
across plants.

Bento and Restuccia (2017) build a model that allows for productivity investments both at the
time of entry as well as along the life cycle post-entry. They find that the greater implicit taxes
faced by more productive establishments in India compared to the United States reduces
aggregate productivity in India by 53 percent and average establishment size by 86 percent.
They decompose this productivity effect into three components: a static effect of misallocation,
a life-cycle effect due to lower life-cycle investment in productivity, and an entry productivity
effect capturing the effect of lower investment in productivity at the time of entry. The
reduction in aggregate productivity is roughly equally shared between static misallocation and
entry-level productivity investments. In their model, life-cycle investment in productivity plays a
minor role because the reduction in life-cycle productivity growth is offset by its effect on
establishment entry.

In related work, Ayerst (2016) attempts to connect misallocation with barriers to technology
adoption and diffusion lags across countries, based on the insight that policies and institutions
that generate misallocation may create disincentives to adopt the most modern and best
technologies. Bigio and La’O (2016) study the effect of policy distortions in an environment with
production networks as emphasized in the survey article of Jones (2013). They find that the
productivity effects of policy distortions in a model with production networks are roughly four
times that in the model of the economy that abstracts from the network structure.

Overall, the work just described suggests that studies of misallocation should look for
opportunities to go beyond static effects of misallocation, and focus on the potentially much
larger dynamic effects. We believe that micro-level panel data will be critical to producing
compelling empirical evidence about these channels.

Where to From Here?

To take stock, we revisit the three questions posed in the introduction.

First, how important is misallocation? Misallocation appears to be a substantial channel in
accounting for productivity differences across countries, but the measured magnitude of the
effects depends on the approach and context. Productivity losses from misallocation reported
using the indirect approach are typically an order of magnitude or more larger than the losses
associated with specific policies and institutions reported using the direct approach. More work
is needed on the various mechanisms that can potentially amplify the effect of misallocation on
aggregate productivity and in particular in connecting policies that generate misallocation with
observed micro productivity distributions.



                                                19
Second, what are the causes of misallocation? The research has not found a dominant source of
misallocation; instead, many specific factors seem to contribute a small part of the overall
effect. Our view is that studies that follow the direct approach are more likely to reach
concrete, persuasive, and specific conclusions of practical policy relevance. However, the
indirect approach can be especially valuable in diagnosing important dimensions of
misallocation: for example, whether it is more significant in some sectors, or whether it is
related to specific factors of production such as capital, labor or land.

Third, are there additional costs to misallocation? The answer is clearly “yes,” and whereas
much of the literature has focused on static misallocation, we think the dynamic effects of
misallocation deserve much more attention going forward.

In moving ahead, we expect that the increasing availability of micro data sets, especially firm
level panel data sets, is likely to yield opportunities to exploit changes in policies and
institutions and variations across individuals, firms, regions, and other relevant dimensions, and
will offer new opportunities to study the role of misallocation.

We are also intrigued by aspects of misallocation that reach beyond the issues of how labor and
capital might be misallocated across firms. For example, discrimination, culture, and social
norms can lead to misallocation of talent across employment status, occupations, and sectors.
Hnatkovska et al. (2012) document the misallocation of talent in India that arises as a result of
the caste system, and document that these barriers have decreased dramatically over the last
20 years. In a similar spirit, Hsieh et al. (2014) discuss shifts in the allocation of talent across
occupations in the United States. For example, in 1960 around 94 percent of doctors and
lawyers were white men, whereas by 2008 the share declined to 62 percent. Given that innate
talent is unlikely to feature such a concentration across gender and races, the occupational
distribution in 1960 reflects misallocation of talent and the observed convergence represents
an improvement in the allocation. They estimate that convergence in the occupational
distribution across races and gender can account for 15 to 20 percent of growth in aggregate
output per worker in the United States between 1960 and 2008. We think this work suggests a
promising direction for additional work on the allocation of talent and how it differs across
economies.




                                                20
References

Adamopoulos, Tasso, and Diego Restuccia. "The size distribution of farms and international
productivity differences." The American Economic Review 104, no. 6 (2014): 1667-1697.

Adamopoulos, Tasso, and Diego Restuccia. "Land Reform and Productivity: A Quantitative
Analysis with Micro Data." Unpublished manuscript, University of Toronto, (2015).

Adamopoulos, Tasso, Loren Brandt, Jessica Leight, and Diego Restuccia. "Misallocation,
Selection and Productivity: A Quantitative Analysis with Panel Data from China." NBER working
paper W23039 (2017).

Asker, John, Allan Collard-Wexler, and Jan De Loecker. "Dynamic inputs and resource (mis)
allocation." Journal of Political Economy 122, no. 5 (2014): 1013-1063.

Aw, Bee Yan, Mark Roberts and Daniel Yi Xu. “R&D Investment, Exporting, and Productivity
Dynamics.” American Economic Review 101, no. 4: 1312-1344.

Ayerst, Stephen. “Idiosyncratic Distortions and Technology Adoption.” Manuscript, University of
Toronto, 2016.

Baily, Martin N., Charles Hulten, and David Campbell. "Productivity dynamics in manufacturing
plants." Brookings papers on economic activity. Microeconomics 1992 (1992): 187-267.

Banerjee, Abhijit V. "Land reforms: prospects and strategies." In Conference Paper, Annual
World Bank Conference on Development Economics, Washington DC, pp. 99-24. 1999.

Banerjee, Abhijit V., and Esther Duflo. "Growth theory through the lens of development
economics." Handbook of Economic Growth 1 (2005): 473-552.

Bartelsman, Eric, John Haltiwanger, and Stefano Scarpetta. "Cross-country differences in
productivity: The role of allocation and selection." The American Economic Review 103, no. 1
(2013): 305-334.

Bento, Pedro, and Diego Restuccia. “Misallocation, Establishment Size, and Productivity.” The
American Economic Journal: Macroeconomics. Forthcoming July (2017).

Bernard, Andrew, J. Bradford Jensen, and Peter Schott. “Trade Costs, Firms and Productivity.”
Journal of Monetary Economics 53 (2006): 917-937.

Besley, Timothy, and Maitreesh Ghatak. "Property rights and economic development.” In
Handbook of Development Economics edited by Dani Rodrik and Mark Rosenzweig. Vol 5
(2009).


                                              21
Bigio, S. and La’O, J., 2016. Financial frictions in production networks (No. 22212). National
Bureau of Economic Research.

Bils, Mark, Peter Klenow, and Cian Ruane. “Misallocation or Mismeasurement? Unpublished
manuscript, Stanford University (2017)

Bloom, Nicholas. "The impact of uncertainty shocks." Econometrica 77, no. 3 (2009): 623-685.

Bloom, Nicholas, Mirko Draca and John Van Reenen. “Trade Induced Technical Change? The
Impact of Chinese Imports on Innovation, IT, and Productivity.” Review of Economic Studies 83,
no. 1 (2016): 87-117.

Bloom, Nicholas, Benn Eifert, Aprajit Mahajan, David McKenzie, and John Roberts. "Does
Management Matter? Evidence from India." The Quarterly Journal of Economics 128, no. 1
(2013): 1-51.

Bollard, Albert, Peter J. Klenow, and Gunjan Sharma. "Indiaʼs mysterious manufacturing
miracle." Review of Economic Dynamics 16, no. 1 (2013): 59-85.

Bond, Stephen, and John Van Reenen. "Microeconometric models of investment and
employment." Handbook of econometrics 6 (2007): 4417-4498.

Brandt, Loren, Trevor Tombe, and Xiaodong Zhu. "Factor market distortions across time, space
and sectors in China." Review of Economic Dynamics 16, no. 1 (2013): 39-58.

Buera, Francisco J., Joseph P. Kaboski, and Yongseok Shin. "Finance and Development: A Tale of
Two Sectors." The American Economic Review 101, no. 5 (2011): 1964.

Buera, Francisco J., Joseph P. Kaboski, and Yongseok Shin. "Entrepreneurship and financial
frictions: A macro-development perspective." Annual Review of Economics 7, no. 1 (2015): 409-
436.

Busso, Matías, Lucía Madrigal, and Carmen Pagés. "Productivity and Resource Misallocation in
Latin America." The BE Journal of Macroeconomics 13, no. 1 (2013): 903-932.

Busso, M., M. V. Fazio, and S. Levy. "Informal and Unproductive: The productivity costs of
excessive informality in Mexico." BID, Department of Research and Chief Economist (2012).

Bustos, Paula. “Trade Liberalization, Exports and Technology Upgrading: Evidence of the Impact
of MERCOSUR on Argentinian Firms.” American Economic Review 101 no. 1 (2011): 304-340.

Caballero, Ricardo J., Takeo Hoshi, and Anil K. Kashyap. "Zombie lending and depressed
restructuring in Japan." The American Economic Review 98, no. 5 (2008): 1943-1977.


                                                22
Caliendo, Lorenzo, and Fernando Parro. “Estimates of the Trade and Welfare Effects of NAFTA.”
Review of Economic Studies 82, no. 1 (2015):1-44.

Caliendo, Lorenzo, and Esteban Rossi-Hansberg. “The Impact of Trade on Organization and
Productivity.” Quarterly Journal of Economics 127, no.3 (2013): 1393-1467.

Calligaris, Sara. "Misallocation and Total Factor Productivity in Italy: Evidence from Firm‐Level
Data." Labour 29, no. 4 (2015): 367-393.

Caselli, Francesco. "Accounting for Cross-country Income Differences." Handbook of economic
growth 1 (2005): 679-741.

Caselli, Francesco, and Nicola Gennaioli. "Dynastic Management." Economic Inquiry 51, no. 1
(2013): 971-996.

Chen, Chaoran, Diego Restuccia, and Raul Santaeulalia-Llopis. Land Markets, Resource
Allocation, and Agricultural Productivity. Unpublished manuscript, University of Toronto (2017).

Chen, Kaiji, and Alfonso Irarrazabal. "The role of allocative efficiency in a decade of recovery."
Review of Economic Dynamics 18, no. 3 (2015): 523-550.

Cooper, Russell W., and John C. Haltiwanger. "On the nature of capital adjustment costs." The
Review of Economic Studies 73, no. 3 (2006): 611-633.

Costantini, James and Marc Melitz. “The Dynamics of Firm-Level Adjustment to Trade
Liberalization.” In The Organization of Firms in a Global Economy, ed. Elhanan Helpman, Dalia
Marin and Thiery Verdier, 107-141. Cambridge MA, Harvard University Press.

Da-Rocha, José-Marıa, Marina Mendes Tavares, and Diego Restuccia. “Policy distortions and
aggregate productivity with endogenous establishment-level productivity.” Unpublished
manuscript, University of Toronto (2016a).

Da-Rocha, José-Marıa, Marina Mendes Tavares, and Diego Restuccia. “Firing costs,
misallocation, and aggregate productivity.” NBER working paper w23008 (2016b).

David, Joel M., Hugo A. Hopenhayn, and Venky Venkateswaran. "Information, Misallocation,
and Aggregate Productivity." The Quarterly Journal of Economics 131, no. 2 (2016): 943-1005.

David, Joel M., and Venky Venkateswaran. "Capital Misallocation: Frictions or Distortions?."
(2016).

De Janvry, Alain. "The role of land reform in economic development: policies and politics."
American Journal of Agricultural Economics 63, no. 2 (1981): 384-392.


                                                23
De Janvry, Alain, Kyle Emerick, Marco Gonzalez-Navarro, and Elisabeth Sadoulet. "Delinking
land rights from land use: Certification and migration in Mexico." The American Economic
Review 105, no. 10 (2015): 3125-3149.

De Mel, Suresh, David McKenzie, and Christopher Woodruff. "Returns to capital in
microenterprises: evidence from a field experiment." The Quarterly Journal of Economics
(2008): 1329-1372.

De Vries, Gaaitzen J. "Productivity in a distorted market: the case of Brazil's retail sector."
Review of Income and Wealth 60, no. 3 (2014): 499-524.

Deininger, Klaus, and Gershon Feder. "Land institutions and land markets." Handbook of
agricultural economics 1 (2001): 287-331.

D’Erasmo, Pablo and Hernan Moscoso Boedo. “Financial Structure, Informality and
Development.” Journal of Monetary Economics 59, no.3 (2012): 286-302.

Dias, Daniel, Carlos Robalo Marques, and Christine Richmond. "Comparing misallocation
between sectors in Portugal." Economic Bulletin and Financial Stability Report Articles (2016a).

Dias, Daniel, Carlos Robalo Marques, and Christine Richmond. “Misallocation and productivity
in the lead up to the Eurozone crisis.” Journal of Macroeconomics 49 (2016b): pp.46-70.

Eaton, Jonathan, and Samuel Kortum. "Technology, geography, and trade." Econometrica 70,
no. 5 (2002): 1741-1779.

Eaton, Jonathan, Sam Kortum and Francis Kramarz. “An Anatomy of International Trade:
Evidence from French Firms.” Econometrica 79, no. 5 (2011): 1453-1498.

Edmond, Chris, Virgiliu Midrigan, and Daniel Yi Xu. "Competition, markups, and the gains from
international trade." The American Economic Review 105, no. 10 (2015): 3183-3221.

Epifani, Paolo, and Gino Gancia. "Trade, markup heterogeneity and misallocations." Journal of
International Economics 83, no. 1 (2011): 1-13.

Fajgelbaum, Pablo D., Eduardo Morales, Juan Carlos Suarez Serrato, and Owen M. Zidar. State
taxes and spatial misallocation. No. w21760. National Bureau of Economic Research, 2015.

Fernandes, Ana. “Trade Policy, Trade Volumes and Firm-Level Productivity in Colombian
Manufacturing Industries.” Journal of International Economics 71, no. 1 (2007): 52-71.

Foster, Lucia, John Haltiwanger, and Chad Syverson. "Reallocation, firm turnover, and
efficiency: Selection on productivity or profitability?." The American Economic Review 98, no. 1
(2008): 394-425.

                                                 24
Fujii, Daisuke, and Yoshio Nozawa. Misallocation of Capital During Japan's Lost Two Decades.
Working Paper, 2013.

Garcia-Santana, M. and Pijoan-Mas, J., 2014. The reservation laws in India and the misallocation
of production factors. Journal of Monetary Economics, 66, pp.193-209.

Garicano, Luis, Claire Lelarge, and John Van Reenen. "Firm size distortions and the productivity
distribution: Evidence from France." The American Economic Review 106, no. 11 (2016): 3439-
3479.

Gollin, Douglas, Stephen Parente, and Richard Rogerson. "The role of agriculture in
development." The American Economic Review 92, no. 2 (2002): 160-164.

Gopinath, Gita, Sebnem Kalemli-Ozcan, Loukas Karabarbounis, and Carolina Villegas-Sanchez.
Capital allocation and productivity in South Europe. No. w21453. National Bureau of Economic
Research, 2015.

Gourio, François, and Nicolas Roys. "Size‐dependent regulations, firm size distribution, and
reallocation." Quantitative Economics 5, no. 2 (2014): 377-416.

Greenwood, Jeremy, Juan M. Sanchez, and Cheng Wang. "Quantifying the impact of financial
development on economic development." Review of Economic Dynamics 16, no. 1 (2013): 194-
215.

Guner, Nezih, Gustavo Ventura, and Yi Xu. "Macroeconomic implications of size-dependent
policies." Review of Economic Dynamics 11, no. 4 (2008): 721-744.

Hall, Robert E., and Charles I. Jones. "Why Do Some Countries Produce So Much More Output
Per Worker Than Others?." The Quarterly Journal of Economics 114, no. 1 (1999): 83-116.

Heckman, James, and Carmen Pagés. "Introductory Chapter." Law and Employment: Lessons
from the Latin America and the Caribbean (2004): 1-108.

Hnatkovska, Viktoria, Amartya Lahiri, and Sourabh Paul. "Castes and Labor Mobility." American
Economic Journal: Applied Economics 4, no. 2 (2012): 274-307.

Holmes, Thomas, and James Schmitz. “Competition and Productivity: A Review of Evidence.”
Annual Reviews of Economics 2010, no. 2: 619-642.

Hopenhayn, Hugo A. "Entry, exit, and firm dynamics in long run equilibrium." Econometrica
(1992): 1127-1150.



                                               25
Hopenhayn, Hugo, and Richard Rogerson. "Job turnover and policy evaluation: A general
equilibrium analysis." Journal of political Economy (1993): 915-938.

Hopenhayn, Hugo A. "Firms, misallocation, and aggregate productivity: A review." Annu. Rev.
Econ. 6, no. 1 (2014): 735-770.

Hopenhayn, H.A., 2016. Firm Size and Development. Economía, 17(1), pp.27-49.

Hsieh, Chang-Tai, Erik Hurst, Charles I. Jones, and Peter J. Klenow. The allocation of talent and
us economic growth. No. w18693. National Bureau of Economic Research, 2014.

Hsieh, Chang-Tai, and Peter J. Klenow. "Misallocation and Manufacturing TFP in China and
India." The Quarterly Journal of Economics 124, no. 4 (2009): 1403-1448.

Hsieh, Chang-Tai, and Peter J. Klenow. "The Life Cycle of Plants in India and Mexico." The
Quarterly Journal of Economics 129, no. 3 (2014): 1035-1084.

Hsieh, Chang-Tai, and Enrico Moretti. Why Do Cities Matter? Local Growth and Aggregate
Growth. No. w21154. National Bureau of Economic Research, 2015.

Jones, Charles I. "Misallocation, Input-Output Economics, and Economic Growth, volume II of
Advances in Economics and Econometrics-Tenth World Congress." (2013).

Jones, Charles I., 2016. The facts of economic growth. Handbook of Macroeconomics, 2, pp.3-
69.

Kalemli-Ozcan, Sebnem, and Bent E. Sørensen. "Misallocation, property rights, and access to
finance: evidence from within and across Africa." In African Successes: Modernization and
Development. University of Chicago Press, 2014.

Kehoe, Timothy, Pau Pujolas, and Jack Rossbach. “Quantitative Trade Models: Developments
and Challenges.” 2016. Forthcoming, Annual Reviews of Economics.

Khandelwal, Amit K., Peter K. Schott, and Shang-Jin Wei. "Trade liberalization and embedded
institutional reform: evidence from Chinese exporters." The American Economic Review 103,
no. 6 (2013): 2169-2195.

Klenow, Peter J., and Andres Rodriguez-Clare. "The neoclassical revival in growth economics:
Has it gone too far?." NBER macroeconomics annual 12 (1997): 73-103.

La Porta, Rafael, and Andrei Shleifer. "Informality and development." The Journal of Economic
Perspectives 28, no. 3 (2014): 109-126.

Lagos, Ricardo. "A model of TFP." The Review of Economic Studies 73, no. 4 (2006): 983-1007.

                                                26
Leal Ordóñez, Julio. "Tax collection, the informal sector, and productivity." Review of Economic
Dynamics 17, no. 2 (2014): 262-286.

Levine, Ross. "Financial development and economic growth: views and agenda." Journal of
economic literature 35, no. 2 (1997): 688-726.

Lewis, W. Arthur. "Economic development with unlimited supplies of labour." The Manchester
School 22, no. 2 (1954): 139-191.

Mayer, Thierry, Marc Melitz, Gianmacro Ottaviano. “Product Mix and Firm Productivity
Responses to Trade Competition.” Working Paper, Harvard University, 2017.

Melitz, Marc J. "The impact of trade on intra‐industry reallocations and aggregate industry
productivity." Econometrica 71, no. 6 (2003): 1695-1725.

Melitz, Marc J., and Stephen Redding. 2014. “Heterogeneous Firms and Trade.” In Handbook of
International Economics, Vol. 4, edited by Gita Gopinath, Elhanan Helpman, and Ken Rogoff, 1–
54. New Holland.

Midrigan, Virgiliu, and Daniel Yi Xu. "Finance and Misallocation: Evidence from Plant-Level
Data." American Economic Review 104, no. 2 (2014): 422-58.

Moll, Benjamin. "Productivity Losses from Financial Frictions: Can Self-Financing Undo Capital
Misallocation?." The American Economic Review 104, no. 10 (2014): 3186-3221.

Munshi, Kaivan, and Mark Rosenzweig. "Networks and misallocation: Insurance, migration, and
the rural-urban wage gap." The American Economic Review 106, no. 1 (2016): 46-98.

Oberfield, Ezra. "Productivity and misallocation during a crisis: Evidence from the Chilean crisis
of 1982." Review of Economic Dynamics 16, no. 1 (2013): 100-119.

Olley, G. Steven, and Ariel Pakes. "The Dynamics of Productivity in the Telecommunications
Equipment Industry." Econometrica (1996): 1263-1297.

Pavcnik, Nina. "Trade liberalization, exit, and productivity improvements: Evidence from Chilean
plants." The Review of Economic Studies 69, no. 1 (2002): 245-276.

Peters, Michael. Heterogeneous mark-ups, growth and endogenous misallocation. Manuscript,
Yale University, 2016.

Prescott, Edward C. "Lawrence R. Klein lecture 1997: Needed: A theory of total factor
productivity." International economic review (1998): 525-551.


                                                27
Rauch, James E. "Modelling the informal sector formally." Journal of Development Economics
35, no. 1 (1991): 33-47.

Reis, Ricardo. "The Portuguese Slump and Crash and the Euro Crisis." Brookings Papers on
Economic Activity (2013): 143-93.

Restuccia, Diego. "The Latin American Development Problem: An Interpretation." Economía 13,
no. 2 (2013): 69-100.

Restuccia, Diego, Dennis Tao Yang, and Xiaodong Zhu. "Agriculture and aggregate productivity:
A quantitative cross-country analysis." Journal of Monetary Economics 55, no. 2 (2008): 234-
250.

Restuccia, Diego, and Richard Rogerson. "Policy distortions and aggregate productivity with
heterogeneous establishments." Review of Economic dynamics 11, no. 4 (2008): 707-720.

Restuccia, Diego, and Richard Rogerson. "Misallocation and productivity." Review of Economic
Dynamics 16, no. 1 (2013): 1-10.

Restuccia, Diego, and Raul Santaeulalia-Llopis. “Land Misallocation and Productivity.” NBER
working paper w23128 (2017).

Rubin, Loris. “Innovation and the Trade Elasticity.” Journal of Monetary Economics 66, no. 4
(2014): 32-46.

Sandleris, Guido, and Mark LJ Wright. "The costs of financial crises: Resource misallocation,
productivity, and welfare in the 2001 argentine crisis." The Scandinavian Journal of Economics
116, no. 1 (2014): 87-127.

Song, Zheng, Kjetil Storesletten, and Fabrizio Zilibotti. "Growing like china." The American
Economic Review 101, no. 1 (2011): 196-233.

Syverson, Chad. "What determines productivity?." Journal of Economic literature 49, no. 2
(2011): 326-365.

Tombe, Trevor. "The missing food problem: Trade, agriculture, and international productivity
differences." American Economic Journal: Macroeconomics 7, no. 3 (2015): 226-258.

Tombe, Trevor, and Xiaodong Zhu. "Trade, migration and productivity: A quantitative analysis of
china." Manuscript, University of Toronto (2015).

Topalova, Petia, and Amit Khandelwal. “Trade Liberalization and Firm Productivity: The Case of
India.” The Review of Economics and Statistics 93, no. 3 (2011):995-1009.


                                                28
Trefler, Daniel. “The Long and the Short of the Canada-U.S. Free Trade Agreement.” American
Economic Review 94, no. 5 (2004): 870-895.

Udry, Christopher. "Misallocation, Growth and Financial Market Imperfections." SED plenary
lecture (2012).

Waugh, Michael. "International trade and income differences." The American Economic Review
100, no. 5 (2010): 2093-2124.

Ziebarth, Nicolas L. "Are China and India backward? Evidence from the 19th century US Census
of Manufactures." Review of Economic Dynamics 16, no. 1 (2013): 86-99.

Ziebarth, Nicolas L. "The Great Depression through the eyes of the Census of Manufactures."
Historical Methods: A Journal of Quantitative and Interdisciplinary History 48, no. 4 (2015): 185-
194.




                                               29
