                             NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




     PRICE RISK, PRODUCTION FLEXIBILITY, AND LIQUIDITY MANAGEMENT:
              EVIDENCE FROM ELECTRICITY GENERATING FIRMS

                                          Chen Lin
                                      Thomas Schmid
                                     Michael S. Weisbach

                                     Working Paper 23434
                             http://www.nber.org/papers/w23434


                    NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                             1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                               Cambridge, MA 02138
                           May 2017, Revised August 2017




Previously circulated as "How Production Risk and Flexibility Affect Liquidity Management:
Evidence from Electricity Generating Firms." We are very grateful to Heitor Almeida, Igor
Cunha, Shan Ge, John Graham, Bernadette Minton, Weiling Song, René Stulz, Tracy Wang, and
seminar participants at Ohio State University and the University of Washington for helpful
suggestions. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect
the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2017 by Chen Lin, Thomas Schmid, and Michael S. Weisbach. All rights reserved. Short
sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission
provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Price Risk, Production Flexibility, and Liquidity Management: Evidence from Electricity
Generating Firms
Chen Lin, Thomas Schmid, and Michael S. Weisbach
NBER Working Paper No. 23434
May 2017, Revised August 2017
JEL No. G3,G32,G35,L5

                                          ABSTRACT

Production inflexibility together with product price uncertainty creates price risk, which is a
potentially important factor for firms’ liquidity management. One industry for which price risk
can be measured is the electricity producing industry. We use data on hourly electricity prices in
41 markets to measure fluctuations in output prices and information on over 60,000 power plants
to approximate firms’ flexibilty to vary output quantities. Our results suggest that higher
electricity price volatility leads to increased cash holdings, but only in firms using inflexible
production technologies. This effect is robust to a number of specification choices including
instrumenting for volatility in electricity prices using weather forecast data. After deregulation,
firms hold 20-25% more cash, suggesting that the process of deregulation increases the risk
firms’ face. Price risk affects cash holdings most in financially constrained firms, and in firms
that cannot easily hedge the electricity price through derivative markets. Capital market liquidity
and balance sheet liquidity appear to be substitutes for one another.

Chen Lin                                         Michael S. Weisbach
Faculty of Business and Economics                Department of Finance
The University of Hong Kong                      Fisher College of Business
Hong Kong                                        Ohio State University
chenlin1@hku.hk                                  2100 Neil Ave.
                                                 Columbus, OH 43210
Thomas Schmid                                    and NBER
Faculty of Business and Economics                weisbach.2@osu.edu
University of Hong Kong
Hong Kong
schmid@hku.hk
                 Moody's Investors Service says that power prices are expected to remain volatile […]
                 Individual generators that can rapidly adjust their output in response to price swings will
                 likely benefit, but those that cannot could prove commercially unviable over time.
                                                                           Moody’s Investor Service (2016)



1. Introduction

        One source of risk facing many firms is price risk. Price risk occurs when firms with inflexible

production face uncertainty about the market price of their products. For instance, if firms must decide on

the production volume before knowing the exact demand for their product, they will face costs when they

have to alter production. The magnitude of these costs depends on the nature of the production process:

the more inflexible the production process is, the higher the ex post cost of altering production and hence

the higher the ex ante price risk.1 For this reason, price risk can potentially be an important factor in

firms’ liquidity management decisions.

        An industry for which price risk is both relevant and empirically measurable is the electricity

generating industry. In many parts of the world, this industry has been deregulated. In deregulated

electricity markets, electricity producers sell their product on a wholesale market to electricity retail firms,

who then distribute it to the consumers. Because generation capacities are fixed in the short-run,

wholesale prices fluctuate considerably when demand for electricity changes, which often occurs because

of changes in weather or seasonal factors. Since storing electricity is prohibitively expensive, electricity

prices tend to fluctuate much more than prices in other commodity or financial markets. Consequently,

generating firms have to adjust production in response to demand changes, which often entails the

shutdown and later restart of plants. Depending on the method used to produce electricity, shutdowns and

restarts of plants can take considerable time, and such disruptions to production can be very costly for

producers. For this reason, price fluctuations and the associated uncertainty create risk for energy utilities,

especially those using inflexible production technologies such as coal-fired power plants.



1 Discussion of price risk dates to the classic paper by Sandmo (1971), and the idea that flexibility in production
affects its magnitude comes from Turnovsky (1973) and Epstein (1978).


                                                        1
         This paper measures the extent to which price risk affects the liquidity management decisions of

electricity producing companies. It considers a sample of 481 electricity-generating firms between 1999

and 2014. These firms operate more than 60,000 individual plants, which use technologies ranging from

wind power to coal to nuclear power, and represent the vast majority of publicly traded electricity

generating firms in the world. In most of our empirical tests, we focus on the 253 firms that sell electricity

in organized markets in which retail firms purchase electricity from the wholesale market. In 41 regional

markets from 30 countries, we are able to obtain the hourly wholesale prices received by our sample firms

during our sample period. 2

         However, price uncertainty is unlikely to create the same price risk for all electricity producing

firms. Rather, their production technology is likely to play a key role. Using data on firms’ power plants

to approximate how easy the can adjust production to changing prices, we analyze whether firms’

liquidity choices vary systematically with the price risk they face. Firms which operate flexible plants

such as gas-fired plants can quickly shut down these plants as soon as the price falls below their variable

cost. For less flexible plants like coal this is more difficult as the shut-down and restart typically requires

several hours and involves considerable cost. 3 To measure price uncertainty, we use data on hourly

electricity wholesale prices in a power market. These data allow us to estimate a firm’s price risk because

electricity producers sell most of the electricity in the market where the plant is located. 4 Hourly prices

are used instead of daily or weekly prices because power plants are dispatched within a day. For instance,

gas-fired power plants would be turned on as soon as the price increases above their marginal cost. Daily

prices average all hourly prices of a day and are thus less precise. 5 Based on these hourly prices, we


2 These are virtually all markets around the globe that operate a day-ahead market for electricity and have hourly
pricing. Section 2.1 provides an overview on the markets and the criteria for their inclusion.
3 Instead of shutting down a plant, the operator could also reduce its load. However, there are considerable technic al

limitations to this approach. For instance, operators of gas combined cycle and coal-fired power plants typically
limit the minimum generation to about 40% to 50% of its capacity. Furthermore, the efficiency of thermal power
plants decreases significantly for low load levels.
4 Selling in electricity to other markets is possible, but there are substantial technical (e.g., losses due to

transmission) and legal (e.g., market regulations) limitations. Based on geographical segment data, we estimate that
our sample firms sell more than 90% of their production in the market where they are located.
5 For instance, consider a daily average electricity price of 50 USD/MWh and a gas-fired power plant with variable

cost of 75 USD/MWh. To know whether this plant was switched on or not, it is necessary to know the distribution of


                                                          2
calculate the electricity price volatility during a firm’s fiscal year. We use the average volatility during the

whole fiscal year because cash holding decisions are typically not made on short-term (e.g., daily or

weekly) basis. We focus on firms’ cash holdings, since they are the most common way that firms adjust

the liquidity of their balance sheet. Because of the many institutional, tax, and cultural differences across

countries and markets, we include firm fixed effects in all equations we report, so that the results should

be interpreted as the way in which a particular firm changes its cash holdings in response to changes in

market conditions.

         Our estimates suggest that firms with inflexible production do adjust their cash holdings in

response to changes in price uncertainty. For firms using relatively flexible technologies such as gas-fired

power plants, in which output can be adjusted very quickly and at little or low cost, we find little effect of

price uncertainty on liquidity management. However, firms using inflexible production technologies such

as coal react to changes in the volatility of wholesale prices changing the amount of cash they hold. These

findings suggest that firms do hedge price risk through liquidity management.

         To isolate the channel through which price risk affects liquidity decisions, we rely on the fact that

electricity prices are heavily influenced by an exogenous factor – the weather. While electricity capacity

is rather fixed in the short-run and supply can be planned by energy utilities, electricity demand varies

considerably. One important determinant of electricity demand is the weather (Perez-Gonzalez and Yun,

2013). 6 Since adjustments in the electricity supply are costly and slow, demand changes due to

unexpectedly high or low temperatures lead to price fluctuations. We approximate such unexpected

weather events by deviations of actual temperatures from forecasted values, which lead to unexpected




hourly prices within the day. For a price of 50 USD/MWh for all hours, the plant would not run; for a price of 100
USD/MWh during 12 hours and 0 USD/MWh during the other 12 hours, the plant would run 50% of the time.
Similarly, consider a coal plant with variable cost of 30 USD/MWh. In the first scenario, this plant would be highly
profitable. However, in the second scenario, the plant would likely also produce despite a price below marginal cost,
which reduces its overall profitability.
6 In this context, Vattenfall, a large European energy utility, states that “[e]lectricity prices on the Nordic electricity

exchange, Nordpool, are 70 per cent governed by the elements.” (http://corporate.vattenfall.com/news-and-
media/news/2014/how-the-weather-affects-the-electricity-price/)


                                                            3
demand and increase the volatility of electricity prices. 7 Using this logic, we construct an instrument for

electricity price volatility based on how uncertain (or unpredictable) future temperatures are in a power

market and year. This instrument varies considerably between different regions and over time. 8

Instrumenting for volatility using this approach leads to similar findings to those discussed above: price

uncertainty increases cash holdings of firms with inflexible production technologies but not those with

flexible production technologies.

        We perform a number of robustness tests to ensure that these results do not occur because of

arbitrary choices we have made in our empirical design. For instance, we use alternative proxies for

operational adjustment cost or alternative measurements for electricity price volatility (based on annual

prices). To mitigate concerns that our results are driven by a specific production technology (e.g., nuclear

power plants which are special along several dimensions), we reestimate our equations excluding all firms

that operate several specific technologies. To ensure that the results do not reflect the actions of energy

utilities who have market power and therefore can influence wholesale electricity prices, we reestimate

our equations without all firms that account for more than five or ten percent of the production capacity in

any specific market. All of these tests confirm the main finding that price risk coming from volatility in

wholesale prices is an important factor in electricity producing firms’ liquidity management decisions.

        As originally argued by Keynes (1936), holding cash for precautionary reasons only makes sense

if there is some likelihood of a firm facing financial constraints in the future. Holding cash is costly for a

number of reasons, so if a firm can always borrow costlessly at the appropriate cost of capital, reliance on

the capital market should dominate holding cash. Therefore, we expect that if the results we present occur

because of firms hedging price risk by holding cash on their balance sheets, the effect should be larger for

firms likely facing financial constraints.



7 Ronald N. Keener, Senior Scientist of Duke Power Company states in this context that a “conservative annual
estimate of weather error costs associated with startup-shutdown of generation units is $8,000,000 for Duke Power.”
(http://sciencepolicy.colorado.edu/socasp/weather1/keener.html)
8 For time series variation, two effects are important. First, forecasting techniques are becoming more precise over

time. Second, the weather tends to be more extreme and unpredictable due to the climate change.


                                                        4
          To evaluate this argument, we split our sample into subsamples of firms based on their production

flexibility. For each sub-sample, we then estimate how financial constraints affect the way in which firms

adjust their cash holdings in response to wholesale price volatility. We use four measures of financial

constraints: firm size (with smaller firms being more constrained), whether the firm has participated in the

syndicated loan market, whether a firm has a bond rating, and whether a firm is in a Common Law

country, since these firms tend to have superior access to financing through equity markets. The estimates

imply that for the subsample of firms with inflexible production, the impact of price uncertainty on cash

holdings is much more pronounced in financially constrained firms. However, for the subsamples of firms

that are not likely to be financially constrained, price uncertainty does not appear to affect firms’ liquidity

management decisions. These results suggest that, consistent with theoretical predictions, constrained

firms are more prone to manage price risk through their cash positions than unconstrained firms.

          An alternative way to manage price risk is to pre-sell electricity through a liquid futures market.

In our sample period, the existence and liquidity of futures markets for electricity varied substantially

across regions. We reestimate our equation on subsamples of firms that are in regions with liquid futures

markets, and those in markets that either do not have a futures market, or have one that is relatively

illiquid. Our estimates suggest that the sensitivity of cash holdings to price volatility varies inversely with

the ability of firms to hedge their exposure to potential shocks through futures markets: if firms can easily

hedge shocks through derivatives, even those with low production flexibility have very small changes in

cash holdings following changes volatility. Since it is usually cheaper to hedge through the derivatives

market than by holding cash, firms appear to do so when such markets exist and are liquid. This result

highlights the way in which derivative markets are substitutes to liquidity management, and suggests that

a benefit of having liquid derivative markets is that they allow firms to hold less cash on their balance

sheets.

          We evaluate whether firms build up liquidity reserves in response to price risk by restricting

payouts. Consistent with this idea, we find that price risk leads to lower payouts, both in terms of




                                                      5
dividends alone and also dividends plus share repurchases. Adjustments in payout policy seem to be one

way in which firm using inflexible technologies achieve higher liquidity in response to price uncertainty.

        Finally we consider the extent to which price risk represents a cost of deregulation to firms. Since

firms hold more cash because of the wholesale price risk and holding cash is costly, the price risk

electricity producers face is potentially an additional cost of deregulation. As a direct test of this idea, we

compare the cash holdings of deregulated electricity producers and otherwise identical regulated ones.

Consistent with the notion that deregulation increases the risk faced by electricity producers, our results

suggest that firms selling on wholesale markets hold about 20-25% more cash than otherwise identical

firms in regulated markets.

        Our analysis extends the literature in a number of ways. First, we measure the extent to which

electricity producers in deregulated markets adjust their cash holdings in response to the risk they face

from wholesale price movements. While there has been prior research documenting a relation between a

firm’s cash flow volatility and its cash holdings, measuring this relation is challenging. Most prior

literature uses accounting based measures that are only available at an annual frequency. In contrast, we

rely on micro data about the output prices faced by particular producers, which leads to a clean

identification of this relation. Second, the fact that we directly measure output prices rather than use firm-

level cash flow data allows us to identify the impact of uncertainty on cash holdings because we can

instrument for electricity price volatility by weather forecast uncertainty. Third, our detailed data on the

methods of producing electricity used by different firms enables us to measure the way in which price risk

depends on the inflexibility of the production process. Fourth, we use cross-firm and cross-country data

to evaluate the importance of the factors that potentially influence the importance of liquidity

management. In particular, we identify the way that greater access to equity and debt markets, as well as

the ability to hedge in liquid futures markets are substitutes for active management of the liquidity of a

firm’s balance sheet.    Fifth, we consider the way in which deregulation imposes risks on firms by

exposing them to wholesale price movements, which lead them to have to pay costs to adjust their




                                                      6
production decisions. We document the way in which firms compensate for this additional risk by

comparing the liquidity choices of otherwise similar firms in regulated and unregulated markets.

        There has, nonetheless, been a substantial literature on liquidity management.             The most

prominent explanation why firms hold cash dates to Keynes (1936), who originally proposed that firms

hold cash as a hedge against potential future financial constraints. Opler, Pinkowitz, Stulz, and

Williamson (1999) was the first paper to examine this idea empirically, and started a literature that

generally concludes that the precautionary motive is an important determinant of firms’ liquidity

management decisions. 9

        This paper also contributes to a long line of research about the economics of energy utilities.

Fabrizio, Rose and Wolfram (2007), for instance, analyze how efficiency of energy utilities is affected by

regulatory changes. Furthermore, Becher, Mulherin, and Walkling (2012) investigate corporate mergers

in the energy utilities industry, Perez-Gonzalez and Yun (2013) use energy utilities to disentangle the

value contribution of risk management with derivatives, and Rettl, Stomper, and Zechner (2016) measure

competitor inflexibility in this industry. Reinartz and Schmid (2016) analyze the impact of production

flexibility on the financial leverage in the electricity-generation industry. For this purpose, they also

construct flexibility measures based on the plants which are operated by firms. Reinartz and Schmid

(2016) focus on the impact of flexibility on leverage, whereas this paper analyzes how price uncertainty

affects cash holdings of firms with flexible and inflexible production.

        This paper’s analysis suggests that a cost of delivering electricity through wholesale markets is

the risk that such markets expose firms to; since electricity producing firms are price takers in the

wholesale market, price fluctuations create risk they must manage, either through adjustment in their cash

positions or through the derivative markets.




9 See Almeida, Campello, and Weisbach (2004), Bates, Kahle and Stulz (2009), Lins, Servaes, and Tufano (2010),
Campello, Giambona, Graham and Harvey (2011), Hoberg, Phillips and, Prabhala (2014), Morellec, Nikolov and
Zucchi (2014), and Erel, Jang, Minton, and Weisbach (2017). Almeida, Campello, Cunha, and Weisbach (2014)
provide a survey of this literature.


                                                      7
2. Wholesale Price Fluctuations and Utilities’ Demand for Liquidity

2.1. The Wholesale Market for Electricity

        Competitive wholesale markets for electricity exist in many countries. In these markets, the prices

for electricity adjust to reflect the supply and demand at a particular point in time. Consumers typically

pay a pre-arranged rate to their retail company. These retail companies, however, typically purchase

electricity they sell to consumers from the wholesale market at whatever the prevailing price happens to

be. The suppliers of electricity on the wholesale markets are electricity-generating firms, many of which

do not directly sell to final consumers. The Electricity Power Supply Association (EPSA) summarizes

that “[i]n many cases, electricity is generated by a power company that ultimately will not deliver it to the

end-use customer. A single megawatt […] is frequently bought and re-sold a number of times before

finally being consumed. These transactions are considered "sales for re-sale," and make-up the wholesale

electricity market.”10

        Wholesale markets for electricity usually have a day-ahead market (DAM) in which market

participants buy and sell electricity for delivery on the following day. Thus, this market is essentially a

very short-term future market. The DAM typically features contracts for the delivery of electricity during

individual hours of the following day. 11 The price for electricity is formed independently for each contract

and thus for every hour. Some wholesale markets also offer real-time markets in which electricity for

delivery on the same day is traded. Because these markets are generally not very liquid, we focus on the

DAM in which most of the trading takes place.

        Wholesale electricity markets have developed in different regions of the world, with (slightly)

different structures and regulations. In the U.S., the Federal Energy Regulatory Commission (FERC)

order 2000, which was issued in February 2000, set the starting point for the creation of regional

wholesale markets for electricity. Independent system operators (ISOs) and regional transmission

organizations (RTOs) then formed market regions with day-ahead wholesale markets for electricity.

10https://www.epsa.org/industry/primer/?fa=wholesaleMarket
11We focus on markets for which hourly electricity prices are available. If a market uses half -hourly prices, we
define the hourly price as the average of the two half-hourly prices.


                                                       8
Currently there are seven organized markets in the U.S. These are ISO New England, New York ISO,

PJM, Midwest ISO, Southwest Power Pool, ERCOT, and California ISO. Whereas some of those markets

focus (approximately) on a single state (e.g., ERCOT covers most of Texas), others serve regions with

multiple states (e.g., PJM covers all or part of 13 different states). 12 According to EPSA, two-thirds of the

United States' economic activity occurs within the boundaries of these markets. States outside these

markets still do not have competitive markets for electricity, so in these states, electricity is still supplied

by regulated utilities.

         In Europe, the process of deregulating electricity markets and introducing wholesale markets for

electricity was started in 1996 by the European Union Directive 96/92/EC. By the early 2000s, the

majority of all E.U. markets were deregulated. European markets are generally organized as day-ahead

markets, and most but not all wholesale markets in Europe cover one country. Nordpool, the largest

electricity market in Europe, is an important exception and covers several northern European countries.

         In Asia and Oceania, the deregulation process varied across countries. Australia was an early

adopter and started introducing wholesale markets in the mid-1990s. It now has multiple markets, which

generally cover single states. There are no markets for which we are able to get data during our sample

period in South America and Africa.

         Overall, we collect hourly electricity prices for 41 power markets located in 30 countries. We do

not consider markets which were active for less than two years during our sample period, markets without

day-ahead trading, and markets without hourly pricing. 13 Figure 1 illustrates the regions of the world that

supply electricity competitively through wholesale markets. These regions cover a large portion of the

developed economic world. However, while the basic structure of electricity markets is similar across the

globe, the markets differ in a number of ways. For this reason, we focus on time-series variation in the



12 For simplicity, we assume that a market exists in a state if it covers all or most of the state according to the FERC.
13 For this reason, we do not include the Southwest Power Pool (starting in 2013), IBEX in Bulgaria (2014), EPIAS
in Turkey (2015), and CROPEX in Croatia (2016). Furthermore, we ignore markets which do not feature a typical
day-ahead market with hourly pricing (WESM, Philippines). Hourly electricity prices could not be obtained for the
markets in Brazil, Argentina, and Colombia.


                                                           9
volatility of electricity prices in our empirical tests because of potential cross-regional differences that are

potentially difficult to control for econometrically.

2.2. Wholesale Price Risk and Production Flexibility

           Price risk faced by electricity producers should vary as a function both of the market and also by

production technology. In some markets, demand for electricity is relatively stable and easy to forecast,

leading wholesale prices to be relatively stable.           However, in other markets, demand can fluctuate

substantially and be difficult to predict accurately. For example, a heat wave in Texas in early August

2011 led to an electricity supply shortage and boosted prices peaks of more than 2,000 USD per MWh

(the average price being around 30 USD per MWh). 14 In contrast, the electricity price went down to

around negative 150 USD per MWh in Germany in May 2016.15 The reason for this negative price was a

combination of higher than expected production by wind turbines and the inflexibility of other power

plants, which continued producing despite the negative price. Fluctuating wholesale prices impose

adjustment costs on electricity producers, since they cannot store electricity easily if prices are low, and

must pay setup costs to increase production if prices are high. Furthermore, because there is no way to

dispose of electricity costlessly, these firms have to sell all the electricity they produce, even if the price is

negative. Thus, wholesale price volatility creates a demand for liquidity from electricity producing

companies, since unforeseen price fluctuations impose incremental costs on these firms.

           Electricity producing firms differ from one another in terms of their exposure to price risk,

because they face differences in regional demand fluctuations and also because their methods of

producing electricity have different costs of adjusting output. Since electricity producers sell their product

in the wholesale market, their revenues will vary with the price they receive in the wholesale market.

Because consumers’ demand for electricity tends to be price inelastic, a shock to demand can lead to large

changes in wholesale prices. Supply curves of electricity producing firms, in contrast, can be relatively

elastic, so changes in prices can lead firms to desire to adjust quantities substantially. Therefore, the

14   https://www.eia.gov/todayinenergy/detail.php?id=3010
15 http://www.independent.co.uk/environment/renewable-energy-germany-negative-prices-electricity-wind-solar-

a7024716.html


                                                        10
ability to adjust output quantities at relatively low cost in response to price movements can be very

valuable to electricity producers.

         The cost to electricity producers of changing output varies dramatically with the method they use

to produce electricity. The average cost of adjusting output for each of the main technologies is

summarized in Table 1. Gas-fired power plants are very flexible, with run-up times of only several

minutes and a low cost for starting the plant. 16 Gas combined cycle power plants are also quite flexible,

with run-up times of about 90 minutes. However, for other production technologies the time needed to

stop and start the plants and the associated cost can be considerable. For example, lignite-fired plants need

about six hours to start at a cost of about 35 Euro per megawatt of production capacity, while coal-fired

power plants cost about 50 Euro per megawatt. The most inflexible technology is nuclear power, since it

can take days to shut down or restart a plant, with a very high cost of doing so (above 100 Euro per

megawatt).

         The total cost associated with starting and stopping of plants to electricity producing firms can be

sizable. To gauge the magnitude of these costs, consider an average sized firm with 15 coal-fired plants.

The average capacity of a coal-fired plant is 750 megawatts and the cost of cycling a coal plant (stopping

and restarting it), is about $56 per megawatt, so each cycle costs about $42,000 per plant. If there are 50

cycles per year at each plant, the total cost is about $31.5 m annually per firm, which is more than 10% of

the annual net income for a typical firm in our sample. 17

         The importance of production flexibility for energy utilities is highlighted by the existence of

negative electricity prices in many markets. In this context, the European Power Exchange states that

“[n]egative prices are not a theoretical concept. Buyers are actually getting money and electricity from



16 For wind and solar power, start costs and time are zero as these technologies are typically not actively dispatched
(we present a robustness test later which excludes these technologies to ensure that they do not bias our findings).
17 These cost estimates are for "warm starts", which means that the plant is not totally shut down. Costs for "cold

starts", in which the plant is completely shut down would be higher, but these events are much rarer. Estimates for
the number of warm start-ups of coal-fired plants varies slightly between different sources, but 50 is an average
estimate. For instance, the International Energy Agency estimates that a typical coal-fired plant has about 45 warm
starts per year (see Trueby, 2014, p. 19), whereas data from Aptech suggests more than 50 start-ups for coal-fired
plants (see Leyzerovich, 2007, p. 316).


                                                         11
sellers. However, you need to keep in mind that if a producer is willing to accept negative prices, this

means it is less expensive for him to keep their power plants online than to shut them down and restart

them later.”18 The fact that electricity prices are sometimes negative increases the value of being able to

adjust output at low cost, as well as the downside risk that firms with inflexible production face from

price volatility.

2.3. Empirical Implications

          Uncertainty about future prices combined with high inflexibility creates price risk for electricity

producers. If the wholesale price changes substantially, then the optimal response of the suppliers would

be to move along the supply curve and adjust output accordingly.          However, it takes time to change

output, e.g., by shutting down a power plant, especially for firms producing electricity with inflexible

technologies. For this reason, an inflexible producer will be left producing a suboptimal quantity after a

demand shock for a period of time. Because it is costly to change output, inflexible suppliers sometimes

choose to produce a suboptimal quantity for limited periods of time rather than pay the costs of stopping

and restarting the plant. Regardless of whether a firm pays to shut down a plant temporarily or continues

to operate at a loss, the firm can suffer a cash flow shock when there are declines in the wholesale price.

          The potential of such cash flow shocks provides a reason why electricity producers should use

liquidity management.      Almeida, Campello, Cunha, and Weisbach (2014) formally model a problem

similar to the one faced by electricity producers. In this model, the firm faces an uncertain cash flow

requirement to continue a valuable investment so holds cash in anticipation of the potential cash flow

shock. A clear implication of this model is that when the magnitude of a potential cash flow shock

increases, a firm should hold more cash in anticipation of a cash flow shock. This effect is lessened when

a firm has better access to capital markets or can hedge the cash flow shocks in other ways, such as

through a derivatives market.

          For electricity producers, the potential cash flow shock arises from the risk coming from

uncertainty about the wholesale price of electricity when there is inflexibility in their production process.

18   https://www.epexspot.com/en/company-info/basics_of_the_power_market/negative_prices


                                                      12
When price uncertainty is low and/or production flexibility is high, such price risk is relatively

unimportant. However, when price uncertainty is high and the cost of adjusting production is high, price

risk is substantial, increasing the probability of negative cash flow shocks. Consequently, firms are

expected to hedge such price risk ex ante by holding more liquidity. In addition, we expect this hedging

via liquidity effect to be larger when firms are more likely to be financially constrained and when they do

not have access to derivative markets that can be used to hedge cash flow shocks directly.



3. Data Description

3.1. Sample of Electricity-Producing Utilities

          To construct a sample of energy utilities from all over the world, we start by combining lists of

active and inactive utility companies from Thomson Reuters. We focus on publicly-traded utilities

because reliable data for unlisted firms is often not available. The sample covers the years 1999 to 2014,

which is the period for which we can obtain the necessary data on firms' production assets.

          We perform several steps to clean the sample. First, we eliminate all firms without a primary

security classified as equity. Second, we wish to consider only companies that focus on the generation of

electricity. To ensure that other companies are not included, we rely on firms’ SIC and ICB codes, the

business description obtained from Capital IQ, and additionally conduct manual research on the

companies’ business lines. This process leads to a sample of 481 utilities for which we are able to obtain

data on production assets. For much of the analysis, we focus on the subsample of the 253 firms that are

located in regions that have wholesale markets for electricity during some portion of our sample period.

These firms are located in 33 different electricity markets and have a total of nearly 40,000 unique power

plants.

          Table 2 provides a detailed overview of the composition of the sample over time. The number of

sample firms increases significantly over time. The main reason for this increase is that many regions

deregulated their electricity markets and created wholesale markets during our sample period.

3.2. Wholesale Electricity Price Data


                                                     13
        To measure the degree of electricity price volatility, we use hourly data on electricity prices in

each market. These data are available for 41 regional markets from 30 countries. Most countries have

their own national market but some markets cover more than one country (e.g., Nordpool, which covers

several Northern European countries) and some countries have more than one market (i.e., Australia,

Canada, and the U.S.). We obtain the price data from the websites of the power exchanges, direct contact

with those exchanges, or from Thomson Reuters. To make the prices comparable across countries, all

prices are converted into U.S. dollars.

        Table 3 provides descriptive statistics for electricity prices in each market. It is evident from this

table that there is substantial variation across the world in electricity prices. Prices are highest in markets

in Japan and Singapore, which have to import resources to produce electricity. In each of these markets,

the mean and median wholesale prices are around $100 per megawatt hour. In contrast, prices in the

Russian wholesale market, which has abundant energy resources, average about one fifth of this level,

$22 per megawatt hour.

        To illustrate that there are consistent differences across markets, we present in Figure 2 a time

series plot of electricity price times for one month (January 2012) in three selected markets: the German

market, the Italian market, and Nordpool, which covers several Northern European countries. This figure

indicates that the degree of fluctuations varies considerably between different markets and over time.

Even though all three markets are for developed European countries, the Italian market consistently has

higher price than the German market’s price, which is in turn higher than the price in Nordpool.

        Since our goal is to evaluate the way in which wholesale price fluctuations affect firms’ liquidity

management, we calculate a measure of the price fluctuations in a particular market. To do so, we first

match all sample firms to electricity markets based on their geographical location. We calculate a measure

we refer to as VOLATILITY, which equals the standard deviation of returns of hourly electricity prices

during a firm’s fiscal year. Daily prices, which are simply aggregations of hourly prices because the




                                                      14
hourly contracts are those which are typically traded, are less precise than hourly prices for our purpose. 19

Returns are calculated as differences between hourly prices in U.S. dollar and standardized by the average

price in a market.     Table 2 presents statistics on VOLATILITY in each market. This measure of price

volatility varies substantially across markets, with an average of .05 for Russia, .08 for Nordpool, and

over 2 for the Australian markets.20

3.3. Measuring Production Flexibility

        Our measures for production flexibility are based on the generation technologies of the sample

firms’ power plants. Data on the production technologies for single power plants is obtained from the

annual versions of the Platts World Electric Power Plant database. This comprehensive database contains

information on power plants and their technologies around the globe. It includes information on single

power plant units, including their production technologies, capacities, geographic locations, start dates of

commercial operation, and their owners/operators. 21

        We obtain this database for all years between 2000 and 2014 and manually match each power

plant in this database to the energy utilities sample. 22 About 50% of the plants match to our sample firms;

the remainder are owned by large utilities that are not publicly listed and are excluded from our sample

for this reason. These data on production processes allow us to calculate the degree of production

flexibility for each firm in each year.




19 For example, assume a daily price of 100 USD. If the price was 100 USD for all hourly contracts, it would have
been optimal to run coal-fired plants in all hours. However, if the price was zero for 12 hours and 200 for the other
12 hours, switching on and off the plant would have been the optimal strategy. These two c ases cannot be
distinguished when using daily prices. Nevertheless, we perform a robustness test with daily prices and find similar,
but slightly weaker results (which is to be expected due to the loss of measurement precision).
20 An alternative approach is to use longer time intervals to calculate volatility, since the decision to shut down

plants is presumably made for longer than hourly periods. We construct measures for daily and annual volatility
below in section 4.4.1 and the results using these measures are similar to those using hourly volatility.
21 A detailed description of the database is provided by Platts’ Data Base Description and Research Methodology

(www.platts.com/IM.Platts.Content/downloads/udi/wepp/descmeth.pdf). Reinartz and Schmid (2016) contain
additional information about it as well as other information about electricity markets.
22 We use the yearly version of the database because they only include the current owner/operator. For 1999, we use

the database version of 2000 but exclude all power plants that were started after 2000.


                                                         15
         Based on these data, we follow Reinartz and Schmid (2016) and use RUN-UP TIME as a measure

of production flexibility for a particular firm-year. RUN-UP TIME is calculated as the capacity-weighted

average run-up time:




with index i for firm, t for year, k for production technology and M for the number of different

technologies. The technology specific values for run-up time and their sources are summarized in Table 1.

We define FLEXIBILITY as one minus the normalized RUN-UP TIME (i.e., the run-up time divided by

the maximum value of RUN-UP TIME). This measure for flexibility is bounded between zero and one,

with higher values being associated with greater production flexibility. 23

3.4. Financial variables

         Our measure of cash holdings is calculated as total cash holdings of the firm divided by book

value of assets. Control variables included in all models are size (measured as the natural logarithm of

total assets), cash flow (earnings before interest, taxes, depreciation, and amortization scaled by total

assets), and GDP (the natural logarithm of the GDP per capita).24 In additional tests, we also control for

several other possible determinants of cash holdings, such the market-to-book ratio (market capitalization

divided by the book value of equity), capital expenditures (scaled by total assets), leverage (total debt

divided by the sum of total debt and book value of equity), and dividend payments (a dummy variable

which equals one if a divided is paid). Fiscal years that end between January and June are allocated to the

previous year; only complete fiscal years are considered. To restrict the impact of outliers, all financial

variables are winsorized at the 1% and 99% levels.

3.5. Descriptive statistics




23 In robustness tests, we use alternative measures for production flexibility based on ramp-up cost, full-load hours,
and a relative ranking of all production technologies.
24 All financial variables are measured in U.S. dollars. Both the measure of cash holdings and the control variables

have become standard in the literature on cash holdings since Opler, Pinkowitz, Stulz and Williamson (1999).


                                                         16
        Table 4 shows the descriptive statistics for our sample firms, averaged for the whole sample

period. On average, energy utilities have cash holdings equal to eight percent of their total assets. This is

comparable to values reported for multi-industry samples (see Almeida, Campello, Cunha, and Weisbach

(2014)). Furthermore, there is considerable variation in the cash ratio with an inter-quartile range of nine

percentage points. The average firm in our sample has total assets of around 18 billion USD (median: 4

billion USD). The average electricity price is 56 USD per megawatt hour (MWh), with 25th and 75th

percentiles of 33 and 68 USD per MWh, respectively. The average value of VOLATILITY is 0.36, with

considerable variation as indicted by the standard deviation of 0.76. The average run-up time is 3.7 hours

with a standard deviation of 5.1, while FLEXIBILITY has an average value of 0.91. Our sample firms

contain an average of 235 different power plants and use 6 different production technologies.



4. Estimating the Impact of Price Risk on Utilities’ Liquidity

4.1. Empirical Specification

        To measure the impact of price risk on utilities’ liquidity management decisions, we estimate the

extent to which utilities’ cash holdings reflect price risk coming from wholesale price uncertainty and the

inflexibility of the production process. As emphasized by Duchin, Gilbert, Harford and Hrdlicka (2017),

this variable includes holdings of a number of securities, some of which are risky. Firms do, of course,

have other ways managing liquidity; for example, they can acquire lines of credit, build debt capacity, or

hedge through derivatives markets.     We focus on cash holdings for two main reasons. First, cash is

straightforward to measure and has been the focus of the prior empirical literature. Second, there are

theoretical reasons why cash is the preferred way of managing liquidity. Lines of credit and debt capacity

can disappear during poor financial conditions when they are most needed, effectively being used to fund

overinvestments in good times rather than efficient investments in poor times (see Acharya, Almeida and

Campello (2007) or Almeida, Campello, Cunha, and Weisbach (2014)). Hedging price risk by pre-selling

electricity in the OTC or futures markets is common in many markets; we address this possibility and

analyze how it affects our findings below in Section 5.2.


                                                     17
        We estimate equations predicting an energy utility’s cash holdings. We use the measures of price

volatility and production flexibility we discussed above as our primary independent variables. Because of

cross-sectional differences caused by firm-level, country-level, and market-level factors, we include firm

fixed effects in all equations. The inclusion of these firm fixed effects implies that the important variation

in the data determining our estimates are time series changes undergone by individual firms rather than

differences across firms. We include year fixed effects to control for factors that affect the entire industry

at any point in time. Finally, we include the firm’s log (assets), its cash flow (normalized by assets), and

GDP per capital (in 2010 USD) in each equation. 25

4.2. Estimates of the Way Wholesale Price Volatility and Production Flexibility Affect Cash Holdings

        We present these estimates in Table 5. The results presented in Column (1) suggest that higher

wholesale price volatility is associated with higher cash holdings, while higher production flexibility

leads to lower cash holdings. This pattern is consistent with theoretical predictions because both higher

price volatility and lower production flexibility are associated with higher price risk. When production is

more flexible, the cost of adjusting output is lower, so utilities with more flexible production approaches

hold less cash on their balance sheets.

        Theoretically, according to a model such as Almeida, Campello, Cunha, and Weisbach (2014),

what should affect liquidity choices is the expectation of cash requirements. This expectation equals the

product of the likelihood of a required cash inflow with the quantity of the required cash inflow

conditional on one being needed. The likelihood of a cash inflow requirement is a function of the

uncertainty of wholesale prices, and the size of any potential cash flow shock is a function of the

inflexibility of the production process used. Therefore, we expect that the magnitude of each of these

variables will affect the impact the other has on liquidity. In other words, utilities that have a high price

risk due to both inflexible production methods and high product price uncertainty should adjust their cash




25The reported t-statistics are based on cluster-robust Huber/White standard errors (White, 1980), clustered by
countries.


                                                      18
holdings more in response to an increase in price volatility than utilities with more flexible production

methods.

         To evaluate this hypothesis, we split the sample in two subsamples based on the flexibility of the

production process used. In Column (2) of Table 5, we reestimate our equation on the subsample of

observations for which FLEXIBILITY is above the median value in a country and year, and in Column (3),

we reestimate the equation on the subsample in which FLEXIBILITY is below the median in a country and

year. The results suggest that impact of price volatility on cash holdings comes primarily from the sample

of firms with relatively inflexible production technologies. The coefficient on volatility for the subsample

of firms using flexible production technologies is very close to zero; for those firms using inflexible

technologies, it is much larger and the difference between the two is statistically significant. The positive

impact of volatility on cash holdings appears to be driven by firms with inflexible production

technologies. In contrast to flexible firms, these energy utilities cannot easily adjust their production in

case of adverse price shocks. Because of the possibility of an unexpected cash flow shock, these firms

build up liquidity buffers if the electricity price is highly volatile.

         This pattern suggests that the appropriate specification of our model includes a term interacting

price volatility with our measure of production flexibility. In Column 4 of Table 5, we present estimates

of the equations including this interaction term and in Column 5 we reestimate this specification with

additional control variables.    In each specification, the estimated coefficient on the interaction term is

negative and statistically significantly different from zero.

         The estimated magnitude of this effect is substantial. According to the estimates presented in

Column 5, a one-standard deviation increase of the electricity price volatility would translate into an

about five percentage-point increase (in absolute terms) of the cash to total assets ratio for the most

inflexible firms. Since the average cash ratio in our sample is 0.08, this increase represents a more than 50

percent change in relative terms. For a firm with average flexibility, a one-standard deviation increase in

volatility would go along with a 0.6 percentage-point increase of the cash ratio, nearly a ten percent

relative change. These calculations emphasize the importance of production flexibility, since the impact


                                                         19
of high wholesale price volatility on an electricity-producing firm’s cash holdings is much more

pronounced for firms using inflexible methods of producing electricity.

        In addition to these statistical analyses, we also plot the relationship between electricity price

volatility and cash holdings in Figure 3, separately for all firms, firms with high production flexibility,

and those with low flexibility. Here, electricity price volatility is set to zero for firms in regions without

wholesale markets for electricity. For all firms, we find a clear correlation between cash holdings and

price volatility. When looking at the sub-samples of firms with high and low production flexibility, we

find that this comovement is driven by firms with low production flexibility. Thus, this graphical analysis

confirms the implications of the estimated regressions: inflexible firms react to an increase in price

volatility with higher cash holdings.

4.3. Identifying the Equation Using Weather Uncertainty as an Instrument for Price Volatility

        The estimates in Table 5 are all based on firm-fixed effects estimations and thus are based on

variation of wholesale price volatility over time rather than across firms. While it is unlikely that one

firm’s financial policies can have a major impact on the volatility of wholesale price volatility, it is

conceivable that electricity price volatility in a market could be correlated with other time-variant country

factors, such as economic growth expectations. If these factors affect firms’ production flexibility at the

same time, they could lead to correlation between volatility and the residuals in the estimated equations.

        To address such concerns and to identify the impact of price risk on firms’ liquidity policies more

cleanly, we exploit the fact that electricity prices are heavily influenced by an exogenous factor – the

weather. One of the most important factors influencing electricity demand is the temperature. Energy

utilities typically apply sophisticated temperature forecasting models and plan electricity supply

accordingly. 26 Since adjustments in the electricity supply are costly and slow, electricity prices react with

an increase in volatility if uncertainty about future temperatures is high and temperature forecasts change

frequently. Thus, electricity price volatility should increase if temperatures are difficult to forecast.

26Because energy utilities use sophisticated weather forecasting techniques, measures based on deviations of actual
temperature from historical averages are unlikely to have a strong effect on price volatility. Expected temperature
changes also lead to price changes, but these changes are less pronounced compared to unexpected demand shocks.


                                                        20
        Using this logic, we construct an instrument for electricity price volatility based on how

unpredictable future temperatures are in a power market. We obtain data on historical weather forecasts

from Intellovations, and consider all 3-day forecasts for various locations in the U.S., which are available

between 2005 and 2014. 27 We do not obtain only an aggregated forecast, but also individual forecasts

from six different forecast providers. Based on these data, we construct the variable WEATHER

FORECAST UNCERTAINTY. We start by calculating the forecast error for each forecast provider for

each location on each day, defined as the squared difference between the forecasted and actual average

temperature at a specific location. To measure the uncertainty of forecasts, we then calculate the standard

deviation of these temperature forecast errors across different forecast providers. Lastly, we calculate the

average of this standard deviation for each market and year. High values of WEATHER FORECAST

UNCERTAINTY imply that there is high uncertainty among forecast providers about the future weather,

so that it is difficult to estimate future electricity demand precisely.

        We present estimates of the equation using this instrument for firms with low flexibility in Panel

A of Table 6, and those with high flexibility in Panel B of Table 6. First, we estimate a simple firm-fixed

effects regression with the uninstrumented volatility variable in Column (1) as baseline model. As before,

we find a positive effect of volatility on cash holdings for the subsample of firms with low production

flexibility. As a next step, we replace volatility with WEATHER FORECAST UNCERTAINTY and find

similar results in Column (2).

        In the last two columns, we conduct an instrumental variables analysis. For WEATHER

FORECAST UNCERTAINTY to be a valid instrument for electricity price volatility, it must be unrelated

to the residuals in the equations predicting firms’ cash holdings but correlated with electricity price

volatility. The weather is clearly exogenous to any firm-level decisions. 28 To evaluate whether it is related

to electricity price volatility, we estimate a first stage regression, in which we predict electricity price


27 A comprehensive time series of weather forecasts is only available for the U.S; forecasts for most other countries
start in 2012, and coverage is much weaker than for the U.S. Thus, we focus on the U.S. markets in this test, using
more than 10 million daily temperature forecasts to construct the instrument.
28 Except possibly those involving the firm’s CO emissions.
                                                2




                                                         21
volatility as a function of WEATHER FORECAST UNCERTAINTY. Estimates of this equation, reported in

Column 3, indicate that WEATHER FORECAST UNCERTAINTY clearly predicts movements in

electricity price volatility (with K-P rk Wald F statistics of above 20). Therefore, because WEATHER

FORECAST UNCERTAINTY is exogenous but correlated with electricity price volatility, it appears to be

a valid instrument. In Column (4), we analyze the impact of volatility on cash holdings using the

instrumented values for volatility. As in the specifications reported in Table 5, we find a strong and

positive impact of variations in the electricity price and firm liquidity for firms with low flexibility that is

virtually the same magnitude as in the fixed effect specification in Column 1. Overall, this finding

suggests that the relation changes in electricity price volatility occurring because of weather uncertainty

causally affect a firm’s liquidity management decisions.

4.4. Robustness

        We have argued that electricity-producing utilities face risk coming from uncertain wholesale

prices they receive for their electricity and inflexible production. This price risk can lead to negative cash

flow shocks, so firms hold more liquidity in response to this risk. We have provided evidence suggesting

that firms do adjust their liquidity in this fashion. We now present a series of tests designed to ensure that

these results are robust to alternative specifications, definitions of variables, and other choices we have

made in designing our empirical tests.

4.4.1. Measurement of Volatility

        The measure we use for the volatility of electricity prices is based on hourly electricity prices. An

alternative approach would be to use daily or annual prices instead of hourly prices. Daily prices are the

average of all 24 hourly prices within a day. Although they are less precise than hourly prices because

they ignore hourly variation (which can be a very important factor for start/stop decisions of power

plants), we use them as robustness test. Annual prices reflect long-term changes in the cost of electricity,

but cannot be used to calculate the volatility within a firm’s fiscal year because there is only one price

observation per year. Thus, we estimate the volatility of electricity prices as the standard deviation of the

returns from the previous four years. These data have the advantage of providing a more long-term


                                                       22
perspective on price volatility, although they are measured at much longer intervals so cannot capture

short term changes in price volatility.29

        In Columns (1) and (2) of Table 7, Panel A, we present estimates of the main equation using

measures of price volatility constructed using daily and four years prior annual data on electricity prices.

Although the measurement of volatility is very different from that in the equations presented above, the

results are similar. Higher volatility still leads to higher cash holdings and this effect is concentrated in

firms using inflexible approaches to producing electricity. Our results do not appear to depend on any

particular approach we use to measure electricity price volatility.

4.4.2. Measurement of Flexibility

        Our main flexibility measure is based on the run-up time of a particular technology, which

measures how long it takes to restart a power plant. In Columns (3) and (4) of Table 7, Panel A, we apply

two alternative measures of production flexibility. The first is based on a relative ranking of the

technologies flexibilities based on run-up time. Higher rank values are assigned to more flexible

technologies so that a higher value of this measure indicates more production flexibility. These

technology-specific values for ranking are summarized in Table 1.

        The second alternative flexibility measure is based on ramp-up cost, which is an estimate of the

cost for a hot start of a power plant (in Euro per megawatt). A higher ramp-up cost indicates less

production flexibility. The estimates of ramp-up cost are also summarized in Table 1. Similar to our main

flexibility measure which is based on run-up time, we first calculate the capacity weighted average ramp-

up cost for a firm and year, normalize it by dividing it by its maximum value, and then calculate the

flexibility proxy as one minus the normalized ramp-up cost.

        The estimates of the equations using these alternative approaches to measuring production

flexibility are similar to the ones presented above in Table 5. In each estimated equation, higher volatility

leads to higher cash holdings and that this effect is concentrated in inflexible firms.


29The data on annual electricity prices is obtained from the Energy Information Administration (EIA) for U.S. states
and from the International Energy Agency (IEA) for all other countries.


                                                         23
4.4.3. Sensitivity to Particular Technologies

        One potential concern is that the differences we observe across technologies do not reflect the

differences in flexibility, but instead occur because of one or two particular technologies that are different

for some reason. For example, nuclear power is likely to contain risks not present with other technologies

that could lead firms using nuclear power to have more liquid balance sheets, although it is not clear why

those risks would lead to a relation between cash holdings and price volatility. Furthermore, the cost

structures of nuclear power plants are opaque because cost for the final deposition of nuclear waste are

often unclear and difficult to consider. Nonetheless, in Panel B of Table 7, we reestimate our equation

excluding individual technologies to ensure that the results are general and are not driven by the

idiosyncrasies associated with any particular technology. In Columns (1) to (4), we exclude all firm years

that have at least one plant with the following technologies: nuclear, coal, and gas. Another possible

concern is that certain types of power plants are not actively switched dispatched (i.e., switched on and

off). In particular, wind and solar plants produce electricity whenever there is wind or sun with little

active dispatching of such power plants. To a smaller extent, this concern also applies to hydro power

plants. To analyze whether such not actively dispatched power plants bias our results, we exclude all

firm-years of utilities operating any of these three technologies in Column (4). The results are similar to

those in the main specification in Table 5. Thus, it does not appear that the use if any particular

technology is driving our results. Regardless of which firms are included into the equation, their liquidity

decisions appear to be a function of both the price volatility and the flexibility of the production

technology.

4.4.4. Other Alternative Specifications

        In Panel C of Table 7, we present several additional specifications to evaluate the robustness of

our empirical results. First, we replace our main measure for liquidity (cash holdings scaled by total

assets) with the natural logarithm of cash holdings scaled by total assets. The estimates using this

alternative dependent variable are presented in Column (1) and are very similar to our main specification

in Table 5.


                                                      24
           In Columns (2) and (3), we only consider observations of firms that account for less than 10% or

5% of the market’s total capacity. It is possible that if firms have a large market share, they can

manipulate the wholesale prices and could potentially not be price takers in this market. In the subsample

used to estimate this equation, the average firm accounts for only 2.5% (median: 1%) of the market’s total

capacity, so is unlikely to have power to influence prices. The estimates in this equation are nonetheless

similar to those reported above. In Column (4) we exclude small energy utilities operating fewer than 25

power plants. None of these alternative specifications changes the results substantially.



5. Cross-Sectional Differences

5.1. Financial Constraints

           As Keynes (1936) originally pointed out, liquidity management and financing constraints are

fundamentally linked. If financial markets work as well as most models in the finance literature assume

they do, firms’ liquidity decisions would be irrelevant. However, if financial markets contain frictions

making it costly for firms to issue debt or equity, liquidity management becomes important. In the case of

electricity production, this logic implies that it should be more important for firms to hedge price risk

through liquidity management when firms are more financially constrained.

           We evaluate the extent to which the relation between firms’ cash holdings and price risk varies

with the financial constraints facing the firms in our sample. To do so, we construct four measures of

financial constraints: firm size (with smaller firms being more constrained), a dummy variable indicating

that the firm has issued a syndicated loan, a dummy variable indicating that the firm has a bond rating,

and a dummy variable that indicating if the firm resides in a common law country (which is likely to be

related to access to equity financing).30 As before, we split the sample into high and low flexibility firms

and interact our measure for volatility with a dummy variable which equals one for the subset of firms

that are less likely to face financial constraints and zero otherwise.



30   We find similar results using other measures of access to equity capital such as the anti self-dealing index.


                                                            25
        The estimates are reported in Columns 1-8 of Table 8. They suggest that regardless of the

measure we use to construct the subsamples, the impact of electricity price volatility on cash holdings in

firms using inflexible methods of producing electricity is much more pronounced for the financially

constrained subsamples (i.e., small firms, those without syndicated loan issuances, those without a bond

rating, and those with worse access to equity financing). For firms using inflexible technologies, price

volatility does not affect cash holdings regardless of whether the firms are likely to face financial

constraints. This pattern suggests that the extent to which firms change their liquidity in response to

wholesale price volatility varies dramatically with the costs firms face in accessing capital markets. The

dependence of the observed relation between corporate liquidity and price volatility on access to financial

markets provides support for the view that the relation that we have documented does reflect the

precautionary motive for holding cash.

5.2. Hedging through Derivatives Markets

        An alternative to holding cash as liquidity is to hedge directly using derivatives. Derivatives can

substitute for cash holdings because they transfer cash flows to the states of the world where they are

most valuable (Froot, Scharfstein and Stein, 1993).       However, derivatives are imperfect substitutes

because they only allow firms to hedge risks for which appropriate markets exist, and the use of these

markets for hedging is limited by their liquidity.

        In the case of electricity markets, the relevant markets are the futures or forwards markets, in

which firms can sell part of their output in advance. Doing so at least partly protects them from

fluctuations in the day-ahead spot market. However, hedging opportunities vary substantially across

power markets: some markets have very liquid electricity forward and/or future trading, while it is

difficult to hedge price risk in other markets. For instance, a report by the Economic Consulting

Associates (2015) on European electricity forward markets and hedging products “found weaknesses in

liquidity in many forward energy markets with only Austria, Germany and the Nordic area exhibiting

high levels of churn” (p. VII).




                                                     26
         To evaluate the importance of derivative markets on liquidity management decisions, we again

divide the sample into firms with high and low flexibility and interact volatility and evaluate the extent to

which the existence of a liquid derivatives market exists affects the relation between price volatility and

cash holdings in each subsample. We manually classify each power market as having a liquid derivatives

market or not based on multiple sources. First, we use the percentage of a country’s annual electricity

demand that is traded in hedging products (i.e., forward or futures) as proxy for the availability of hedging

products. Data for this proxy is available for European countries from a report by the Economic

Consulting Associates (2015). Furthermore, we are able to collect the necessary information for this

dimension for the Australian markets from an OECD report (“Infrastructure to 2030”) and for New

Zealand from the market operator. Second, we use information from a survey among market participants

that was conducted for the European Commission. 31 Data on this measure is only available for European

countries. Lastly, we collect information on the availability of hedging products from industry reports,

newspaper articles, or publications by the operators of the power markets or electricity exchanges. 32

         We present estimates of these equations in Columns (9) and (10) of Table 8. We find that

volatility affects cash holdings in inflexible firms much more when firms have poor hedging

opportunities. When liquid derivative markets exist, firms can more easily sell their electricity in advance

and hedge the risk coming from price fluctuations. However, if derivative markets do not exist or if they

are not sufficiently liquid, then firms change their cash holdings in response to volatility changes. This

finding provides direct evidence that hedging through derivatives markets is a substitute for holding cash.

5.3. Payout Policy




31 In this survey, active market participants were asked to rate the ability to trade forwards as “weak,” “moderate,” or
“strong” (see “Review and analysis of EU wholesale energy markets”, 2 nd July 2008).
32 For instance, neither of the two previous measures is available for PJM, but there is strong evidence that the

trading of forwards and futures is quite liquid for this market. Thus, we would set the general liquidity of PJM to
high. Classifying markets this way, we define markets to have a liquid hedging derivative product are AMEO NSW,
AMEO QLD, AMEO VIC, AESO, APX UK, CAISO, EPEX Switzerland, EPEX Germany, EPEX France, ERCOT,
EXAA, IESO, ISO New England, MISO, Nordpool, NYISO, OTE, and PJM. Markets without liquid hedging
products according to our classification are AMEO SA, AMEO WA, ATS, BELPEX, EMC, EMI, GME, HUPX,
IEX, JEPX, KPX, NP LITHUANIA, OMIE PORTUGAL, OMIE SPAIN, OPCOM, and TGE.


                                                          27
         The results to this point suggest that electricity-generating firms adjust their cash holdings as a

function of price risk due to uncertainty in the power price and inflexible production. However, it is not

clear from these results exactly how the utilities go about adjusting their output. One possibility is that

the utilities make adjustments to their payouts as a way of managing their cash balances.

         We evaluate the extent to which firm manage their liquidity through adjustments through payout

policy. To do so, we estimate equations predicting utilities’ payouts as a function of VOLATILITY and

FLEXIBILITY, as well as the interaction of the two. We also include firm-level control variables that

potentially also explain payouts, and firm and year fixed effects. The firm fixed effects imply that even

though the dependent variable in the equations is the level of payouts, they measure the level relative to

the firm’s average payout over the sample period. Consequently, the equations measure the effect of the

independent variables on the abnormal payout level for the firm in question.

         We present estimates of this equation in Table 9. This table includes four columns, each of which

contains estimates using a different dependent variable: the natural logarithm of total payouts (dividends

plus share repurchases), total payouts normalized by the firm’s market capitalization, the natural

logarithm of dividends, and dividends normalized by the firm’s market capitalization. In each column,

the coefficients have the opposite sign from those predicting cash holdings in Table 5: higher price

volatility decreases payouts, and the positive coefficient on the interaction term implies the negative

effect of volatility in payouts comes primarily from firms using inflexible technologies.       The fact that

payouts decrease in exactly the same circumstances as when liquidity increases suggests that the two

effects are related. These results are consistent with the view that the changes in utilities’ liquidity due to

changes in price risk come from adjustments to their payouts.



6. Deregulation as a Source of Risk

         The results we have presented suggest that electricity producing firms’ cash holdings change with

the volatility in wholesale prices, especially when firms use a relatively inflexible technology to produce

the electricity.   The implication of this result is that volatility in wholesale prices leads to volatility in


                                                       28
electricity-producing firms’ cash flows that they compensate for by holding additional cash. Presumably,

if the price electricity producing firms received were either constant or a function of the firms’ costs, then

they would choose to hold less cash, since holding cash is tax disadvantaged in most countries and creates

potential agency problems. Under deregulation, electricity-producing firms sell in the wholesale market,

and must bear price risk they do not have to bear in a regulated environment. This risk leads electricity

producing firms to add liquidity to their balance sheets, the cost of which should be considered when

making regulatory decisions.

         An implication of this view is that producing firms that operate in deregulated markets should

face more risk, and consequently hold more cash, than otherwise similar firms who operate in regulated

markets.    This prediction can be tested in our sample, since of the 452 electricity-producing firms for

which all the necessary data is available, 213 change from regulated to deregulated markets during our

sample period, and the remaining 253 are in regulated or deregulated markets for the entire sample period.

Using the larger sample of both regulated and deregulated firms, we reestimate the equation presented

throughout the paper. We include a dummy variable Market equal to 1 if the firm sells its electricity in a

wholesale market in a particular year, and 0 otherwise. Estimates of this variable measure the incremental

cash held by deregulated firms relative to otherwise similar regulated ones. 33

         We present estimates of this equation in Table 10.                 In Column 1, we present the basic

specification without country and firm fixed effects and in Column 2, we include country fixed effects. In

Column 1, the estimated coefficient on Market is .018, and in Column 2 it is .015, each of which is

statistically significantly different from zero. Since the mean cash holdings (normalized by assets) is .08,

this equation implies that deregulation leads to about a 20% increase in firms’ cash holdings.




33 Because most markets were deregulated in the late 1990s and early 2000s, we use 1995 as the starting year for this
test. Furthermore, electricity wholesale markets typically require some time to become fully functional, we exclude
the start year and the year thereafter. For this test, we use the start year of the wholesale market in each country. In
most cases, this corresponds to the start year of the wholesale price data as summarized in Table 3. For some
countries, the wholesale market started before the data on prices became available. Brazil, Chile, and Colombia
started a market during our sample period, but electricity price data for these markets is not available.


                                                          29
           In Column 3, we include firm fixed effects to control for factors that vary by firm or country.

With firm fixed effects, Market is perfectly correlated with the fixed effects when firms are either

deregulated or regulated throughout the entire sample period. Consequently, in this specification, Market

is identified from the firms that switch from being regulated to deregulated in our sample period. In this

fixed effect specification, the estimated coefficient on Market equals .02, slightly larger than the

coefficient in the specification without firm fixed effects.         This coefficient implies that having to sell

electricity through a wholesale market leads firms to increase cash holdings by 25%. Finally, in Column

4, we include Flexibility and Flexibility interacted with Market into the equation. 34 The estimates in this

equation also imply that having a market increases firms’ cash, and presumably the risk they are exposed

to. It also suggests that the impact of a market on firms’ cash holdings is larger for firms with inflexible

production technologies, for which it is more costly to adjust their output in response to price movements.



7. Conclusion

           One of the most important decisions a financial manager must make concerns the liquidity of the

firm’s balance sheet. Holding cash is costly for tax and other reasons, while at the same time it can

insulate the firm from the obligation to raise external capital should there be an unexpected cash shortfall.

We evaluate firms’ decisions to hold cash by isolating one specific source of risk faced by firms in one

industry: the risk faced by electricity producing firms when electricity wholesale prices are volatile and

their production is inflexible.

           We estimate the extent to which firms’ balance sheets vary with the potential price risk they are

likely to face. Our analysis makes use of variation in hourly wholesale regional electricity price data to

measure the likelihood that firms will desire to change the amount of electricity they produce, and of data

on firms’ power plants to measure the flexibility of the firms’ production processes. We focus on firms’

cash holdings, since cash holdings are the easiest way that firms can adjust the liquidity of their balance

sheet.

34   We use flexibility values as of 2000 for years prior to 2000.


                                                           30
         Our estimates imply that firms’ cash holdings are positively related to both demand fluctuations

and the cost of adjusting production. Firms operating in markets with more volatile prices and firms with

more inflexible production technologies for which altering output is costly, tend to hold more cash. In

contrast, electricity price uncertainty has little impact on firms’ cash holdings if their production

flexibility is high. This pattern is consistent with the view that firms’ liquidity choices reflect the expected

costs of price risk.

         To isolate the channel through which wholesale electricity price volatility affects producing

firms’ liquidity choices, we rely on the fact that movements in electricity prices often occur because of

weather-induced demand shocks. We construct an instrument for electricity price volatility based on the

uncertainty of future weather, and reestimate the equations predicting electricity producing firms’

liquidity choices using instrumental variables. Instrumenting for volatility this way, we find the same

pattern as when we use our baseline firm-fixed effects models for estimation: price volatility leads to

changes in cash holdings, with this relation much stronger for firms using methods of production for

which it is more difficult and costly to change output quantities.        This result suggests that price risk

causally affects firms’ cash policy in the manner suggested by the precautionary theory of liquidity.

         We evaluate several cross-sectional predictions of the precautionary theory of liquidity

management. A key assumption underlying the precautionary theory is that it is costly to access financial

markets. Therefore, we expect that the dependence of liquidity on changes in price volatility will be

stronger for firms that have a higher cost of external finance and are likely to be financially constrained.

Using four alternative measures of the cost of external finance, our results imply that regardless of the

measure we use, firms’ changes in liquidity in response to changes in price risk are substantially larger for

firms more likely to be financially constrained.

         In addition, the ability of firms to hedge price risk through futures or forward markets by selling a

portion of their electricity in advance through the derivative market varies across countries. The ability to

hedge in this manner is potentially a substitute for holding liquidity. Empirically, we find that, consistent




                                                       31
with this argument, the existence of a more liquid futures or forward market in electricity reduces the

impact of price risk on firms’ liquidity choices.

        To understand the manner in which firms change their liquidity in response to demand shocks, we

estimate the way in which firms’ payouts respond to changes in price risk. The results imply that the

factors that lead firms to increase their liquidity are exactly the opposite of those that increase payouts;

payouts increase with reductions in volatility with this effect larger for firms with inflexible production

processes. This finding suggests that one way in which firms change their liquidity is through changes in

their payouts.

        Wholesale price volatility appears to increase the risk faced by electricity producers, who

compensate by holding more cash on their balance sheets.           This additional risk faced by electricity

producers is a consequence of the deregulatory environment. As a test of this idea, we compare the cash

holdings of firms operating in regulated markets to those operating in deregulated ones. Consistent with

the notion that deregulation increases the risk faced by electricity producers, our results suggest that firms

selling on wholesale markets hold about 20-25% more cash than otherwise identical firms in regulated

markets.

        Overall, our findings suggest that in the electricity producing industry, price risk can be an

important factor affecting firms’ liquidity choices. The flexibility of the production process is a major

factor affecting this risk. The electricity producing industry provides a useful laboratory for studying

liquidity management issues, since we can observe the production processes and output price volatility.

However, it is likely that price risk affects liquidity management choices in a similar manner in other

industries as well.

        Our analysis highlights the fact that firms’ balance sheets are endogenous, and that economy or

industry level factors can affect them. In doing so, these factors can impose potentially substantial costs

on firms that have not been fully appreciated. First, deregulating the electricity industry had the effect of

forcing producers to face wholesale price risk, and compensate for this risk by holding more cash than

they otherwise would. The cost firms face from having to adjust their balance sheets is real effect of


                                                      32
deregulation that has not been fully appreciated. Second, the results emphasize an important implication

of more liquid capital markets; in particular, more liquid capital markets mean firms can hold less liquid

balance sheets. Since it is costly for firms to hold liquidity, when a country adopts policies that lower the

cost of external finance, a consequence is that firms in that country can hold less cash. Third, more active

derivative markets mean firms can hold less liquid balance sheets. Again, since it is costly for firms to

hold liquidity, the effects of liquid derivative markets on firms’ balance sheets is a social benefit of

having such markets.




                                                     33
                                             References


Acharya, Viral V., Heitor Almeida and Murillo Campello (2007) “Is Cash Negative Debt? A Hedging
Perspective on Corporate Financial Policies,” Journal of Financial Intermediation, 16, 515-554.

Almeida, Heitor, Murillo Campello, Igor Cunha, and Michael S. Weisbach (2014) “Corporate Liquidity
Management: A Conceptual Framework and Survey,” Annual Review of Financial Economics, 6, 135-
162.

Almeida, Heitor, Murillo Campello, and Michael S. Weisbach (2004) “The Cash Flow Sensitivity of
Cash,” Journal of Finance, 59, 1777-1804.

Bates, Thomas W., Kathleen M. Kahle, and René M. Stulz (2009) “Why do U.S. firms hold so much
more cash than they used to?” Journal of Finance 64, 1985–2021.

Becher, D. A., J. H. Mulherin, and R. A. Walkling (2012) “Sources of gains in corporate mergers:
Refined tests from a neglected industry,” Journal of Financial and Quantitative Analysis 47:57–89.

Boldt, Jenny; Hankel, Lisa; Laurisch, Lilian Charlotte; Lutterbeck, Felix; Oei, Pao-Yu; Sander, Aram;
Schroeder, Andreas; Schweter, Helena; Sommer, Philipp; Sulerz, Jasmin (2012) “Renewables in the grid.
Modeling the German power market of the year 2030,” Working Paper.

Campello, Murillo, Erasmo Giambona, John R. Graham, and Campbell R. Harvey (2011) “Liquidity
management and corporate investment during a financial crisis,” Review of Financial Studies 24, 1944–
1979.

Duchin, Ran, Thomas Gilbert, Jarrad Harford and Christopher Hrdlicka (2017) “Precautionary Savings
with Risky Assets: When Cash is not Cash,” The Journal of Finance, forthcoming.

Economic Consulting Associates (2015) “European Electricity Forward Markets and Hedging Products
– State of Play and Elements for Monitoring,” Final Report.

Epstein, Larry (1978) “Production Flexibility and the Behaviour of the Competitive Firm under Price
Uncertainty,” Review of Economic Studies, 45, 251-261.

Erel, Isil, Yeejin Jang, Bernadette A. Minton, and Michael S. Weisbach (2017), “Corporate Liquidity,
Acquisitions, and Macroeconomic Conditions,” Working Paper.

Fabrizio, K., N. Rose, and C. Wolfram. 2007. “Do markets reduce costs? Assessing the impact of
regulatory restructuring on US electric generation efficiency,” American Economic Review 97, 1250–77.

Federal Energy Regulatory Commission (2015) “Energy Primer: A Handbook of Energy Market Basics.”

Froot, K.A., D.S. Scharfstein, and J.C. Stein (1993) “Risk Management: Coordinating Investment and
Financing Policies,” The Journal of Finance, 48, 1629-1658.

Hoberg, Gerard, Gordon Phillips, and Nagpurnanand Prabhala (2014) “Product market threats, payouts,
and financial flexibility,” The Journal of Finance, 69, 293–324.




                                                 34
Keynes, John Maynard (1936), “The General Theory of Employment, Interest and Money,” (McMillan,
London).


Leyzerovich, Alexander S. (2007) “Steam Turbines for Modern Fossil-Fuel Power Plants”, CRC Press
Inc., Tylor & Francis Group.

Liang, Jiaqi and Ronald G. Harley (2010) “Pumped storage hydro-plant models for system transient and
long-term dynamic studies,” Power and Energy Society General Meeting, 2010 IEEE.

Lins, Karl V., Henri Servaes, and Peter Tufano (2010) “What drives corporate liquidity? An international
survey of cash holdings and lines of credit,” Journal of Financial Economics 98, 160–176.

Moody’s Investor Service (2016) “Australian utilities' operational flexibility is key to their ability to
manage power price volatility,” report summary available at https://www.moodys.com/research/Moodys-
Australian-utilities-operational-flexibility-is-key-to-their-ability--PR_354068

Morellec, Erwan, Boris Nikolov, and Francesca Zucchi (2014) “Competition, cash holdings, and
financing decisions,” Working Paper, Swiss Finance Institute.

Opler, Tim, Lee Pinkowitz, Rene M. Stulz, and Rohan Williamson (1999), “The Determinants and
Implications of Corporate Cash Holdings,” Journal of Financial Economics, 52, 3-46.

Peltzmann, Sam and Winston, Clifford (2000) “Deregulation of network industries - What’s next?”
Washington, DC: AEIBrookings Joint Center for Regulatory Studies.

Pérez González, Francisco and Yun, Hayong (2013) “Risk Management and Firm Value: Evidence from
Weather Derivatives”, Journal of Finance, 68, 2143-2176.

Reinartz, Sebastian and Thomas Schmid (2016) “Production Flexibility, Product Markets, and Capital
Structure Decisions,” Review of Financial Studies, 29, 1501-1548.

Rettl, Daniel A., Alex Stomper, and Josef Zechner (2016) “The Stability of Dividends and Wages: Effects
of Competitor Inflexibility,” Working Paper.

Sandmo, Agnar (1971) “On the Theory of the Competitive Firm Under Price Uncertainty,” American
Economic Review, 61, 65-73.

Swider, Derk Jan (2006) “Handel an Regelenergie- und Spotmärkten”, (Springer, Wiesbaden)

Trueby, Johannes (2014) “Thermal Power Plants Economics and Variable Renewables Energies”,
International Energy Agency Insight Series.

Turnovsky, Stephen J. (1973) “Production Flexibility, Price Uncertainty and the Behavior of the
Competitive Firm,” International Economic Review, 14, 395-413.




                                                   35
                                      (a) North America




                                         (b) Europe




                   (c) Asia                                     (d) Oceania

Figure 1: This figure shows the different regions which have competitive wholesale markets for
electricity and are included in our sample.




                                             35
                                        (a) GME (Italy)




                                    (b) EPEX D (Germany)




                                (c) Nordpool (Northern Europe)

Figure 2: This figure shows hourly electricity prices (in USD per MWh) for three selected market
in January 2012. The same price scales are used for all three markets. An overview on the included
markets can be found in Table 3.




                                               36
                                             (a) all firms




         (b) high production flexibility                       (c) low production flexibility

Figure 3: This figure shows the development of cash holdings and electricity price volatility over time
for all firms (a), highly flexible firms (b), and firms with low production flexibility (c). Electricity
price volatility is set to zero for regions without a wholesale market for electricity. Only firms with
more than ten observations are considered.




                                                  37
                  Table 1: Production technologies

 Technology           run-up time      ramp-up cost         ranking
                         hours          USD per MW            rank

 Biogas                   0.25                38.99             7
 Biomass                   2.00              56.82              5
 Coal                     3.00                56.82             4
 Hydro                    0.08                0.00              9
 Gas                      0.25               30.79              7
 Gas comb. cycle          1.50                38.99             6
 Geothermal               0.00                0.00              9
 Lignite                   6.00               43.26             3
 Nuclear                  40.00              160.83             1
 Oil                       0.08               30.79             8
 Pump storage             0.02                 0.00             9
 Solar                     0.00                0.00             9
 Waste                    12.00              56.82              2
 Wind                      0.00                0.00             9

Run-up time is measured in hours and refers to warm-starts in the
case of thermal power plants. The values for coal, gas-combined
cycle, lignite, and nuclear are based on Eurelectric’s “Flexible Gen-
eration: Backing-up Renewables”, p. 19. Danish Energy Agency’s
“Technology Data for Energy Plants” is the source for the values
of biogas, biomass, and waste. Information from life-cycle power
solutions provider Wärtsilä is used to calculate the run-up time for
oil. The values for hydro and pump storage power plants are based
on data from Duke Energy, FirstGen, MWH Global, and Liang and
Harley (2010). The run-up time for solar and wind is zero, as such
plants are usually not actively dispatched and start generation as
soon as sun or wind are available. Similarly, zero run-up time is
assumed for geothermal power plants.
Ramp-up costs are measured in USD per MW. The values for coal,
lignite, nuclear, gas combined cycle, and oil are based on Boldt et al.
(2012). Euro values are converted to USD based on the EUR/USD
exchange rate at the end of 2014. We assume that ramp-up costs for
gas power plants equal those of oil power plants and that ramp-up
costs for geothermal, hydro, pump storage, solar, and wind power
plants are zero. For biomass and waste power plants, we assume
equal ramp-up costs as for coal plants. For biogas, we assume same
cost as for gas combined-cycle.
Ranking is the relative ranking of all production technologies. The
least flexible technology has a rank of one. The ranking is based on
run-up time and ramp-up cost.




                                  38
                       Table 2: Descriptive statistics: Sample

                  Total                            Wholesale Markets
 Year      #Firms #Plant Units             #Markets #Firms #Plant Units

 1999         209           15,020               7           37            2,710
 2000         212           14,946              11           41             2,981
 2001         211           17,383              12            49            4,677
 2002         232           20,326              15            56            7,629
 2003         255           22,142              19            73            9,520
 2004         278           23,368              19            78           10,044
 2005         313           25,857              21           103           14,239
 2006         331           26,590              23           132           16,342
 2007         355           28,020              26           146           17,232
 2008         368           29,899              28           151           18,473
 2009         374           30,818              29           195           20,657
 2010         362           33,032              31           195           22,606
 2011         357           34,025              33           196           23,336
 2012         345           34,533              33           189           23,718
 2013         340           35,563              33           187           24,202
 2014         331           35,037              33           179           23,834

 Total        4873          426,559            373          2,007         242,200
 Unique       481           60,004             33            253           39,982

This table presents an overview on the sample firms and their power plant units for
each sample year. Total refers to all firms, independent of their location. Wholesale
markets refers to firms which are located in regions with competitive wholesale markets
for which hourly electricity price data is available (cf. Table 3 for an overview on the
different markets).




                                          39
                Table 3: Descriptive statistics: Electricity markets

Country             Market          start        N       mean      median      vola

Australia           AEMO NSW         1999     158,395     32.14        33.03   3.11
Australia           AEMO QLD         1999     158,395     33.70        27.36   2.95
Australia           AEMO SA          1999     158,395     39.55        37.06   2.95
Australia           AEMO TAS         2006     101,939     42.17        38.85   2.05
Australia           AEMO VIC         1999     158,395     29.44        27.63   2.78
Australia           AEMO WA          2007      90,000     43.58        46.15   0.26
Austria             EXAA             2003     129,552     51.59        54.04   0.21
Belgium             BELPEX           2007      87,672     61.47        60.55   0.43
Canada              AESO             2000     148,615     54.36        49.47   1.13
Canada              IESO             2003     128,616     32.96        33.29   0.56
Czech Republic      OTE              2010      60,617     49.51        48.85   0.16
Denmark             Nordpool         1999     157,800     39.94        38.45   0.09
Estonia             NP EE            2011      61,368     49.96        50.48   0.28
Finland             Nordpool         1999     157,800     39.94        38.45   0.09
France              EPEX F           2002     140,256     52.50        57.64   0.44
Germany             EPEX D           2001     149,040     46.94        50.21   0.36
Hungary             HUPX             2011      56,539     57.36        56.43   0.31
India               IEX              2009      74,568     72.16        66.31   0.17
Italy               GME              2005     111,780     83.86        85.11   0.21
Japan               JEPX             2006     102,912    111.00        90.66   0.13
Korea               KPX              2002     137,376     85.54        88.34   0.12
Latvia              NP LV            2014      35,064     55.63        46.50   0.25
Lithuania           NP LT            2013      43,848     55.21        57.76   0.20
Netherlands         APX NL           2000     157,800     54.22        54.44   0.48
New Zealand         EMI              1999     176,835    110.32        51.47   0.25
Norway              Nordpool         1999     157,800     39.94        38.45   0.09
Poland              TGE              2001     144,672     44.23        41.65   0.12
Portugal            OMIE PT          2008      83,319     61.71        56.00   0.11
Romania             OPCOM            2006     100,765     53.89        48.49   0.18
Russia              ATS              2009      72,216     22.16        22.75   0.05
Singapore           EMC              2003     122,736     99.91        93.72   0.43
Slovakia            OKTE             2010      61,361     50.02        49.46   0.19
Spain               OMIE SP          1999     166,527     49.30        51.35   0.13
Sweden              Nordpool         1999     157,800     39.94        38.45   0.09
Switzerland         EPEX CH          2007      96,432     69.53        66.34   0.25
United Kingdom      APX UK           2004     121,080     66.43        65.98   0.23
United States       CAISO            2010      61,361     34.84        32.32   0.13
United States       ERCOT            2011      52,602     31.74        27.41   1.15
United States       ISONE            2003     121,320     54.06        53.72   0.13
United States       MISO             2006      95,856     33.93        30.81   0.19
United States       NYISO            2000     148,903     49.46        46.15   0.14
United States       PJM              1999     164,376     39.91        37.14   0.26

Total/Average                        2004    4,872,703    53.00        49.73   0.57
                              continued on next page


                                        40
                                   Table 3 continued

This table presents summary statistics for the hourly electricity prices in the different
markets. Prices are in megawatt per USD. Local prices are converted to USD using
daily exchange rates. Reported are the first year for which data is available, number
of observations (N), mean price, median price, and volatility. The start year for the
data collection is 1999; the last year for which data is available is 2014 for all markets.




                                            41
                       Table 4: Descriptive statistics: Firms

 Variable                     Obs     Mean       p25       p50       p75        SD

 Cash                        2,005     0.08      0.01      0.04      0.10       0.11
 Assets (mio USD)            2,007    17,938      828     4,215     18,809    37,726
 Assets (log)                2,007    15.07     13.63     15.25     16.75      2.08
 Cash flow                   1,979      0.08     0.06       0.09      0.11      0.07
 MtB                         1,799      1.64      0.90      1.35      1.89      1.44
 Capex                       1,955     0.08      0.04      0.06      0.09      0.10
 Leverage                    2,006      0.48     0.37      0.52      0.64      0.21
 Dividend                    1,977      0.76      1.00      1.00      1.00      0.43
 GDP (USD per capita)        2,007    39,206    34,877    43,434    48,775    16,283
 GDP (ln)                    2,007     10.36     10.46     10.68     10.79      0.88
 Electricity price           2,007     56.42    32.79      48.97     67.97     38.76
 Volatility                  2,007      0.36     0.11      0.17      0.29      0.76
 Volatilitydaily             2008       0.29      0.11      0.17      0.29      0.44
 Volatilityannual            1253       0.08      0.03      0.07      0.12      0.06
 Run-up time                 2,007      3.71     0.25       2.25      4.21      5.10
 Flex                        2,007      0.91     0.89      0.94      0.99       0.13
 Weather Forecast Unc.        453      10.71     9.79     10.49     11.49      1.53
 #Plant Units                2,007      235        29        93       245       458
 #Technologies               2,007      6.29     3.00      6.00     10.00       3.85

This table presents descriptive statistics for all sample firms located in regions with
competitive wholesale markets for which hourly electricity price data is available.
Reported are the number of observations (N), mean value, 25% percentile, median,
75% percentile, and standard deviation (SD). A detailed description of all variables
can be found in Appendix A.




                                          42
               Table 5: Predicting Cash Holdings as a Function of Price Risk

 Column                         1             2           3              4             5
 Sample                        all        high flex    low flex         all           all

 Volatility               0.0058***       0.00023     0.011***      0.071***       0.059***
                            (3.65)         (0.11)      (4.30)         (4.65)         (3.48)
 Flexibility               -0.065*                                  -0.075**        -0.11**
                            (-1.86)                                  (-2.46)        (-2.44)
 Vol x Flex                                                        -0.068***      -0.056***
                                                                     (-4.26)        (-3.14)

 Log(assets)               -0.031***     -0.047***     -0.0043      -0.032***      -0.030**
                             (-4.08)       (-5.47)     (-0.69)        (-4.11)       (-2.29)
 Cash flow                    0.036        -0.067       0.12*          0.036         0.058
                             (0.81)        (-1.09)      (1.97)        (0.82)         (1.24)
 Log(GDP per capita)          0.026         0.037       -0.033         0.025         0.011
                             (0.37)        (0.44)      (-0.42)        (0.36)         (0.15)
 Market-to-book                                                                     0.0011
                                                                                     (0.27)
 Capex                                                                              0.0026
                                                                                     (0.12)
 Leverage                                                                           0.0015
                                                                                    (0.055)
 Dividend                                                                           0.0018
                                                                                     (0.20)

 Firm-FE                       yes          yes          yes           yes            yes
 Year-FE                       yes          yes          yes           yes            yes
 Observations                 1,944         865          870          1,944          1,687
 Firms                         252          168          136           252            235
 R2                           0.74          0.74         0.74          0.74           0.76

The dependent variable is cash holdings [wc02001] normalized by total assets [wc02999].
Volatility is defined as the standard deviation of hourly electricity price changes, normalized
by a market’s average electricity price level. Flexibility is defined as the one minus the
standardized run-up time of a firm’s power plants. The sample is restricted to firms with
a production flexibility which is higher (lower) than the median value in a particular year
and country in Column 2 (Column 3). The sub-samples do not sum up to the full sample
because the median firm in a market and year is not included. All models are firm fixed effects
regressions. Control variables are lagged by one year. T-statistics based on Huber/White
robust standard errors clustered by countries are presented in parentheses. ***, ** and *
indicate significance on the 1%-, 5%- and 10%-levels, respectively. A detailed description of
all variables can be found in Appendix A.




                                              43
Table 6: Instrumenting Wholesale Price Volatility using Weather Forecast Uncertainty

Panel A: U.S. firms with low flexibility

Column                                   1               2        3              4
Model                                         firm-FE          IV first      IV second

Volatility                           0.036**
                                      (3.62)
Weather Forecast Uncertainty                      0.0030**    0.083***
                                                   (2.97)      (4.62)
Volatilityinstr                                                                  0.037**
                                                                                  (2.31)

Log(assets)                           0.0043       0.0049       0.017             0.0043
                                       (0.20)      (0.23)      (1.40)             (0.23)
Cash flow                             0.047**      0.044*      -0.087            0.048***
                                       (2.82)      (2.47)      (-1.64)            (3.20)

Firm-FE                                 yes             yes      yes               yes
Year-FE                                 yes             yes      yes               yes
Observations                            222             222      221               221
K-P rk Wald F                           n/a             n/a               21.4

Panel B: U.S. firms with high flexibility

Column                                   1               2        3              4
Model                                         firm-FE          IV first      IV second

Volatility                            -0.0066
                                      (-0.20)
Weather Forecast Uncertainty                      -0.00017    0.067***
                                                  (-0.053)     (4.65)
Volatilityinstr                                                              -0.0026
                                                                             (-0.060)

Log(assets)                           -0.061       -0.061     0.048**            -0.061
                                      (-1.31)      (-1.35)     (2.32)            (-1.47)
Cash flow                              -0.64        -0.64     -0.0076             -0.64
                                      (-1.44)      (-1.44)    (-0.13)            (-1.62)

Firm-FE                                 yes             yes      yes               yes
Year-FE                                 yes             yes      yes               yes
Observations                            222             222      217               217
K-P rk Wald F                           n/a             n/a               21.6
                               continued on next page




                                        44
                                     Table 6 continued

The dependent variable is cash holdings [wc02001] normalized by total assets [wc02999].
The sample for this test is restricted to U.S. firms with a production flexibility above the
median in Panel A and those with a flexibility below the median in Panel B. Weather
forecast uncertainty is the average standard deviation of the 3-day weather forecast error
across different forecast providers in an electricity market and year. Weather forecast error
is defined as the squared difference between the forecasted and actual average temperature
at a specific location. IV stands for instrumental variables regression. T-statistics based on
Huber/White robust standard errors clustered by countries are presented in parentheses.
***, ** and * indicate significance on the 1%-, 5%- and 10%-levels, respectively. A detailed
description of all variables can be found in Appendix A.




                                             45
      Table 7: Robustness of Cash Predictive Models to Alternative Specifications

Panel A: Measurement of volatility and production flexibility

Column                       1              2                 3                  4
                            volatility measures                 flexibility measures
                       daily prices annual prices          ranking          ramp-up cost

Volatility               0.051**           0.45**        0.028***           0.040***
                          (2.39)           (2.42)          (5.02)             (3.42)
Flexibility              -0.065*          -0.096*         -0.0041             -0.029
                         (-1.98)          (-1.90)         (-1.17)            (-0.81)
Vol x Flex              -0.050**         -0.53**       -0.0036***          -0.043***
                         (-2.21)         (-2.32)         (-3.75)             (-2.85)

Log(assets)             -0.031***        -0.026**          -0.031***        -0.031***
                          (-4.12)         (-2.62)            (-3.95)          (-3.92)
Cash flow                  0.037           0.058              0.035            0.034
                          (0.85)          (0.62)             (0.81)           (0.79)
Log(GDP per capita)        0.027         0.16***              0.024            0.025
                          (0.38)          (3.92)             (0.35)           (0.36)

Firm-FE                    yes              yes               yes              yes
Year-FE                    yes              yes               yes              yes
Observations              1,944            1,145             1,944            1,944
Firms                      252              168               252              252
R2                         0.77             0.83              0.74             0.74

Panel B: Exclusion of firms with a particular technology

Column                     1                2                 3               4
Exclude                  Nuclear           Coal              Gas       Hydro/Wind/Solar

Volatility               0.084***        0.099***          0.093**           0.074**
                           (3.58)          (4.60)            (2.58)           (2.27)
Flexibility                 -0.14          -0.072           -0.69**           -0.11*
                          (-1.40)         (-1.51)           (-2.39)          (-1.86)
Vol x Flex              -0.084***        -0.10***          -0.10**          -0.077**
                          (-3.34)         (-4.43)          (-2.27)           (-2.37)

Log(assets)             -0.034***        -0.036***         -0.033***         -0.019**
                          (-4.13)          (-3.82)           (-3.12)          (-2.43)
Cash flow                  0.047            0.057           0.17***            0.052
                          (0.90)           (0.98)            (3.52)           (0.76)
Log(GDP per capita)        0.064            0.18               0.10            0.029
                          (0.79)           (1.25)            (1.02)           (0.27)

Firm-FE                    yes             yes               yes               yes
Year-FE                    yes             yes               yes               yes
Observations              1,494            796               604               416
Firms                      218             130               100                93
R2                         0.74            0.75              0.79              0.64
                                  continued on next page


                                           46
                                       Table 7 continued


 Panel C: Various alternative specification

 Column                         1             2               3                    4
                            ln(cash)      <10% capa        <5% capa           ≥ 25 plants

 Volatility                  0.68**        0.073***        0.069***            0.063**
                             (2.58)           (4.42)          (4.80)            (2.62)
 Flexibility                -1.42***        -0.081***       -0.076***            -0.074
                             (-4.21)          (-3.60)         (-3.17)           (-1.37)
 Vol x Flex                 -0.59**        -0.072***       -0.071***           -0.056**
                            (-2.19)          (-4.11)         (-4.53)            (-2.29)

 Log(assets)                  -0.18        -0.036***        -0.039***           -0.031**
                             (-1.50)         (-4.31)          (-4.53)            (-2.53)
 Cash flow                     0.63           0.044            0.063             -0.12**
                             (1.21)          (0.91)           (1.15)             (-2.71)
 Log(GDP per capita)          -0.12            0.10             0.12            -0.17***
                             (-0.14)         (0.94)           (1.00)             (-3.10)
 Firm-FE                       yes             yes              yes                yes
 Year-FE                       yes             yes              yes                yes

 Observations                 1,936           1,598           1,436               800
 Firms                         251             233             217                100
 R2                            0.69            0.75            0.75               0.71

The base specification is as follows: the dependent variable is cash holdings [wc02001] nor-
malized by total assets [wc02999]; volatility is defined as the standard deviation of hourly
electricity price changes, normalized by a market’s average electricity price level; flexibility
is defined as the one minus the standardized run-up time of a firm’s power plants.
In Panel A, volatility is calculated as the standard deviation of returns of daily prices in
Column 1 and annual prices (over the last four) in Column 2. Annual electricity prices in
USD are based on EIA and IEA data. The alternative flexibility measures are ranking and
ramp-up cost.
In Panel B, firm-years with plants using the technology specified in each column are excluded.
Control variables are lagged by one year.
In Panel C, the dependent variable is the natural logarithm of cash holdings scaled by total
assets in column 1. Only firms which account for less than 10% or 5%of the total production
capacity in a country/state and year are considered in Column 2 and 3. In Column 4, only
firms with more than 25 different power plants are considered. In Column 4, we exclude firms
which operate in more than one electricity market.
All models are firm fixed effects regressions. Control variables are lagged by one year. T-
statistics based on Huber/White robust standard errors clustered by countries are presented in
parentheses. ***, ** and * indicate significance on the 1%-, 5%- and 10%-levels, respectively.
A detailed description of all variables can be found in Appendix A.




                                              47
                                           Table 8: Cross-Sectional Differences in the Relation between Cash and Price Risk

      Column                        1           2             3         4              5         6              7          8            9          10
                                      Firm Size            Syndicated Loans           Bond Ratings            Access to Equity       Hedging Opportunities
                                 low flex   high flex      low flex high flex       low flex high flex       low flex  high flex     low flex   high flex
      Volatility                0.016***        0.00062    0.073**     -0.010      0.016***      -0.00022    0.029**     -0.0026      0.094**        -0.086
                                  (3.80)         (0.15)     (2.42)     (-0.60)       (3.91)      (-0.056)     (2.79)     (-0.25)       (2.36)        (-0.90)
      Dummyunconstr.             -0.0079         0.0038       ...         ...        0.0019      -0.052**       ...         ...
                                 (-1.42)         (0.33)       ...         ...        (0.16)       (-2.34)       ...         ...
      Vol x Dunconstr.         -0.0088**       -0.00076    -0.064*     0.011      -0.0095**       0.0015     -0.019*     0.0031
                                 (-2.28)        (-0.14)    (-2.08)     (0.66)       (-2.64)       (0.30)     (-2.00)     (0.32)
      Dummyhigh                                                                                                                          ...           ...
                                                                                                                                         ...           ...
      Vol x Dhigh                                                                                                                    -0.083**        0.087
                                                                                                                                      (-2.10)        (0.91)
      Log(assets)                -0.0030       -0.048***   -0.0033    -0.047***     -0.0040     -0.047***    -0.0045    -0.047***     -0.0032       -0.048***
                                 (-0.49)         (-5.58)   (-0.55)      (-5.49)     (-0.61)       (-5.95)    (-0.74)      (-5.46)     (-0.54)         (-5.67)
      Cash flow                    0.12*         -0.066     0.12*       -0.065        0.12*       -0.072       0.12*      -0.067       0.12*          -0.066
                                  (1.98)         (-1.09)    (2.00)      (-1.06)      (1.96)       (-1.15)     (1.98)      (-1.09)      (1.99)         (-1.05)
      Log(GDP per capita)         -0.036          0.038     -0.037       0.035       -0.033        0.028      -0.031       0.037       -0.023          0.024
                                 (-0.46)         (0.45)    (-0.51)      (0.41)      (-0.42)       (0.33)     (-0.39)      (0.43)      (-0.38)         (0.24)




48
      Firm-FE                     yes            yes         yes        yes          yes           yes         yes         yes          yes            yes
      Year-FE                     yes            yes         yes        yes          yes           yes         yes         yes          yes            yes
      Observations                870            865         870        865          870           865         870         865          870            865
      Firms                       136            168         136        168          136           168         136         168          136            168
      R2                          0.76           0.72        0.76       0.72         0.76          0.72        0.76        0.72         0.76           0.72
     The base specification is as follows: the dependent variable is cash holdings [wc02001] normalized by total assets [wc02999]; volatility is defined as the
     standard deviation of hourly electricity price changes, normalized by a market’s average electricity price level; flexibility is defined as the one minus the
     standardized run-up time of a firm’s power plants.
     In Columns 1 to 6, we use firm size, syndicated loans, and bond ratings to split firms in financially constrained and unconstrained firms. For firms
     size, a firm is financially unconstrained if total assets are higher than the median total assets in a country and year. For syndicated loans, financially
     unconstrained are those firms which have issued a syndicated loan during our sample period. We define a firm to be financially unconstrained if S&P
     issued a long-term bond rating in the current or any previous year. In Columns 7 and 8, access to equity is high for countries with common law. Hedging
     opportunities in Columns 9 and 10 is set to one if the liquidity of the market for electricity price hedging products is high and zero if the liquidity is
     low or no such market exists. We classify each market based on multiples sources, such as newspaper articles, industry reports, or reports issued by the
     exchanges. Furthermore, we use date on the annual volume of electricity futures/forwards relative to demand from the “European Electricity Forward
     Markets and Hedging Products - State of Play and Elements for Monitoring” report by the Economic Consulting Associates and a survey for the European
     Commission which investigates the ability to trade forwards.
     All models are firm fixed effects regressions. Control variables are lagged by one year. T-statistics based on Huber/White robust standard errors clustered
     by countries are presented in parentheses. ***, ** and * indicate significance on the 1%-, 5%- and 10%-levels, respectively. A detailed description of all
     variables can be found in Appendix A.
Table 9: Payout Policy as a way of Adjusting Cash Holdings for Price Risk

 Column                       1             2               3           4
                            Payout      Payout/MC       Dividend     Div/MC

 Volatility                -2.36***        -0.027**     -1.84**      -0.019*
                            (-2.80)         (-2.14)     (-2.57)      (-1.95)
 Flexibility                  0.29           -0.0035      0.036       -0.0014
                             (0.31)          (-0.13)     (0.029)     (-0.056)
 Vol x Flex                2.67***          0.031**     2.21***       0.021*
                            (3.33)           (2.26)      (3.30)       (1.97)

 Log(assets)                0.79***         0.0032       0.76**       0.0027
                             (2.85)         (0.87)        (2.74)      (0.82)
 Cash flow                  6.21**         0.043***      5.63***     0.030***
                             (2.53)         (3.63)        (3.40)      (3.20)
 Log(GDP per capita)          -1.65         -0.037         -0.67      -0.031
                            (-0.56)         (-0.69)      (-0.28)      (-0.79)

 Firm-FE                      yes             yes          yes          yes
 Year-FE                      yes             yes          yes          yes
 Observations                1,605           1,480        1,923        1,748
 Firms                        236             225          252          239
 R2                           0.76           0.23          0.76         0.32

The dependent variable is the natural logarithm of 1 plus the total payout
amount (i.e., dividends [wc04751] plus share repurchases [wc05376]) in Col-
umn 1 and total payout amount scaled by market capitalization [wc08001]
in Column 2. Only dividends are considered in Columns 3 and 4. Volatility
is defined as the standard deviation of hourly electricity price changes, nor-
malized by a market’s average electricity price level. Flexibility is defined as
the inverse capacity-weighted average run-up time of a firm’s power plants.
Control variables are lagged by one year. Models are firm fixed effects regres-
sions. T-statistics based on Huber/White robust standard errors clustered
by countries are presented in parentheses. ***, ** and * indicate significance
on the 1%-, 5%- and 10%-levels, respectively. A detailed description of all
variables can be found in Appendix A.




                                      49
 Table 10: Measuring the Impact of Wholesale Markets on Cash Holdings

 Column                            1             2           3           4

 Market                        0.018**        0.015**     0.020**     0.055***
                                (2.12)         (2.27)      (2.11)      (2.85)
 Flexibilitybackfilled                                                 -0.012
                                                                       (-0.44)
 Market x Flexbackfilled                                              -0.039*
                                                                      (-1.90)

 Log(assets)                  -0.015***       -0.013***   -0.025***   -0.024***
                                (-6.76)         (-5.85)     (-5.39)     (-5.33)
 Cash flow                       0.064           0.055     0.14***     0.14***
                                (0.83)          (0.70)      (3.49)      (3.48)
 Log(GDP per capita)           -0.0014         -0.050**     -0.018      -0.018
                                (-0.25)         (-2.56)     (-0.95)     (-0.95)

 Country-FE                       no             yes         n/a         n/a
 Firm-FE                          no             no          yes         yes
 Year-FE                          yes            yes         yes         yes
 Observations                    5,040          5,040       5,040       5,040
 Firms                            452            452         452         452
 R2                              0.099          0.25        0.25        0.25

The dependent variable is cash holdings [wc02001] normalized by total assets
[wc02999]. Market is a dummy variable which equals on if a wholesale market
for electricity exists in a region and year. The year in which a market is intro-
duced and the first year thereafter are excluded because markets are frequently
not fully functional at the beginning. Flexibility is defined as the one minus
the standardized run-up time of a firm’s power plants. For years before 1999,
we use the earliest available flexibility value as approximation. Models are
pooled OLS or firm fixed effects regressions. Control variables are lagged by
one year. T-statistics based on Huber/White robust standard errors clustered
by countries are presented in parentheses. ***, ** and * indicate significance
on the 1%-, 5%- and 10%-levels, respectively. A detailed description of all
variables can be found in Appendix A.




                                         50
Appendix

                              Appendix A: Definition of variables

Variable               Description

Main Variables

Cash                   Cash & short term investments [wc02001] / total assets [wc02999].
Volatility             Standard deviation of returns of hourly electricity prices during the firm’s
                       fiscal year. Returns are calculated as differences between hourly prices in
                       U.S. dollar and standardized by the average price in a market. Source: Own
                       calculations based on hourly electricity prices.
Flexibility            One minus the normalized flexibility measure (default is run-up time). Nor-
                       malizing means that the flexibility measures is divided by its maximum so
                       that it is bound between zero and one. Source: Own calculations based.
Run-up time            Capacity-weighted average time which is necessary to start-up a power plant
                       in hours. Based on the production technologies of the firms’ power plants.
                       Source: Own calculations based on WEPP database.
Weather Forecast Un-   Weather forecast uncertainty is the average standard deviation of the 3-day
certainty              weather forecast error across different forecast providers in an electricity
                       market and year. Weather forecast error is defined as the squared difference
                       between the forecasted and actual average temperature at a specific location.
                       Source: Own calculations based on data on historic weather forecasts from
                       Intellovations.

Other Variables

Electricity Price      Average hourly electricity spot price in USD/MWh over the firm’s fiscal year.
                       Source: Own calculations based on hourly electricity prices.
Volatility (daily)     Equals the main volatility measure, but daily prices instead of hourly prices
                       are used. Daily prices are caluclated as the average across all 24 hourly
                       prices. Source: Own calculations based on hourly electricity prices.
Volatility (annual)    Standard deviation returns of annual electricity prices. We use windows of
                       four years to calculate the standard deviation. Data is obtained from the EIA
                       for U.S. states and the IEA for other countries. Source: Own calculations
                       based IEA/EIA data.
Ranking                Relative ranking of the flexibility based on run-up time. Higher rank value
                       are assigned to more flexible technologies. Source: Own calculations based
                       on WEPP database.
Ramp-up cost           Capacity-weighted average cost for a hot start of power plant in e /MW.
                       Based on the production technologies of the firms’ power plants. Source:
                       Own calculations based on WEPP database.

Control Variables

Log(assets)            Logarithm of total assets [wc02999] in U.S. dollar.
Cash flow              Earnings before interest, taxes, depreciation, and amortization (EBITDA)
                       [wc18198] / total assets [wc02999].
Log(GDP per capita)    Natural logarithm of GDP per capita (in 2010 U.S. dollar) in a country and
                       year. Source: Worldbank.


                                            51
                        Definition of Variables - continued
Variable         Description
Market-to-book   Market capitalization [wc08001] divided by book value of common equity
                 [wc03501].
Leverage         Total debt [wc03255] / (Total debt [wc03255] + book value of common equity
                 [wc03501]).
Capex            Capital expenditures [wc04601] scaled by total assets [wc02999] at the be-
                 ginning of the respective year.
Dividend         Dummy variable which equals one if the firm pays a dividend [wc05376].




                                     52
