                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




      THE EFFECT OF PRIOR CHOICES ON EXPECTATIONS AND SUBSEQUENT
                           PORTFOLIO DECISIONS

                                      Camelia M. Kuhnen
                                        Sarah Rudorf
                                        Bernd Weber

                                      Working Paper 23438
                              http://www.nber.org/papers/w23438


                    NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                             1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                               Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    May 2017




Funding for this work was provided by the German Research Council (DFG; We 4427/3-2), the
Frankfurt Institute of Risk Management and Regulation, and the Wells Fargo Center for
Corporate Finance at the University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill. The views expressed herein
are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of
Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2017 by Camelia M. Kuhnen, Sarah Rudorf, and Bernd Weber. All rights reserved. Short
sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission
provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
The Effect of Prior Choices on Expectations and Subsequent Portfolio Decisions
Camelia M. Kuhnen, Sarah Rudorf, and Bernd Weber
NBER Working Paper No. 23438
May 2017
JEL No. G02,G11

                                          ABSTRACT

We document that prior portfolio choices influence investors' expectations about asset values, and
their future choices. We find that people update more from information consistent with their prior
choices, leading to sticky portfolios over time. These effects are related to how the brain's
valuation centers encode new information about assets and about the trader's own success. These
findings provide microfoundations for theoretical models where agents learn jointly about their
skill and about asset values, leading to disagreement, and offer a common explanation for several
puzzling investor behaviors, specifically, households' low stock market participation rate, and the
disposition and repurchase effects.

Camelia M. Kuhnen                                Bernd Weber
University of North Carolina                     Center for Economics and Neuroscience
Kenan-Flagler Business School                    Nachtigallenweg 86 53127 Bonn
300 Kenan Center Drive, MC #4407                 Germany
Chapel Hill, NC 27599                            bweber@lifeandbrain.com
and NBER
camelia_kuhnen@kenan-flagler.unc.edu

Sarah Rudorf
University of Bern, Dept. Psychology
Fabrikstrasse 8
CH-3012 Bern, Switzerland
sarah.rudorf@psy.unibe.ch
1     Introduction

An implicit assumption in the finance literature is that market participants learn the same
way from new information about available investments, irrespective of the composition of
their portfolio. However, there are several puzzling aspects of investor behavior that raise
questions about this assumption. People exhibit the disposition (e.g., Odean (1998)) and
repurchase effects (e.g., Strahilevitz, Barber, and Odean (2011)), as they are reluctant to
sell stocks that have not performed well, and to repurchase stocks that have increased in
price after selling them. Moreover, the literature has documented surprisingly low levels of
stock market participation, as the majority of people in the U.S. and Europe do not invest
in equities (Campbell (2006), Calvet, Campbell, and Sodini (2007)).
    Here, we propose and provide evidence for a common mechanism that can help explain
these patterns in household financial decisions. Namely, we show that people’s prior invest-
ment choices shape how they learn from new information about investment options, and
make subsequent portfolio decisions. We find that people’s expectations about assets are bi-
ased by whether their prior choices seem right ex-post, in that disconfirming evidence tends
to be ignored, and because of this bias in updating beliefs about the available assets, portfolio
choices are sticky over time. We document these behavioral effects using a controlled experi-
mental setting, and we provide further evidence supporting this biased updating mechanism
by examining participants’ brain activation patterns during their portfolio choices.
    Theoretical work has shown that previous portfolio choices can influence investors’ util-
ity function. These models include regret theory (Shefrin and Statman (1985), Barberis,
Huang, and Santos (2001)), prospect theory (Barberis, Huang, and Thaler (2006)), as well
as realization utility theory (Barberis and Xiong (2012)). Utility-based mechanisms can help
explain the disposition effect, the repurchase effect and the low stock market participation
puzzle, but to do so they need to be combined with narrow framing (Barberis and Huang
(2008)). Experimental work has documented evidence in support of utility-based mecha-
nisms. For example, the results in Frydman and Camerer (2016) show that regret theory

                                               1
can help explain people’s propensity to exhibit the repurchase effect, and those in Frydman,
Barberis, Camerer, Bossaerts, and Rangel (2014) indicate that realization utility can help
explain the disposition effect. However, it is possible that prior portfolio choices might also
change investors’ beliefs or the learning rules they use to incorporate financial market news.
   The general idea that investors can be different in how they form expectations is at
the heart of the large finance literature on investor disagreement and its effects on asset
prices and trading volume. In a comprehensive summary of this literature, Hong and Stein
(2007) point out that investors’ beliefs may differ not only because of access to different
information sets or different priors, but also because of differential interpretation of the
same information. In more recent work, Banerjee and Kremer (2010) show theoretically
that disagreement in the interpretation of common information can impact trading volume
and price volatility. Cookson and Niessner (2016) provide empirical evidence consistent with
the idea that disagreement in investor expectations is driven by both different information
sets as well as by differential interpretation of the same information, by studying opinions
expressed by investors on a social media investing platform. As Cookson and Niessner (2016)
note, an important missing piece in the literature on investor disagreement is why people
differ in evaluating information. Our paper provides evidence for one mechanism that leads
to investors being different when forming expectations about financial assets.
   Specifically, we document that, at the behavioral and brain level, different people react
to the same information differently because of their prior choices, as the outcomes of these
provide signals about the person’s trading ability, and not just about the quality of the
available investments. Our results provide microfoundations for models such as Daniel, Hir-
shleifer, and Subrahmanyam (1998) and Gervais and Odean (2001), where self-attribution
bias causes investors to make different inferences about stocks, based on their beliefs re-
garding their ability as traders (i.e., beliefs about the precision of the signals they receive
regarding the available assets). In these models, people are more inclined to attribute past
successes, rather than past failures, to their ability. As a result, investors will become over-


                                               2
confident about their talent, and will put too much weight on past successes when deciding
their future choices. This prediction is in line with the recent empirical evidence in Campbell,
Ramadorai, and Ranish (2014), who use detailed data on household investment choices and
provide evidence that people repeat investment behaviors that happen to have performed
well for them in the recent past. The authors propose that this might be due to people
“feeling better” about themselves after receiving positive feedback about prior investment
decisions, but the data do not allow them to investigate the exact mechanism driving house-
holds to repeat past winning actions. Hence, while the literature posits that previous choices
may impact how people assess their opportunities going forward, no clear evidence for this
assertion has yet been provided. Our goal in this paper is to investigate whether and how
expectations and subsequent choices are influenced by prior actions.
   We study the effect of prior choices on expectations and future portfolio decisions using an
experimental setting with working-age, highly educated and high-earning adults faced with
real financial incentives. Participants in the experiment made decisions regarding which one
of two assets they wanted to hold in their portfolio at a given point in time. The two assets
were a risk-free bond with a known payoff, and a stock that paid dividends from either a
good or a bad distribution. The two dividend distributions had the same support, but the
probability of high outcomes was higher if the stock was paying dividends according to the
good distribution, rather than the bad one. Participants learned the stock dividend in each
time period, or trial, no matter what portfolio choice they had made in that trial. Everybody
started from a common prior that there was a 50% chance that the stock paid from the good
dividend distribution, and then as trials went by, new dividend information was revealed and
thus people’s expectations about the quality of the stock evolved over time. After 6 time
periods, which constitute a learning block, the information about assets was refreshed, and
participants had to learn again starting from the 50% prior that the stock was paying from
the good dividend distribution. In total, each person completed 16 learning blocks of 6 trials
each, for a total of 96 trials. Importantly, in this experiment it was optimal for participants


                                               3
to learn objectively from all new outcomes, as their prior choices did not constrain them
from changing their portfolio going forward.
   We find that controlling for people’s prior expectations about the quality of the stock, in
trials when participants held the stock they updated more positively from observing a high
dividend than in trials when they held the bond. However, if a low dividend was observed,
when people held the bond they updated more negatively their views about the stock relative
to situations when they held the stock. Importantly, these effects are identified within person
and thus are not confounded by unobserved risk preferences or other fixed characteristics of
the individual. As a result, if they held the stock, people ended up with more optimistic
beliefs about the quality of the stock than if they held the bond, irrespective of the available
objective information about the stock’s dividends. This in turn induced stickiness over time
in portfolio choices. After choosing the stock in one trial, people had a significantly higher
chance to choose the stock again, rather than switch to the bond. For those who chose
the bond, the opposite pattern was true: they had a significantly higher chance to hold the
bond subsequently, and not switch to holding the stock. The random choice that people
made in the first trial of each learning block, based solely on the 50% common prior for
the probability that the stock paid dividends from the good distribution that block, was
a significant predictor of people’s subsequent choices, particularly in the next trial. This
stickiness in choices over time was driven by the fact that when making portfolio decisions,
people relied less on the new information about the stock if this information contradicted
the prior choice, and relied more on their prior belief.
   In support of our behavioral results we also provide brain imaging evidence that learning
about asset payoffs depends on how these payoffs match with people’s prior choices. That
is, at the brain level we observe that their exists learning not just about the stock dividend
but also about one’s success in selecting investments. Brain areas previously found critical
for learning and valuation encode more strongly news about the stock that matches people’s
prior choices, that is, they are more sensitive to stock outcome information in cases when this


                                               4
information also provides a favorable signal about the person’s ability to select investments.
This differential activation at the moment when the stock dividend news is revealed can
help predict, before people make their next choice, whether they will rely more on the newly
observed dividend information when updating their expectations about the stock and when
making their next portfolio choice.
   These results add to the finance literature regarding individual investor behavior. Our
findings can help shed light on the puzzling fact that a large share of households do not
participate in the stock market (Campbell (2006), Calvet, Campbell, and Sodini (2007)),
a behavior which is detrimental to wealth accumulation. Our findings suggest that one
potential reason for this outcome may be that people who are not currently stock holders
update their beliefs insufficiently if stocks perform well, and hence will be overly pessimistic
about future payoffs in the stock market. These pessimistic beliefs will in turn deter these
individuals from investing in equities, which will lead to limited stock market participation
in the population. Our results may also help explain another puzzling aspect of investor
behavior, namely, the disposition effect (Odean (1998)), which refers to the fact that investors
seem to be reluctant to sell stocks that have not performed well. Our results indicate that
a potential reason for this pattern is that these investors do not update sufficiently their
beliefs after observing low outcomes of stocks they have previously purchased, since these
low outcomes do not line up ex-post with people’s choice to invest in those stocks. Moreover,
our evidence suggests that the repurchase effect (Strahilevitz, Barber, and Odean (2011))
can occur because investors do not update beliefs upwards sufficiently after observing high
outcomes of stocks they no longer own, since these high outcomes contradict the earlier
decision to sell those stocks. Our beliefs-related mechanism for the disposition and repurchase
effects is complementary to the findings in Frydman, Barberis, Camerer, Bossaerts, and
Rangel (2014) and Frydman and Camerer (2016), who find evidence that people’s utility
function is affected negatively by realizing losses and by missing possible gains.
   Our results also provide microfoundations for models of investor behavior such as Daniel,


                                               5
Hirshleifer, and Subrahmanyam (1998) and Gervais and Odean (2001), where people learn
not just about asset payoffs but also about their own ability as traders. Investors in these
models form incorrect beliefs about asset values because of their bias to update more from
the success, rather than the failure, of their prior portfolio choice. These individual-level
errors in learning can have aggregate outcomes. This general point was made by Daniel
and Hirshleifer (2015), who note that differences among investors in terms of their beliefs
about their ability can lead to high trading volume and predictability in asset prices. A
specific implication of the biased learning mechanism we document here is that in a world
with short-selling constraints, in the near term markets will over-react to good news and
under-react to bad news, since market participants made the choice to own stocks and thus
will be biased to update more from good news, rather than bad news, about these assets.
       Our paper complements the recent experimental literature in finance regarding learning
in markets, which shows that investors exhibit deviations from Bayesian learning (Kluger
and Wyatt (2004), Payzan-LeNestour and Bossaerts (2015), Asparouhova, Bossaerts, Eguia,
and Zame (2015)), and that strategic considerations regarding others’ behavior influence
learning and trading (Kogan (2009), Bruguier, Quartz, and Bossaerts (2010), and Carlin,
Kogan, and Lowery (2013)). We add to this literature by documenting that people’s prior
choices induce a bias in how they learn from new information, in that they update more from
news which confirms, rather than disconfirms, their prior choices, and rely more on these
news when making subsequent choices, in a setting where it is optimal to update beliefs
correctly. Hence, the evidence in this paper brings forward a novel mechanism through
which people can form incorrect beliefs about future outcomes.1
   1
     Outside the finance literature, existing work shows that people form beliefs indicating that they view
themselves as better individuals, with a better future, than deemed by objective data. Specifically, Eil and
Rao (2011) and Mobius, Niederle, Niehaus, and Rosenblat (2014) provide experimental evidence that people
update more from good news regarding their own beauty or intelligence, relative to bad news. Sharot, Korn,
and Dolan (2011) show that people underestimate the likelihood that adverse life events, such as illness,
will happen to them, and found that this unfounded optimism about one’s odds of encountering bad events
was related to a diminished brain response to undesirable information. Mayraz (2013) provides a theoretical
model and experimental evidence supporting the idea of wishful thinking, namely, that people believe that
the future outcomes that will occur will be those that maximize their payoffs.



                                                     6
   The closest paper to our work is Kuhnen and Knutson (2011). While the primary focus of
that paper was on the role of affect manipulations on financial decision making, the authors
found that errors in updating priors about stocks were larger in situations where stockholders
experienced a financial loss, or bondholders missed on a financial gain. While this evidence
suggests that investment outcomes are parsed differently depending on how they line up with
prior portfolio choices, it is confounded by the fact that realized gains and losses may impact
learning differently, aside from any effect of prior choices and whether they are confirmed by
new evidence. The fact that gains and losses shape updating rules differently was shown in
Kuhnen (2015), where learning from negative payoffs was found to induce overly pessimistic
expectations, relative to learning from positive payoffs – an effect completely orthogonal
to that of prior decisions, which is the focus of our paper. Here we isolate the effect of
prior choices on expectations formation from any effect related to the sign of outcomes that
investors learn from, by having each subject learn separately from gains, and from losses, in
different segments of the experiment. Moreover, to investigate the robustness of the effect of
prior choices on learning across different types of environments, we change the variance of
the distribution of dividends that subjects learn about, keeping the sign of the outcomes the
same (i.e., keeping the outcomes in the gain domain, or in the loss domain). We also analyze
the effect of prior investments on future choices, not just expectations, and document that
people’s portfolios are sticky, and this is driven by the fact that new information is less relied
upon when it disagrees with one’s prior investment. Furthermore, here we also document
the existence of a biological mechanism, related to the functioning of valuation areas in
the brain, that underlies the effect of prior choices on decision making, and show that this
biological mechanism can offer microfoundations for theoretical models of individual trading
that involve learning about assets at the same time as learning about one’s ability as an
investor.




                                                7
2       Experimental design

Participants completed a financial decision making task where they made 96 portfolio choices,
split into 16 separate blocks of six trials each. In each of the 96 trials, each subject had to
select one of two securities to hold in their portfolio for the duration of the trial: a stock with
risky payoffs coming from one of two distributions (good and bad), one which was better
than the other in the sense of first-order stochastic dominance, and a bond with a known
payoff. In each trial, no matter which asset they chose, participants observed the dividend
paid by the stock, after making their asset pick, and then were asked to provide an estimate
of the probability that the stock was paying from the good distribution.
      The task included gain and loss blocks, as learning may differ across these domains. This
effect was shown in Kuhnen (2015) but it is independent from the effect of prior choices
on learning and subsequent actions, which is the focus of this paper. The way we measure
subjective expectations and portfolio choices in our experiment is similar to the procedure in
Kuhnen (2015), but we study a completely different determinant of expectations formation
relative to that studied in this prior work.
      In gain blocks, the two securities provided positive payoffs only. The stock payoffs were
+ e10 or + e2 (gain & low variance condition), or e0 or + e12 (gain & high variance
condition), while the bond payoff was + e6. In loss blocks, the two securities provided
negative payoffs only. The stock payoffs were - e10 or - e2 (loss & low variance condition),
or e0 or - e12 (loss & high variance condition), while the bond payoff was - e6 (see Table
1).
      In either condition, the stock paid dividends from a good distribution or from a bad dis-
tribution. The good distribution is that where the high dividend occurs with 70% probability
in each trial, while the low dividend occurs with 30% probability. The bad distribution is
that where these probabilities are reversed: the high dividend occurs with 30% probability,
and the low dividend occurs with 70% probability in each trial.
      For each block of six trials, the participants’ learning problem is the same. That is, par-

                                                 8
ticipants know that the computer will either pay dividends from the good stock distribution
in each of these six trials, or it will pay from the bad distribution in each of the six trials.
At the beginning of each learning block, the computer randomly selected (with 50%-50%
probabilities) whether the dividend distribution to be used in the following six trials would
be the good or the bad one.
   Importantly, participants were carefully instructed that the probability that the stock
will pay from the good distribution is 50% for each learning block. Participants were given
this information and the experiment proceeded when they confirmed that they understood
that they would start each learning block with this 50% prior. Based on this 50% prior belief,
as well as on the dividend revealed each trial, participants were asked to provide a posterior
probability estimate that the stock is paying from the good distribution in that block. The
16 learning blocks that each subject faced were split equally in gain vs. loss, and high vs.
low variance conditions. The order of the blocks was randomized across subjects. Figure 1
presents two trial examples – one belonging to a learning block in the gain and low variance
condition, and one belonging to a learning block in the loss and high variance condition.
   Participants were paid based on their investment payoffs and the accuracy of the probabil-
ity estimates provided. Specifically, they received the accumulated payoffs of the investments
they chose throughout the task, plus ten Euro cents for each probability estimate within 5%
of the correct answer, namely, the objective Bayesian posterior probability. Information re-
garding the accuracy of each subject’s probability estimates and the corresponding payment
was only provided at the end of the task, after all learning blocks were completed. This was
done to avoid feedback effects that could have changed the participants’ strategy or answers
during the progression of the task.
   The value of the objective Bayesian posterior that the stock is paying from the good
distribution can be easily calculated. Specifically, after observing t high outcomes in n trials
                                                                             1
so far, the Bayesian posterior that the stock is the good one is:   1+ 1−p     q
                                                                           ∗( 1−q )n−2t
                                                                                        ,   where p = 50%
                                                                        p

is the prior that the stock is the good one (before any dividends are observed in that learning


                                                9
block) and q = 70% is the probability that a good stock pays the high (rather than the low)
dividend in each trial. Table A1 in the Appendix provides the value of the objective Bayesian
posterior for all {n, t} pairs possible in the experiment. Using this Bayesian posterior we
can measure how close the subjects’ expressed probability estimates are to the objectively
correct beliefs, and how well the subjective updates in beliefs each trial track the objective
updates based on the new dividend information.
    The 46 participants in the study were all male, to avoid gender effects, with ages ranging
from 29 to 49 years (mean 40.08 years, sd. 6.53 years) and were recruited in Bonn, Germany.
Participants gave written informed consent, as required by human subjects protection rules.
The experiment lasted approximately 2 hours. Subjects received e25 at the outset, as well
as the payoff accumulated during the financial learning task. If the final payoff was less than
e20 per hour, the difference was compensated for. On average, participants’ compensation
for this study was e41.4.
    Importantly, the sample was purposely selected to be representative of educated, high-
earning individuals across the age span: 78% of the participants have a college degree, 49%
are home owners, and 60% earn more than e4000 per month.



3     Results

3.1    Expectations

We first document that the subjective beliefs we elicit from participants each trial are mean-
ingful quantities, in the sense that they predict these individuals’ investment choices in
subsequent trials. This can be seen in Figure 2, where we plot the average propensity to
choose the stock in a trial as a function of the subjective belief that the stock is paying from
the good dividend distribution provided by participants at the end of the prior trial. This
belief can either be below, equal to, or above 50%. Individuals who are risk-neutral and who
maximize expected value would choose the bond in the first case, would randomize between


                                              10
stock and bond in the second case, and would choose the stock in the third case.
   We group the subjective probability estimates gathered from participants at the end of
the prior trial in several categories, to examine whether the likelihood of the stock being
chosen in the current trial indeed exhibits a significant jump when these estimates cross
50%. To simplify the exposition, we use five categories for the subjective estimates that the
stock is good expressed at the end of the prior trial, namely [0%,30%), 30%, 50%, 70%, and
(70%, 100], but using a finer categorization scheme will not change the results. As shown
in the figure, in situations when people had a 50% prior that the stock was good, in 47%
of these cases these individuals decided to hold the stock in the next trial, and not the
bond. This propensity to choose the stock is significantly higher, at p < 0.01, than that
observed in situations where people’s prior was either below 30%, or between 30% and 50%
(in these two scenarios, the chance that people would choose the stock in the next trial was
22%, and 29%, respectively) and significantly lower, also at p < 0.01, than that observed in
situations where people’s prior was either between 50% and 70%, or above 70% (i.e., 72%
and 75%, respectively). Hence, Figure 2 shows that subjective beliefs are significant drivers
of subsequent portfolio choices.
   However, it is important to establish that these expectations are meaningful predictors of
asset choices across all experimental conditions, and after accounting for differences across
subjects that can simultaneously influence a person’s the degree of optimism about stocks,
as well as one’s portfolio choices. The probit models in Table 2 shows that, even after
controlling for the type of experimental condition of each trial faced by participants, as well
as for subject fixed effects, the chance that the stock, and not the bond, was chosen in a
given trial is increasing in participants’ estimate in the prior trial regarding the probability
that the stock pays from the good dividend distribution.
   Confirming the results in Figure 2, the estimates in Table 2 show that there exists a
jump in the probability that the stock is chosen in a given trial, once the subjective belief
that the stock is good crosses 50%: at this belief level, the chance that the participant picks


                                              11
the stock, rather than the bond, is 27% to 31% (p < 0.01) higher than if the belief was in
the lowest category, namely, less than 30%. For subjective beliefs strictly above 50%, the
increase in the chance that the stock is selected, relative to situations when subjective beliefs
are in the lowest category, is between 48% and 51% (p < 0.01). Gradually across the three
specifications in the table, we add as control variables indicators for whether the particular
block that the trial belongs to is in the gain, loss, high variance or low variance conditions, as
well as subject fixed effects. The inclusion of these variables does not change the result that
participants’ propensity to choose the stock in a given trial increases significantly with these
individuals’ estimate for the probability that the stock is paying from the good distribution
of dividends.
   While the relationship between subjective beliefs and subsequent choices is strong and
in the expected direction, as more optimistic beliefs predict a higher likelihood that the
stock will be chosen in the next trial, it is also the case that there is a substantial degree
of stochasticity in participants’ choices, as observed in many other economic settings (see
Krajbich, Oud, and Fehr (2014)). In the probit model in the first column of Table 2 we show
that the probability estimates of the participants explain 12% of variation in the investment
choice. Adding condition fixed effects (second column) does not increase the model fit, but
adding subject fixed effects (third column) as explanatory variables for the decision to choose
the stock and not the bond in a given trial, increases the R2 of the investment choice model
to 19%.
   This means that in the data there exist many situations where we observe the same
participant expressing the same subjective probability that the stock is good, but the person’s
choice in the next trial is sometimes the stock and some other times the bond. We can
thus exploit this within-subject variation in the investment decision, controlling for prior
subjective beliefs, to conduct our main analysis – namely, to study the effect of the investment
choice on how people learn from new information after they make this choice, and how they
make subsequent choices.


                                               12
       As predicted, we find that prior investment choices influence participants’ posterior beliefs
about the stock dividend distribution, and the manner in which they update from new
dividend outcomes, even though in this task it is optimal for subjects to use objectively all
information, as their prior choices do not constrain them from changing their portfolio going
forward.2
       Figure 3 shows that controlling for the beliefs expressed by subjects regarding the quality
of the stock before the investment choice is made, when individuals choose the stock they
form more positive posterior beliefs about the stock dividend distribution compared to when
they choose the bond, given the same new information about the stock dividend. We assign
the subjective beliefs about the stock being good, measured at the end of trial t − 1, into
the same five categories listed above. We then split the observations based on whether in
trial t the person decided to hold the stock or the bond (indicated in the figure by colors red
and blue, respectively), and on whether the stock dividend revealed during trial t, after the
choice was made, was high or low (indicated by solid lines, and dashed lines, respectively).
In other words, for each level of subjective beliefs about the stock at the end of trial t − 1,
we calculate the subjective beliefs expressed by participants at the end of trial t, in four
scenarios: they chose the stock and the dividend in trial t was high, they chose the stock and
the dividend in trial t was low, they chose the bond and the dividend in trial t was high, and
they chose the bond and the dividend in trial t was low. Figure 3 shows that no matter what
the subjective prior (in trial t−1) was, after a high dividend is revealed in trial t, participants
who chose to hold the stock in that trial form significantly more optimistic estimates, by
   2
    Individuals who update incorrectly in this task earn significantly less than those who update and choose
assets optimally. To measure the extent of losses from suboptimal learning and behavior, we ran simulations
for different possible decision strategies to estimate the subjects’ compensation. Individuals who always
choose the bond earn just their initial endowment (e25) due to the equal number of gain and loss trials.
Based on simulations (1000 subjects per strategy), perfect Bayesian investors earn on average e65.4, whereas
individuals who always choose the stock earn on average e26.4. Those who choose assets based solely on
the most recent outcome earn on average e58. Aside from these earnings that come from accumulating the
payoffs of the chosen assets, Bayesian learners would also earn e9.60 for 96 correct probability estimations.
Individuals who never update and always report a 50% posterior would be correct on average on 28.8 trials
and get e2.88. Therefore if participants were to always choose the bond and never update the 50% prior,
they would earn a total of e27.88, whereas Bayesian optimizers would earn e75.



                                                     13
9.27% on average (p < 0.01), for the probability that the stock is good, relative to those who
chose the stock. When the dividend revealed in trial t is low, then participants who chose
the bond form significantly more pessimistic estimates, by 3.27% on average (p < 0.01), for
the probability that the stock is paying from the good dividend distribution, relative to those
who chose the stock that trial.
   These results suggest that updating subjective priors about the quality of the stock
depends on people’s choice, and on the new information revealed. We examine this more
closely by conducting the analysis shown in Figure 4. The procedure is similar to that used
for the analysis in Figure 3, with one exception: the variable shown on the y-axis is not
the subjective probability estimate expressed in trial t, but rather, the subjective update in
people’s own estimate between trials t − 1 and t. Controlling, as before, for subjective priors
in trial t, we find as expected that upon seeing a high dividend, people update their prior
upward (i.e., the subjective update is a positive quantity), and upon seeing a low dividend,
people update their prior downward (i.e., the subjective update is a negative quantity). The
interesting finding here is that the size of the update depends on people’s choice in that trial.
When a high dividend is presented, those who chose the stock that trial have significantly
more positive updates, by 9.07% (p < 0.01) on average, in their estimates for the probability
that the stock is good, relative to those who chose the bond. When a low dividend is
presented, those who chose the bond that trial have significantly more negative updates, by
2.98% (p < 0.05) on average, in their estimates for the probability that the stock is good,
relative to those who chose the stock that trial.
   The results in Figures 3 and 4 illustrate in a clear manner that expectations formation
depends on how new information matches with people’s prior choices. However, in this
analysis we have not accounted for possible differences across participants in their propensity
to choose a certain asset, or in their estimates about the quality of the stock. It is important
to show that the same person, with the same prior about the stock dividend distribution, and
seeing the same dividend news in a trial, will update differently from this news depending


                                               14
on whether they held the stock or the bond that trial.
   Moreover, if indeed we observe that prior choices change expectations within subjects,
it is also important to understand whether this effect is confounded by the type of learning
environment faced by the person: whether they are updating about a stock that has all
positive outcomes (i.e., they are learning in the gain domain), or all negative outcomes (i.e.,
they are learning in the loss domain), or has high or low variance in the dividend distribution.
Therefore, to assess the effect of the degree to which new information matches one’s prior
choice on the person’s subsequent beliefs, we need to control for subjective priors, for subject
fixed effects, and for the exact experimental condition faced by a person in that trial.
   We do so in the linear regression models in Table 3. In the top panel, the dependent
variable is the probability estimate that the stock is good provided by a subject in trial t of
a learning block, and in the bottom panel, the dependent variable is the subjective update
in this belief between trial t − 1 and t. The independent variables of interest are interaction
terms between indicators for whether the person chose the stock or the bond in trial t, and
whether the dividend observed in that trial was high or low.
   As can be seen in the first regression model in the top panel, when the dividend is low, we
find that, all else equal, if a person chose the bond in the beginning of that trial, their estimate
for the probability that the stock is good is 4.25% (p < 0.01) lower than if they chose the
stock. When the dividend shown in trial t is high, all else equal, if a person chose the stock in
the beginning of that trial, their estimate for the probability that the stock is good is 9.09%
(p < 0.01) higher than if they chose the bond. This effect is obtained by calculating the
difference between the coefficients on the indicators Stock holder x High dividend and Bond
holder x High dividend, namely 34.39% and 25.30%. These two coefficients separately show
how much higher subjective probabilities are in the two situations the indicators capture,
relative to the omitted indicator in the regression, namely Bond holder x Low dividend.
   In columns 2-5 of Table 3 we estimate the effects of the interaction terms between the
prior choice and the type of new dividend revealed on subjective beliefs separately for each


                                                15
of the four experimental conditions that participants faced. Whether subjects have to learn
from or experience solely positive stock outcomes, or solely negative stock outcomes, or
face dividend distributions characterized by low or high variance, we find that the extent to
which new information matches prior choices has a significant impact on how people form
expectations about the stock – similar in magnitude and statistical significance to the results
found in the main specification in the first column in the table. In other words, these results
indicate that the effect of prior choices on how people use new information about assets to
form their expectations about these assets going forward is robust to the type of learning
environment faced by investors.
   The results in the first regression model in the bottom panel of Table 3 show that upon
observing a low dividend, the update in a person’s belief that the stock is paying from
the good dividend distribution is 3.89% lower if the person chose the bond earlier in that
trial, than if they chose the stock. Upon observing a high dividend, the update in subjective
beliefs is 8.93% higher (i.e., 33.78%-24.85%) for stock holders relative to bond holders. These
differences are significant at p < 0.01, and are obtained holding fixed the subjective prior
belief of the individual. In other words, the results in the bottom panel of Table 3 show a
differential reaction, starting from the same prior, by the same person, to news about the
stock dividend, depending on whether the person in that trial held the stock or the bond.
The effects documented in the two panels of the table are similar to those shown in the
simpler analyses in Figures 3 and 4, and demonstrate that people update their expectations
about the quality of assets available to them differently depending on whether news about
these assets seems to ex-post confirm these people’s prior investment decisions.
   Importantly, this effect is different from the classic confirmation bias (Myanatt, Doherty,
and Tweney (1977)), which refers to people’s tendency to choose information sources that
can help confirm a particular hypothesis, instead of seeking sources that can help reject it.
Our results suggest that when people obtain explicit falsifying information that does not
match their prior choice, they fail to use it to reject incorrect hypotheses.


                                              16
3.2    Subsequent portfolio choices

We now investigate whether prior choices influence participants’ potfolio decisions going
forward. So far, we have documented the people’s expressed beliefs about the quality of
the stock depend on whether the new information learned about the stock matches their
prior choice. However, it is important to show that the expressed beliefs are truthful, in the
sense that they drive people’s choices – that is, we need to document that participants’ asset
choices going forward are biased by whether past choices were confirmed by new dividend
information.
   If choices were to be biased in this manner, we should observed that people persevere with
the same choice from trial to trial, since they do not incorporate disconfirming evidence as
readily as confirming outcomes. In other words, we should see that, controlling for people’s
prior beliefs before they made a choice in trial t, and for the new information revealed in
trial t, the choice made in trial t + 1 will be positively correlated with the choice made in
trial t. The analysis in the probit models in Table 4 confirms this prediction. The dependent
variable is an indicator equal to one if the person chose the stock in trial t + 1, and zero if
they chose the bond. The independent variables of interest are interaction terms between
indicators for whether the individual chose the stock or the bond in trial t and indicators
for whether the new stock dividend revealed in trial t was high or low. The controls include
fixed effects for subjective priors at the end of trial t − 1, for the experimental condition
encountered by the subject in the learning block to which the trial belongs (i.e., gain, loss,
high or low variance in the dividend distribution), and subject fixed effects. We examine the
relationship between the prior and the subsequent choice, for each level of dividend revealed
in trial t (i.e., high or low), for the entire set of observations (in column 1), and separately
for each experimental condition (columns 2-5). The effects we obtain are very similar across
all these subsets of the data, therefore we here report the estimates obtained using all trials,
which are those in column 1 of Table 4.
   We find that if the dividend in trial t is low, a person who chose the stock in trial t


                                              17
has a 32% (p < 0.01) higher chance to choose the stock again in trial t + 1, relative to a
person who chose the bond in trial t. A similar effect is observed after a high dividend is
revealed: those who held the stock in trial t have a 21% (p < 0.01) higher chance to hold the
stock in the next trial, compared to people who in trial t held the bond. This estimate is
obtained as the difference between the coefficients on the interaction terms Stock holder &
High dividend and Bond holder & High dividend, i.e., 0.55-0.34, or 21%. In other words,
stock holders tend to continue holding the stock, and bond holders tend to continue holding
the bond, given the same prior beliefs about the stock, and the same new information about
the stock’s dividends.
   One concern that needs to be addressed is that the stickiness of choices from trial t to
trial t + 1 is not driven by people reacting differently to dividend news in trial t based on
whether this news matches their prior choice, but rather, it is driven by measurement error
in the subjective probability estimates that people form before they make their choice in
trial t. To alleviate this concern, we will examine whether the asset choice made by a person
in the first trial of each of the 16 learning blocks they go through will influence which asset
they choose for the rest of that block, controlling for the actual information observed during
block. Subjects know that in the beginning of each learning block of 6 trials the learning
problem is refreshed, and there is a 50% probability that they will face the good or the
bad stock for the incoming 6 trials. All participants thus start with the same 50% prior,
before any stock dividends are presented later on. Given this information, the expected
payoff from either choosing the stock or the bond in that first trial of the learning block is
exactly the same. A risk-neutral agent would therefore randomize which asset to hold during
the first trial, and this is what we in fact see our subjects do. Hence, we can see whether
that randomly made first choice in a learning block is a predictor of what asset the person
will choose in the remaining 5 trials in the block, controlling for the dividend information
that the person is shown later during the block. Since we conduct this analysis by using
within-subject variation in their first choice in each learning block, the results are not driven


                                               18
by unobserved subject fixed effects such as risk attitudes.
   As expected, we find that subsequent choices in a learning block depend on the random
asset choice the person made in trial 1 of the 6 trials in the block. This result is shown
in the probit models in Table 5. The dependent variable is an indicator equal to 1 if the
subject chose the stock in trial t ∈ 2, 3, 4, 5, 6 of a certain learning block, and 0 if they chose
the bond. The independent variable of interest is an indicator equal to 1 if in trial 1 of
that same learning block the subject chose the stock, and 0 if they chose the bond. We
include experimental condition fixed effects, subject fixed effects, and fixed effects for the
objective probability that the stock is paying from the good dividend distribution, based on
the dividends revealed up to and including trial t − 1 in that learning block. These fixed
effects capture the information that the person has seen about the stock and should drive,
for a Bayesian learner, their choice in trial t. However, as the results in the table show, even
controlling for what objectively was revealed to the subject about the stock up to trial t, the
asset choice made at random by the individual in the first trial of the block has a significant
and positive effect on the asset choice made in trial t. If the person chose the stock in the
first trial, then during trials 2 through 6 of that learning block they have a 10% (p < 0.01)
higher chance to chose the stock. We study how long-lived the effect of the first choice is, by
examining separately in the last thee columns in Table 5 the choices made in trial 2, trials 3
and 4, and trials 5 and 6, respectively. We find that the effect of the choice made in the first
trial on subsequent choices is particularly strong – namely, 24% (p < 0.01) – for choices in
trial 2, drops to 10% (p < 0.05) for trials 3 and 4, and then is not significantly different from
zero in trials 5 and 6. In other words, first choices induce stickiness in subsequent choices,
but the effect diminishes over time.
   While the stickiness in choices is consistent with the learning mechanism we have in
mind, it is necessary that we document in a more direct manner that upon making an asset
choice, people discount new evidence that does not match their prior investment decision.
We shows this graphically in a population-based analysis in Figure 5, and in probit models


                                                19
using within-subject variation in Table 6.
   Our goal for the analysis in Figure 5 was to examine whether people’s propensity to
choose the stock, rather than the bond, is not influenced as much if they observe a stock
outcome that does not match their choice in the prior trial, than if they observe an outcome
that matches their prior choice. Consider situations where people said at the end of trial
t − 1 that they think that there is a 50% probability that the stock is paying from the good
dividend distribution. From the analysis in Figure 2 we know that in these situations, 47%
of the time people choose the stock. We find that among people who chose the stock in trial
t and had the 50% prior right before making this choice, 84% of them chose the stock again
in trial t + 1 if a high dividend was presented in trial t, and 46% of them chose the stock
in trial t + 1 if a low dividend was presented in trial t. Therefore, relative to the baseline
propensity of choosing the stock of 47% prior to seeing the new information, the propensity
to choose the stock does not change much (i.e., drops by 1%) if those who chose the stock
see a low dividend, but it increases dramatically (i.e., by 84%-47%, or 37%) if they see a
high dividend. However, among people who chose the bond in trial t and had the 50% prior
right before making this choice, 59% of them chose the stock in trial t + 1 if a high dividend
was presented in trial t, and 14% of them chose the stock in trial t + 1 if a low dividend
was presented in trial t. Therefore, relative to its 47% baseline value, for bond holders the
propensity to choose the stock drops dramatically (i.e., by 47%-14%, or 33%) if they see a
low dividend, but does not change as much (i.e., it increases by 59%-47%, or 12%) if they
see a high dividend. In the figure we show these changes in people’s propensity to choose the
stock, based on whether the new information matches their prior choice, for each category
of subjective estimates of the probability that the stock is good, not just for the case of the
50% prior, and find similar patterns across all categories of subjective priors. Namely, the
people whose propensity to choose the stock is increased most by seeing high dividends are
those who previously chose the stock, and the people whose propensity to choose the stock
is decreased most by seeing a low dividend are those who previously chose the bond.


                                              20
   Another strategy for investigating whether subsequent choices depend differentially on
the new dividend information based on whether it matches the prior choice is to estimate a
within-subject model predicting a person’s choice in trial t, where we examine the dependence
of this choice on the information revealed in trial t and on the subjective belief about the
quality of the stock that the person expressed at the end of trial t − 1, right before making
their choice for trial t. If people tend to ignore information that disconfirms their prior choice,
then when making the asset choice in trial t + 1, they will rely more on the new dividend
information in trial t if that confirms their choice in that trial, than when it disconfirms it.
In case of disconfirming evidence, as opposed to confirming outcomes, people’s subsequent
choice will rely more on the subjective beliefs about the stock that they had at the end
of trial t − 1, before the new evidence was presented in trial t. In other words, when the
evidence does not match their choice, people will rely more on their old beliefs, as if there
was no information revealed in trial t, when making their portfolio choice in trial t + 1.
When, instead, the dividend news in trial t matches their choice in trial t, people will rely
more on this news when making their next portfolio choice.
   The analysis in Table 6 confirms these predictions. The dependent variable in the probit
models in the table is an indicator equal to 1 if the person chose the stock in trial t + 1 of a
learning block, and 0 if they chose the bond. The models include condition and subject fixed
effects, as in prior analyses. In the first two columns we split the data based on whether in
trial t the dividend presented matched the choice made earlier in that trial by the person.
We define a match as occurring if the person chose the stock in trial t and then was informed
that the stock outcome that trial was high, or if the person chose the bond in trial t and
then was informed that the stock outcome was low. In the case of matching trials (first
column), we find that there is a positive and significant correlation between the dividend
shown in trial t and the person’s likelihood of choosing the stock in trial t + 1. Specifically, if
the dividend was high, all else equal the person would have a 59% higher chance of choosing
the stock on the next trial. However, looking at trials where the dividend did not match


                                                21
the person’s choice (second column), we observe no significant correlation between the newly
revealed dividend and the person’s subsequent choice. The only significant predictor of the
asset choice in trial t + 1 in these cases is the person’s subjective estimate for the probability
that the stock is good, as expressed before the trial t dividend is revealed. An increase in
this probability of 1% leads to an increase of 0.6% in the chance that the person chooses
the stock in trial t + 1. The impact of this old subjective prior on the choice in trial t + 1
is double in the case when the new information does not line up with the person’s choice
in trial t, relative to the case when the information matches the choice – namely, 0.6% vs.
0.3%, respectively. A chi-squared test shows that these effects are significantly different at
p < 0.05.
   To further examine whether people rely less on new information if it disagrees with their
prior investment when making their next portfolio choice, we assess the degree to which the
choice in trial t + 1 is correlated with what the person’s subjective assessment about the
quality of the stock ought to be, given their subjective estimate in trial t − 1 and the new
information in trial t, assuming that they update from this new information in an objective,
Bayesian manner. It is easy to show that if a person’s prior that the stock is paying from the
good distribution is some value p, the person’s posterior probability that the stock is good
should be 7p/(4p + 3) if the new dividend is high, and 3p/(7 − 4p) if the new dividend is low.
The less people update their priors in a Bayesian manner, the less correlated their choice in
the next trial will be with this Bayesian subjective posterior probability. As shown in the last
two columns in Table 6, while this subjective posterior — obtained by correctly updating a
person’s own prior after seeing the new dividend in trial t — is correlated with the person’s
choice in trial t + 1, this relationship is much weaker in cases when the dividend in trial
t disconfirmed the person’s choice that trial. Specifically, we find that an increase in this
Bayesian subjective posterior of 1% leads to an increase of 1.1% (p < 0.01) in the probability
that the person will choose the stock in trial t + 1 if the news received in trial t matched
their choice that trial, but it only corresponds to an increase of 0.4% in this probability if


                                               22
the news received in trial t did not match their choice in trial t. A chi-squared test shows
that these effects are significantly different at p < 0.01. In other words, people rely less on
what should be their correctly updated beliefs about the quality of the stock when making
their next portfolio decision, if they received information that does not line up with their
previous decision.


3.3    Evidence on learning mechanism from brain imaging data

The evidence shown so far indicates that the extent to which new information is in line
with investors’ prior choices will influence how these individuals update their beliefs about
available assets, and which assets they will choose in the future. Specifically, we have found
that subjective expectations and portfolio choices are sticky over time, as investors update
more from information that matches, rather than disconfirms, their previous choices.
   We interpret this evidence as providing support for models of investor behavior such as
Daniel, Hirshleifer, and Subrahmanyam (1998) and Gervais and Odean (2001), where the
degree to which people update from new information about financial assets depends on their
beliefs about their own ability to get precise signals about asset values. In those models, the
assumption is that people prefer to think that they have high ability as traders, and thus
will preferentially update their beliefs about their skill after observing information consistent
with their prior choices. In other words, this prior theoretical work assumes that learning
about one’s skill can interfere with learning about asset payoffs.
   The behavioral evidence we have presented so far lines up well with this assumption.
Ideally, however, it would be helpful to in fact identify whether at the neural level two
distinct learning processes– one about a person’s ability, and one about the quality of the
available financial assets – take place simultaneously and interfere with each other. To
accomplish this goal, we had the participants in our experiment perform the investment task
while undergoing functional magnetic resonance imaging. The brain imaging question we
need to answer is whether the areas of the brain that are involved in learning and valuation


                                               23
have different activation patterns when the information revealed to the trader matches the
person’s prior choice, relative to when it disconfirms it.
   A large body of work in neuroscience and neuroeconomics has identified the brain areas
that are critical for updating from new information and calculating the value of available
actions. Specifically, the ventromedial prefrontal cortex (vmPFC) and the ventral striatum
(vSTR) have been found to be the key regions of a subjective value network (e.g., Bartra,
McGuire, and Kable (2013), Clithero and Rangel (2014)), responsible for the encoding of
objective and subjective probabilities in choice valuation tasks (d’Acremont, Schultz, and
Bossaerts (2013), Ting, Yu, Maloney, and Wu (2015)).
   Therefore, our goal was to investigate whether at the time when new dividend information
is released in a trial, activation in these two areas will depend on whether the new dividend
is in line with the person’s choice in that trial. That is, does learning about asset payoffs, at
the neural level, depend on whether these payoffs confirm or contradict the investor’s prior
choice? If the answer is yes, then this would provide biological microfoundations for our
behavioral effects documented earlier, and for the prior theoretical models that assume that
updating about one’s skill as an inverstor can interfere with updating about asset payoffs.
   We find that indeed, activation in the two key learning areas, the vmPFC and the vSTR,
depends on both the type of dividend observed, as well as on whether that dividend confirms
the person’s choice that trial. This result is shown in Figure 6, which pools data on brain
activation and behavior from all subjects. As it is standard in these types of analyses, brain
activation was measured as the blood-oxygen-level dependent (BOLD) signal recorded by
the brain scanner continuously during the task, using standard imaging procedures (see the
Appendix for more details).
   On the left side of the figure we show – colored in yellow – the areas in the brain that we
find to have significantly higher activation (p < 0.001) at the time of the presentation of new
stock dividend information if that information confirms the person’s choice made earlier in
the trial. These areas are the vmPFC and the vSTR (left and right), as expected in light


                                               24
of the prior literature on valuation. Activation here is therefore significantly greater when
stock holders see a high stock dividend, rather then a low one, and when bond holders see a
low stock dividend, rather than a high one.
   On the right side of Figure 6 we investigate the distribution of these effects across subjects.
For each participant, we calculate the average activation response in the areas identified in
the group analysis above, in four types of situations, based on whether they were a stock or
a bond holder that trial, and whether the stock dividend presented at the end of the trial
was high or low. Estimates in red refer to observations from trials where the subjects were
stock holders, and estimates in blue refer to observations from trials where the subjects were
bond holders. We calculate the mean and the standard error of these brain responses across
all participants. The results of this individual level brain activation analysis match those
obtained using pooled data across all participants, namely, we observe that subjects have
significantly higher activation in the learning and valuation areas of the brain when they are
stock holders and see a high stock dividend, rather than a low one, and when they are bond
holders and observe a low stock dividend, rather than a high one. In other words, learning
about the payoff of the asset is influenced by whether or not the new stock outcome conveys
good or bad information about the person’s ability to make good investment choices.
   Importantly, these brain-level effects showing the importance of prior choices on how
people learn from new information are obtained even after we control for the probability
(subjectively estimated, or the objective Bayesian value) that the stock is paying from the
good distribution, given all the information observed about the stock prior to that trial.
That is, controlling for prior beliefs, we show that updating from new information about the
stock at the brain level is dependent on whether the choice recently made is confirmed or
not by the new dividend. In the analysis, we also control for the payoff of the participant
that trial, to make sure the effect we isolate is specifically about the new dividend matching
or not the prior choice, rather than reflecting an asymmetry in responding to realized gains
or losses, for example.


                                               25
   While analyzing the brain response to high versus low dividends provides a simple way to
see whether prior choices influence the brain response to new information, we can use a finer
analysis to shed light on this question. Specifically, we can calculate the objective Bayesian
value of the update in the probability that the stock is paying from a good distribution, in
any given trial. For example, if the prior probability that the stock is good was 50%, and
now a high dividend is observed, this probability should jump to 70% (see Table A1 in the
appendix for all possible values of this probability, and how they depend on how many high
dividends were observed so far during a learning block). In this case, the objective update in
the probability that the stock is good is an increase of 20%. If, however, the prior probability
was 70% – which would be the case, for example, if the person observed a high dividend in
the first trial in the block, and now they are in trial two – and a high dividend is seen in the
current trial, then the probability should jump to 84.48%. Therefore, in this scenario, the
objective update in the probability that the stock is the good one is an increase of 14.48%.
For the person to learn correctly about the quality of the stock, their brain valuation areas
need to do more than simply keep track of whether the dividend is high or low: namely, they
would need to keep track of how informative this dividend is, which is captured by the value
of the probability update.
   Therefore, we investigated whether prior choices change the strength with which the
brain encodes the value of the probability update that should be correctly inferred from
the new dividend information in a given trial. The results of this analysis are presented in
Figure 7. The top panel presents the results of a group analysis, where all the subjects’ data
are pooled together, and the goal is to identify where in the brain there exist a significant
difference in activation in response to objective probability updates, based on whether the
person was a stock holder or a bond holder. The areas shown in yellow are those where this
difference is statistically significant (p < 0.001). Unsurprisingly, the vmPFC and the vSTR
(left and right) show this differential response to objective probability updates, based on
the person’s recent portfolio choice, in that they have increased activation when the update


                                              26
matches their choice.
       This effect is illustrated in more detail in the bottom panel of Figure 7. For each subject,
we calculate the average response in each of the two areas identified in the group analysis
above, separately for different values of the objective update, and for situations where the
person was a stock holder that trial, or a bond holder. We calculate the mean response in
the vmPFC and the vSTR for each of these situations, as well as the standard error of this
response, across participants. We group the value of objective updates in four categories:
-20%, -15% to -0.08%, 0.8% to 15%, and 20%. The number of observations in each category
is roughly similar.3 Estimates referring to observations when participants were stock holders
are shown in red, and those referring to observations when participants were bond holders
are shown in blue.
       The patterns of activation in the vmPFC and the left and right vSTR are similar: when
people hold the stock, the activation in these valuation areas is positive when the objective
probability update regarding the quality of the stock is positive, and negative otherwise.
When instead people hold the bond, the relationship between the activation in these areas
and the objective update changes sign, such that they brain response is more negative when
the objective update about the quality of the stock is more positive. These effects are
identified controlling for the prior probability that the stock is good, and for the payoff each
subject received in each trial, to isolate the relationship between activation in valuation areas
and objective changes in expectations about asset values, without concerns for confounding
effects of priors, or realized gains or losses.
       Overall, the results in Figures 6 and 7 indicate that valuation areas in the brain exhibit a
particularly strong reaction when new information about the stock is presented that matches
the person’s prior choice, that is, when the person is shown ex-post to have made the right
investment that trial. However, to validate that these brain results indeed speak to the
   3
    Updates of +20% or -20% are frequent because they occur in trials following an equal number of high
and low dividends (e.g., one high and one low, or two high and two low dividends) when the objective
probability is 50%. Upon seeing a new dividend, this probability will become either 70% or 30%, depending
on whether the dividend is high or low, and thus the update will be either +20% or -20%.


                                                   27
learning channel we have in mind, we need to show that this bias in activation due to
prior choices actually influences how people change their expectations, and their subsequent
choices. That is, we need to show that the stronger is the activation in brain areas that keep
track of one’s ex-post success, the tighter is the connection between a person’s subjective
probability estimate and the new information, and between their next choice and the new
information about the stock.
   The analysis in Table 7 confirms this prediction. In the first column we estimate a linear
regression where the dependent variable is the probability estimate produced by a subject at
the end of a trial. We control for the person’s prior belief (i.e., that expressed at the end of
the previous trial), for condition effects, and include subject fixed effects also. As expected,
all else equal, if the person observes a high dividend in the current trial, their estimate for
the probability that the stock is good is on average 26.55% (p < 0.01) higher than if they
observe a low dividend. That is, unsurprisingly, there is a positive correlation between the
person’s expectation about the stock quality, and the size of the newly revealed dividend.
The novel result in this regression is given by the interaction term between the indicator for
whether the dividend is high, and an indicator for whether at the time when the dividend
was presented, the subject exhibited high (i.e., above the median) activation in the vmPFC
area identified in the analysis in Figure 6. The coefficient estimate on this interaction term
is positive and significant (2.28, p < 0.01). This means that subjective probability estimates
about the stock quality are more tightly related to the new dividend information revealed
in that trial (by about 10% of the baseline effect) when the person has a stronger brain
response encoding whether the new dividend matches their prior choice.
   In the second column the dependent variable is the update in people’s subjective beliefs
about the quality of the stock, from trial t − 1 to t. The independent variables of interest
are the value of the objective, Bayesian value of the update in the probability that the stock
is good given the available dividend information, and an interaction of this objective update
with the indicator for whether the subject exhibited high (i.e., above the median) activation


                                              28
in the vmPFC area. As expected if subjects pay attention to the information revealed
during the experiment, the subjective update in beliefs from trial to trial is positively and
significantly correlated with the objective update – an increase in the latter of 1% leads to
an increase in the former by 0.78%. However, the effect is larger, by 0.08% (p < 0.01), or
about a tenth of the baseline value, if the subject exhibited high (i.e., above the median)
activation in the vmPFC area when the dividend news was presented during the trial.
    In the last two columns of Table 7 we examine whether subsequent choices are more
tightly dependent on the dividend information in trial t if there is more activation in the
vmPFC area related to encoding whether one’s choice was right. We find evidence consistent
with this prediction. Namely, people’s choices in trial t + 1 are significantly more dependent,
by about a quarter of the baseline effect (p < 0.05), on the dividend learned in trial t, or on
the objective update in trial t in the probability that the stock is good, if the brain signals
more strongly that the person’s choice that trial was confirmed by the new evidence.
    In other words, the results in Table 7 indicate that new information about the stock
dividend distribution is relied upon more strongly when people update expectations about
the quality of the stock, and when they decide their next investment choice, the more sensitive
their valuation brain regions are to whether the person’s choice is ex-post shown to be right.



4     Conclusion

We document that prior investment decisions influence people’s ability to correctly form be-
liefs about the quality of financial assets, and their subsequent portfolio choices. Specifically,
controlling for prior beliefs, we find that if participants’ most recent choice is a stock, rather
than a safe bond, they will form more optimistic posterior beliefs about the dividend distri-
bution of the stock. This occurs because stock holders update their beliefs about the stock
significantly more after seeing a high dividend, compared to seeing a low one, and bond hold-
ers do the opposite, in that they update more from observing low dividends. Future asset



                                               29
choices reflect these biased beliefs, as people rely less on recently observed information when
making subsequent portfolio choices, if this information disconfirms their prior investment
decisions. As a result, portfolio choices are sticky over time.
   This behavioral asymmetry in learning and portfolio selection decisions that is induced by
participants’ prior investment choices is mirrored by an asymmetry in the response of brain
areas important for learning and valuation, at the time when new dividend information is
presented. Specifically, these areas encode more strongly information that confirms, rather
than contradicts, people’s prior choices. The extent to which the brain is sensitive to whether
the news matches an individual’s prior choice helps predict whether this new information
will be relied on, rather than ignored, when the person updates their expectations about the
quality of the stock, and makes their next portfolio choice.
   Our evidence that people’s ability to learn from news about assets depends on whether the
news confirms these individuals’ prior investment decisions provides a common explanation
for several puzzling financial behaviors, namely, the disposition effect, the repurchase effect,
and households’ low stock market participation rate. Also, by documenting that updating
from news differs based on people’s prior portfolio choices, our results provide microfounda-
tions for disagreement models where traders receive information that not only speaks to the
quality of the assets in the market, but also, to their ability to value these assets.
   An important question to be addressed in future research is under which conditions people
will be able to learn and make choices free of any bias induced by how well new information
ex-post justifies their prior decisions. These effects of prior choices may get weaker with
enough experience, assuming that the environment is stable enough that people can assess
their trading ability over time, and that this ability does not change. That being said, being
proven right may fundamentally be something that people covet, and could be ingrained in
our brains’ functioning. In this case, our prior actions will have a bearing on our future
view of the world and on our choices, financial or not, even after we accumulate significant
objective information about our options, and our skills.


                                               30
References

 Asparouhova, E., P. Bossaerts, J. Eguia, and W. Zame (2015). Asset Pricing and Asym-
    metric Reasoning. Journal of Political Economy 123 (1), 66–122.

 Banerjee, S. and I. Kremer (2010). Disagreement and Learning: Dynamic Patterns of
    Trade. Journal of Finance 65 (4), 1269–1302.

 Barberis, N. and M. Huang (2008). Handbook of the equity risk premium, Chapter The
    Loss Aversion/Narrow Framing Approach to the Equity Premium Puzzle, pp. 199–236.
    Elsevier.

 Barberis, N., M. Huang, and T. Santos (2001). Prospect theory and asset prices. The
    Quarterly Journal of Economics.

 Barberis, N., M. Huang, and R. Thaler (2006). Individual preferences, monetary gam-
    bles, and stock market participation: A case for narrow framing. American Economic
    Review , 1069–1090.

 Barberis, N. and W. Xiong (2012). Realization utility. Journal of Financial Eco-
    nomics 104 (2), 251–271.

 Bartra, O., J. T. McGuire, and J. W. Kable (2013). The valuation system: A coordinate-
    based meta-analysis of BOLD fMRI experiments examining neural correlates of sub-
    jective value. NeuroImage 76, 412–427.

 Bruguier, A. J., S. R. Quartz, and P. Bossaerts (2010, October). Exploring the nature of
    ”trader intuition”. Journal of Finance 65 (5), 1703–1723.

 Calvet, L. E., J. Y. Campbell, and P. Sodini (2007). Down or out: Assessing the welfare
    costs of household investment mistakes. Journal of Political Economy 115 (5), 707–747.

 Campbell, J. (2006). Household Finance. Journal of Finance 61 (4), 1553–1604.

 Campbell, J. Y., T. Ramadorai, and B. Ranish (2014). Getting better or feeling better?
    How equity investors respond to investment experience. NBER Working Paper 20000 .

                                          31
Carlin, B., S. Kogan, and R. Lowery (2013, October). Trading complex assets. Journal of
   Finance 68 (5), 1937–1960.

Clithero, J. A. and A. Rangel (2014). Information parcellation of the network involved in
   the computation of subjective value. SCAN 9, 1289–1302.

Cookson, J. A. and M. Niessner (2016). Why Dont We Agree? Evidence from a Social
   Network of Investors. Working paper .

d’Acremont, M., W. Schultz, and P. Bossaerts (2013). The human brain encodes event
   frequencies while forming subjective beliefs. Journal of Neuroscience 33 (26), 10887–
   10897.

Daniel, K. and D. Hirshleifer (2015). Overconfident Investors, Predictable Returns, and
   Excessive Trading. Journal of Economic Perspectives 29 (4), 61–88.

Daniel, K., D. Hirshleifer, and A. Subrahmanyam (1998). Investor Psychology and Security
   Market Under- and Overreactions. Journal of Finance 53 (6), 1839–1885.

Eil, D. and J. Rao (2011). The Good News-Bad News Effect: Asymmetric Process-
   ing of Objective Information about Yourself. American Economic Journal: Microe-
   conomics 3 (2), 114–138.

Frydman, C., N. Barberis, C. Camerer, P. Bossaerts, and A. Rangel (2014). Using Neural
   Data to Test a Theory of Investor Behavior: An Application to Realization Utility.
   Journal of Finance 69 (2), 907–946.

Frydman, C. and C. Camerer (2016). Neural Evidence of Regret and Its Implications for
   Investor Behavior. Review of Financial Studies 29 (11), 3108–3139.

Gervais, S. and T. Odean (2001). Learning to be overconfident. Review of Financial Stud-
   ies 14 (1), 1–27.

Hong, H. and J. C. Stein (2007). Disagreement and the Stock Market. Journal of Economic
   Perspectives 21 (2), 109–128.


                                           32
Kluger, B. D. and S. B. Wyatt (2004, June). Are judgment errors reflected in market prices
   and allocations? Experimental evidence based on the Monty Hall problem. Journal of
   Finance 59, 969–997.

Kogan, S. (2009). Distinguishing the Effect of Overconfidence from Rational Best-
   Response on Information Aggregation. Review of Financial Studies 22 (5), 1889–1914.

Krajbich, I., B. Oud, and E. Fehr (2014). Benefits of Neuroeconomic Modeling: New
   Policy Interventions and Predictors of Preference. American Economic Review: Papers
   & Proceedings 104 (5), 501–506.

Kuhnen, C. M. (2015). Asymmetric Learning from Financial Information. Journal of Fi-
   nance 70 (5), 2029–2062.

Kuhnen, C. M. and B. Knutson (2011). The influence of affect on beliefs, preferences, and
   financial decisions. Journal of Financial and Quantitative Analysis 46 (3), 605–626.

Mayraz, G. (2013). Wishful thinking. Working paper .

Mobius, M. M., M. Niederle, P. Niehaus, and T. S. Rosenblat (2014). Managing self-
   confidence. Working paper .

Myanatt, C. R., M. E. Doherty, and R. D. Tweney (1977). Confirmation bias in a simulated
   research environment: An experimental study of scientific inference. Quarterly Journal
   of Experimental Psychology 29, 85–95.

Odean, T. (1998, October). Are investors reluctant to realize their losses? The Journal of
   Finance 53 (5).

Payzan-LeNestour, E. and P. Bossaerts (2015). Learning About Unstable, Publicly Unob-
   servable Payoffs. Review of Financial Studies 28 (7), 1874–1913.

Sharot, T., C. W. Korn, and R. J. Dolan (2011). How unrealistic optimism is maintained
   in the face of reality. Nature Neuroscience 14 (11), 1475–1479.




                                           33
Shefrin, H. and M. Statman (1985). The disposition to sell winners too early and ride
   losers too long: Theory and evidence. Journal of Finance 40 (3), 777–90.

Strahilevitz, M. A., B. M. Barber, and T. Odean (2011). Once burned, twice shy: How
   naive learning, counterfactuals, and regret affect the repurchase of stocks previously
   sold. Journal of Marketing Research 48 (SPL), 102–120.

Ting, C.-C., C.-C. Yu, L. T. Maloney, and S.-W. Wu (2015). Neural mechanisms for inte-
   grating prior knowledge and likelihood in value-based probabilistic inference. Journal
   of Neuroscience 35 (4), 1792–1805.




                                         34
Figure 1: Timeline of trials. At the beginning of each learning block, an indication for the
gain or loss condition is displayed for 2s, followed by a brief pause of 1-3s. Then, the choice
screen for the first trial in the block is presented and the subject has 3s to make a choice.
After the subject has made a choice, a green frame is presented around the chosen asset for
0.75s, followed by an anticipation period during which a fixation cross is presented for 3.5-7s.
Next, irrespective of the subject’s choice, the stock dividend is shown for 3s. The subject
is then asked to estimate the probability that the stock is paying from the good dividend
distribution. The estimation is self-paced. Finally, the subject’s accumulated balance so far
is presented for 3s (not shown). After a brief pause of 1-3s, the next trial begins. Each
learning block consists of 6 trials and can be a gain or loss block, with high or low variance
in the dividend distribution, rendering four task conditions. The figure shows one example
of a trial in a block in the gain and low variance condition (upper panel) and one example
of a trial in a block in the loss and a high variance condition (lower panel). For each block,
the stock is randomly assigned to pay from a good or a bad dividend distribution. If the
stock is paying from the good (bad) distribution, it pays the high outcome with 70% (30%)
probability and the low outcome with 30% (70%) probability. To make investment choices
yielding the highest expected payoff at the end of each trial, it is in subjects’ best interest
to correctly update their beliefs about the stock’s dividend distribution after observing each
dividend paid by the stock.




                                              35
                                                                       Propensity to hold the stock
                                                                   given subjective probability estimates
                                                           80
                                                           70
             Propensity to hold the stock in trial t (%)
                                                           60
                                                           50
                                                           40
                                                           30
                                                           20




                                                                <30%    [30%,50%)            50%        (50%,70%]            >70%
                                                                   Subjective probability estimate at end of trial t−1 (%)



Figure 2: Portfolio choices depend on subjective beliefs. Data on whether the stock or the
bond is chosen by each participant in a given trial is pooled across all subjects and split
based on the value of the subjective estimates of the probability that the stock is good,
expressed at the end of the prior trial. We group these values in the five categories listed on
the x-axis. The frequency with which the stock is chosen for each of the values of subjective
prior beliefs is shown on the y-axis, along with standard error bars.




                                                                                        36
                                                                    0 10 20 30 40 50 60 70 80 90 100   Subjective probability estimates by prior choice and dividend type
             Subjective probability estimate in current trial (%)




                                                                                                       <30%        [30%,50%)               50%     (50%,70%]             >70%
                                                                                                                Subjective probability estimate in prior trial (%)

                                                                                                                  Stock holder & High dividend        Bond holder & High dividend

                                                                                                                  Stock holder & Low dividend         Bond holder & Low dividend




Figure 3: Subjective posteriors depend on prior choices and the new dividend. Data on the
subjective probability estimate provided by each participant in a given trial is pooled across
all subjects and split based on the value of the subjective estimates of the probability that
the stock is good, expressed at the end of the prior trial, as well as on the choice made
(stock or bond) and on the type of dividend observed (high or low) in the current trial. We
group the values of subjective beliefs in the five categories listed on the x-axis. The average
subjective estimates for the probability that the stock is good, expressed at the end of the
current trial, is shown on the y-axis for each of the values of subjective prior beliefs, along
with standard error bars.




                                                                                                                                      37
                                                       −50−40−30−20−10 0 10 20 30 40 50   Subjective probability updates by prior choice and dividend type
              Subjective update in current trial (%)




                                                                                          <30%      [30%,50%)              50%     (50%,70%]            >70%
                                                                                                  Subjective probability estimate in prior trial (%)

                                                                                                    Stock holder & High dividend        Bond holder & High dividend

                                                                                                    Stock holder & Low dividend         Bond holder & Low dividend




Figure 4: Subjective updates depend on prior choices and the new dividend. Data on the
subjective update of the probability estimate provided by each participant from one trial to
the next is pooled across all subjects and split based on the value of the subjective estimates
of the probability that the stock is good, expressed at the end of the prior trial, as well as
on the choice made (stock or bond) and on the type of dividend observed (high or low) in
the current trial. We group the values of subjective beliefs in the five categories listed on the
x-axis. The average subjective update in the probability that the stock is good, expressed at
the end of the current trial, is shown on the y-axis for each of the values of subjective prior
beliefs, along with standard error bars.




                                                                                                                        38
                                                                                                            Subsequent choice by prior choice and dividend type
             change in propensity to choose stock from t to t+1 (%)
                                                                      −50−40−30−20−10 0 10 20 30 40 50




                                                                                                         <30%    [30%,50%)                50%    (50%,70%]              >70%
                                                                                                            Subjective probability estimate at end of trial t−1 (%)

                                                                                                                 Stock holder & high dividend       Bond holder & high dividend
                                                                                                                 in trial t                         in trial t
                                                                                                                 Stock holder & low dividend        Bond holder & low dividend
                                                                                                                 in trial t                         in trial t




Figure 5: Portfolio choices are sticky. Data on whether the stock or the bond is chosen by
each participant in a given trial is pooled across all subjects and split based on the value of
the subjective estimates of the probability that the stock is good, expressed at the end of
the prior trial, as well as on the choice made (stock or bond) and on the type of dividend
observed (high or low) in the current trial. We group the values of subjective beliefs in the
five categories listed on the x-axis. The change from the prior to the current trial in the
propensity to choose the stock is shown on the y-axis for each of the values of subjective
prior beliefs, along with standard error bars. For each subjective prior category, the baseline
propensity to hold the stock is that shown in Figure 2.




                                                                                                                                     39
Figure 6: The brain activity at the time of stock outcome presentation reflects the interaction
effect of prior investments (stock or bond holder) and stock dividend (high or low dividend).
Activity in the ventromedial prefrontal cortex (vmPFC) and the left (L) and right (R) ventral
Striatum (vSTR) is greater if the newly revealed dividend matches the prior asset choice.
The individual subject regression models underlying these results control for the probability
that the stock is good before the new stock outcome was presented and the received payoff
in the current trial. More details regarding the brain imaging data analysis are available in
the Appendix.




                                              40
                                                                         vmPFC




                                       L                    R   L         vStr         R

                               vmPFC               vStr


                      x = −6                    y=2                      z = −12




Figure 7: The brain encoding of objective probability updates differs by the prior investment
choice. Activity in the ventromedial prefrontal cortex (vmPFC) and the left (L) and right
(R) ventral Striatum (vSTR) is positively correlated with the objective update regarding the
probability that the stock is paying from the good dividend distribution, given the newly
revealed stock dividend in the trial, if the person holds the stock that trial. If the person
holds the bond, activity in these areas is negatively correlated with the value of the objective
update in the probability that the stock is good. The individual subject regression models
underlying these results control for the probability that the stock is good before the new stock
outcome was presented and the received payoff in the current trial. More details regarding
the brain imaging data analysis are available in the Appendix.




                                              41
Table 1: Experimental design. Subjects made 96 decisions to invest in one of two securities:
a stock with risky payoffs coming from one of two distributions, one better than the other,
and a bond with a known payoff. After each choice subjects provided an estimate of the
probability that the stock was paying from the better distribution. Subjects were paid based
on their investment payoffs and the accuracy of the probability estimates provided. The 96
trials are split into 16 blocks of 6 trials each: for these six trials, the learning problem is
the same. That is, the computer either pays dividends from the good stock distribution in
each of these six trials, or it pays from the bad distribution in each of the six trials. The
good distribution is that where the high dividend occurs with 70% probability in each trial,
while the low dividend occurs with 30% probability. The bad distribution is that where
these probabilities are reversed: the high dividend occurs with 30% probability, and the
low dividend occurs with 70% probability in each trial. At the beginning of each learning
block, the computer randomly selects (with 50%-50% probabilities) whether the dividend
distribution to be used in the following six trials will be the good or the bad one. These
parameters are common knowledge for participants in the experiment. See Figure 1 for
examples of trials.

                                      Stock            Bond Number          Trials
             Condition               Payoffs           Payoff of blocks    per block
         Gain Low variance       + e10 or + e2         + e6       4            6
         Gain High variance      + e12 or + e0         + e6       4            6
         Loss Low variance       − e10 or − e2         − e6       4            6
         Loss High variance      − e12 or − e0         − e6       4            6




                                              42
Table 2: Investment choices depend on subjective beliefs. The dependent variable in the
probit models below, Stock holderi,b,t , is equal to 1 if in trial t of learning block b participant
i chose the stock, and not the bond. In the first column, we include as independent variables
fixed effects for the levels of subjective estimates, expressed at the end of trial t − 1, of the
probability that the stock is paying from the good dividend distribution. In columns 2 and 3
we add controls for the experimental condition faced by the subject in that learning block (i.e.
gain or loss condition, low or high variance condition), and subject fixed effects. Marginal
effects are reported. Standard errors are clustered by subject. t-statistics are reported in
parentheses. ∗ , ∗∗ and ∗∗∗ denote statistical significance at p < 0.1, p < 0.05, and p < 0.01,
respectively.

         Dependent variable                                Stock holderi,b,t
         P robabilityEstimatei,b,t−1 ∈ [30%, 50%)      0.08        0.07          0.12
                                                     (1.09)      (1.05)      (2.01)∗∗
         P robabilityEstimatei,b,t−1 = 50%             0.27        0.27          0.31
                                                         ∗∗∗         ∗∗∗
                                                  (4.26)      (4.20)       (5.75)∗∗∗
         P robabilityEstimatei,b,t−1 ∈ (50%, 70%]      0.47        0.46          0.49
                                                         ∗∗∗         ∗∗∗
                                                  (7.87)      (7.80)     (10.02)∗∗∗
         P robabilityEstimatei,b,t−1 > 70%             0.48        0.48          0.51
                                                  (9.03)∗∗∗ (8.77)∗∗∗      (9.93)∗∗∗
         Gain conditioni,b,t                                       0.07          0.08
                                                               (2.39)∗∗      (2.42)∗∗
         Low variance conditioni,b,t                               0.01          0.01
                                                                 (0.53)        (0.45)
         Subject FEs                                    No          No            Yes
           2
         R                                             0.12        0.12          0.19
         Observations                                 4395        4395          4395




                                                43
Table 3: Subjective probability estimates, and subjective updates after new dividends depend on
prior choices.     The dependent variable in the linear regressions in the top panel in the table,
P robabilityEstimatei,b,t , is the probability estimate produced by subject i at the end of trial t in learn-
ing block b. In the bottom panel of the table, the dependent variable is the update between trial t − 1 and t
in the person’s subjective estimate for the probability that the stock is paying from the good distribution (i.e.,
it is P robabilityEstimatei,b,t - P robabilityEstimatei,b,t−1 ). The independent variables of interest in both
panels are the interaction terms between the person’s choice that trial (indicator variables StockHolderi,b,t
or BondHolderi,b,t ) and the level of the stock dividend revealed at the end of the trial (indicator variables
HighDividendi,b,t or LowDividendi,b,t ). The reference (omitted) category of events refers to situations
when the person was a bond holder and the stock paid a low dividend. The regressions include subject fixed
effects and control for the experimental condition faced by each participant i in learning block b (i.e., gain
vs. loss, low vs. high variance), as well as for the subject’s probability estimate at the end of trial t − 1 in
that learning block. Standard errors are clustered by subject. t-statistics are reported in parentheses. ∗ , ∗∗
and ∗∗∗ denote statistical significance at p < 0.1, p < 0.05, and p < 0.01, respectively.

 Dependent variable                                                  P robabilityEstimatei,b,t
                                                                  — Experimental condition —
                                                  All         Gain         Loss      Low variance      High variance
 Stock holderi,b,t & High dividendi,b,t             34.39        36.64       32.68           32.30             36.39
                                               (11.10)∗∗∗   (11.96)∗∗∗ (9.94)∗∗∗       (11.52)∗∗∗         (10.37)∗∗∗
 Stock holderi,b,t & Low dividendi,b,t               4.25         4.88        4.45             3.97             4.73
                                                (2.95)∗∗∗    (2.91)∗∗∗    (2.29)∗∗      (2.87)∗∗∗          (2.82)∗∗∗
 Bond holderi,b,t & High dividendi,b,t              25.30        26.84       23.79           23.19             27.40
                                               (11.73)∗∗∗   (12.36)∗∗∗ (9.41)∗∗∗       (10.70)∗∗∗         (11.69)∗∗∗
 P robabilityEstimatei,b,t−1 ∈ [30%, 50%)           12.52        12.83        9.79           13.98             10.64
                                                (5.62)∗∗∗    (4.91)∗∗∗ (4.20)∗∗∗        (6.53)∗∗∗          (4.19)∗∗∗
 P robabilityEstimatei,b,t−1 = 50%                  19.86        19.61       17.39           21.81             17.47
                                                (7.21)∗∗∗    (6.25)∗∗∗ (6.28)∗∗∗        (7.92)∗∗∗          (5.76)∗∗∗
 P robabilityEstimatei,b,t−1 ∈ (50%, 70%]           26.88        25.57       23.99           28.81             24.12
                                                (7.85)∗∗∗    (7.27)∗∗∗ (6.66)∗∗∗        (8.61)∗∗∗          (6.27)∗∗∗
 P robabilityEstimatei,b,t−1 > 70%                  37.00        34.25       35.22           39.60             33.30
                                                (7.48)∗∗∗    (6.60)∗∗∗ (6.87)∗∗∗        (8.50)∗∗∗          (6.13)∗∗∗
 Gain conditioni,b,t                                 2.14                                      1.82             2.49
                                                 (2.14)∗∗                                   (1.55)          (2.28)∗∗
 Low variance conditioni,b,t                         0.16         0.01        0.44
                                                   (0.32)       (0.02)      (0.53)
 Subject FEs                                          Yes          Yes         Yes              Yes               Yes
 R2                                                 0.649        0.688       0.632           0.674              0.630
 Observations                                        4395         2205        2190             2199              2196

 Dependent variable                                   P robabilityEstimatei,b,t - P robabilityEstimatei,b,t−1
                                                                   — Experimental condition —
                                                  All          Gain       Loss        Low variance High variance
 Stock holderi,b,t & High dividendi,b,t             33.78         36.06     32.21             31.50            36.05
                                               (10.63)∗∗∗ (11.47)∗∗∗ (9.53)∗∗∗           (11.22)∗∗∗        (9.75)∗∗∗
 Stock holderi,b,t & Low dividendi,b,t               3.89          3.95       4.82             3.78             4.15
                                                (2.79)∗∗∗    (2.72)∗∗∗   (2.47)∗∗         (2.89)∗∗∗         (2.47)∗∗
 Bond holderi,b,t & High dividendi,b,t              24.85         26.48     23.39             23.28            26.47
                                               (11.85)∗∗∗ (12.66)∗∗∗ (9.51)∗∗∗           (10.93)∗∗∗      (11.72)∗∗∗
 FES for P robabilityEstimatei,b,t−1                  Yes           Yes        Yes              Yes              Yes
 Condition FEs                                        Yes           Yes        Yes              Yes              Yes
 Subject FEs                                          Yes           Yes        Yes              Yes              Yes
 R2                                                 0.515         0.569     0.487             0.504            0.531
 Observations                                        4395          2205      2190              2199             2196

                                                       44
Table 4: Subsequent investments depend on prior choices and new information. The depen-
dent variable in the probit models in the table, Stock holderi,b,t+1 , is an indicator equal to
1 if subject i in learning block b chose to hold the stock in trial t + 1, and 0 if they chose
to hold the bond. The independent variables of interest are interaction terms between the
person’s choice trial t (indicator variables StockHolderi,b,t or BondHolderi,b,t ) and the level
of the stock dividend revealed at the end of trial t (indicator variables HighDividendi,b,t or
LowDividendi,b,t ). The reference (omitted) category of events refers to situations when in
trial t the person was a bond holder and the stock paid a low dividend. The models include
subject fixed effects and controls for the experimental condition faced by each participant
i in learning block b (i.e., gain vs. loss, low vs. high variance), as well as for the subject’s
probability estimate at the end of trial t − 1 in that learning block. Marginal effects are
reported. Standard errors are clustered by subject. t-statistics are reported in parentheses.
∗ ∗∗
 , and ∗∗∗ denote statistical significance at p < 0.1, p < 0.05, and p < 0.01, respectively.

 Dependent variable                                                Stock holderi,b,t+1
                                                               — Experimental condition —
                                             All          Gain         Loss     Low variance     High variance
 Stock holderi,b,t & High dividendi,b,t         0.55          0.51        0.56            0.50            0.57
                                          (13.03)∗∗∗    (10.26)∗∗∗ (11.60)∗∗∗        (9.72)∗∗∗      (14.19)∗∗∗
 Stock holderi,b,t & Low dividendi,b,t          0.32          0.32        0.26            0.28            0.32
                                          (10.26)∗∗∗     (7.91)∗∗∗   (5.49)∗∗∗       (7.41)∗∗∗       (7.58)∗∗∗
 Bond holderi,b,t & High dividendi,b,t          0.34          0.35        0.31            0.32            0.35
                                           (8.22)∗∗∗     (7.95)∗∗∗   (6.36)∗∗∗       (6.32)∗∗∗       (7.34)∗∗∗
 FES for P robabilityEstimatei,b,t−1             Yes           Yes         Yes             Yes             Yes
 Condition FEs                                   Yes           Yes         Yes             Yes             Yes
 Subject FEs                                     Yes           Yes         Yes             Yes             Yes
 R2                                            0.233         0.247       0.246           0.250           0.250
 Observations                                   3647          1834        1813            1826            1821




                                                       45
Table 5: Subsequent investments depend on the random first choice in a learning block. The
dependent variable in the probit models in the table, Stock holderi,b,t , is an indicator equal
to 1 if subject i in learning block b chose to hold the stock in trial t, and 0 if they chose to
hold the bond. The independent variable of interest is the indicator Stock holder in triali,b,1 ,
which is equal to 1 if in the first trial of learning block b subject i chose the stock. At the
moment of the first choice in the block, the subject knows that the probability that the stock
is good is 50%, and the expected value of choosing the stock is equal to that of choosing the
bond. In these situations a risk neutral decision maker will randomly pick one of the assets.
The regressions also include fixed effects of the value of the objective Bayesian probability
that the stock is paying from the good distribution, based on the information revealed prior
to trial t, fixed effects for various experimental conditions (i.e., gain vs. loss, low vs. high
variance), and subject fixed effects. The specifications in the table use observations from
various sets of trials in the learning block: all trials after the first one (i.e., trials 2-6), only
trial 2, trials 3-4, and trials 5-6, respectively, to assess how long lived the effect of the random
first choice is during the rest of the learning block. Marginal effects are reported. Standard
errors are clustered by subject. t-statistics are reported in parentheses. ∗ , ∗∗ and ∗∗∗ denote
statistical significance at p < 0.1, p < 0.05, and p < 0.01, respectively.

        Dependent variable                              Stock holderi,b,t
                                           Trials 2-6 Trial 2 Trials 3-4         Trials 5-6
        Stock holder in triali,b,1               0.10     0.24        0.10             0.03
                                            (2.90)∗∗∗ (3.77)∗∗∗   (2.50)∗∗           (0.66)
        FEs for Objective probability
        that stock is goodi,b,t−1                 Yes         Yes          Yes          Yes
        Condition FEs                             Yes         Yes          Yes          Yes
        Subject Fixed Effects                     Yes         Yes          Yes          Yes
        R2                                      0.217       0.252        0.224        0.245
        Observations                             3644         714         1456         1458




                                                 46
Table 6: Subsequent investment choices rely differently on new information depending on
whether it matches prior choices. The dependent variable in the probit models in the table
is an indicator equal to 1 if person i chose the stock in trial t + 1 of learning block b, and 0
if they chose the bond. The models include experimental condition fixed effects and subject
fixed effects. We split the data based on whether in trial t the dividend presented matched
the choice made earlier in that trial by the person. We define a match as occurring if the
person chose the stock in trial t and then was informed that the stock outcome that trial was
high, or if the person chose the bond in trial t and then was informed that the stock outcome
was low. In the first two columns the independent variables of interest are the indicator for
whether the dividend revealed in trial t was high or low, and the subjective estimate of the
probability that the stock was paying from the good distribution, expressed by participant
i at the end of trial t − 1 in that learning block. In the last two columns the independent
variable of interest is the Bayesian value of the probability that the stock is good, given the
subjects’ own prior belief (expressed at the end of trial t − 1) and the dividend information
revealed in trial t. Assuming that people update their own prior p using this new information
in an objective manner, the Bayesian posterior probability that the stock is good at the end
of trial t is 7p/(4p + 3) if the new dividend is high, and 3p/(7 − 4p) if the new dividend is
low. Marginal effects are reported. Standard errors are clustered by subject. t-statistics are
reported in parentheses. ∗ , ∗∗ and ∗∗∗ denote statistical significance at p < 0.1, p < 0.05, and
p < 0.01, respectively.

   Dependent variable                                      Stock holderi,b,t+1
                                              Trial t dividend matches choice in trial t?
                                                   YES          NO        YES         NO
   High dividendi,b,t                             0.598       0.021
                                              (11.59)∗∗∗     (0.38)
   P robability estimatei,b,t−1                   0.003       0.006
                                               (3.12)∗∗∗ (4.38)∗∗∗
   Bayesian estimate using own prior                                     0.011      0.004
                                                                             ∗∗∗
   in trial t − 1 and the dividend in trial t                        (7.74)      (3.36)∗∗∗
   Condition FEs                                     Yes        Yes         Yes       Yes
   Subject Fixed Effects                             Yes        Yes         Yes       Yes
     2
   R                                              0.374       0.089      0.328      0.078
   Observations                                    1965        1682       1965       1682




                                               47
Table 7: The value of the brain signal for learning about one’s success influences the incor-
poration of new information about asset payoffs in the updating of expectations, as well as
in selecting subsequent investments. The dependent variables across the models in the table
include the subjective probability that the stock is paying from the good dividend distri-
bution, expressed by person i at the end of trial t in block b (first column), the subjective
update in this beliefs relative to the prior trial (second column), and an indicator equal to
1 if the person chose the stock in trial t + 1, and 0 if they chose the bond (third and fourth
columns). The independent variables of interest in the first and third columns include an
indicator for whether the dividend observed in trial t was high or low, and its interaction
with an indicator equal to 1 if at the time when the dividend was presented the partici-
pant had high (i.e., above median) activation in the ventromedial prefrontal (vmPFC) area
encoding whether news matches one’s prior choice. The independent variables of interest
in the second and fourth columns include the value of the objective update relative to the
prior trial in the probability that the stock is paying from the good dividend distribution,
given the newly observed dividend in trial t, and its interaction with the same indicator
for high activation in the vmPFC area sensitive to encoding whether information confirms
prior actions. The regressions also include fixed effects of the value of the subjective belief
about the stock in the prior trial, fixed effects for various experimental conditions (i.e., gain
vs. loss, low vs. high variance), and subject fixed effects. Standard errors are clustered by
subject. t-statistics are reported in parentheses. ∗ , ∗∗ and ∗∗∗ denote statistical significance
at p < 0.1, p < 0.05, and p < 0.01, respectively.

 Dependent                                         P robability    Subjective        Stock           Stock
 variable                                          Estimatei,b,t   U pdatei,b,t   holderi,b,t+1   holderi,b,t+1
 High dividendi,b,t                                        26.55                          0.27
                                                     (11.99)∗∗∗                      (6.14)∗∗∗
                                      vmP F C
 High dividendi,b,t x HighM atchSignali,b,t                 2.28                          0.08
                                                       (3.41)∗∗∗                      (2.28)∗∗
 Objective updatei,b,t                                                    0.78                           0.008
                                                                    (12.16)∗∗∗                       (6.07)∗∗∗
                                         vmP F C
 Objective updatei,b,t x HighM atchSignali,b,t                            0.08                           0.002
                                                                     (3.12)∗∗∗                        (2.35)∗∗
                 vmP F C
 HighM atchSignali,b,t                                    –0.15           0.73           –0.05          –0.007
                                                        (–0.23)         (1.38)         (–1.43)         (–0.36)
 FEs for P robability estimatei,b,t−1                       Yes            Yes             Yes             Yes
 Condition FEs                                              Yes            Yes             Yes             Yes
 Subject FEs                                                Yes            Yes             Yes             Yes
 R2                                                       0.633          0.449           0.189           0.188
 Observations                                              4416           4416            3663            3663




                                                   48
                                              Appendix
1. Calculating objective Bayesian posterior beliefs

Table A1. The table below provides all possible values for the objectively correct Bayesian posterior that
the stock is paying from the good dividend distribution, starting with a 50%-50% prior, and after observing
each possible dividend history path in a learning block. Every trial a new dividend (high or low) is revealed.
There are six trials in each learning block. The objective Bayesian posterior that the stock is the good
one, after observing t high outcomes in n trials so far is given by: 1+ 1−p ∗(1 q )n−2t , where p = 50% is the
                                                                           p   1−q
prior that the stock is good (before any dividends are observed in that learning block) and q = 70% is the
probability that a good stock pays the high dividend in each trial.

                          n trials       t high          Probability{stock is good |
                           so far    outcomes so far    t high outcomes in n trials}
                             1              0                      30.00%
                             1              1                      70.00%
                             2              0                      15.52%
                             2              1                      50.00%
                             2              2                      84.48%
                             3              0                       7.30%
                             3              1                      30.00%
                             3              2                      70.00%
                             3              3                      92.70%
                             4              0                       3.26%
                             4              1                      15.52%
                             4              2                      50.00%
                             4              3                      84.48%
                             4              4                      96.74%
                             5              0                       1.43%
                             5              1                       7.30%
                             5              2                      30.00%
                             5              3                      70.00%
                             5              4                      92.70%
                             5              5                      98.57%
                             6              0                       0.62%
                             6              1                       3.26%
                             6              2                      15.52%
                             6              3                      50.00%
                             6              4                      84.48%
                             6              5                      96.74%
                             6              6                      99.38%

2. Brain imaging data acquisition and analysis

Functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI) session and financial decision making task To
measure brain activation during financial learning we used a task that requires subjects to update their beliefs
about a stock’s dividend distribution on a trial-by-trial basis in order to make optimal choices. Instructions
for the task were presented to the subjects as a standardized slide presentation at a desktop computer. The
subjects then proceeded with a training session for the task. The design and timing of the training session
were identical to the task used during scanning, but the training was shortened to two learning blocks. Next,
the subject was placed in the MR scanner and accustomed with the choice button device (four buttons, one


                                                       49
for each thumb and index finger). The subject viewed the experimental screen over video goggles that were
adjusted to the subject’s sight (subjects with an ametropia of more than ± 5 dpt were excluded).
     In the first trial of each block, the stock could be either good or bad with the same probability (50%).
With every high (low) stock outcome, it is more (less) likely that the stock is good. After the stock payoff
was shown in each trial, the subject was asked to estimate the probability that the stock is good. Estima-
tions within 5% of the correct answer, namely the objective Bayesian value, were rewarded with 0.10 Euro
that were added to the final payoff, at the end of the experiment. The last screen of each trial showed the
subject’s updated balance, that is, the accumulated payoffs from their asset choices so far. This balance did
not reflect any additional money earned by correctly estimating the probability that the stock is paying from
the good dividend distribution. This additional amount was only revealed to the subject at the end of the
experiment, to avoid feedback effects on how people estimated probabilities during the task.

fMRI data acquisition and analysis All MRI sessions were run on a Siemens Trio 3.0 T scanner with
a standard eight-channel head coil. Scan sessions started off with a localizer scan followed by a structural
scan that included T1-weighted images (TR, 1570 ms; TE, 3.42 ms; flip angle, 15; 1 mm slices). While
subjects played the financial learning task, T2*-weighted echoplanar images (EPIs) were collected (TR, 2500
ms; TE, 30 ms; flip angle, 90; 37 3 mm slices in ascending order; field of view, 192 mm; voxel size, 3 x 3
x 3.3 mm; approx. 840 volumes). The task was implemented in Presentation (Neurobehavioral Systems;
www.neurobs.com).
    Preprocessing of the functional images was implemented in the MATLAB (MathWorks) based software
Statistical Parametric Mapping 8 (SPM8, version r5236). It included realignment, normalization on MNI
standard (Evans et al. (1993)) using SPM8’s optimized segmentation of the T1 image and the mean realigned
EPI into gray and white matter, cerebrospinal fluid, bone matter, soft tissue and air tissue classifications
and the application of these deformations on the remaining EPI images, as well as spatial smoothing with
an 8 mm full width half maximum Gauss kernel.
    The statistical fMRI analysis was also implemented in SPM8 (version r5236). For the first-level analysis
we used a general linear model (GLM) which was estimated with SPM8’s canonical hemodynamic response
function and included a high-pass filter of 128 Hz as well as correction for autocorrelations. SPM8’s internal
masking threshold for the estimation of beta parameters was set to 0.4.

Details regarding Figure 6
     The main goal of the fMRI analysis was to identify brain regions that are sensitive to prior investment
choices during the processing of new stock information. In the analysis in Figure 6 we investigate whether
the size of the new stock dividend (high vs. low) revealed at the end of a trial is encoded differently
depending on the person’s choice earlier in the trial. For this we computed a general linear model that
included the following events for every trial of the financial decision making task: onset of the choice screen,
onset of the stock outcome presentation, onset of the estimation screen, and onset of the accumulated payoff
presentation. Each event was modeled by four onset regressors as stick functions. The onset of the choice
screen was modeled by regressors for the four conditions: (1) gain & low variance, (2) gain & high variance,
(3) loss & low variance, (4) loss & high variance. The onset of the stock outcome presentation was modeled
by indicator variables for the subject’s prior investment choice and the presented stock outcome, creating
four onset regressors: (1) stock choice & high dividend, (2) bond choice & high dividend, (3) stock choice
& low dividend, (4) bond choice & low dividend. Because we were primarily interested in the effect of
prior investment decisions on the BOLD signal when new stock information was presented, these four onset
regressors were defined as regressors of interest. The onsets of the estimation screen and the accumulated
payoff presentation were modeled by the same indicator variables. As control variables we included the
objective Bayesian probability that the stock is good given the information available as of the end of the
prior trial, as well as the subjects’ received payoff during the trial. Six motion parameters were added to the
GLM as nuisance regressors.
     For each subject, we computed contrast images for the four regressors of interest and tested them in a
two-by-two ANOVA at the group level with a within-subject factor for prior investment (stock and bond)
and a within-subject factor for stock outcome (high and low dividend). The ANOVA was designed as a
full factorial model with dependent measurements. We tested the positive interaction of the two factors
and applied whole-brain correction for multiple comparisons based on familywise error (FWE) control. We


                                                      50
expected activation in brain areas associated with outcome and reward encoding, such as the vmPFC and
the ventral striatum (e.g. Bartra (2013)). The left panel of Figure 6 shows that the brain activity at the
time of stock outcome presentation reflects the interaction effect of prior investments (stock or bond holder)
and stock dividend (high or low dividend). Activity in the ventromedial prefrontal cortex (vmPFC) and the
bilateral ventral striatum (vStr) is greater when the new dividend information matches the person choice
that trial, namely, when stock holders see a high dividend, and bond holders see a low dividend. The figures
on the left show statistical group activation maps of the two-by-two ANOVA. For illustration purposes, maps
are thresholded at t > 3.14, cluster size kE > 10, projected on a template brain in MNI space, and color
coded for the t-values as indicated by the color bar on the left.
     In the right panel of Figure 6 we illustrate these results using subject-level estimates of brain activation
in the regions of interest, vmPFC and vSTR, as a function of the choice made and the newly revealed divi-
dend. For each subject we extracted the activation, or BOLD, response to each of the four events of interest,
captured by the interaction terms between indicators of stock or bond choice, and indicators of whether
the stock paid a high or low dividend that trial. We measured this activation response using anatomically
defined region of interest masks for the vmPFC and the vSTR using the MarsBaR toolbox and the the AAL
atlas (Brett et al. (2002), Tzourio-Mazoyer et al. (2002)). We then plotted the mean (M) and standard error
(SE) of these parameters across all subjects against the four regressors of interest in the right panel in Figure
6. The individual subject regression models underlying these results control for the objective probability
that the stock is good before the new stock outcome was presented and for the received payoff in the current
trial.

Details regarding Figure 7
     The goal of the analysis in Figure 7 is to investigate whether the objective update in the probability that
the stock is good is encoded differently depending on the person’s choice earlier in the trial. This probability
update is a direct measure of the ”prediction error” realized at the presentation of a new stock outcome, in
that it captures how much better or how much worse the stock is relative to what its assessed value was in
the prior trial, in light of the new dividend observed in the current trial.
     The top panel in 7 shows that activity in the vmPFC and the bilateral vStr at the presentation of a new
stock outcome correlates positively with the objective probability update when the subjects hold the stock,
but not when they hold the bond. The panel shows statistical group activation maps of the paired t-test of
the parametric modulation of the BOLD response by the objective probability update at the stock outcome
presentation for trials in which the subject held the stock contrasted with trials in which the subject held
the bond. For illustration purposes, maps are thresholded at t > 3.28, cluster size kE > 20 voxels, projected
on a template brain in MNI space and color coded for the t-values as indicated by the color bar on the left.
     In the bottom panel of Figure 7 we illustrate these results using subject-level estimates of brain activation
in the regions of interest, vmPFC and vSTR, as a function of the choice made at the beginning of a trial
and the value of the objective probability update that occurred at the end of the trial. Specifically, the
figure shows that activity in the vmPFC and bilateral vStr at the time when the stock outcome is presented
increases with the update in the objective probability that the stock is good when subjects hold the stock,
but decreases with this update about the quality of the stock when subjects hold the bond. The figure
presents the mean and standard error of activation, or BOLD response, across all subjects, in the vmPFC
and vSTR areas, separately for situations when the hold the stock, and hold the bond, respectively, and
across four categories of the objective probability update: -0.2, [-0.15,-0.008], [0.008, 0.15], and 0.2. These
categories, or update bins, encompass all the possible changes in the probability that the stock is good,
upon observing one additional dividend, and each contains roughly a quarter of all trials. The levels of this
probability are shown in Table A1 in the Appendix.
     For each subject, BOLD response values corresponding to each choice (stock versus bond) and each
probability update bin were extracted from a 5 mm sphere around the single-subject voxel with the peak
value for the correlation shown in the top panel, within an anatomical mask for the respective region of in-
terest, derived from the AAL atlas (Tzourio-Mazoyer et al. (2002)). This was done to correct for variations
in single-subject peaks. Note that this is an illustration of the whole-brain analysis shown in the top panel
in Figure 7 and is not subjected to inference statistics. Whereas the whole-brain analysis in the top panel in
Figure 7 tests how well the BOLD response fits with the linear function of the objective probability update
(i.e. the slope), these graphs visualize the estimated magnitude of the BOLD response separately for bins of


                                                       51
increasing value of the objective probability update. This illustration of the whole-brain analysis was done
with the rfxplot toolbox (Glscher, 2009). The individual subject regression models underlying these results
control for the objective probability that the stock is good before the new stock outcome was presented and
for the received payoff in the current trial.

Details regarding Table 7
     The second goal of the fMRI analysis was to investigate at the subject-trial level the effect of the dif-
ferential encoding in these areas of new dividends depending on prior investments on probability updating
and future choices. To analyze the fMRI time courses, we first defined volumes of interest (VOIs) in the
vmPFC and the bilateral vSTR based on 8 mm spheres around the voxel with peak correlation value for the
match-mismatch contrast. For each subject and each VOI, we extracted the first BOLD eigenvariate from
the preprocessed image files. As part of the extraction each BOLD eigenvariate was whitened, high-pass
filtered, and corrected for confounds like scanner drifts. From the BOLD eigenvariates we selected, trial by
trial, the values that corresponded to the expected peak BOLD response for the onset of the stock outcome
presentation, and used those values in the analysis in Table 7.

References
Bartra, O., McGuire, J. T. & Kable, J. W. (2013). The valuation system: A coordinate-based meta-analysis
of BOLD fMRI experiments examining neural correlates of subjective value. NeuroImage, 76 (0), 412427.

Brett, M., Anton, J.-L., Valabregue, R., & Poline, J.-B. (2002). Region of interest analysis using an SPM
toolbox. Presented at the 8th International Conference on Functional Mapping of the Human Brain in
Sendai, Japan. Available on CD-ROM in NeuroImage, 16(2).

Evans AC, Collins DL, Mills SR, Brown ED, Kelly RL, Peters TM (1993). 3D statistical neuroanatomical
models from 305 MRI volumes. In: IEEE Conference Record Nuclear Science Symposium and Medical
Imaging Conference, pp 18131817. IEEE.

Glscher, J. (2009). Visualization of group inference data in functional neuroimaging. Neuroinformatics, 7(1),
7382. http://doi.org/10.1007/s12021-008-9042-x
Tzourio-Mazoyer, N. et al. (2002). Automated anatomical labeling of activations in SPM using a macroscopic
anatomical parcellation of the MNI MRI single-subject brain. Neuroimage 15, 273289




                                                     52
