                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




         INNOVATIVE ORIGINALITY, PROFITABILITY, AND STOCK RETURNS

                                       David Hirshleifer
                                        Po-Hsuan Hsu
                                         Dongmei Li

                                      Working Paper 23432
                              http://www.nber.org/papers/w23432


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     May 2017


We thank Robin Greenwood and Andrew Karolyi (the editors), and two anonymous referees for
very helpful suggestions. We also thank Vikas Agarwal, Bronson Argyle (WFA discussant),
Nicholas Barberis, Geert Bekaert, Hui Chen, James Choi, Lauren Cohen, Zhi Da, Karl Diether
(WFA discussant), Ming Dong, Bernard Dumas, Phil Dybvig, Thierry Foucault, Paolo
Fulghieri, Pengjie Gao, Zhenyu Gao, Thomas George, William Goetzmann, Amit Goyal,
Allaudeen Hameed, Valentin Haddad, Gerard Hoberg, Harrison Hong, Kewei Hou, Danling
Jiang, Marcin Kacperczyk, Matti Keloharju, Praveen Kumar, Michael Lemmon, Jonathan
Lewellen, Jay Li, Kai Li, Xu Li, Sonya Lim, Dong Lou, Gustavo Manso, Stefan Nagel, Terrance
Odean, Dimitris Papanikolaou, Gordon Phillips, Joshua Pollet, Richard Sias, Mark Schankerman,
˛Tao Shu, Ken Singleton, Noah Stoffman, Rene Stulz, Avanidhar Subrahmanyam, Siew
 Hong Teoh, Sheridan Titman, Neng Wang, Xin Wang, Kelsey Wei, Kuo-chiang Wei, Wei
 Xiong, and seminar and conference participants at WFA (Seattle), Chinese University of Hong
 Kong, CityU Finance Conference, HKUST, National University of Singapore, Singapore
 Management University, Southwestern University of Finance and Economics, University of
 Arizona, University of Houston, and University of Miami for very helpful discussions, and the
 Don Beall Center for Innovation & Entrepreneurship and Batten Institute for Entrepreneurship
 and Innovation for financial support. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do
 not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2017 by David Hirshleifer, Po-Hsuan Hsu, and Dongmei Li. All rights reserved. Short sections
of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that
full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Innovative Originality, Profitability, and Stock Returns
David Hirshleifer, Po-Hsuan Hsu, and Dongmei Li
NBER Working Paper No. 23432
May 2017
JEL No. G12,G14,G3

                                          ABSTRACT

We propose that innovative originality (InnOrig) is a valuable organizational resource, and that
owing to limited investor attention and skepticism of complexity, firms with greater InnOrig are
undervalued. We find that firms’ InnOrig strongly predicts higher, more persistent, and less
volatile profitability; and higher abnormal stock returns—findings that are robust to extensive
controls. The return predictive power of InnOrig is stronger for firms with higher valuation
uncertainty, lower investor attention, and greater sensitivity of future profitability to InnOrig.
This evidence suggests that innovative originality acts as a ‘competitive moat,’ and that the
market undervalues InnOrig.

David Hirshleifer                                Dongmei Li
The Paul Merage School of Business               University of South Carolina
University of California, Irvine                 Darla Moore School of Business
4291 Pereira Drive                               1014 Greene St
Irvine, CA 92697                                 Columbia, SC 29208
and NBER                                         dongmei.li@moore.sc.edu
david.h@uci.edu

Po-Hsuan Hsu
University of Hong Kong
Faculty of Business and Economics
Room 923, K.K. Leung Building
Pokfulam Road
Hong Kong
paulhsu@hku.hk
    To finance innovative activities effectively, investors need to value them. This is hard to do,

as it requires going beyond routine application of standardized procedures and metrics. Valuing

innovation requires understanding how the economic fundamentals of a firm or its industry are

changing, and forecasting how a firm will navigate the long road from concept to implementation

to actual profits. These considerations suggest that the market may be inefficient in valuing

innovation, and that we can gain insight into the nature of such misvaluation by considering the

informational demands placed upon investors, and the constraints on investors’ cognitive

processing power. 1

    Extensive psychological evidence shows that individuals pay less attention to, and place less

weight upon, complex and hard-to-process information. A type of information that is especially

hard to evaluate is the originality of an innovation, which involves many dimensions of uncertainty

that typically require extensive knowledge and expertise to evaluate. We therefore suggest that

investors tend to neglect/underweight the information contained in proxies for innovative

originality (InnOrig).

    Neglect could take the form of not even being aware of the firm’s innovative originality, or of

being aware of but not processing this information to make good use of it due to signal jamming.

Hence stock prices would underweight InnOrig, which may contain favorable information about

future profitability; and InnOrig is a positive predictor of future abnormal stock returns. To

formalize this intuition and to motivate empirical analyses, we test the implications of a model of

limited attention (see the Internet Appendix, Section D) about the direction and strength of the

return predictive power of InnOrig. In the model, InnOrig predicts high subsequent abnormal



1
  Some studies suggest that investors may overdiscount the cash flow prospects of R&D-intensive firms owing to high
technical uncertainty associated with innovations, leading to underpricing (see, e.g., Hall 1993; Lev and Sougiannis
1996; Aboody and Lev 1998; Chan, Lakonishok, and Sougiannis 2001; Lev, Sarath, and Sougiannis 2005).

                                                         1
returns if it is positively associated with a firm’s future profitability and a fraction of investors

neglects InnOrig. 2

    Furthermore, the model predicts that this return predictive power is strengthened by valuation

uncertainty, the fraction of inattentive investors, and the sensitivity of future profitability to

InnOrig. Intuitively, the smaller the fraction of attentive investors, the less influence they have on

the current price and hence the larger mispricing owing to neglect of InnOrig. In addition, when

prior uncertainty about the stock value (without any conditioning on InnOrig) is higher, heavier

weight should optimally be placed on InnOrig by investors in forming posterior beliefs about

value. So neglect of InnOrig causes greater mispricing. Similarly, the more sensitive a firm’s future

profitability is to InnOrig, the greater the mispricing induced by neglect of the signal.

    Empirically, motivated by a popular view of innovation as recombinant search, we measure

InnOrig by the breadth of knowledge used to innovate. Under this view, innovation comes from

combining technological components in novel manners or reconfiguring existing combinations. 3

The discovery of the double helix structure of DNA by Francis Crick and James Watson illustrates

the recombinant view. It was Crick’s knowledge of X-ray crystallography that helped Watson

understand the famous X-ray diffraction image of DNA (known as “Photo 51” discovered by

Rosalind Franklin), which is crucial to their successful modeling of the double helix structure of

DNA.4 Since patents are widely used to measure innovation, we proxy a firm’s InnOrig by the

average range of knowledge built upon by its recently granted patents. Intuitively, a patent that

draws knowledge from a wide range of technology is more original because it tends to deviate


2
  As discussed in Section III, models of ambiguity aversion provide a reinforcing argument for a positive InnOrig-
return relation.
3
  See, e.g., Schumpeter (1934), Basalla (1988), Henderson and Clark (1990), Weitzman (1998), Ahuja and Katila
(2001), and Singh and Fleming (2010).
4
  https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Francis_Crick#Crick1990, https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Photo_51, and
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=d7ET4bbkTm0 (36:03 to 36:47).

                                                        2
from current technology trajectories to a greater extent (e.g., Balsmeier, Fleming, and Manso

2017). InnOrig may also reflect the capability of a firm’s managers and scientists to combine

different technologies in an original way to create a sustainable competitive advantage.

    To capture the range of knowledge built upon, we use the number of unique technological

classes of patents cited by a firm’s patents. If a firm’s patents cite previous patents belonging to a

wide set of technologies, its originality score will be high. Motivated by the view of innovation as

recombinant search, the innovation/corporate finance literature has measured the originality of a

patent by one minus the Herfindahl index of patents cited by the focal patent across different

technological classes. 5 However, to better capture the cross-sectional variation in knowledge

breadth that motivates this measure, we focus on the average number of unique technological

classes of patents cited by a firm’s recently granted patents (more details are provided in Section I).

    In particular, the range of knowledge captured by the number of unique technological classes

may matter more in driving InnOrig than the distribution of patents cited among different classes

captured by the Herfindahl index. When a patent cites only one patent from a certain class,

knowledge from that class can still play a crucial role in making this focal patent original. Consider

the case of Affymetrix, a pioneer of the development of DNA microarray techniques (see the

Appendix). Knowledge about semiconductors, electricity, and optics is crucial for its innovative

methods. However, the number of patents cited in these classes by Affymetrix’s major patents is

quite small.6 The importance of these few patents cited is better captured by the number of unique

technological classes than by one minus the Herfindahl index.



5
  See, e.g., Trajtenberg, Henderson, and Jaffe (1997), Hall, Jaffe, and Trajtenberg (2001), Lerner, Sorensen, and
Strömberg (2011), and Custodio, Ferreira, and Matos (2013).
6
  For example, Patent 6,965,020, which protects Affymetrix’s major product line, GeneChip®, only cites one patent
from each of the ‘semiconductor’ (Class 250) and ‘optics’ (Class 356) classes. It cites 30 patents from 19 unique
classes (both primary and secondary) in total.

                                                       3
    A literature in strategy argues that firms with more technologically diversified patents perform

better in internal integration and cross-fertilization of knowledge and expertise. The organizational

capability to create more novel technologies based on combinative and collaborative activities is

a competitive advantage (sometimes called a competitive moat) that other firms have difficulty in

replicating or matching, and helps firms deal with rapid technological change. In addition, when a

firm is more experienced in integrating various knowledge sources, it is better at identifying and

exploiting future innovation opportunities. 7

    Therefore, high InnOrig firms may generally outperform their competitors persistently due to

the market power provided by original innovations. Consistent with this intuition, we find that

high InnOrig firms have substantially and significantly higher future profitability up to five years

(see the Internet Appendix, Section E). Furthermore, these firms have more persistent and stable

future profitability. We also find that the influence of InnOrig on these aspects of future

profitability is much stronger than that of innovative efficiency (Hirshleifer, Hsu, and Li 2013)

and works (at least in part) through its effect on gross margin.

    Greenwald et al. (2004) argue that value investors seldom place much weight on a firm’s

growth prospects in forming valuations as such prospects are only reliable within a protected

franchise that offers sustainable competitive advantage. They argue that such advantage comes in

only a few forms (patents being one of the few), and that, perhaps for competitive reasons, firms

tend to remain quiet about their ‘moats.’ This makes it hard for investors to differentiate companies

that have genuine franchises from those that do not. This argument suggests that investors with




7
 See, e.g., Levin et al. (1987), Henderson and Cockburn (1994), Gupta and Govindarajan (2000), Martin and Salomon
(2003), Subramaniam and Youndt (2005), Singh (2008), Makri, Hitt, and Lane (2010), Gomez-Mejia et al. (2011),
and Berry (2014).

                                                       4
limited attention—even value investors who are performing fundamental analysis—may tend to

undervalue competitive moats.

    To test the prediction on the return predictive power of InnOrig, we perform portfolio sorts

and Fama-MacBeth (1973) cross-sectional regressions. The results are supportive. For portfolio

analysis, the average portfolio returns increase monotonically with InnOrig, and the return spread

between the high and low InnOrig portfolios is economically substantial. The pattern is robust to

industry- and characteristic-adjustment (by size, book-to-market, and momentum) and recently

developed risk benchmarks and mispricing factor models. 8 Furthermore, the InnOrig effect

remains substantial and significant even after controlling for the patents- or citations-based

innovative Efficient-Minus-Inefficient (EMI) factor that reflects commonality in mispricing

associated with innovative efficiency (IE).

    The theory predicts that InnOrig-induced mispricing should be more severe among harder-to-

value firms. Consistent with this, independent double sorts show that the monthly value-weighted

alphas for the high-minus-low InnOrig portfolio among firms with high valuation uncertainty (VU)

index range from 0.82% (t = 2.38) to 1.08% (t = 3.10), depending on the factor model. The monthly

industry- and characteristic-adjusted returns for this spread portfolio are also very large: 0.99% (t

= 3.66) and 1.17% (t = 3.84), respectively. Furthermore, these results are mainly driven by the

undervaluation of high InnOrig firms. In contrast, these returns are tiny and insignificant for low

VU firms. Since R&D is a crucial input for generating innovation and to the extent that firms that

invest heavily in R&D are also harder to value due to the uncertain nature of R&D investment, we



8
 These models include the q-factor model (Hou, Xue, and Zhang 2015), the mispricing factor model (Stambaugh and
Yuan 2017), the Fama and French three-factor model augmented with the momentum (UMD) factor as in Carhart
(1997) (henceforth, the Carhart model), and the Carhart model augmented with one of the following factors: the
Investment-Minus-Consumption (IMC) factor (Papanikolaou 2011), the liquidity (LIQ) factor (Pastor and Stambaugh
2003), the Undervalued-Minus-Overvalued (UMO) factor (Hirshleifer and Jiang 2010), the Robust-Minus-Weak
(RMW) factor and the Conservative-Minus-Aggressive (CMA) factor (Fama and French 2015).

                                                      5
expect the InnOrig effect to be stronger among high R&D firms. This is confirmed in the data. We

also confirm that this InnOrig effect is stronger among firms with less investor attention (ATT) or

higher sensitivity (Sen) of future profitability to InnOrig, as implied by the theory.

    High InnOrig firms on average are larger. Other things equal, we expect large firms to receive

greater investor attention, which tends to reduce misvaluation. However, large firms are also

generally more complex, making them harder to value (e.g., Cohen and Lou 2012). It is not clear

whether this additional attention outweighs complexity to make the valuation of the innovative

originality of large firms more accurate. In fact, the return predictive power of InnOrig exists in

both small and big firms and does not have a significant interaction with size.

    To assess the robustness of the return predictive power of InnOrig, we perform Fama-MacBeth

regressions that control for industry effects and different sets of well-known return predictors,

including sales diversity and innovation-related variables such as IE, patents, and R&D. The

InnOrig effect remains statistically significant, irrespective of the control variables used. Similar

to the double sorts, we also perform Fama-MacBeth regressions in subsamples split by VU, ATT,

and Sen. The same sharp contrast in the InnOrig effect exists across these subsamples.

    Although the evidence is consistent with the limited attention theory, we do not completely

rule out potential risk-based explanations (see further discussion in Section III.E). Previous

research on valuation of innovation focuses on innovative input, output, and efficiency. 9 However,

this literature does not examine the role of innovative originality. Our paper is also closely related

to the literature on how limited attention and processing power affect security prices. 10


9
   See, e.g., Griliches (1990), Lerner (1994), Lev and Sougiannis (1996), Deng, Lev, and Narin (1999), Chan,
Lakonishok, and Sougiannis (2001), Eberhart, Maxwell, and Siddique (2004), Lanjouw and Schankerman (2004), Gu
(2005), Lev, Sarath, and Sougiannis (2005), Hsu (2009), Li (2011), Cohen, Diether, and Malloy (2013), and
Hirshleifer, Hsu, and Li (2013).
10
   Theoretical models imply that owing to limited attention, market prices will place insufficient weight on signals
with low salience or that are hard to process (e.g., Hirshleifer and Teoh 2003; Peng and Xiong 2006; Hirshleifer, Lim,
and Teoh 2011). Empirical studies provide supporting evidence (e.g., Klibanoff, Lamont, and Wizman 1998;

                                                          6
        I. The data, the innovative originality measure, and summary statistics

A. The data and the innovative originality measure

    Our sample consists of firms in the intersection of Compustat, CRSP (Center for Research in

Security Prices), and the NBER patent database. We obtain accounting data from Compustat and

stock returns data from CRSP. All domestic common shares trading on NYSE, AMEX, and

NASDAQ with accounting and returns data available are included except financial firms, which

have four-digit standard industrial classification (SIC) codes between 6000 and 6999 (finance,

insurance, and real estate sectors), and utility firms (SIC codes beginning with 49). Following

Fama and French (1993), we exclude closed-end funds, trusts, American Depository Receipts,

Real Estate Investment Trusts, units of beneficial interest, and firms with negative book value of

equity. To mitigate backfilling bias, we require firms to be listed on Compustat for two years

before including them in our sample. For some of our tests, we also obtain analyst earnings forecast

data from the Institutional Brokers Estimate System (IBES), and institutional ownership data from

the Thomson Reuters Institutional Holdings (13F) database.

    Patent-related data are mainly from the updated NBER patent database originally developed

by Hall, Jaffe, and Trajtenberg (2001). The database contains detailed information on all U.S.

patents granted by the U.S. Patent and Trademark Office (USPTO) between January 1976 and

December 2006: patent application and grant dates, primary three-digit technology classes, all

citations received by each granted patent, assignee’s Compustat-matched identifier, and other

details. Only patents granted by the USPTO by the end of 2006 are included in the database. In



Huberman and Regev 2001; Barber and Odean 2008; Cohen and Frazzini 2008; DellaVigna and Pollet 2009;
Hirshleifer, Lim, and Teoh 2009; Hou, Peng, and Xiong 2009; Da, Engelberg, and Gao 2011; Da and Warachka 2011;
Cohen and Lou 2012; Li and Yu 2012; Da, Gurun, and Warachka 2014).

                                                      7
addition, we collect the information on each patent’s secondary three-digit technology classes from

the Harvard Business School U.S. patent inventor database (Li et al. 2014). As a result, our

combined dataset contains each patent’s primary and secondary technology classes that are

important for our analysis.

     As mentioned earlier, we proxy a firm’s InnOrig by the range of knowledge its innovations

draw upon, specifically, the average number of unique technological classes of patents cited by its

recently granted patents. Until November 2000, the USPTO did not disclose a patent application

until it was approved. The gap between application and approval is on average two years. Failed

patent applications were also not disclosed. Subsequent to the American Inventors Protection Act,

which became effective on November 30, 2000, the USPTO began publishing patent applications

18 months after the filing date, even if the patents had not yet been granted. In contrast, the patent

granting decision is published every Tuesday by the USPTO and is immediately available to the

public. Therefore, we use recently granted patents instead of filed patent applications to measure

a firm’s InnOrig to ensure that investors can observe this originality measure at the time of

portfolio formation and avoid look-ahead bias in our sample (1976-2006).

     Specifically, we first compute a patent’s originality score as the number of unique

technological classes (both primary and secondary classes) assigned to the patents cited by the

focal patent. We then proxy a firm’s InnOrig in each year with the average originality score of all

patents granted to the firm over the previous five years. A case example of innovative originality

of Incyte in 1996 is provided in Section B of the Internet Appendix. 11 Averaging across patents

helps reduce the influence of extreme values and the correlation between the InnOrig measure and



11
   Incyte received 12 granted patents in the five-year period 1992-1996. The number of unique technology classes (N)
of patents cited by these patents ranges from 1 to 6. By averaging N across these 12 patents, we obtain Incyte’s InnOrig
in 1996, 3.67.

                                                           8
firm size. Furthermore, we choose a five-year rolling window since not all firms have patents

granted every year. 12 As a result, the firm-level InnOrig measure is available from 1980 to 2006.

We begin our sample from 1981 as we need to control for the innovative efficiency measures,

which are not available until 1981.

     Compared to the Herfindahl index-based innovative originality measure proposed in Hall,

Jaffe, and Trajtenberg (2001), our measure reflects the breadth of knowledge built upon by a firm’s

innovation more directly. The Herfindahl index (also known as the Herfindahl–Hirschman index,

or HHI) mainly reflects the distribution of patents cited among different classes conditioning on

the number of technological classes cited. This difference can be illustrated by a stylized example.

Assume Patent 1 cites one patent from each of ten different technology classes, while Patent 2

cites one patent from each of five different classes. Since both patents cite an equal number of

patents from different classes, they have very similar HHI-based innovative originality measures

as proposed in Hall et al. (2001): 0.9 for Patent 1, and 0.8 for Patent 2. However, the range of

knowledge drawn upon by Patent 1 doubles that of Patent 2: 10 versus 5. 13

     Our InnOrig measure is significantly positively correlated with the average number of future

citations a firm’s patents receive, a measure of innovation novelty in Seru (2014). 14 The product

uniqueness measure of Hoberg and Phillips (2012) suggests a different possible approach to

measuring innovative originality. However, their measure reflects the difficulty of replicating a

firm’s current product lines, which are relatively easier to value, while our InnOrig measure is

based on patents, which is related to innovation that affects future product lines. As a forward-


12
   The choice of a five-year window for patent-based proxies is common in the literature (e.g., Deng, Lev, and Narin
1999; Rothaermel and Deeds 2004; Matolcsy and Wyatt 2008; Pandit, Wasley and Zach 2011).
13
   Section C of the Internet Appendix discusses the results using a modified HHI-based innovative originality measure.
14
   The Pearson correlation between the two measures is 0.22. The novelty measure of Seru (2014) utilizes ex-post
information, as it is based upon subsequent citations received by a firm’s patents. In contrast, our InnOrig measure is
based on ex-ante information, which is appropriate for tests of return predictability. Seru (2014) does not study whether
innovation novelty predicts stock returns.

                                                           9
looking measure, InnOrig therefore captures the ongoing innovation that is susceptible to cognitive

biases leading to misvaluation. This difference could explain why their product uniqueness

measure does not predict abnormal returns, while our InnOrig measure does.

       Since InnOrig relies on the list of patents cited by the focal patent, its validity depends upon

the extent the citation list is complete and relevant. We argue that the tendency of under- or over-

citing is negligible based on the following reasons. First, patent applicants have a “duty of candor

and good faith” to disclose all prior arts (especially previous publications and patents) that are

material to patentability of their applications. 15 As an application may be rejected by the USPTO

if the duty of disclosure was violated, applicants have the incentive to cite all relevant patents in

the filings (Caballero and Jaffe 1993; Roach and Cohen 2013). Even if a patent is granted, its

validity could still be challenged if its citation list misses prior arts (Allison and Lemley 1998;

Sampat 2010).

       Second, patent applications are reviewed by patent examiners based on their novelty and non-

obviousness, the two major requirements for patentability. Patent examiners conduct their own

search for prior arts to reject applications that do not satisfy novelty and non-obviousness and

require patent applicants to add any missing relevant citations. In fact, a substantial amount of

patents cited by granted patents are added upon request of patent examiners: 62% in the sample of

Sampat (2010) and 41% in the sample of Thompson (2006).

       Third, over-citing prior arts is also inappropriate because the applicants have to describe how

their applications are different from the cited prior arts to justify the “novelty” of their inventions.

More importantly, such over-citing behavior does not exist in the data because 57% of self-




15
     See http://www.uspto.gov/web/offices/pac/mpep/s2001.html.

                                                        10
citations of published patents, which are most likely to be over-cited by applicants, are in fact

inserted by patent examiners (Sampat 2010).

   Fourth, even if there exists idiosyncratic errors in citations, they should not systematically bias

our analyses since we average the originality score of all patents granted to a firm over the last five

years.

   Another concern of using patent data to measure InnOrig is about how to deal with firms

without patents granted over the last five years. Although certain firms may intentionally choose

not to use patents to protect their invention, it is hard to separate them empirically from firms with

no invention to apply for patents and firms with unsuccessful patent applications, both of which

should be categorized as low InnOrig firms since only successful patent applications are recorded

in the NBER patent database. However, the historical success rate for patent applications is around

50%-60% (see Kortum and Lerner 1998), suggesting that we cannot assume firms with no patents

granted simply do not use patents to protect their intellectual property. Therefore, we include firms

with positive R&D expenses but no patents granted over the last five years in our sample and

assume these firms have the lowest InnOrig. (Excluding these firms generate stronger results in

portfolio sorts as discussed later.) We also include firms with no R&D expenses over the last five

years as a comparison group.



B. Summary statistics

   Table 1 reports the pooled summary statistics of the InnOrig measure for firms (with non-zero

patents granted over the last five years) in selected innovation-driven industries based on the Fama

and French (1997) 48 industry classifications. There is large cross-sectional variation in InnOrig

within these industries. The 30th percentile is around 4, the 70th percentile is around 8, and the 95th



                                                  11
percentile ranges from 10 to 18 across these industries. However, the time-series average of the

cross-section of InnOrig across all firms with nonmissing InnOrig is more even (untabulated). The

30th, 70th, and 95th percentiles are 4, 6, and 11, respectively.

     Although there is significant within-industry variation in InnOrig, the cross-industry variation

in InnOrig is quite small. Specifically, the within-industry coefficient of variation (CV) for InnOrig

ranges from 0.48 for automobiles and trucks to 0.69 for business services, while the cross-industry

CV is only 0.13 (0.10) based on mean (median) InnOrig. Therefore, to make sure our results are

not driven by any particular industry, we control for industry effects by adjusting stock returns

directly instead of the InnOrig measure as detailed later.

     In Table 2 (Panel A), we report average InnOrig and other characteristics (both raw value and

percentile ranks) that are known to predict stock returns for the InnOrig portfolios formed (at the

end of June of year t) based on the 30th and 70th percentiles of InnOrig in year t – 1. We also assign

firms with positive R&D expenses but no patents granted over the last five years to the low InnOrig

portfolio. 16 Intuitively, firms with positive R&D expenses have low innovative originality if they

do not have any patents granted as explained earlier. Firms with no R&D expenses over the last

five years are assigned to the “No” group.

     On average, there are 4671 firms in the sample, 2462 of which are in the “No” group. The three

InnOrig portfolios (Low, Middle, and High) are well diversified, with the average number of firms

ranging from 409 to 1283. The cross-sectional variation in InnOrig is large, ranging from 3.02 to

9.78 for the three InnOrig portfolios. The average size (market capitalization at the end of each

June) of the low, middle, and high InnOrig portfolios is $702 million, $4,334 million, and $2,033




16
  For the low InnOrig portfolio, average InnOrig is based on firms with at least one patent granted over the past five
years, while the averages of other characteristics reported are based on all firms assigned to the portfolio.

                                                         12
million, respectively. Furthermore, firms in the three InnOrig portfolios cover 67% of the total

stock market capitalization. Therefore, it is economically meaningful to study these firms.

    The book-to-market (BTM, the ratio of book equity of fiscal year ending in year t – 1 to market

equity at the end of year t – 1), momentum (MOM, the previous eleven-month returns with a one-

month gap between the holding period and the current month), and idiosyncratic volatility (IVOL,

measured at the end of June of year t as the standard deviation of the residuals from regressing

daily stock returns on the Fama-French three factor returns over the previous 12 months with a

minimum of 31 trading days) do not vary much across the InnOrig portfolios. There is no clear

relation between InnOrig and total skewness (SKEW, measured at the end of June of year t using

daily returns over the previous 12 months with a minimum of 31 trading days).

     Firms with higher InnOrig have higher patents-to-assets (CTA, the number of patents issued

to a firm in year t – 1 divided by the firm’s total assets at the end of year t – 1), higher citations-

and patents-based innovative efficiency (CIE and PIE in year t – 1), but lower R&D intensity

(RDME, R&D expenses in fiscal year ending in year t – 1 divided by market equity at the end of

year t – 1). 17 We also report other characteristics, such as return on assets (ROA, income before

extraordinary items plus interest expenses in year t – 1 divided by lagged total assets), return on

equity (ROE, income before extraordinary items plus interest expenses in year t – 1 divided by

lagged book equity), asset growth (AG, change in total assets in year t – 1 divided by lagged total

assets), investment intensity (IA, capital expenditure in year t – 1 divided by lagged total assets),

net stock issues (NS, change in the natural log of the split-adjusted shares outstanding in year t –



17
   Citations-based innovative efficiency measure (CIE) in year t – 1 is adjusted patent citations received in year t – 1
by patents granted to a firm in years t – 2 to t – 6 scaled by the sum of R&D expenses in years t – 4 to t – 8. The
adjusted citations in year t – 1 to patent k are citations to patent k in year t – 1 divided by the mean citations to patents
of the same subcategory and grant year group in year t – 1. Patents-based innovative efficiency measure (PIE) in year
t – 1 is patents granted to a firm in year t – 1 scaled by research and development (R&D) capital in year t – 3, computed
as the five-year cumulative R&D expenses from year t – 7 to year t – 3 with a 20% annual depreciation.

                                                             13
1), institutional ownership (InstOwn, the fraction of firm shares outstanding owned by institutional

investors in year t – 1), stock illiquidity (ILLIQ, the absolute monthly stock return divided by

monthly dollar trading volume computed in June of year t as in Amihud 2002), short-term reversal

(REV, lagged monthly stock return), number of sales segments (NSD, the number of sales

segments based on Fama-French 48 industry classifications over year t – 5 to year t – 1), and one

minus the Herfindahl index of segment sales (HHISD, based on Fama-French 48 industry

classifications over year t – 5 to year t – 1). However, these characteristics do not vary much across

the InnOrig portfolios except contemporaneous ROA and ROE. The high InnOrig group has the

second lowest contemporaneous ROA and ROE.

    We report the time series averages of cross-sectional correlations between InnOrig and these

characteristics in Panel B of Table 2. Consistent with Panel A, InnOrig does not strongly correlate

with these characteristics. In particular, the Pearson correlations between InnOrig and size,

citations- and patents-based innovative efficiency, the number of sales segments, and the HHI-

based sales diversity are only –0.01, 0.13, 0.06, –0.03, and –0.03, respectively. The corresponding

Spearman rank correlations are also very low.

    Overall, these low correlations suggest that our InnOrig proxy is a firm characteristic that is

distinct from other well-known return predictors.



C. Autocorrelations of InnOrig and Mispricing

    Our use of a rolling window to construct InnOrig follows the literature on the return predictive

ability of R&D and patent-related variables, as mentioned earlier. InnOrig has moderate

persistence beyond the first lag at the firm level. The cross-sectional average autocorrelations

between InnOrig in year t and InnOrig in years t – 1, t – 2, t – 3, t – 4, t – 5 are 0.62, 0.43, 0.32,



                                                 14
0.23, and 0.08, respectively. Since we focus on InnOrig ranking in portfolio sorts, the average

autocorrelations between InnOrig tercile ranks in year t and InnOrig tercile ranks in years t – 1, t

– 2, t – 3, t – 4, t – 5 are 0.52, 0.28, 0.12, –0.02, and –0.18, respectively. Correspondingly, the

number of migrators within one year is quite low; there are on average 61 (56) firms that move to

the top (bottom) tercile each year.

   As discussed earlier, high InnOrig firms may outperform their competitors persistently due to

the market power associated with original innovations. Generally, if a firm constantly adapts its

innovation strategy by incorporating more diverse technology, then it is likely to rank persistently

high in InnOrig and is protected against lagging behind. For example, Affymetrix persistently

ranked high in InnOrig by constantly innovating based upon a wider range of technology than its

competitors. Correspondingly, Affymetrix outperformed its competitors and was acquired by

Thermo Fisher Scientific for approximately $1.3 billion in March 2016.

   On the other hand, if a firm does not adapt to new technology trends or other firms’ shifts in

innovation strategy, then it is likely to lag behind and experience a drop in its InnOrig rank. An

example of a firm with large shifts in InnOrig rank is Respironics, a leading manufacturer of

medical devices used primarily for the treatment of respiratory disorders. When Respironics’

InnOrig increased/dropped substantially relative to other firms, its profitability increased/declined

correspondingly (see Section A of the Internet Appendix for more details). Since the raw value of

Respironics’ InnOrig did not change that much over time, these changes in Respironics’ InnOrig

rank may be partly owing to shifts in any given firm’s innovation strategy or shifts in technology

trends.

    However, for several reasons, persistence in InnOrig rank does not necessarily mean that

conclusive corrective information about the cash flows of high InnOrig firms will arrive quickly.



                                                 15
InnOrig is constructed based upon patent information instead of product information. Therefore,

these patents may not generate cash flows for the firm quickly; the road from patent being granted

to the patent-protected products generating cash flows could take years, and is subject to technical

and market uncertainty. Some other examples in the innovation literature also suggest slow

correction. For example, Lev and Sougiannis (1996) show that five-year accumulated R&D

expenditures (scaled by market equity) positively predict abnormal stock returns in the subsequent

year. Chambers et al. (2002) and Ciftci et al. (2011) find that five-year accumulated scaled R&D

expenditures positively predict abnormal stock returns for up to ten years.

    Furthermore, a firm can be persistently undervalued and have persistently high expected

returns indefinitely. (Underpricing provides an investor with a cheap claim to a long-run dividend

stream, and in a steady state expected payout/growth regime, each period of reinvestment with

similar underpricing provides another chunk of cheap dividends.) For example, Hong and

Kacperczyk (2009) show that “sin” stocks (sin being a persistent trait) tend to be undervalued and

have higher expected returns than otherwise-comparable stocks.



                     II. Innovative originality and future profitability

   In this section, we examine whether InnOrig contains favorable information about a firm’s

future profitability to verify the key assumption of the limited attention theory and the competitive

advantage associated with InnOrig. In particular, we conduct annual Fama-MacBeth regressions

to study the relation between InnOrig and different aspects of future profitability: the persistence

and the volatility. To explore the channel of this association, we also examine the relation between

InnOrig and gross margin.




                                                 16
A. InnOrig and persistence of future profitability

   To explore the effect of InnOrig on the persistence of future profitability (measured by return

on equity or return on assets), we examine the interaction between InnOrig and mean reversion of

profitability. Specifically, following Fama and French (2000), we conduct annual cross-sectional

regressions of next year’s change in profitability on InnOrig, change in profitability, interaction

between InnOrig and change in profitability, interaction between IE and change in profitability,

and other control variables (profitability, market-to-book assets, advertising expenses, capital

expenditure, R&D, innovative efficiency, and industry effects). We set missing values for InnOrig,

IE, advertising expenses, and R&D expenses to zero. We also control for a dummy variable that

equals one for firms with no R&D expenses over the last five years, and the interactions of this

dummy with all the other control variables. To reduce the influence of outliers and facilitate the

interpretation, we winsorize all variables at the 1% and 99% levels and standardize all independent

variables (except the dummies) to zero mean and one standard deviation. For brevity, we omit the

slopes on the industry dummies, the dummy for firms with no R&D and its interactions with other

control variables in the tabulation of results. The focus is the slope on the interaction between

InnOrig and change in profitability.

    We report the results for ROE and ROA in Panels A1 and A2 of Table 3, respectively. In each

panel, we control for citations-based IE (CIE) on the top and patents-based IE (PIE) at the bottom.

The slopes on the interaction between InnOrig and change in profitability are significantly positive

at the 1%, 5% or 10% level. The magnitude is substantial, regardless which type of IE we control

for. For example, in the top row of Panel A1, the slope on InnOrigt*ΔROEt is 1.97% (t = 3.49).

Since the slope on ΔROEt is –13.57%, this implies that a one standard deviation increase in InnOrig

slows down the mean reversion of ROE by 14.52% relative to a firm with zero InnOrig and zero



                                                17
CIE. These results indicate that firms with high InnOrig exhibit significantly slower mean

reversion, which is consistent with the intuition that high InnOrig allows firms to maintain

competitive advantage and sustainable profitability.

    In contrast, the effect of IE on the mean reversion of profitability is unclear. For example, in

the top row of Panel A1, the slope on CIEt*ΔROEt is –0.92% (t = –1.69); on the other hand, in the

bottom row of the same panel, the slope on PIEt*ΔROEt is 1.62% (t = 2.49). Combined with the

insignificant slopes on IE and significant slopes on InnOrig (see the Internet Appendix, Section E)

when we regress the level of future ROA/ROE on InnOrig and IE, these results illustrate the

distinctiveness between IE and InnOrig in determining firms’ fundamentals.



B. InnOrig and volatility of future profitability

    In addition, if high InnOrig allows a firm to maintain sustainable profitability, we expect that

high InnOrig is associated with less volatile future profitability. Therefore, following Kothari,

Laguerre, and Leone (2002), we conduct annual cross-sectional regressions of volatility of

profitability over the next five years on InnOrig, the volatility of profitability over the past five

years, and other control variables. The methodology of treating missing variables is the same as

above. Similarly, for brevity, we omit the slopes on the industry dummies, the dummy for firms

with no R&D and its interactions with other control variables. The focus is the slope on InnOrig.

    We report the results for ROE and ROA in Panels B1 and B2 of Table 3, respectively. In each

panel, we control for citations-based IE (CIE) on the top and patents-based IE (PIE) at the bottom.

The slope on InnOrig is always significantly negative at the 1% level and substantial. For example,

in the top row of Panel B1, the slope on InnOrig is –2.79% (t = –4.62). This implies that a one

standard deviation increase in InnOrig reduces the volatility of next five years’ ROE by 11.37%



                                                    18
(relative to the average volatility of ROE over next five years at 24.53%) controlling for citations-

based IE and other variables. Similarly, in the top row of Panel B2, the slope on InnOrig is –0.68%

(t = –7.19). This implies that a one standard deviation increase in InnOrig reduces the volatility of

next five years’ ROA by 10.37% (relative to the average volatility of ROA over next five years at

6.56%) controlling for citations-based IE and other variables. The magnitude of these effects

controlling for patents-based IE is almost identical as indicated by the very similar slopes on

InnOrig in the bottom rows of Panels B1 and B2.

    In contrast, the effect of IE on volatility of future profitability is often tiny and positive. For

example, the slope on citations-based IE in Panel B1 is only 0.65% (t = 1.22). These results confirm

that the relations between InnOrig or IE and firm’s fundamentals differ substantially. This

evidence is consistent with the idea that more original innovation is a means by which firms can

build moats that protect firms from competition, resulting in higher, more persistent, and more

stable subsequent profitability.



C. InnOrig and future gross margin

   As discussed earlier, highly original innovation may help create unique and superior products,

which allow firms to charge a price premium and maintain sustainable competitive advantage.

Therefore, in this subsection, we examine the relation between InnOrig and future gross margin

(GM), measured by sales minus cost of goods sold, scaled by sales. To reduce the noise in this

measure, we set GM to 1 (or –1) if it exceeds 1 (or –1) following the literature (see, e.g. Kothari,

et. al. 2002). We find that InnOrig is associated with significantly higher persistence and lower

volatility of future gross margins.




                                                  19
   Specifically, to illustrate the effect of InnOrig on the persistence in GM, we conduct annual

Fama-MacBeth regressions of next year’s gross margin on InnOrig, gross margin in current year

and over the past four years, interaction of InnOrig with current GM and GM over the past four

years, and other controls. Similar to Table 3, we set missing values for InnOrig, IE, advertising

expenses, and R&D expenses to zero. We also control for a dummy variable that equals one for

firms with no R&D expenses over the last five years, and the interactions of this dummy with all

the other control variables. For brevity, in the tabulation of results we omit the slopes on these

terms, GM over the past four years and their interaction with InnOrig, and the industry dummies.

To reduce the influence of outliers and facilitate the interpretation, we winsorize all variables at

the 1% and 99% levels and standardize all independent variables (except the dummies) to zero

mean and one standard deviation.

   The focus is the slope on the interaction between InnOrig and GM. As shown in Panel A of

Table 4, the slope on InnOrigt*GMt is significantly positive at the 5% level, regardless which type

of IE we control for. The magnitude is also substantial. For example, in the top row of Panel A,

the slope on InnOrigt*GMt is 0.71%. Since the slope on GMt is 23.90%, this implies that a one

standard deviation increase in InnOrig increases the persistence in GM by 3% relative to a firm

with zero InnOrig. These results are consistent with the intuition that high InnOrig allows firms to

maintain competitive advantage and sustainable high gross margin.

    We also examine the effect of InnOrig on volatility of future GM. The model specification is

the same as in Panel B of Table 3. In Panel B of Table 4, we show that high InnOrig also reduces

volatility of future GM significantly. The slope on InnOrig is always significantly negative at the

1% level and substantial. For example, in the top row of Panel B, the slope on InnOrig is –0.28%

(t = –3.42). This implies that a one standard deviation increase in InnOrig reduces the volatility of



                                                 20
next five years’ GM by 5.53% (relative to the average volatility of GM over next five years at

5.06%) controlling for citations-based IE and other variables. In contrast, the slope on CIE and

PIE are significantly positive.

     Overall, these results suggest that high InnOrig firms are able to achieve higher, more

persistent, and less volatile profitability (at least in part) through the effect of InnOrig on gross

margin.



                      III. Return predictive power of innovative originality

     We next test whether InnOrig predicts returns. Limited attention predicts that as long as a

positive fraction of investors neglect favorable information in InnOrig, higher InnOrig is

associated with greater subsequent abnormal returns. A similar implication follows from

skepticism of complexity and models of ambiguity aversion. 18

     After evaluating this prediction in the full sample, we then test the other three implications

regarding the strength of the return predictive power of InnOrig (see Propositions 2 through 4 in

Section D of the Internet Appendix). The limited attention hypothesis predicts that the InnOrig

effect should increase with valuation uncertainty, the fraction of inattentive investors, and the

sensitivity of future profitability to InnOrig. Intuitively, when the prior uncertainty about the value

of the stock (without any conditioning on InnOrig) is higher, heavier weight should optimally be



18
   Such models (see, e.g., Dow and Werlang 1992; Chen and Epstein 2002; Cao, Wang, and Zhang 2005; and Bossaerts
et al. 2010) imply that when investors perceive higher uncertainty about an investment opportunity, they view it more
skeptically. For example, in Cao et al. (2005), conglomeration causes a price discount owing to the difficulty of
evaluating complex firms. This is potentially consistent with psychological evidence showing that observers tend to
interpret signals with lower processing fluency with greater skepticism, and view the subject matter of such signals as
riskier (e.g., Alter and Oppenheimer 2006; Song and Schwarz 2008, 2009, 2010). More original innovations tend to
deviate more from current technology trajectories, and hence involve greater uncertainty and complexity. This makes
them harder to evaluate, inducing skepticism. We therefore argue that high InnOrig leads to investor pessimism about
firm value. This generates the same empirical prediction that high InnOrig is associated with undervaluation, and
hence is a positive predictor of future abnormal returns.

                                                          21
placed on InnOrig by investors in forming posterior beliefs about value. So neglect of InnOrig

causes greater mispricing among these firms. Similarly, the larger the fraction of inattentive

investors, the more influence they have on the current price and hence the larger mispricing owing

to neglect of InnOrig.

   In addition, the more sensitive a firm’s future profitability is to InnOrig (or the more favorable

information contained in InnOrig about a firm), the more that neglect of InnOrig causes market

value to deviate from true fundamental value. This prediction is implied by the limited attention

argument but not by the argument based upon skepticism of complexity or ambiguity aversion,

and therefore helps distinguish these hypotheses. In particular, the limited attention argument

requires InnOrig to be an important predictor of firms’ future profitability, as we verify in Tables

3 and 4. Ignoring/underreacting to this important signal in valuation will lead to mispricing,

especially for firms whose future profitability is more sensitive to InnOrig. So the cash flow

channel predicts a stronger ability of InnOrig to predict returns among firms with high sensitivity.

In contrast, the ambiguity aversion hypothesis does not require InnOrig to predict future

profitability in order to generate mispricing. Even if InnOrig does not predict profitability,

ambiguity aversion predicts over-discounting/undervaluing firms with higher InnOrig or more

complex innovation.

   To test these hypotheses, we conduct portfolio sorts first to illustrate the abnormal returns and

then Fama-MacBeth regressions to illustrate the robustness of the effect to other return predictors.



A. Portfolio sorts

AI. Single sort




                                                22
     At the end of June of year t from 1982 to 2007, we sort firms with non-missing InnOrig into

three InnOrig portfolios (Low, Middle, and High) based on the 30th and 70th percentiles of InnOrig

in year t – 1. We also assign firms with no patents granted but with positive R&D spending over

the last five years into the low InnOrig portfolio. 19 As an alternative for comparison, we also assign

firms with no R&D expenses and patents over the last five years in the “No” group. To examine

the InnOrig-return relation, we form a hedge portfolio that takes a long position in the high InnOrig

portfolio and a short position in the low InnOrig portfolio. Since the USPTO fully discloses patents

granted in the weekly Official Gazette of the United States Patent and Trademark Office, the

InnOrig measure in year t – 1 is publicly observable at the end of year t – 1. We allow a six-month

lag in forming the InnOrig portfolios only to make the results comparable to previous studies.

     We hold these portfolios over the next twelve months (July of year t to June of year t + 1) and

compute their value-weighted monthly returns to make sure the results are not driven by small

firms. In Panel A of Table 5, we report average monthly returns in excess of one-month Treasury

bill rate (excess returns) as well as industry- and characteristic-adjusted returns for these portfolios

to make sure that the InnOrig effect is not driven by industry effects or well-known firm

characteristics. The industry-adjusted returns are based on the difference between individual firms’

returns and the returns of firms in the same industry (based on Fama and French 48 industry

classifications). Following Daniel et al. (1997) (DGTW) and Wermers (2004), we compute

characteristic-adjusted returns based on the difference between individual firms’ returns and the

DGTW benchmark portfolio returns (which are formed from 5-by-5-by-5 independent triple sorts

on size, book-to-market, and momentum).



19
  The results are even stronger if we completely exclude firms with no patents granted. For example, the mean excess
return and Carhart four-factor alpha for the high-minus-low InnOrig portfolio are 0.32% and 0.37% per month,
respectively, and are significant at the 1% level.

                                                        23
     In Panel B, to examine the relation between InnOrig and abnormal returns, we perform time-

series regressions of the portfolios’ excess returns on the Fama-French three factors (the market

factor–MKT, the size factor–SMB, and the value factor–HML) and the momentum (UMD) factor

as in Carhart (1997) (henceforth, the Carhart 4F model). We also report alphas from other factor

models for robustness check. In particular, we augment the Carhart model with the Investment-

Minus-Consumption (IMC) factor, the liquidity (LIQ) factor, the citations-based innovative

Efficient-Minus-Inefficient (EMI1) factor, the patents-based EMI (EMI2) factor, the Robust-

Minus-Weak (RMW) factor and the Conservative-Minus-Aggressive (CMA) factor, or the

Undervalued-Minus-Overvalued (UMO) factor, respectively. 20 We also report alphas from the q-

factor model of Hou, Xue, and Zhang (HXZ 2015) and the mispricing factor model of Stambaugh

and Yuan (2017). Controlling for these additional factors helps ensure that the InnOrig effect is

not driven by the investment-specific technology risk, the liquidity effect, the innovative efficiency

effect, the profitability effect, the investment effect, or existing mispricing factors.

     As mentioned in the introduction, the excess returns, industry- and characteristic-adjusted

returns, and alphas from different factor models generally increase monotonically with InnOrig

from low to high, implying a positive InnOrig-return relation. Furthermore, the InnOrig effect is

economically and statistically significant. The monthly alphas of the hedge portfolio range from

0.20% to 0.35% and are generally significant. Consistent with the idea that firms with no R&D

investment are the least innovative firms, the alphas of the “No” group are negative and slightly

larger in magnitude than those of the low InnOrig group.

     To further examine whether the undervaluation of high InnOrig firms is driven by investors

not recognizing the implication of high InnOrig on firms’ fundamentals, we find that future


20
 Following Fama and French (2015), the RMW and CMA factors are from 2 × 2 × 2 × 2 sorts on size, book-to-
market, operating profitability, and investment.

                                                   24
abnormal returns mostly come from future earnings announcement windows. Specifically, the

three-day cumulative abnormal return (CAR relative to the Carhart model) around future earnings

announcement is 0.18% for the high InnOrig portfolio, which is 25.33% of its quarterly Carhart

alpha.

    Although InnOrig is associated with high profitability over the next five years, we find no

significant return predictability beyond the first post-sorting year (see Figure 1 for the alphas of

the InnOrig spread portfolio over the five post-sorting years from different factor models).

Therefore, the data seem to suggest that the market fully corrects the undervaluation in the first

year after portfolio formation. This is consistent with the argument of Chambers, Jennings, and

Thompson (2002) that mispricing-based return predictability should be corrected in a short period

while risk-based return predictability should persist for a long period.

    Overall, these results suggest that high InnOrig firms are undervalued relative to low InnOrig

firms, and the InnOrig effect is incremental to industry effects, well-known characteristics,

standard and recently developed risk and mispricing factors, as well as the IE effect in Hirshleifer,

Hsu, and Li (2013). It is also noteworthy that these results are not driven by very small firms as

shown in Table 2. Furthermore, we construct value-weighted portfolios (which put more weight

on larger firms) and rebalance them only once a year. Therefore, these abnormal returns are likely

to survive typical transaction costs.

    High InnOrig firms on average are larger. Other things equal, we expect large firms to receive

greater investor attention, which tends to reduce misvaluation. However, as mentioned earlier,

large firms are also generally more complex, making them harder to value (e.g., Cohen and Lou

2012). It is not clear whether this additional attention outweighs complexity to result in more

accurate valuation of the innovative originality of large firms. In fact, the return predictive power



                                                 25
of InnOrig exists in both small and big firms and does not vary much across size subsamples

(untabulated).

    We also examine how the returns of the hedge portfolio vary over time. Figure 2 plots the

returns on a per annum basis from July of 1982 to June of 2008. The hedge portfolio’s returns are

negative only in eight out of the 27 years. Although this portfolio has a market beta close to zero,

the correlation between the hedge portfolio’s returns and the market excess returns is –0.53 on an

annual basis. As discussed earlier, the returns of the high-minus-low InnOrig (hedge) portfolio is

not fully explained by existing factor models. The correlations between the monthly returns of the

hedge portfolio and those factor returns range from –0.42 with the size (SMB) factor to 0.44 with

the RMW factor. In particular, the correlations with the citations- and patents-based IE factors, the

momentum factor, the CMA factor, the IMC factor, and the LIQ factor are small, ranging from –

0.10 to 0.25. The correlation with the market factor is negative (–0.25), suggesting that investing

in this portfolio can provide hedge against market downturns.

    The average monthly return of the hedge portfolio is 0.29%, which is substantially higher than

that of SMB (0.07%), IMC (–0.15%), and CMA (0.15%) in absolute value, and is comparable to

that of the value (HML) factor (0.37%), and the RMW factor (0.34%). Furthermore, the high-

minus-low InnOrig portfolio offers an ex post annual Sharpe ratio of 0.50, which is higher than

that of SMB (0.08), HML (0.34), CMA (0.33), IMC (–0.13), the market factor (0.47), the size

factor in the mispricing factor model (0.39), and is comparable to that of the investment factor in

the q-factor model (0.57), RMW (0.57), and LIQ (0.58). Since the high level of the equity premium

is a well-known puzzle for rational asset pricing theory (Mehra and Prescott 1985), the high ex

post Sharpe ratio associated with the high-minus-low InnOrig portfolio is also puzzling from this

perspective.



                                                 26
AII. Double sorts

     We next test the implications on the interaction of the InnOrig effect with proxies of valuation

uncertainty (VU), investor attention, and the sensitivity of future profitability to InnOrig via

independent double sorts.

     For VU, we use two proxies. 21 One is an index that combines age and opacity. Age is a popular

measure of valuation uncertainty (see, e.g., Kumar 2009). 22 However, age alone may not be

sufficient in fully capturing VU. For example, a young firm with very transparent financial reports

may not necessarily involve more valuation uncertainty than an old and established firm with very

opaque reports. Opacity is a popular measure of transparency of a firm’s financial reports (see,

e.g., Hutton, Marcus, and Tehranian 2009). Therefore, we combine both age and opacity to fully

capture VU. Specifically, age is defined as the number of years listed on Compustat with non-

missing price data. Opacity is defined as the three-year moving sum of the absolute value of

discretionary accruals, a proxy of earnings management. Younger firms or more opaque firms have

higher valuation uncertainty. To construct the VU index, we first standardize all firms’ age and

opacity measure in each year to zero mean and one standard deviation. The VU index for each

firm-year observation is then computed as standardized opacity minus standardized age. By

construction, the higher the index, the higher VU is. The second proxy of VU is analyst forecast

dispersion (scaled by the absolute value of mean forecast).



21
   In Tables 11 and 12, we also report the InnOrig-return relation within R&D intensity subsamples. Since R&D is
hard to value by its uncertain nature, R&D intensity is another alternative proxy of VU. The results reported later
provide further support for this conditional prediction.
22
   Kumar (2009) also uses turnover and idiosyncratic volatility (IVOL) as additional proxies for valuation uncertainty.
However, turnover has also been used as a proxy of investor attention in some studies (e.g., Gervais, Kaniel, and
Mingelgrin 2001; Hou, Peng, and Xiong 2009). Since firms with lower turnover can be interpreted as having lower
investor attention or lower valuation uncertainty, the overall prediction is unclear. We do not use IVOL to proxy VU
as it is highly negatively correlated with firm size and is often interpreted as a proxy of short-sale constraints.

                                                          27
     We measure investor attention (ATT) by the inverse of transient institutional investors’

ownership. Following Bushee (1998, 2001), we categorize all institutional investors (including

hedge funds and mutual funds) into three groups: transient, dedicated, and quasi-indexer. Transient

institutional investors trade stocks based on momentum and short-term strategies. As argued in

Bushee (1998), they do not pay much attention to firms’ fundamentals. 23 Thus we use the fraction
                                                                                                      u
of transient institutional investors as a proxy for the fraction of inattentive investors (f              in our

model).

     Lastly, we measure the sensitivity (Sen) of future profitability to InnOrig by an industry-level

sensitivity of past ROE to lagged InnOrig. Specifically, we measure Sen by the slope on InnOrig

from annual industry-level Fama-MacBeth regression of firms’ past ROE on lagged InnOrig and

a set of control variables (ROE, change in ROE, market-to-book assets, advertising expenses

scaled by book equity, capital expenditure scaled by book equity, R&D scaled by book equity, and

citations-based IE). This sensitivity measure is observable to investors before portfolio formation

since it is estimated based on prior information.

     To ensure that these proxies serve their purpose of capturing different aspects of the three

distinct conditional predictions from the model, we examine the correlations among these proxies

first. In untabulated results, we find that the correlations among these proxies are very low, ranging

from –0.02 to 0.04. In addition, their correlations with size are also very low, ranging from –0.15

to 0.06.

     To perform these conditional tests, at the end of June of year t, we conduct 3 by 3 double sorts

on InnOrig and each of those conditioning variables listed. As the number of analyst forecast is

sparse before 1983, the portfolio sorts for VU based on analyst dispersion start in June of 1984.


23
  On the other hand, dedicated institutional investors take a long-term perspective and are thus more active in
corporate governance and value creation.

                                                      28
The three InnOrig portfolios are formed as in the single sort. The conditioning variables are

measured in year t – 1. To compare the InnOrig effect across the subgroups, we also form a high-

minus-low InnOrig (hedge) portfolio in each subgroup. We hold these portfolios over the next

twelve months (July of year t to June of year t + 1). All portfolios are value-weighted. Similar to

Table 5, we report the average monthly excess returns, industry- and characteristic-adjusted

returns, and alphas estimated from different factor models.

     The results in Table 6 support the predictions. The hedge portfolio’s returns and alphas are

substantial and significant in the high VU group (firms with VU in the top tercile), but small and

often insignificant in the low VU group (firms with VU in the bottom tercile). For example, in

Panel A1 of Table 6, among high VU index firms, the monthly average excess returns as well as

industry- and characteristic-adjusted returns of the hedge portfolio are 1.10%, 0.99%, and 1.17%,

respectively, and are significant at the 1% level. The monthly alphas from different factor models

range from 0.82% (the q-factor model) to 1.08% (controlling for the Carhart four factors plus LIQ)

and are significant at the 1% level. In contrast, among low VU index firms, these returns and alphas

are small and insignificant, ranging from 0.07% to 0.19%. Similarly, in Panel A2, the alphas of

the InnOrig hedge portfolio range from 0.47% (the Carhart four factors plus RMW and CMA

factors) to 0.69% (the Carhart four factors) and are generally significant at the 5% level among

high VU firms (based on high analyst forecast dispersion), but these alphas are smaller and

generally insignificant among low VU firms. 24

     Similarly, the InnOrig effect is also much stronger among firms with lower investor attention

or higher sensitivity of future profitability to InnOrig (see Panels B and C). Specifically, the

monthly alphas from different factor models for the hedge portfolio range from 0.42% (controlling


24
  The results are even stronger when we restrict the sample to firms with at least five analyst forecasts. The alphas of
the hedge portfolio among the high dispersion group range from 0.50% to 0.76%, all significant at the 5% or 1% level.

                                                          29
for the Carhart four factors plus EMI1) to 0.58% (controlling for the Carhart four factors) and are

significant at the 1% level among low attention firms. These alphas range from 0.51% (the q-factor

model) to 0.81% (controlling for the Carhart four factors plus LIQ) and are significant at the 1%

level among high sensitivity firms. But they are small and insignificant among firms with high

attention or low sensitivity.

       We also verify that these contrasts are not due to the difference in the InnOrig measure spreads.

The spread in InnOrig does not vary much across these subsamples and is very similar to that in

the single sort as shown in Table 2. Furthermore, similar to the unconditional return predictive

power of InnOrig, the significant InnOrig effect among high VU, low attention, high sensitivity

firms is not driven by very small firms either. The average size of the low, middle, and high

InnOrig portfolios range from $316 to $895 million in the high VU index group, $782 million to

$2.31 billion in the high analyst forecast dispersion group, $1.11 to $3.12 billion in the low

attention group, and $759 million to $4.44 billion in the high sensitivity group (untabulated).

       The high VU, low attention, and high sensitivity firms also constitute a significant portion of

the CRSP universe. When we measure VU by combining age with opacity, the high VU subsample

weighs 5.3% of total CRSP universe. The high VU subsample based on analyst forecast dispersion

weighs 8.1% of the CRSP universe. 25 The low ATT (high sensitivity) subsample constitutes 28.3%

(21.7%) of total CRSP universe. Therefore, the subsamples with the strongest InnOrig-return

relation account for a significant fraction of the overall market, especially the low-ATT and high-

Sen subsamples.

       Overall, independent double sorts provide fairly strong evidence supporting the model

predictions on the conditional return predictive power of InnOrig.



25
     The high VU subsample based on R&D intensity (see Tables 11 and 12) weighs 11.1% of the CRSP universe.

                                                       30
B. Fama-MacBeth regressions

BI. Full-sample Fama-MacBeth regressions

    We next examine the ability of InnOrig to predict the cross section of returns using monthly

Fama-MacBeth regressions. This analysis allows us to control more extensively for other

characteristics that can predict returns, to verify whether the positive InnOrig-return relation as

measured in portfolio sorts is driven by other known return predictors.

    As in Fama and French (1992), we allow for a minimum six-month lag between the

accounting-related control variables and stock returns to ensure that the accounting variables are

fully observable to investors. Specifically, for each month from July of year t to June of year t +

1, we regress monthly returns of individual stocks on the natural log of one plus InnOrig of year t

– 1, different sets of control variables, and industry fixed effects based on Fama and French 48

industry classifications.

    Table 7 shows the time-series average slopes (in percentage) and corresponding Newey-West

heteroscedasticity-robust and autocorrelation-adjusted t-statistics (in parentheses) from the

monthly cross-sectional regressions for different model specifications. We winsorize all

independent variables at the 1% and 99% levels to reduce the impact of outliers, and then

standardize all independent variables (except dummies) to zero mean and one standard deviation

to facilitate the comparison of economic effects of all variables. We set InnOrig to zero for firms

without InnOrig, and include a dummy that equals one for firms with no patent and no R&D over

the past five years and the interaction of this dummy with the other control variables in the

regressions. For brevity, we omit the slopes on these terms and the industry dummies in the

tabulations.



                                                31
    Model 1 is a univariate regression of future returns on InnOrig. The slope on InnOrig is 0.15%

(t = 2.91). Model 2 controls for institutional ownership (InstOwn), stock illiquidity (ILLIQ), short-

term return reversal (REV), BTM, size, momentum (MOM), and industry dummies based on Fama

and French 48 industry classifications. InnOrig and BTM are measured in year t – 1. ILLIQ and

REV are the previous month’s stock illiquidity and stock return, respectively. Size is the natural

log of market capitalization at the end of June of year t; BTM is also in the log form. The slope on

InnOrig is statistically significant: 0.15% (t = 5.34). The slopes on the other variables are consistent

with previous studies. Although the slopes on momentum are insignificant, they are positive.

Furthermore, in unreported results, we find significantly positive slope on momentum if we only

control for size and book-to-market.

    In Model 3, we control for additional return predictors related to innovation (CIE or PIE, CTA,

and RDME), investment (AG and IA), financing (NS), profitability (ROA), idiosyncratic volatility

(IVOL), and total skewness (SKEW) measured in year t – 1. 26 IVOL is included as Pastor and

Veronesi (2009) and Garleanu, Panageas, and Yu (2012) propose that new technologies are

associated with idiosyncratic risk, and SKEW is included as Kapadia (2006) argues that investors

prefer high-tech stocks for their positive skewness. CIE (PIE) is the natural log of one plus the

citations-based (patents-based) IE measure following Hirshleifer, Hsu, and Li (2013). Missing CIE

and PIE are set to zero. CTA is the natural log of one plus patents granted in year t – 1 divided by

total assets in year t – 1. RDME is the natural log of one plus R&D-to-market equity in year t – 1.

We use the log transformation for those innovation variables to mitigate their skewness following



26
   On the capital investment effect, see, e.g., Lyandres, Sun, and Zhang (2008) and Polk and Sapienza (2009). On the
asset growth effect, see, e.g., Cooper, Gulen, and Schill (2008). On the net stock issues effect, see, e.g., Ikenberry,
Lakonishok, and Vermaelen (1995), Daniel and Titman (2006), Fama and French (2008), and Pontiff and Woodgate
(2008). On the profitability effect, see, e.g., Fama and French (2006), and Hou, Xue, and Zhang (2015). On the
idiosyncratic volatility and skewness effects, see, e.g., Ang et al. (2006), Harvey and Siddique, (2000), Kapadia
(2006), Boyer, Mitton, and Vorkink (2009), and Bali, Cakici, and Whitelaw (2011).

                                                          32
Lerner (1994) and Aghion, Van Reenen, and Zingales (2013).

     The InnOrig slopes remain statistically significant: 0.10% (t = 3.58) controlling for CIE, and

0.12% (t = 4.42) controlling for PIE. The slopes on the control variables are generally consistent

with previous studies. The slope on IVOL is significantly positive, which is consistent with Bali,

Cakici, and Whitelaw (2011). Moreover, the InnOrig slopes remain similar when we use other

proxies of skewness such as systematic skewness (Harvey and Siddique 2000), idiosyncratic

skewness (Bali, Cakici, and Whitelaw 2011), and expected idiosyncratic skewness (Boyer, Mitton,

and Vorkink 2009) in unreported results. 27

     Lastly, we also control for sales diversity measured by two proxies: the first is the number of

sales segments (NSD) defined by Fama-French 48 industries over the previous five years (year t –

5 to year t – 1). The second is one minus the Herfindahl index of segment sales (HHISD, based on

Fama-French 48 industry classifications) over year t – 5 to year t – 1. We use the segment sales

data from Compustat segment files following Cohen and Lou (2012) among others. Since the two

proxies are very highly correlated, we only report the results from controlling for NSD. However,

the results (unreported) from controlling for HHISD are almost the same. As shown in Model 4,

the slopes on InnOrig remain almost the same in magnitude with statistical significance. Therefore,

the InnOrig effect is robust to controlling for sales diversity in product markets.

     Overall, the results above indicate that the predictive power of InnOrig is distinct from, and

robust to the inclusion of, other commonly known return predictors, innovation-related variables,

industry effects, and sales diversity. Although the magnitudes of the InnOrig slopes are modest,

we mainly rely on Fama-MacBeth regressions to illustrate the statistical significance of the InnOrig


27
   Idiosyncratic skewness (ISKEW) is measured at the end of June of year t as the skewness of residuals from
regressing daily stock returns on daily market factor returns and squared market factor returns. Systematic skewness
is the slope on the squared market factor returns from the regression for ISKEW. Expected idiosyncratic skewness is
measured in the previous month.

                                                        33
effect and portfolio sorts to identify the economic magnitude of abnormal returns following Fama

and French (2006). 28



BII. Subsample Fama-MacBeth regressions

     We also perform Fama-MacBeth regressions in subsamples split by these conditioning

variables as in the double sorts. We use the same method and model specifications as in the test of

the unconditional InnOrig effect above. For brevity, we only report the slopes estimated from

Model 3 in Table 8 since the slope on sales diversity is small and insignificant (see Table 7). For

each panel, we report results from controlling for CIE (PIE) on the left (right).

     The results show a sharp contrast in the InnOrig effect across the subsamples even after we

control for many well-known return predictors and industry effects. Specifically, controlling for

citations-based IE and others (Model 3A), the slopes on InnOrig are 0.21%, 0.15%, 0.16%, 0.23%

among high VU index, high VU (based on analyst forecast dispersion), low attention, and high

sensitivity firms, respectively, and are generally significant at the 1% or 5% level. In contrast, their

counterparts are only 0.01%, 0.07%, 0.00%, and 0.05% among low VU index, low dispersion,

high attention, and low sensitivity firms, respectively, and are insignificant. These sharp contrasts

remain the same if we control for patent-based IE (Model 3B).

     Taken together, consistent with our hypotheses, both portfolio sorts and Fama-MacBeth

regressions provide support for a more pronounced InnOrig-return relation among firms with

higher valuation uncertainty, lower investor attention, and higher sensitivity of future profitability

to InnOrig.



28
  As pointed out in Fama and French (2006), “cross-section return regressions can identify variables that help describe
average stock returns, but the economic significance of the average slopes is not always easy to judge. Moreover, the
average slopes from the return regressions cannot tell us whether the regressions are well-specified.”

                                                          34
C. Innovative originality versus innovative efficiency

    In previous tests, we showed that the InnOrig effect is distinct from the IE effects by

controlling for the citations- or patents-based EMI factor in the portfolio sorts and the two types

of IE in the Fama-MacBeth regressions. In this subsection, we further test the incremental return

predictive power of InnOrig by conducting double sorts on IE and InnOrig (Table 9), and Fama-

MacBeth regressions within IE subsamples (Table 10) for both types of IE.

    Regardless of the test approaches, a strong incremental InnOrig effect remains. Since the

Fama-MacBeth regressions allow for extensive controls, we interpret the interaction between the

IE and InnOrig effects based on Table 10, which shows that the InnOrig effect is significantly

stronger among low IE firms for both types of IE measures.

    On ex ante grounds, it is not clear why the InnOrig effect is stronger among low IE firms. One

possibility is that there is a tradeoff between being innovatively efficient (which may require being

tough about cancelling projects that are not producing output quickly) and original (which may

require high tolerance for failure and providing a lot of slack for highly speculative projects in the

hope that they may someday pay off). The low IE category, in combination with high InnOrig,

may be especially good at identifying the high originality that the market underweights.



D. Innovative originality and R&D intensity

   Since R&D is a crucial input for generating innovation and firms that invest heavily in R&D

are also harder to value due to the uncertain nature of R&D investment, we hypothesize that the

InnOrig-return relation is stronger among higher R&D firms. To test this hypothesis, we use the

same methods as in Tables 6 and 8, and obtain supporting evidence in double sorts on R&D



                                                 35
intensity (measured by R&D expenses scaled by total assets) and InnOrig and the Fama-MacBeth

subsample regressions. Specifically, Table 11 shows that the monthly alphas of the InnOrig hedge

portfolio among high R&D firms are substantial and significant. They range from 0.84% (the

Carhart four factors plus LIQ model) to 1.24% (the mispricing factor model). In contrast, among

low R&D firms, they are negative and insignificant. In other words, high InnOrig only predicts

high abnormal returns among firms that invest heavily in R&D. Table 12 shows that the slope on

InnOrig among high R&D firms is positive and significant. The magnitude is also much larger

than that among low R&D firms. For example, when we control for CIE, the slopes on InnOrig

are 0.14% (t = 2.01) and 0.05% (t = 1.07) among high and low R&D firms, respectively.



E. Potential alternative explanations

    Although overall the evidence above is consistent with limited attention, we do not rule out

potential risk-based explanations. To address the possibility that InnOrig captures information

asymmetry, we examine whether our InnOrig measure correlates with proxies for information

asymmetry such as analyst coverage, analyst forecast dispersion, opacity of financial statements,

and presence of bond rating. The correlations are very low.

    In addition, since financing constraint is particularly important for R&D firms (e.g., Hall 1992,

2005, 2009; Himmelberg and Petersen 1994; Hall and Lerner 2010; Li 2011), one may wonder if

our results are driven by financing constraints risk. However, we find that the InnOrig effect exists

in both small and big firms and does not have a significant interaction with size. Since size is

inversely associated with financing constraints (e.g., Gertler and Gilchrist 1994; Campello and

Chen 2010), this evidence suggests that constraints risk cannot explain the InnOrig effect.




                                                 36
Furthermore, as discussed earlier, the correlation between our InnOrig measure and size is very

low.

     To address the possibility that the InnOrig effect captures investment-specific technological

change risk, as discussed earlier, we control for IMC in computing risk-adjusted returns and

examine the loading of the InnOrig hedge portfolio’s returns on IMC. 29 The alphas are robust to

controlling for IMC, and the loading on IMC is small and insignificant regardless whether we use

IMC alone or combine IMC with the market factor or the Carhart model. For example, the loading

(untabulated) of the InnOrig hedge portfolio on IMC is –0.10 (t = –0.79) in the Carhart model

augmented with the IMC factor presented in Table 5. Furthermore, to capture technology-related

risk we construct a portfolio that is long on firms in high-tech industries and is short on firms in

the other industries. The correlation between this mimicking portfolio’s returns and the returns of

the InnOrig hedge portfolio is also very low and insignificant. In addition, the correlation between

the InnOrig hedge portfolio’s return and the aggregate technology shock of Hsu (2009) is

insignificant and negative.

     Obsolescence is another particular kind of risk that stems from technological change (e.g.,

Greenwood and Jovanovic 1999; Hobijn and Jovanovic 2001; Laitner and Stolyarov 2003).

Intuitively it would seem that high InnOrig firms might be less susceptible to obsolescence risk,

as high InnOrig firms, by building upon advances in multiple fields will tend to have at least some

investment in the winning technology (e.g., Garcia-Vega 2006; Gomez-Mejia et al. 2011) rather

than having an all-or-nothing bet. So if anything, based on obsolescence risk we might expect a

negative InnOrig-return relation rather than the positive one that we find.


29
  Greenwood, Hercowitz, and Krusell (1997) suggest that investment-specific technological changes explain
aggregate economic growth; later, Kogan and Papanikolaou (2014) and Papanikolaou (2011) propose investment-
specific technological changes as a systematic risk priced in stock markets. We thank Papanikolaou for providing the
IMC factor returns.

                                                        37
    Lastly, one may wonder why firms would choose high InnOrig if doing so leads to

undervaluation. However, undervaluation need not be costly unless the firm needs to issue

underpriced securities. So for a firm with enough cash to fund its investments, the benefits can

easily exceed the costs (if any) associated with undervaluation. Indeed, we find that high InnOrig

firms have higher future profitability and more novel innovations, which is potentially consistent

with high benefits. In consequence, managers who care about long-term value, not just short-term

stock prices, may have an incentive (at least up to a point) to increase InnOrig. This is similar to

the point that firm managers may rationally invest in R&D even if this comes at the cost of

temporary discount in stock price (Chan, Lakonishok, and Sougiannis 2001).



                                           IV. Conclusion

   Based upon the psychology of limited attention in which, under empirically realistic

conditions, firms with greater innovative originality (measured by the average range of knowledge

drawn upon by a firm’s patents) will be undervalued by the market if InnOrig is a favorable

indicator of future fundamentals that is neglected by some investors. More original innovations

allow a firm to charge customers a price premium and provide a sustainable competitive advantage.

In addition, the greater complexity associated with higher InnOrig makes it harder to cognitively

process this signal, and research in psychology suggests that lower processing fluency results in

more skeptical appraisal. We further hypothesize that the effect of InnOrig upon misvaluation will

be stronger among firms with greater valuation uncertainty, lower investor attention, and stronger

InnOrig predictive ability for fundamentals.

   Our tests support these hypotheses. Firms with higher InnOrig have more persistent, and less

volatile future profitability as well as gross margin. These findings are consistent with the intuition



                                                  38
that InnOrig creates sustainable competitive advantages as it reflects the capability of a firm’s

managers and scientists in effectively combining technologies from various knowledge domains

to innovate in ways that are hard for its competitors to match.

   We further find that high InnOrig firms on average experience higher subsequent abnormal

stock returns, especially among firms with higher valuation uncertainty, lower investor attention,

and stronger sensitivity of future profitability to InnOrig. These findings are robust to industry

adjustment, characteristics adjustment, risk-adjustment methods, recently developed mispricing

factors, and the inclusion of extensive controls including innovative efficiency and investment-

specific technology risk. These results suggest that underreaction to the association between

innovative originality and a firm’s operating performance and/or the inherent skepticism toward

complex information found in psychological studies of cognitive fluency may explain the return

predictability of InnOrig. The high Sharpe ratio of the high-minus-low InnOrig portfolio also

suggests that this relation is not entirely explained by rational pricing. Moreover, the stronger

InnOrig predictive ability among firms with greater sensitivity of future profitability to InnOrig

supports the limited attention explanation over an explanation based on skepticism of complexity.

   Overall, our evidence is consistent with the predictions from a model of limited attention.

Although we do not rule out risk-based explanations, the most plausible interpretation of the

evidence is that the market underweights the information contained in innovative originality. Our

evidence also suggests that innovative originality can be a useful input for firm valuation.




                                                39
                                Appendix. Affymetrix and its competitors

       In this appendix, we discuss an exemplar of recombining distant knowledge components to

make important technological breakthrough – DNA microarray – which greatly facilitates

scientists’ investigation of mutations in genes.

       Mutations denote permanent alterations in the DNA sequence that makes up a gene. Human

genome contains more than 30,000 genes, and at any given moment, some genes are expressed

(turned on), and others are silenced (turned off). Analyzing the mutations of such a large number

of genes to detect mutations was a time-consuming work before the introduction of DNA

microarray. In 1991, Dr. Stephen Fodor, a biochemist, and his colleagues applied the

photolithography technology used in the semiconductor industry for manufacturing computer

microchips to build the first DNA microarray, i.e., a chip that is designed and manufactured to

examine whether the DNA contains mutations in genes. 1 The surface of each DNA microarray

contains a large number of orderly arranged spots, each contains a DNA strand for a particular

gene expression. By placing both the DNA strands from the subject and the control sample in each

spot within one chip, investigators are able to identify the corresponding gene mutation by the

binding of these DNA strands in the spot. This breakthrough technology in gene expression

analysis was covered by Science. 2

       Dr. Fodor founded Affymetrix in 1992, which had been a leading company in DNA microarray

since then. A large portion of Affymetrix’s patents are based on semiconductor- or electronics-

related technologies, which indicates that Affymetrix drew knowledge from widely different areas

to innovate in a novel way. Figures A1 and A2 plot the InnOrig measure and the number of granted




1
    See http://www.the-scientist.com/?articles.view/articleNo/16657/title/The-DNA-Microarray/
2
    S.P. Fodor et al., "Light-directed, spatially addressable parallel chemical synthesis," Science, 251:767–73, 1991.

                                                            40
patents each year for Affymetrix and its two direct competitors: Incyte and Lynx Therapeutics. 3

Affymetrix’ InnOrig increased from 8 in 1996 (its IPO year) to 21 in 2006, and it is persistently

ranked in the top tercile (“High InnOrig” group). In contrast, the two competitors’ InnOrig only

ranges between 3 and 5, and they are persistently ranked in the bottom tercile (“Low InnOrig”

group). These patterns reflect the change in Affymetrix’s innovative strategy by combining more

diverse technologies in its innovation. In addition, the higher InnOrig of Affymetrix cannot be

simply attributed to the size of its patent portfolios because Incyte’s annual number of granted

patents is quite close to Affymetrix’s until 2002 (see Figure A2).

    Consistent with a positive economic link between InnOrig and firms’ operating performance,

Figures A3 and A4 show that the market capitalization and profitability (ROA) of Incyte started

to underperform Affymetrix since 1998/1999, roughly the same time when Affymetrix’s InnOrig

started to surge. These results exemplify the intuition that innovative originality offers a firm with

sustainable competitive advantage (“moat”) that allows it to charge a price premium and obtain

significantly higher profitability and higher stock returns than its competitors.

    We then further examine how Affymetrix’s patents differ from its competitors’ in four

respects. First, we examine the number of unique technology classes (both primary and secondary)

of all patents cited by the patents granted to these three firms in the whole sample period.

Affymetrix cited a total of 213 unique classes, while its competitors, Incyte and Lynx Therapeutics,

only cited a total of 119 and 30 classes, respectively. Figures A5-A7 illustrate the distribution of

these cited patents across different technology classes. They present a much more diverse

distribution for Affymetrix.




3
  These two competitors are identified from Affymetrix’s 10-K. Other competitors that are subsidiaries of
conglomerates or operate in foreign countries are not considered.

                                                   41
    Second, we check whether these three companies have drawn knowledge from semiconductor

devices in particular by focusing on the four technology classes listed in Appendix 1 of Hall et al.

(2001): 257, 326, 438, and 505. Affymetrix cited three of these, Incyte cited two, while Lynx only

cited one. 4 These observations, again, support Affymetrix’s leading position in embedding

semiconductor knowledge in creating biomedical products in a novel way.

    Third, we investigate the patents contributing to the major product line of Affymetrix,

GeneChip®, since its IPO. US Patent 6307042, one of the key patents protecting GeneChip®, cites

patents from 12 unique technology classes. More importantly, two of these have never been cited

by Incyte or Lynx Therapeutics: Class 125—Stone working, and Class 451—Abrading.

    Lastly, we report the number of patents in electronics and optics (Classes 335-361) cited by

these three firms in the whole sample period. Table A1 shows that Affymetrix cited more patents

from these classes than its competitors.

    Affymetrix was acquired by Thermo Fisher Scientific Inc. (NYSE:TMO) for approximately

$1.3 billion in March 2016.




4
 Class 505—Superconductor technology: apparatus, material, process—has been cited by Affymetrix. Class 257—
Active solid-state devices (e.g., transistors, solid-state diodes) —has been cited by Affymetrix and Incyte, and Class
438—Semiconductor device manufacturing: process—has been cited by Affymetrix and Incyte.

                                                         42
                            Figure A1. InnOrig
25

20

15

10

 5

 0
     1993 1994 1995 1996 1997 1998 1999 2000 2001 2002 2003 2004 2005 2006

                           Incyte      Lynx       Affymetrix



               Figure A2. Number of granted patents
60

50

40

30

20

10

 0
     1992 1993 1994 1995 1996 1997 1998 1999 2000 2001 2002 2003 2004 2005 2006

                           Incyte      Lynx       Affymetrix




                                       43
                         Figure A3. Market value
5000
4500
4000
3500
3000
2500
2000
1500
1000
 500
   0
        1993 1994 1995 1996 1997 1998 1999 2000 2001 2002 2003 2004 2005 2006

                           Incyte      Lynx      Affymetrix




                               Figure A4. ROA
20
10
 0
-10    1994 1995 1996 1997 1998 1999 2000 2001 2002 2003 2004 2005 2006 2007

-20
-30
-40
-50
-60
-70

                           Incyte      Lynx      Affymetrix




                                      44
Figure A5. Affymetrix        Figure A6. Incyte




   Figure A7. Lynx




                        45
            Table A1. The Distribution of Patents Cited across Technology Classes 335 to 361
In this table, we presents the number of patents from technology classes 335 to 361 cited by the patents of
Affymetrix, Incyte, and Lynx Therapeutics in the whole sample period, 1976-2006.

  Class     Class description                                           Affymetrix   Incyte   Lynx
                                                                                              Therapeutics
  335       Electricity: magnetically operated switches, magnets, and   1
            electromagnets
  336       Inductor devices                                            1
  338       Electrical resistors                                        1
  340       Communications: electrical                                  1
  341       Coded data generation or conversion                         1
  345       Computer graphics processing and selective visual display   1
            systems
  346       Recorders                                                   1            2
  347       Incremental printing of symbolic information                1            1
  348       Television                                                  1            1        1
  349       Liquid crystal cells, elements and systems                  1
  351       Optics: eye examining, vision testing and correcting        1            2
  353       Optics: image projectors                                    1
  355       Photocopying                                                4
  356       Optics: measuring and testing                               7            2        1
  358       Facsimile and static presentation processing                1            1
  359       Optical: systems and elements                               1            1
  360       Dynamic magnetic information storage or retrieval           1
  361       Electricity: electrical systems and devices                 1




                                                           46
                                                      References

Aboody, David, and Baruch Lev, 1998, The value relevance of intangibles: The case of software capitalization, Journal of
       Accounting Research 36, 161–191.
Aghion, Philippe, John Van Reenen, and Luigi Zingales, 2013, Innovation and institutional ownership. American Economic
       Review 103, 277–304.
Ahuja, Gautam and Riitta Katila, 2001, Technological acquisitions and the innovation performance of acquiring firms: A
       longitudinal study, Strategic Management Journal 22, 197–220.
Allison, John R. and Mark A. Lemley, 1998, Empirical evidence on the validity of litigated patents. American Intellectual
       Property Law Association Quarterly Journal 26, 185–224.
Alter, Adam L., and Daniel M. Oppenheimer, 2006. Predicting short-term stock fluctuations by using processing fluency.
       Proceedings of the National Academy of Science 103, 9369–9372.
Amihud, Yakov, 2002, Illiquidity and stock returns: Cross-section and time- series effects. Journal of Financial Markets 5,
       31–56.
Ang, Andrew, Robert Hodrick, Yuhang Xing, and Xiaoyan Zhang, 2006, The cross-section of volatility and expected
       returns, Journal of Finance 61, 259–299.
Bali, Turan G., Nusret Cakici, and Robert F. Whitelaw, 2011, Maxing out: Stocks as lotteries and the cross-section of
       expected returns, Journal of Financial Economics 99, 427–446.
Balsmeier, Benjamin, Lee Fleming, and Gustavo Manso, 2017, Independent boards and innovation, Journal of Financial
       Economics 123, 536–557.
Barber, Brad, and Terrance Odean, 2008. All that glitters: The effect of attention and news on the buying       behavior of
       individual and institutional investors, Review of Financial Studies 21, 785–818.
Basalla, G., 1988, The Evolution of Technology, Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, MA.Bernard, Victor L., and Jacob
       K. Thomas, 1989, Post-earnings-announcement drift: Delayed price response or risk premium? Journal of Accounting
       Research 27, 1–36.
Berry, Heather, 2014, Global integration and innovation: Multicountry knowledge generation within MNCs
    Strategic Management Journal 35, 869–890.
Bossaerts, Peter, Paolo Ghirardato, Serena Guarnaschelli, and William R. Zame, 2010, Ambiguity in asset markets:
       Theory and experiment, Review of Financial Studies 23, 1325–1359.
Boyer, Brian, Todd Mitton, and Keith Vorkink, 2009, Expected idiosyncratic skewness, Review of Financial Studies 23,
       169–202.
Bushee, Brian, 1998, The influence of institutional investors on myopic R&D investment behavior, Accounting Review 73,
       305–333.
Bushee, Brian, 2001, Do institutional investors prefers near-term earnings over long-run value? Contemporary Accounting
       Research 18, 207–246.
Caballero, Ricardo, and Adam B. Jaffe, 1993, How High are the Giants’ Shoulders: An Empirical Assessment of Knowledge
       Spillovers and Creative Destruction in a Model of Economic Growth, NBER Macroeconomics Annual 8, 15–76.
Campello, Murillo, and Long Chen, 2010, Are financial constraints priced? Evidence from firm fundamentals, and stock
       returns, Journal of Money, Credit, and Banking 42, 1185–1198.
Cao, H. H., T. Wang, and H. H. Zhang, 2005, Model uncertainty, limited market participation, and asset prices, Review of
       Financial Studies 18, 1219–1251.
Carhart, Mark, 1997, On persistence in mutual fund performance, Journal of Finance 52, 57–82.Chan, Louis K.C., and
       Josef Lakonishok, 1997, Institutional equity trading costs: NYSE versus Nasdaq, Journal of Finance 52, 713–735.
Chambers, Dennis, Ross Jennings, and Robert B. Thompson II, 2002, Excess returns to R&D-intensive firms, Review of
       Accounting Studies 7, 133–158.
Chan, Louis K.C., Josef Lakonishok, and Theodore Sougiannis, 2001, The stock market valuation of research and
       development expenditures, Journal of Finance 56, 2431–2456.
Chen, Zengjing, and Larry Epstein, 2002, Ambiguity, risk and asset returns in continuous time, Econometrica 70, 1403–
       1443.
Ciftci, Mustafa, Baruch Lev, and Suresh Radhakrishnan, 2011, Is research and development mispriced or properly risk
       adjusted? Journal of Accounting, Auditing & Finance 26, 81–116.
Cohen, Lauren, Karl Diether, and Christopher Malloy, 2013, Misvaluing innovation, Review of Financial Studies 26, 635–
       666.
Cohen, Lauren, and Andrea Frazzini, 2008, Economic links and predictable returns, Journal of Finance 63, 1977–2011.
                                                              47
Cohen, Lauren, and Dong Lou, 2012, Complicated firms, Journal of Financial Economics 104, 383–400.
Cooper, Michael J., Huseyin Gulen, and Michael J. Schill, 2008, Asset growth and the cross-section of stock returns, Journal
      of Finance 63, 1609–1651.
Custodio, Claudia, Miguel A. Ferreira, and Pedro P. Matos, 2013, Do general managerial skills spur innovation? Darden
      Business School Working Paper.
Da, Zhi, Joseph Engelberg, and Pengjie Gao, 2011, In search of attention, Journal of Finance 66, 1461–1499.
Da, Zhi, Umit G. Gurun, and Mitch Warachka, 2014, Frog in the pan: Continuous information and momentum, Review of
      Financial Studies 27, 2171–2218.
Da, Zhi, and Mitch Warachka, 2011, The disparity between long-term and short-term forecasted earnings growth, Journal
      of Financial Economics 100, 424–442.
Daniel, Kent, Mark Grinblatt, Sheridan Titman, and Russ Wermers, 1997, Measuring mutual fund performance with
      characteristic-based benchmarks, Journal of Finance 52, 1035–1058.
Daniel, Kent, and Sheridan Titman, 2006, Market reactions to tangible and intangible information, Journal of Finance 61,
      1605–1643.
DellaVigna, Stefano, and Joshua M. Pollet, 2009, Investor inattention and Friday earnings announcements, Journal of
      Finance 64, 709–749.
Deng, Zhen, Baruch Lev, and Francis Narin, 1999, Science and technology as predictors of stock performance, Financial
      Analysts Journal 55, 20–32.
Dow, James, and Sérgio Ribeiro da Costa Werlang, 1992, Uncertainty aversion, risk aversion, and the optimal choice of
      portfolio, Econometrica 60, 197–204.
Eberhart, Allan C., William F. Maxwell, and Akhtar R. Siddique, 2004, An examination of long-term abnormal stock returns
      and operating performance following R&D increases, Journal of Finance 59, 623–650.
Fama, Eugene, and French, Kenneth, 1992, The cross-section of expected stock returns, Journal of Finance 47, 427–465.
Fama, Eugene, and French, Kenneth, 1993, Common risk factors in the returns on stocks and bonds, Journal of Financial
      Economics 33, 3–56.
Fama, Eugene, and French, Kenneth, 1997, Industry costs of equity, Journal of Financial Economics 43, 153–193.
Fama, Eugene, and French, Kenneth, 2000, Forecasting profitability and earnings, Journal of Business 73, 161–175.
Fama, Eugene, and French, Kenneth, 2006, Profitability, investment and average returns, Journal of Financial Economics
      82, 491–518.
Fama, Eugene, and French, Kenneth, 2008, Dissecting anomalies, Journal of Finance 63, 1653–1678.
Fama, Eugene, and French, Kenneth, 2015, A five-factor asset pricing model, Journal of Financial Economics,
      Forthcoming.
Fama, Eugene, and James MacBeth, 1973, Risk, return, and equilibrium: empirical tests, Journal of Political Economy 71,
      607–636.
Garcia-Vega, Maria, 2006, Does technological diversification promote innovation? An empirical analysis for European
      firms, Research Policy 35, 230–246.
Garleanu, Nicolae, Stavros Panageas, and Jianfeng Yu, 2012, Technological growth and asset prices, Journal of Finance
      67, 1265–1292.
Gertler, Mark, and Simon Gilchrist, 1994, Monetary policy, business cycles, and the behavior of small manufacturing firms,
      Quarterly Journal of Economics 109, 309–40.
Gervais, Simon, Ron Kaniel, and Dan H. Mingelgrin, 2001, The high-volume return premium, Journal of Finance 56, 877–
      919.
Gomez-Mejia, Luis R., Cristina Cruz, Pascual Berrone, and Julio De Castro, 2011, The bind that ties: Socioemotional wealth
      preservation in family firms, Academy of Management Annals 5, 653–707.
Greenwald, Bruce C. N., Judd Kahn, Paul D. Sonkin, and Michael van Biema, 2004, Value Investing: From Graham to
      Buffett and Beyond, John Wiley & Sons.
Greenwood, Jeremy, Zvi Hercowitz, and Per Krusell, 1997, Long-run implications of investment-specific technological
      change, American Economic Review 87, 342–362.
Greenwood, Jeremy, and Boyan Jovanovic, 1999, The information-technology revolution and the stock market, American
      Economic Review Papers and Proceedings 89, 116–122.
Griliches, Zvi, 1990, Patent statistics as economic indicators: A survey, Journal of Economic Literature 28, 1661–1707.
Gu, Feng, 2005, Innovation, future earnings, and market efficiency, Journal of Accounting Auditing and Finance 20, 385–
      418.


                                                            48
Gupta, Anil K., and Vijay Govindarajan, 2000, Knowledge flows within multinational corporations, Strategic Management
      Journal 21, 473–496.
Hall, Bronwyn H., 1992, Investment and research and development at the firm level: Does the source of financing matter?
      NBER Working Paper No. 4096.
Hall, Bronwyn H., 1993, The stock market’s valuation of R&D investment during the 1980’s, American Economic Review
      83, 259–264.
Hall, Bronwyn H., 2005, Exploring the patent explosion, Journal of Technology Transfer 30, 35–48.
Hall, Bronwyn H., 2009, The financing of innovative firms, European Investment Bank Papers, 14, No. 2, 8–28.
Hall, Bronwyn H., Adam Jaffe, and Manuel Trajtenberg, 2001, The NBER patent citation data file: lessons, insights and
      methodological tools, Working paper, NBER Working Paper 8498.
Hall, Bronwyn H., and Josh Lerner, 2010, The financing of R&D and innovation, In Handbook of the Economics of
      Innovation, ed. Bronwyn H. Hall and Nathan Rosenberg. Elsevier-North Holland.
Harvey, Campbell R., and Akhtar Siddique, 2000, Conditional skewness in asset pricing tests, Journal of Finance 55, 1263–
      1295.
Henderson R. M., and K. B. Clark, 1990, Architectural innovation: the reconfiguration of existing product technologies and
      the failure of established firms, Administrative Science Quarterly 35, 9–30.
Henderson, Rebecca, and Iain Cockburn, 1994, Measuring competence? Exploring firm effects in pharmaceutical research,
      Strategic Management Journal, 15, 63–84.
Himmelberg, Charles P. and Bruce C. Petersen, 1994, R&D and internal finance: A panel study of small firms in high-tech
      industries, Review of Economics and Statistics 76, 38–51.
Hirshleifer, David, Po-Hsuan Hsu, and Dongmei Li, 2013, Innovative efficiency and stock returns, Journal of Financial
      Economics 107, 632–654.
Hirshleifer, David, Sonya Lim, and Siew Hong Teoh, 2009, Driven to distraction: Extraneous events and underreaction to
      earnings news, Journal of Finance 63, 2287–2323.
Hirshleifer, David, Sonya Lim, and Siew Hong Teoh, 2011, Limited investor attention and stock market misreactions to
      accounting information, Review of Asset Pricing Studies 1, 35–73.
Hirshleifer, David, and Siew Hong Teoh, 2003, Limited attention, information disclosure, and financial reporting, Journal
      of Accounting and Economics 36, 337–386.
Hirshleifer, David, and Danling Jiang, 2010, A financing-based misvaluation factor and the cross-section of expected
      returns, Review of Financial Studies 23, 3401–3436.
Hoberg, Gerard, and Gordon Phillips, 2012, The stock market, product uniqueness, and comovement of peer firms, Working
      Paper, University of South California.
Hobijn, Bart, and Boyan Jovanovic, 2001, The information-technology revolution and the stock market: Evidence, American
      Economic Review 91, 1203–1220.
Hong, Harrison, and Marcin Kacperczyk, 2009, The price of sin: The effects of social norms on markets, Journal of
      Financial Economics 93, 15–36.
Hou, Kewei, Lin Peng, and Wei Xiong, 2009, A tale of two anomalies: the implication of investor attention for price and
      earnings momentum, Working paper, Ohio State University.
Hou, Kewei, Chen Xue, and Lu Zhang, 2015, Digesting anomalies: An investment approach, Review of Financial Studies,
      28, 650–705.
Hsu, Po-Hsuan, 2009, Technological innovations and aggregate risk premiums, Journal of Financial Economics 94, 264–
      279.
Huberman, Gur, and Tomer Regev, 2001, Contagious speculation and a cure for cancer, Journal of Finance 56, 387–396.
Hutton, Amy P., Alan J. Marcus, and Hassan Tehranian, 2009, Opaque financial reports, R2, and crash risk, Journal of
      Financial Economics 94, 67–86.
Ikenberry, David, Josef Lakonishok, and Theo Vermaelen, 1995, Market underreaction to open market share repurchases,
      Journal of Financial Economics 39, 181–208.
Kapadia, Nishad, 2006, The next Microsoft? Skewness, idiosyncratic volatility, and expected returns, Working paper. Rice
      University.
Klibanoff, Peter, Owen Lamont and Thierry A. Wizman, 1998, Investor reaction to salient news in closed-end country
      funds, Journal of Finance 53, 673–699.
Kogan, Leonid, and Dimitris Papanikolaou, 2014, Growth opportunities, technology shocks and asset prices, Journal of
      Finance 69, 675–718.


                                                           49
Kortum, Samuel and Josh Lerner, 1998, Stronger protection or technological revolution: what is behind the recent surge in
      patenting? Carnegie-Rochester Conference Series on Public Policy 48, 247–304.
Kothari, S.P., Ted E. Laguerre, and Andrew J. Leone, 2002, Capitalization versus expensing: Evidence on the uncertainty
      of future earnings from capital expenditures versus R&D outlays, Review of Accounting Studies 7, 355–382.
Kumar, Alok, 2009, Hard-to-value stocks, behavioral biases, and informed trading, Journal of Financial and Quantitative
      Analysis 44, 1375–1401.
Laitner, John, and Dmitriy Stolyarov, 2003, Technological change and the stock market, American Economic Review 93,
      1240–1267.
Lanjouw, Jean, and Mark Schankerman, 2004, Patent quality and research productivity: Measuring innovation with multiple
      indicators, Economic Journal 114, 441–465.
Lerner, Josh, 1994, The importance of patent scope: An empirical analysis, RAND Journal of Economics 25, 319–333.
Lerner, Josh, Morten Sørensen, and Per Strömberg, 2011, Private equity and long-run investment: The case of innovation,
      Journal of Finance 66, 445–477.
Lev, Baruch, Bharat Sarath, and Theodore Sougiannis, 2005, R&D reporting biases and their consequences, Contemporary
      Accounting Research 22, 977–1026.
Lev, Baruch, and Theodore Sougiannis, 1996, The capitalization, amortization, and value-relevance of R&D, Journal of
      Accounting and Economics 21, 107–138.
Levin, Richard C., Alvin K. Klevorick, Richard R. Nelson, and Sidney G. Winter, 1987, Appropriating the returns from
      industrial research and development, Brookings Papers on Economic Activity 3, 783–831.
Li, Dongmei, 2011, Financial constraints, R&D investment, and stock returns, Review of Financial Studies 24, 2974–3007.
Li, Guan-Cheng, Ronald Lai, Alexander D’Amour, David M. Doolin, Ye Sun, Vetle Torvik, Amy Z. Yu, and Lee Fleming,
      2014, Disambiguation and co-authorship networks of the U.S. patent inventor database (1975-2010), Research Policy
      43, 941–955.
Li, Jun, and Jianfeng Yu, 2012, Investor attention, psychological anchors, and stock return predictability, Journal of
      Financial Economics 104, 401–419.
Lyandres, Evgeny, Le Sun, and Lu Zhang, 2008, The new issues puzzle: Testing the investment-based explanation, Review
      of Financial Studies 21, 2825–2855.
Makri, Marianna, Michael A. Hitt, and Peter J. Lane, 2010, Complementary technologies, knowledge relatedness, and
      invention outcomes in high technology mergers and acquisitions, Strategic Management Journal 31, 602–628.
Martin, Xavier, and R. Salomon, 2003, Knowledge transfer capacity and its implications for the theory of the multinational
      corporation, Journal of International Business Studies 34, 356–373.
Matolcsy, Zoltan P., and Anne Wyatt, 2008, The association between technological conditions and the market value of
      equity, Accounting Review 83, 479–518.
Mehra, Rajnish, and Edward C. Prescott, 1985, The equity premium: A puzzle, Journal of Monetary Economics 15, 145–
      161.
Newey, W.K., and K.D. West, 1987, A simple, positive semi-definite, heteroskedasticity and autocorrelation consistent
      covariance matrix, Econometrica 55, 703–708.
Pandit, Shail, Charles E. Wasley and Tzachi Zach, 2011, The effect of research and development (R&D) inputs and outputs
      on the relation between the uncertainty of future operating performance and R&D expenditures, Journal of
      Accounting, Auditing & Finance 26: 121–144.
Papanikolaou, Dimitris, 2011, Investment shocks and asset prices, Journal of Political Economy 119, 639–685.
Pastor, Lubos and Robert F. Stambaugh, 2003, Liquidity risk and expected stock returns, Journal of Political Economy 111,
      642–685.
Pastor, Lubos, and Pietro Veronesi, 2009, Technological revolutions and stock prices, American Economic Review 99,
      1451–1483.
Peng, Lin, and Wei Xiong, 2006, Investor attention, overconfidence and category learning, Journal of Financial Economics
      80, 563–602.
Polk, Christopher, and Paola Sapienza, 2009, The stock market and corporate investment: A test of catering theory, Review
      of Financial Studies 22, 187–217.
Pontiff, Jeffrey, and Artemiza Woodgate, 2008, Share issuance and cross-sectional returns, Journal of Finance 63, 921–
      945.
Roach, Michael, Wesley M. Cohen, 2013, Lens or prism? Patent citations as a measure of knowledge flows from public
      research, Management Science 59, 504–525.
Rothaermel, Frank T. and David L. Deeds, 2004, Exploration and exploitation alliances in biotechnology: A system of new

                                                           50
      product development, Strategic Management Journal 25, 201–221.
Sampat, B., 2010, When do applicants search for prior art? Journal of Law and Economics 53, 399–416.
Schumpeter Joseph A., 1934, The Theory of Economic Development, Harvard University Press: Cambridge, MA.
Schumpeter, Joseph A., 1950, Capitalism, Socialism, and Democracy, 3rd ed. (Harper & Row, New York).
Seru, Amit, 2014, Firm boundaries matter: Evidence from conglomerates and R&D activity, Journal of Financial
      Economics 111, 381405.
Singh, Jasjit, 2008, Distributed R&D, cross-regional knowledge integration and quality of innovative output, Research
      Policy 37, 77–96.
Singh, Jasjit, and Lee Fleming, 2010, Lone inventors as sources of breakthroughs: Myth or reality? Management Science
      56, 41–56.
Song, Hyunjin, and Norbert Schwarz, 2008, If it’s hard to read, it’s hard to do: Processing fluency affects effort prediction
      and motivation, Psychological Science 19, 986–988.
Song, Hyunjin, and Norbert Schwarz, 2009, If it’s difficult to pronounce, it must be risky: Fluency, familiarity, and risk
      perception, Psychological Science 20, 135–138.
Song, Hyunjin, and Norbert Schwarz, 2010, If it’s easy to read, it’s easy to do, pretty, good, and true: Fluency effects on
      judgment, choice, and processing style, The Psychologist 23, 108–111.
Stambaugh, Robert F., and Yu Yuan, 2017, Mispricing factors, Review of Financial Studies 30, 1270–1315.
Subramaniam, Mohan, and Mark A. Youndt, 2005, The influence of intellectual capital on the types of innovative
      capabilities, Academy of Management Journal 48, 450–463.
Thompson, Peter, 2006, Patent citations and the geography of knowledge spillovers: Evidence from inventor- and examiner-
      added citations, Review of Economics and Statistics 88, 383–388.
Trajtenberg, Manuel, Rebecca Henderson, and Adam Jaffe, 1997, University versus corporate patents: A window on the
      basicness of invention, Economics of Innovation and New Technology 5, 19–50.
Wermers, Russ, 2004, Is money really ‘smart’? New evidence on the relation between mutual fund flows, manager behavior,
      and performance persistence. Working paper, University of Maryland.
Weitzman, M., 1998, Recombinant growth, Quarterly Journal of Economics 113, 331–360.




                                                             51
Table 1
Innovative originality of selected industries

This table reports the pooled mean, median, standard deviation (Stdev), coefficient of variation (CV), 1st
percentile (P1), 5th percentile (P5), 30th percentile (P30), 70th percentile (P70), 95th percentile (P95), and 99th
percentile (P99) of the innovative originality (InnOrig) measure for firms in selected industries based on Fama-
French 48 industry classifications. We also report CV across industries at the bottom. The sample is from 1981
to 2006 and excludes financial and utility firms. To compute a firm’s InnOrig, we first measure an individual
patent’s citation diversity as the number of three-digit technology classes (both primary and secondary classes)
covered by patents cited by the focal patent (i.e., the “reference list” of the focal patent). The technology classes
are assigned by the US Patent and Trademark Office (USPTO). We then measure a firm’s InnOrig in year t by
the average of citation diversity across all patents granted to the firm over the past five years (year t – 4 to t).


       Industry                           Mean Median Stdev CV P1 P5 P30 P70 P95 P99
       Medical equipment                  7.38  6.04 4.91 0.67 1 2.38 4.47 8.35 17.40 25.67
       Pharmaceutical products            6.59  5.50 4.41 0.67 1 2.00 4.33 7.00 14.50 23.27
       Chemicals                          6.53  5.80 3.83 0.59 1 2.59 4.61 7.25 13.40 23.00
       Machinery                          5.95  5.12 3.38 0.57 1 2.00 4.00 6.93 13.00 16.67
       Electrical equipment               5.78  5.00 3.92 0.68 1 2.00 3.71 6.50 12.00 19.25
       Automobiles and trucks             5.10  4.92 2.45 0.48 1 2.00 3.83 5.75 10.00 13.26
       Business services                  7.88  6.60 5.43 0.69 1 2.00 5.00 8.83 17.50 27.00
       Computers                          6.26  5.50 3.75 0.60 1 2.00 4.08 7.25 13.00 20.00
       Electronic equipment               5.92  5.00 3.82 0.65 1 2.00 4.00 6.50 13.00 21.00
       Measuring and control equipment    6.25  5.33 3.82 0.61 1 2.00 4.00 7.26 13.50 20.33
       Coefficient of variation (CV)      0.13  0.10




                                                         52
Table 2
Summary statistics and correlations

At the end of June of year t from 1982 to 2007, we sort firms with non-missing innovative originality (InnOrig) measure into three groups (Low,
Middle, High) based on the 30th and 70th percentiles of the InnOrig measure in year t – 1. In addition, we assign firms with missing InnOrig (i.e., no
patents) but positive R&D over any of the last five years into the “Low” group and firms with neither R&D investment nor patents into the “No” group.
InnOrig is defined in Table 1. Panel A reports the time-series mean of cross-sectional average characteristics (both raw value and percentile ranks) of
firms in each InnOrig group. The number of firms is the number of firms in each group averaged over years. Size is market capitalization (in millions)
at the end of June of year t. Book-to-market (BTM) is the ratio of book equity of fiscal year ending in year t – 1 to market capitalization at the end of
year t – 1. Momentum (MOM) is the previous eleven-month returns (with a one-month gap between the holding period and the current month). IVOL
is computed at the end of June of year t as the standard deviation of the residuals from regressing daily stock returns on the Fama-French three factor
returns over the previous 12 months (with a minimum of 31 trading days). Skewness (TSKEW) is computed at the end of June of year t using daily
returns over the previous 12 months (with a minimum of 31 trading days). RDME is R&D expenses in fiscal year ending in year t – 1 divided by market
capitalization at the end of year t – 1. CTA is the number of patents issued to a firm in year t – 1 divided by the firm’s total assets at the end of year t –
1. Citations-based innovative efficiency measure (CIE) in year t – 1 is adjusted patent citations received in year t – 1 by patents granted to a firm in
years t – 2 to t – 6 scaled by the sum of R&D expenses in years t – 4 to t – 8. The adjusted citations in year t to patent k are citations to patent k in year
t divided by the mean citations to patents of the same subcategory and grant year group in year t. Patents-based innovative efficiency measure (PIE) in
year t – 1 is patents granted to a firm in year t – 1 scaled by research and development (R&D) capital in year t – 3. R&D capital is computed as the
five-year cumulative R&D expenses with a 20% annual depreciation. ROA (return on assets) is defined as income before extraordinary items plus
interest expenses in year t – 1 divided by lagged total assets. ROE (return on equity) is defined as income before extraordinary items plus interest
expenses in year t – 1 scaled by lagged book equity (common equity plus deferred tax). Asset growth (AG) is the change in total assets in year t – 1
divided by lagged total assets. IA is capital expenditure in year t – 1 divided by lagged total assets. Net stock issues (NS) is the change in the natural
log of the split-adjusted shares outstanding in year t – 1. Split-adjusted shares outstanding is Compustat shares outstanding times the Compustat
adjustment factor. Institutional ownership (InstOwn) denotes the fraction of firm shares outstanding owned by institutional investors in year t – 1.
Short-term reversal (REV) is monthly returns in the prior month. Stock illiquidity (ILLIQ) is defined as absolute stock return in June of year t divided
by dollar trading volume in June of year t (the raw value is multiplied by 1,000,000). Number of segments (NSD) is the number of different sales
segments defined by Fama-French 48 industries over the previous five years (year t – 5 to year t – 1). HHI-based sales diversity (HHISD) is one minus
the Herfindahl index of sales across the number of segments. We winsorize all variables at the 1% and 99% levels except the number of firms, InnOrig,
NSD, and HHISD. Panel B reports the times-series average of cross-sectional correlations between InnOrig and the other characteristics.




                                                                             53
Panel A. Summary statistics
                                                               Raw value                         Percentile ranks
                                               No     Low        Middle     High     All    No   Low Middle         High
Number of firms                               2426    1283           550     409    4671
Innovative originality (InnOrig)                       3.02         5.37    9.78    5.97          15        50       85
Size ($mn)                                     718     702          4334    2033    1311    46    45        66       59
Book-to-market (BTM)                          0.90     0.68         0.70    0.64    0.78    55    45        46       44
Momentum (MOM)                                0.11     0.13         0.15    0.15    0.12    49    48        53       52
Idiosyncratic volatility (IVOL)               0.04     0.04         0.03    0.03    0.04    49    56        38       45
Skewness (SKEW)                               0.61     0.64         0.39    0.47    0.58    50    52        44       47
R&D/Market equity (RDME)                      0.10%   6.76%         6.03%   5.90%   3.60%   27    69        67       66
Patents/Assets (CTA)                          0.00%   0.84%         2.84%   3.45%   0.98%   38    48        75       72
Citations-based innovative efficiency (CIE)   0.00     0.18         0.68    0.81    0.42    26    36        67       66
Patents-based innovative efficiency (PIE)     0.00     0.07         0.25    0.28    0.15    28    37        67       65
Return on assets (ROA)                        4.66%   -2.84%        3.05%   0.29%   1.54%   52    45        52       49
Return on equity (ROE)                        7.95%   -4.17%        5.56%   1.10%   2.96%   54    43        52       47
Asset growth (AG)                             0.18     0.18         0.14    0.16    0.17    51    48        49       49
Capex/Assets (IA)                             0.10     0.07         0.07    0.07    0.08    53    45        49       49
Net stock issuance (NS)                       0.06     0.07         0.04    0.05    0.06    48    52        48       51
Institutional ownership (InstOwn)             0.31     0.29         0.45    0.40    0.33    47    45        63       57
Short-term return reversal (REV)              0.57%   0.53%         0.65%   0.67%   0.56%   50    49        50       50
Illiquidity (ILLIQ)                           0.68     0.49         0.15    0.18    0.53    52    53        36       42
Number of sales segments (NSD)                1.34     1.34         1.69    1.47    1.39    48    48        56       51
HHI Sales diversity (HHISD)                   0.08     0.08         0.16    0.12    0.09    48    48        57       51




                                                               54
Panel B. Correlations
                                              Pearson corrlations   Spearman rank correlations
                                                   InnOrig                  InnOrig
Innovative originality (InnOrig)                       1                         1
Size ($mn)                                          -0.01                      0.05
Book-to-market (BTM)                                -0.07                     -0.08
Momentum (MOM)                                       0.00                      0.01
Idiosyncratic volatility (IVOL)                      0.04                     -0.01
Skewness (SKEW)                                      0.01                     -0.01
R&D/Market equity (RDME)                             0.01                      0.05
Patents/Assets (CTA)                                 0.09                      0.11
Citations-based innovative efficiency (CIE)          0.13                      0.15
Patents-based innovative efficiency (PIE)            0.06                      0.09
Return on assets (ROA)                              -0.06                     -0.02
Return on equity (ROE)                              -0.06                     -0.03
Asset growth (AG)                                    0.03                      0.02
Capex/Assets (IA)                                    0.04                      0.05
Net stock issuance (NS)                              0.04                      0.04
Institutional ownership (InstOwn)                   -0.03                      0.03
Short-term return reversal (REV)                     0.00                      0.00
Illiquidity (ILLIQ)                                 -0.01                     -0.05
Number of sales segments (NSD)                      -0.03                     0.00
HHI Sales diversity (HHISD)                         -0.03                     0.00




                                                55
Table 3
Innovative originality and future profitability

This table reports the average slopes (in %) and their Newey-West (1987) autocorrelation-adjusted
heteroscedasticity-robust t-statistics in parentheses from annual Fama and MacBeth (1973) cross-sectional
regressions. In Panel A, we regress future change in profitability on InnOrig and other control variables. In Panel
B, we regress standard deviation of profitability in year t + 1 to t + 5 on InnOrig and other controls. Profitability
is measured by return on equity (ROE) in Panels A1 and B1, and by return on assets (ROA) in Panels A2 and B2.
∆ROEt (∆ROAt) is the change in ROE (ROA) between year t and year t – 1. R&D is R&D expenditure divided by
assets. Capex is capital expenditure divided by assets. MTB is market-to-book assets. Adv is advertising expense
divided by assets. All the other control variables are defined as in Table 2. We also control for industry dummies
based on the Fama and French (1997) 48 industries. We set missing values for InnOrig, IE, advertising expenses,
and R&D expenses to zero. In addition, we control for a dummy, which equals one for firms with no R&D
investment over the past five years and 0 otherwise, and its interactions with all the other control variables. We
omit the slopes on the 48 industry dummies, the slopes on the missing dummy, and its interactions with other
control variables for brevity. We winsorize all variables at the 1% and 99% levels and standardize all independent
variables (except the dummies) to zero mean and one standard deviation. Financial and utility firms are excluded.
R-square (Firms) is the time-series average of the R-squares (number of firms) from the annual cross-sectional
regressions. The sample is from 1981 to 2006.




                                                         56
Panel A1. InnOrig and mean reversion of future ROE
Dependent InnOrigt ΔROEt InnOrigt *ΔROEt CIEt *ΔROEt             ROE      ADVt R&Dt Capext CIEt           MTBt Intercept R2     Firms
 ΔROEt+1       2.18    -13.57         1.97          -0.92       -19.43     0.72   -7.04   0.75    0.13     0.77   -2.79  0.19   3047
              (7.43) (-13.81)        (3.49)        (-1.69)      (-5.66)   (2.42) (-4.86) (1.49) (0.47)    (0.97) (-2.67)
Dependent InnOrigt ΔROEt InnOrigt *ΔROEt PIEt *ΔROEt             ROE      ADVt R&Dt Capext PIEt           MTBt Intercept R2     Firms
 ΔROEt+1       2.27    -13.69         1.34          1.62        -19.32     0.69   -7.04   0.75   -0.20     0.83   -2.83  0.19   3047
              (7.63) (-13.63)        (2.08)        (2.49)       (-5.61)   (2.37) (-4.84) (1.49) (-0.71)   (1.04) (-2.67)
Panel A2. InnOrig and mean reversion of future ROA
Dependent InnOrigt ΔROAt InnOrigt *ΔROAt CIEt *ΔROAt             ROA      ADVt R&Dt Capext CIEt           MTBt Intercept R2     Firms
 ΔROAt+1       0.49     -3.04         0.22          -0.17        -4.92     0.28   -1.40   0.11    0.05     0.48   -0.05  0.21   3049
              (7.11)   (-7.63)       (2.10)        (-1.75)      (-6.26)   (2.85) (-3.88) (0.68) (1.05)    (2.33) (-0.16)
Dependent InnOrigt ΔROAt InnOrigt *ΔROAt PIEt *ΔROAt             ROA      ADVt R&Dt Capext PIEt           MTBt Intercept R2     Firms
 ΔROAt+1       0.53     -3.06         0.16          -0.04        -4.91     0.27   -1.41   0.12   -0.11     0.49   -0.06  0.21   3049
              (7.33)   (-7.63)       (1.72)        (-0.71)      (-6.26)   (2.67) (-3.88) (0.71) (-1.47)   (2.32) (-0.18)


         Panel B1. InnOrig and volatility of future ROE
         Dependent         InnOrigt CIEt          ADVt     R&Dt     Capext    MTBt ROE_VOLt-4,t    Intercept    R2    Firms
         ROE_VOLt+1,t+5      -2.79      0.65       0.39    15.12     -0.99     -0.29   12.56         25.11     0.12   1745
                            (-4.62) (1.22)        (1.06)   (6.31)   (-1.30)   (-0.34) (11.16)       (10.70)
         Dependent         InnOrigt PIEt          ADVt     R&Dt     Capext    MTBt ROE_VOLt-4,t    Intercept    R2    Firms
         ROE_VOLt+1,t+5      -2.79      0.87       0.38    15.11     -0.99     -0.31   12.58         25.11     0.12   1745
                            (-4.52) (1.44)        (1.01)   (6.31)   (-1.33)   (-0.36) (11.15)       (10.86)
         Panel B2. InnOrig and volatility of future ROA
         Dependent         InnOrigt CIEt          ADVt     R&Dt     Capext    MTBt ROA_VOLt-4,t    Intercept    R2    Firms
         ROA_VOLt+1,t+5      -0.68      0.12      -0.08     2.76     -0.32     0.08    3.09           6.07     0.32   1745
                            (-7.19) (1.96) (-1.34)         (5.93)   (-2.57)   (0.52) (12.03)        (15.35)
         Dependent         InnOrigt PIEt          ADVt     R&Dt     Capext    MTBt ROA_VOLt-4,t    Intercept    R2    Firms
         ROA_VOLt+1,t+5      -0.68      0.17      -0.08     2.76     -0.33     0.08    3.09           6.06     0.32   1745
                            (-6.80) (2.34) (-1.34)         (5.92)   (-2.63)   (0.52) (12.07)        (15.31)
                                                                    57
Table 4
Innovative originality and future gross margin

This table reports the average slopes (in %) and their Newey-West (1987) autocorrelation-adjusted heteroscedasticity-robust t-statistics in parentheses
from annual Fama and MacBeth (1973) cross-sectional regressions. In Panel A, we regress future gross margin (GM) on InnOrig and other control
variables. Slopes on four lagged GMs and interaction of InnOrig with the four lagged GMs are omitted for brevity. In Panel B, we regress standard
deviation of GM in year t + 1 to t + 5 on InnOrig and other controls. GM is measured by (Sales-Cost of goods sold)/Sales. If GM exceeds 1, it is set to
1. If GM is lower than – 1, it is set to – 1. R&D is R&D expenditure divided by assets. Capex is capital expenditure divided by assets. MTB is market-
to-book assets. Adv is advertising expense divided by assets. All the other control variables are defined as in Table 2. We also control for industry
dummies based on the Fama and French (1997) 48 industries. We set missing values for InnOrig, IE, advertising expenses, and R&D expenses to zero.
In addition, we control for a dummy, which equals one for firms with no R&D investment over the past five years and 0 otherwise, and its interactions
with all the other control variables. We omit the slopes on the 48 industry dummies, the slopes on the missing dummy, and its interactions with other
control variables for brevity. We winsorize all control variables at the 1% and 99% levels and standardize all independent variables to zero mean and
one standard deviation. Financial and utility firms are excluded. R-square (Firms) is the time-series average of the R-squares (number of firms) from
the annual cross-sectional regressions. The sample is from 1981 to 2006.

         Panel A. InnOrig and persistence of gross margin (GM)
                                                                                                                                  2
         Dependent        InnOrigt GMt InnOrigt *GMt CIEt                 ADVt    R&Dt        Capext      MTBt      Intercept    R      Firms
         GMt+1              -0.16     23.90          0.71        0.06     0.46    -0.29        0.06        0.81       29.19     0.70    2374
                           (-1.37) (16.41)          (1.97)      (2.78)   (10.39) (-1.44)      (0.43)      (3.34)     (51.85)
                                                                                                                                  2
         Dependent        InnOrigt GMt InnOrigt *GMt PIEt                 ADVt    R&Dt        Capext      MTBt      Intercept    R      Firms
         GMt+1              -0.11     23.91          0.72        -0.01    0.46    -0.29        0.06        0.82       29.22     0.70    2374
                           (-0.98) (16.40)          (1.99)     (-0.16)   (10.12) (-1.41)      (0.47)      (3.33)     (51.76)
         Panel B. InnOrig and volatility of future gross margin (GM)
                                                                                                                        2
         Dependent        InnOrigt CIEt             ADVt        R&Dt     Capext    MTBt     GM_VOLt-4,t Intercept      R        Firms
         GM_VOLt+1,t+5 -0.28           0.14          -0.28       1.85     -0.17     0.23       3.14       3.63        0.29      1735
                           (-3.42) (2.12)          (-7.17)      (4.56)   (-1.81)   (1.87)     (8.98)     (17.88)
                                                                                                                        2
         Dependent        InnOrigt     PIEt         ADVt        R&Dt     Capext    MTBt     GM_VOLt-4,t Intercept      R        Firms
         GM_VOLt+1,t+5      -0.27     0.17         -0.29        1.85   -0.18        0.23       3.14       3.62        0.29      1735
                           (-3.46)   (4.56)       (-7.37)      (4.56) (-1.89)      (1.84)     (8.87)     (18.03)




                                                                            58
Table 5
Return predictive power of innovative originality – Single-sorted portfolio analysis

At the end of June of year t from 1982 to 2007, we form portfolios based on innovative originality (InnOrig) in year t – 1 as in Table 2. We also
construct a high-minus-low (High–Low) portfolio by holding a long (short) position in the high (low) InnOrig portfolio. We then hold these portfolios
over the next twelve months (July of year t to June of year t + 1). In Panel A, we report their average monthly returns in excess of one-month Treasury
bill rate (Exret) as well as their average monthly industry- and characteristic-adjusted returns. The portfolio industry-adjusted returns (Ind-adjret) are
based on the difference between individual firms’ returns and the returns of firms in the same industry (based on Fama-French 48 industry
classifications). Following Daniel, Grinblatt, Titman, and Wermers (DGTW 1997) and Wermers (2004), the portfolio characteristic-adjusted returns
(Char-adjret) are based on the difference between individual firms’ returns and the DGTW benchmark portfolio returns. In Panels B and C, we report
the alphas and R2 from the regression of the time-series of portfolio excess returns on various factor models: the Fama-French three factors (the market
factor–MKT, the size factor–SMB, and the value factor–HML) plus the momentum (UMD) factor (4F) model, 4F plus the investment-minus-
consumption (IMC) factor (Papanikolaou 2011), the liquidity (LIQ) factor (Pastor and Stambaugh 2003), the citations- or patents-based innovative
efficient-minus-inefficient (EMI1 or EMI2) factor as in Hirshleifer, Hsu, and Li (2013), the robust-minus-weak (RMW) factor and the conservative-
minus-aggressive (CMA) factor as in Fama and French (2015), or the undervalued-minus-overvalued (UMO) factor of Hirshleifer and Jiang (2010).
We also report the alpha from the investment-based factor model (q-factor model) of Hou, Xue, and Zhang (HXZ 2015) and the mispricing factor
model of Stambaugh and Yuan (2017). All returns and alphas are value-weighted and expressed in percentage. The t-statistics are reported in
parentheses. R-square is adjusted.

                                                                                                                                    2
A. Excess and adjusted returns        B. Alphas from different factor models                                                    C. R of different factor models
                                                                    4F plus                                                                            4F plus
                    Ind-     Char-                                                       RMW                            Mis-                             RMW            Mis-
InnOrig  Exret     adjret    adjret      4F       IMC       LIQ      EMI1      EMI2     + CMA      UMO        HXZ     pricing    4F IMC LIQ EMI1 EMI2 + CMA UMO HXZ pricing
No        0.61     -0.02     -0.03     -0.13     -0.13     -0.15     -0.06     -0.04     -0.13     -0.12     -0.13     -0.05    0.93 0.93 0.93 0.93 0.93 0.93 0.93 0.92 0.92
         (2.54)   (-0.47)   (-0.15)   (-1.86)   (-1.79)   (-2.09)   (-0.94)   (-0.52)   (-1.79)   (-1.66)   (-1.67)   (-0.55)
Low       0.51     -0.14     -0.09     -0.11     -0.11     -0.12     -0.05     -0.03     -0.04     -0.07     -0.06     -0.12    0.94 0.94 0.94 0.94 0.94          0.94   0.94 0.93   0.93
         (1.74)   (-1.97)   (-0.36)   (-1.44)   (-1.33)   (-1.51)   (-0.59)   (-0.39)   (-0.56)   (-0.96)   (-0.68)   (-1.34)
Middle    0.73      0.03      0.07      0.16      0.17      0.17     0.09       0.07      0.17      0.15      0.15      0.09    0.94 0.94 0.94 0.95 0.95          0.95   0.94 0.95   0.94
         (2.83)    (0.76)    (0.31)    (2.49)    (2.48)    (2.55)   (1.45)     (1.08)    (2.68)    (2.33)    (2.41)    (1.23)
High      0.80      0.09      0.19      0.24      0.24      0.23     0.20       0.19      0.20      0.23      0.14      0.19    0.91 0.91 0.91 0.91 0.91          0.91   0.90 0.90   0.91
         (3.09)    (1.86)    (0.76)    (2.74)    (2.71)    (2.54)   (2.23)     (2.12)    (2.19)    (2.57)    (1.59)    (2.07)
High-Low 0.29       0.23      0.28      0.35      0.35      0.35     0.25       0.22      0.24      0.30      0.20      0.30    0.21 0.22 0.21 0.27 0.27          0.25   0.21 0.23   0.20
         (2.29)    (2.51)    (2.36)    (3.00)    (2.87)    (2.90)   (2.12)     (1.79)    (1.99)    (2.53)    (1.67)    (2.32)




                                                                                              59
Table 6
Return predictive power of innovative originality – Double-sorted portfolio analysis

At the end of June of each year t, we conduct independent double sorts on innovative originality (InnOrig) and proxies of valuation uncertainty (VU),
investor attention (ATT), or the sensitivity of future profitability to InnOrig. In Panel A1, we proxy VU by a composite index of firm age and opacity
of financial reports (standardized opacity minus standardized age). In Panel A2, we proxy VU by the analyst forecast dispersion. In Panel B, we proxy
attention (ATT) by the inverse of the ownership percentage of transient institutional investors. In Panel C, we proxy the sensitivity (Sen) by an industry-
level sensitivity of past ROE to lagged InnOrig. The InnOrig portfolios are formed as in Table 5. The VU, attention, and sensitivity portfolios are based
on tercile breakpoints. We also construct a high-minus-low InnOrig portfolio in each VU (ATT, and Sen) group and hold these portfolios for the next
12 months. For each portfolio, we report average monthly value-weighted excess return (Exret), industry-adjusted returns (Ind-adjret), characteristic-
adjusted returns (Char-adjret), and alphas and R2 from different factor models. The alphas are estimated from the regression of the time-series of
portfolio excess returns on various factor models including the Fama-French three factors (the market factor–MKT, the size factor–SMB, and the value
factor–HML) plus the momentum (UMD) factor (4F), 4F plus the investment-minus-consumption (IMC) factor (Papanikolaou 2011), the liquidity
(LIQ) factor (Pastor and Stambaugh 2003), the citations- or patents-based innovative efficient-minus-inefficient (EMI1 or EMI2) factor as in
Hirshleifer, Hsu, and Li (2013), the robust-minus-weak (RMW) factor and the conservative-minus-aggressive (CMA) factor as in Fama and French
(2015), the undervalued-minus-overvalued (UMO) factor of Hirshleifer and Jiang (2010). We also report alphas from the investment-based factor
model of Hou, Xue, and Zhang (2015) and the mispricing factor model of Stambaugh and Yuan (2017). All returns and alphas are in percentage. The
t-statistics are reported in parentheses. The sample period for returns is from July 1982 to June 2008 except for analyst forecast dispersion subsamples,
which start from July 1984 due to sparsity of analyst forecast data before 1983. R-square is adjusted.




                                                                            60
Panel A. Return predictive power of InnOrig and valuation uncertainty (VU)
Panel A1. VU based on age and opacity
                                                                                                                                                         2
                                                                   Alphas from different factor models                                                  R of different models
                                                                                                 4F +                                                            4F +
                           Ind-     Char-                4F +      4F +      4F +     4F +      RMW        4F +                Mis-         4F + 4F + 4F + 4F + RMW + 4F +      Mis-
VU InnOrig    Exret       adjret    adjret     4F        IMC       LIQ      EMI1      EMI2     + CMA      UMO        HXZ     pricing    4F IMC LIQ EMI1 EMI2 CMA UMO HXZ pricing
Low Low        0.66       -0.04      0.03     -0.07     -0.08     -0.07      0.03     0.01      -0.19     -0.07     -0.22     -0.20    0.83 0.84 0.83 0.85 0.84 0.85  0.84 0.85 0.83
              (2.68)     (-0.67)    (0.13)   (-0.61)   (-0.71)   (-0.64)    (0.26)   (0.05)    (-1.72)   (-0.65)   (-1.95)   (-1.67)
     Middle    0.74        0.03      0.06     0.13       0.12      0.14      0.08     0.02       0.08      0.09      0.05      0.03    0.92 0.92 0.92   0.93   0.93   0.93      0.92   0.93   0.92
              (3.06)      (0.50)    (0.29)   (1.66)     (1.61)    (1.77)    (1.06)   (0.29)     (1.07)    (1.12)    (0.63)    (0.39)
     High      0.73        0.05      0.12     0.12       0.10      0.12      0.12     0.09      -0.08      0.03     -0.13     -0.07    0.77 0.77 0.77   0.77   0.77   0.80      0.77   0.80   0.77
              (3.17)      (0.79)    (0.56)   (0.98)     (0.88)    (1.01)    (1.05)   (0.76)    (-0.69)    (0.25)   (-1.13)   (-0.62)
     High-Low 0.07         0.09      0.09     0.18       0.18      0.19      0.10     0.08       0.11      0.15      0.09      0.13    0.04 0.04 0.04   0.07   0.06   0.05      0.04   0.05   0.04
              (0.51)      (1.02)    (0.67)   (1.23)     (1.21)    (1.26)    (0.65)   (0.54)     (0.74)    (1.00)    (0.64)    (0.84)
High Low       0.23       -0.45     -0.43     -0.23     -0.17     -0.19     -0.18     -0.07      0.15     -0.05      0.08      0.10    0.86 0.87 0.87   0.87   0.87   0.88      0.87   0.86   0.83
              (0.47)     (-2.15)   (-0.99)   (-0.96)   (-0.73)   (-0.79)   (-0.75)   (-0.30)    (0.61)   (-0.18)    (0.30)    (0.36)
     Middle    0.89        0.10      0.22     0.40       0.43      0.44      0.34     0.32       0.67      0.62      0.49      0.78    0.74 0.74 0.74   0.74   0.74   0.75      0.75   0.74   0.76
              (1.95)      (0.44)    (0.51)   (1.43)     (1.56)    (1.57)    (1.21)   (1.14)     (2.28)    (2.14)    (1.71)    (2.60)
     High      1.32        0.54      0.74     0.84       0.87      0.89      0.80     0.79       1.00      0.83      0.90      1.08    0.72 0.72 0.72   0.72   0.72   0.71      0.72   0.69   0.72
              (2.60)      (2.02)    (1.52)   (2.77)     (2.73)    (2.82)    (2.84)   (2.79)     (3.08)    (2.77)    (2.68)    (3.16)
     High-Low 1.10         0.99      1.17     1.07       1.04      1.08      0.98     0.86       0.85      1.05      0.82      0.98    0.04 0.05 0.04   0.05   0.07   0.08      0.04   0.05   0.04
              (3.88)      (3.66)    (3.84)   (3.07)     (2.93)    (3.10)    (3.01)   (2.49)     (2.38)    (2.75)    (2.38)    (2.51)




                                                                                                    61
Panel A2. VU based on analyst forecast dispersion
                                                                   Alphas from different factor models                                   R2 of different models
                                                                                          4F +                                                          4F +
                          Ind-     Char-                4F +      4F + 4F + 4F + RMW 4F +                          Mis-       4F + 4F + 4F + 4F + RMW + 4F +              Mis-
VU InnOrig    Exret      adjret    adjret     4F        IMC       LIQ EMI1 EMI2 + CMA UMO                   HXZ pricing 4F IMC LIQ EMI1 EMI2 CMA UMO HXZ pricing
Low Low        0.55      -0.17     -0.03     -0.04     -0.07     -0.02 0.05 0.03 -0.23 -0.11               -0.23 -0.25 0.74 0.75 0.74 0.75 0.75 0.76            0.74 0.75 0.75
              (2.04)    (-1.66)   (-0.10)   (-0.31)   (-0.51)   (-0.15) (0.34) (0.19) (-1.59) (-0.78)     (-1.50) (-1.64)
     Middle    0.67      -0.02      0.05     0.15       0.13      0.19 0.14 0.15          0.05     0.09     0.10 -0.03 0.86 0.87 0.87 0.86 0.86 0.86            0.87 0.84 0.86
              (2.57)    (-0.19)    (0.19)   (1.64)     (1.51)    (2.07) (1.48) (1.60) (0.57) (1.05)        (1.03) (-0.28)
     High      0.84       0.14      0.15     0.30       0.29      0.32 0.29 0.29          0.13     0.18     0.16    0.06 0.71 0.72 0.71 0.71 0.71 0.73          0.72 0.71 0.73
              (3.30)     (1.50)    (0.59)   (2.06)     (1.94)    (2.14) (1.92) (1.89) (0.90) (1.26)        (1.10) (0.43)
     High-Low 0.29        0.30      0.18     0.35       0.36      0.34 0.25 0.26          0.36     0.33     0.39    0.30 0.02 0.02 0.02 0.05 0.03 0.02          0.02 0.02 0.01
              (1.52)     (2.48)    (0.93)   (1.74)     (1.78)    (1.67) (1.18) (1.20) (1.71) (1.61)        (1.85) (1.45)
High Low       0.48      -0.05     -0.20     -0.24     -0.19     -0.24 -0.21 -0.18 0.02           -0.24     0.02 -0.20 0.77 0.79 0.77 0.77 0.77 0.79            0.76 0.80 0.76
              (1.25)    (-0.28)   (-0.59)   (-1.29)   (-1.07)   (-1.32) (-1.18) (-0.91) (0.09) (-1.24)     (0.09) (-1.08)
     Middle    0.90       0.23      0.14     0.15       0.18      0.10 0.05 -0.03 0.31             0.17     0.23    0.23 0.76 0.77 0.77 0.77 0.77 0.77          0.76 0.78 0.77
              (2.32)     (1.78)    (0.42)   (0.79)     (0.94)    (0.48) (0.24) (-0.13) (1.57) (0.81)       (1.26) (1.15)
     High      1.15       0.38      0.53     0.45       0.47      0.42 0.39 0.32          0.49     0.43     0.50    0.42 0.66 0.66 0.66 0.67 0.67 0.68          0.66 0.68 0.67
              (2.86)     (1.89)    (1.47)   (1.80)     (1.80)    (1.60) (1.61) (1.35) (1.87) (1.66)        (1.92) (1.51)
     High-Low 0.67        0.43      0.73     0.69       0.66      0.67 0.60 0.50          0.47     0.67     0.48    0.62 0.06 0.07 0.06 0.07 0.08 0.11          0.05 0.07 0.06
              (2.59)     (1.97)    (2.96)   (2.74)     (2.54)    (2.57) (2.53) (1.96) (1.78) (2.59)        (1.64) (2.43)




                                                                                             62
Panel B. Return predictive power of InnOrig and investor attention (ATT)
                                                                                                                                             2
                                                                    Alphas from different factor models                                     R of different models
                                                                                           4F +                                                           4F +
                           Ind-     Char-                4F +      4F + 4F + 4F + RMW 4F +                             Mis-      4F + 4F + 4F + 4F + RMW + 4F +             Mis-
ATT InnOrig   Exret       adjret    adjret     4F        IMC       LIQ EMI1 EMI2 + CMA UMO                   HXZ     pricing 4F IMC LIQ EMI1 EMI2 CMA UMO HXZ pricing
Low Low        0.53       -0.13     -0.13     -0.07     -0.07     -0.11 -0.03 -0.06 0.09            0.07     0.09      0.06 0.89 0.89 0.89 0.89 0.89 0.89         0.89 0.88 0.88
              (1.51)     (-1.22)   (-0.42)   (-0.58)   (-0.57)   (-0.85) (-0.22) (-0.44) (0.69) (0.56)      (0.59)    (0.41)
     Middle    0.82        0.11      0.07     0.25       0.24      0.23 0.17 0.09          0.37     0.35     0.35      0.42 0.87 0.87 0.87 0.87 0.88 0.88         0.87 0.88 0.88
              (2.48)      (1.33)    (0.25)   (1.96)     (1.96)    (1.75) (1.43) (0.78) (3.17) (2.76)        (2.73)    (2.95)
     High      1.04        0.29      0.32     0.50       0.50      0.45 0.39 0.38          0.55     0.57     0.54      0.55 0.86 0.86 0.87 0.87 0.87 0.86         0.86 0.86 0.87
              (3.21)      (3.12)    (1.01)   (3.75)     (3.79)    (3.28) (3.12) (3.03) (3.87) (4.15)        (3.74)    (3.66)
     High-Low 0.51         0.43      0.45     0.58       0.58      0.55 0.42 0.44          0.46     0.45     0.45      0.49 0.08 0.08 0.09 0.17 0.12 0.13         0.08 0.09 0.06
              (3.40)      (3.43)    (3.05)   (3.49)     (3.51)    (3.30) (2.70) (2.65) (2.83) (2.61)        (2.45)    (2.54)
High Low       0.43       -0.26     -0.11     -0.14     -0.12     -0.16 -0.08 -0.02 0.17           -0.09     0.30      0.04 0.85 0.85 0.85 0.85 0.85 0.86         0.85 0.85 0.77
              (1.12)     (-1.12)   (-0.28)   (-0.90)   (-0.77)   (-0.99) (-0.53) (-0.12) (1.14) (-0.59)     (1.86)    (0.21)
     Middle    0.75       -0.09     -0.06     -0.03     -0.05      0.02 0.02 -0.02 0.14            -0.26     0.14     -0.20 0.65 0.65 0.65 0.65 0.65 0.68         0.65 0.66 0.57
              (1.99)     (-0.34)   (-0.15)   (-0.10)   (-0.20)    (0.08) (0.10) (-0.07) (0.55) (-1.03)      (0.48)   (-0.70)
     High      0.81        0.00      0.29     0.20       0.20      0.21 0.20 0.20          0.40     0.12     0.29      0.01 0.71 0.71 0.71 0.71 0.71 0.72         0.71 0.69 0.64
              (2.17)      (0.02)    (0.79)   (0.83)     (0.86)    (0.90) (0.85) (0.82) (1.70) (0.47)        (1.03)    (0.04)
     High-Low 0.39         0.26      0.40     0.33       0.31      0.37 0.28 0.21          0.23     0.18    -0.01     -0.03 0.04 0.04 0.04 0.04 0.05 0.05         0.04 0.10 0.09
              (1.83)      (1.42)    (1.83)   (1.39)     (1.32)    (1.54) (1.17) (0.89) (0.93) (0.74)       (-0.05)   (-0.13)




                                                                                              63
Panel C. Return predictive power of InnOrig and industry-level profitability sensitivity (Sen)
                                                                     Alphas from different factor models                                     R2 of different models
                                                                                            4F +                                                            4F +
                            Ind-     Char-                4F +      4F + 4F + 4F + RMW 4F +                             Mis-      4F + 4F + 4F + 4F + RMW + 4F +              Mis-
Sen InnOrig    Exret       adjret    adjret     4F        IMC       LIQ EMI1 EMI2 + CMA UMO                   HXZ     pricing 4F IMC LIQ EMI1 EMI2 CMA UMO HXZ pricing
Low Low         0.81       -0.09      0.16     0.15       0.15      0.12 0.18 0.19          0.32    0.25      0.27      0.37 0.80 0.80 0.80 0.80 0.80 0.81          0.81 0.81 0.81
               (2.46)     (-0.80)    (0.54)   (1.03)     (1.03)    (0.82) (1.21) (1.28) (2.10) (1.73)        (1.69)    (2.58)
     Middle     1.03        0.05      0.30     0.39       0.39      0.38 0.36 0.32          0.43    0.41      0.48      0.45 0.78 0.78 0.78 0.79 0.79 0.78          0.78 0.79 0.79
               (3.55)      (0.87)    (1.16)   (2.53)     (2.53)    (2.48) (2.27) (1.98) (2.63) (2.54)        (2.87)    (2.66)
     High       0.65        0.00      0.03     0.03       0.01      0.05 0.01 -0.04 0.00            0.03     -0.22      0.02 0.69 0.70 0.70 0.70 0.70 0.70          0.69 0.71 0.70
               (2.30)      (0.01)    (0.10)   (0.19)     (0.07)    (0.28) (0.03) (-0.24) (-0.02) (0.15)     (-1.32)    (0.11)
     High-Low -0.16         0.10     -0.13     -0.12     -0.14     -0.07 -0.17 -0.23 -0.32 -0.24             -0.49     -0.36 0.16 0.16 0.17 0.17 0.17 0.19          0.16 0.21 0.17
              (-0.74)      (0.65)   (-0.63)   (-0.60)   (-0.69)   (-0.33) (-0.87) (-1.12) (-1.59) (-1.23)   (-2.33)   (-1.75)
High Low        0.29       -0.21     -0.36     -0.21     -0.19     -0.25 -0.13 -0.16 -0.21 -0.16             -0.17     -0.12 0.81 0.81 0.81 0.81 0.81 0.80          0.80 0.80 0.80
               (0.97)     (-2.21)   (-1.31)   (-1.49)   (-1.36)   (-1.80) (-0.93) (-1.08) (-1.48) (-1.16)   (-1.10)   (-0.76)
     Middle     0.61        0.12      0.03     0.24       0.24      0.21 0.13 0.13          0.23    0.31      0.24      0.22 0.84 0.84 0.84 0.85 0.84 0.84          0.84 0.83 0.81
               (2.03)      (2.02)    (0.12)   (1.68)     (1.73)    (1.51) (1.00) (0.98) (1.72) (2.20)        (1.51)    (1.20)
     High       0.89        0.22      0.30     0.54       0.53      0.56 0.52 0.46          0.43    0.58      0.34      0.58 0.73 0.73 0.73 0.73 0.73 0.73          0.72 0.69 0.70
               (2.93)      (2.02)    (1.11)   (3.07)     (3.04)    (3.10) (3.12) (2.84) (2.39) (3.18)        (1.56)    (2.71)
     High-Low 0.59          0.43      0.65     0.75       0.72      0.81 0.65 0.62          0.64    0.77      0.51      0.70 0.08 0.09 0.09 0.09 0.09 0.08          0.08 0.07 0.05
               (2.92)      (2.81)    (3.23)   (3.31)     (3.18)    (3.59) (2.93) (2.78) (2.75) (3.25)        (2.13)    (2.78)




                                                                                               64
Table 7
Return predictive power of innovative originality – Fama-MacBeth regressions (full sample)

This table reports the average slopes (in %) and their Newey-West (1987) autocorrelation-adjusted heteroscedasticity-robust t-statistics in parentheses
from monthly Fama and MacBeth (1973) cross-sectional regressions. For each month from July of year t to June of year t + 1, we regress monthly
returns of individual stocks on the natural log of one plus InnOrig of year t – 1, different sets of control variables, and industry fixed effects except
Model 1, which is a simple regression. We set missing values for InnOrig, PIE, CIE and R&D expenses to zero, and control for a dummy variable
(missing), which equals 1 for firms with no R&D investment and patent for the past five years and 0 otherwise, and its interactions with all the control
variables in the multiple regressions. We omit the intercept, the slopes on the 48 industry dummies, and the slopes on the missing dummy and its
interactions with all other control variables for brevity. All variables are defined as in Table 2. Size is the log of market capitalization at the end of June
of year t. Book-to-market is also in the natural log form. Intuitional ownership and BTM are measured in year t – 1. ILLIQ and REV are the previous
month’s stock illiquidity and stock return, respectively. In Model 3, we control for additional return predictors related to innovation (CIE for Model
3A or PIE for Model 3B, CTA, and RDME), investment (AG and IA), net stock issues (NS), return-on-assets (ROA), idiosyncratic volatility (IVOL),
and total skewness (TSKEW) measured in year t – 1. CIE (PIE) is the natural log of one plus the citations- (patents-) based innovative efficiency
measure following Hirshleifer, Hsu, and Li (2013). CTA is the natural log of one plus patents granted in year t – 1 divided by total assets in year t – 1.
RDME is the natural log of one plus R&D-to-market equity in year t – 1. In Model 4, we further control for sales diversity measured by the number of
segments (NSD) as defined in Table 2. All independent variables are normalized to zero mean and one standard deviation after winsorization at the 1%
and 99% levels. The return data are from July of 1982 to June of 2008. R-square (number of firms) is the time-series average of the R-squares (number
of firms) from the monthly cross-sectional regressions.




                                                                              65
                                     Model 1      Model 2              Model 3A          Model 3B          Model 4A          Model 4B
Innovative originality (InnOrig)    0.15 (2.91) 0.15   (5.34)        0.10    (3.58)    0.12    (4.42)    0.09    (3.53)    0.12    (4.34)
Size                                            -0.24 (-1.88) -0.13          (-1.50)   -0.12   (-1.45)   -0.11   (-1.24)   -0.11   (-1.21)
Book-to-market (BTM)                            0.43   (5.41)        0.20    (2.75)    0.20    (2.75)    0.21    (2.96)    0.21    (2.94)
Momentum (MOM)                                  0.09   (1.00)        0.01    (0.09)    0.01    (0.09)    0.00    (0.05)    0.00    (0.05)
Institutional ownership (InstOwn)               0.09   (1.55)        0.09    (2.05)    0.09    (2.12)    0.08    (1.90)    0.09    (1.98)
Illiquidity (ILLIQ)                             0.49   (6.47)        0.37    (3.74)    0.37    (3.74)    0.37    (3.71)    0.37    (3.71)
Short-term return reversal (REV)                -1.03 (-9.77) -1.12 (-10.71) -1.12 (-10.71) -1.11 (-10.50) -1.11 (-10.50)
Asset growth (AG)                                                    -0.22   (-4.60)   -0.22   (-4.50)   -0.22   (-4.68)   -0.22   (-4.58)
Capex/Assets (IA)                                                    -0.05   (-1.15)   -0.06   (-1.15)   -0.05   (-1.05)   -0.05   (-1.05)
Patents/Assets (CTA)                                                 0.01    (0.28)    0.03    (0.75)    0.01    (0.23)    0.03    (0.68)
R&D/Market equity (RDME)                                             0.21    (2.98)    0.21    (2.99)    0.21    (3.06)    0.21    (3.08)
Net stock issuance (NS)                                              -0.09   (-2.00)   -0.09   (-2.00)   -0.09   (-1.98)   -0.09   (-1.99)
Return on assets (ROA)                                               0.10    (1.71)    0.10    (1.73)    0.08    (1.37)    0.08    (1.39)
Idiosyncratic volatility (IVOL)                                      0.31    (2.04)    0.31    (2.02)    0.31    (2.00)    0.31    (1.99)
Skewness (SKEW)                                                      -0.10   (-2.72)   -0.10   (-2.69)   -0.10   (-2.78)   -0.10   (-2.75)
Citations-based IE (CIE)                                             0.06    (3.41)                      0.06    (3.49)
Patents-based IE (PIE)                                                                 -0.01   (-0.55)                     -0.01   (-0.46)
Number of sales segments (NSD)                                                                           -0.03   (-1.18)   -0.03   (-1.07)
 2
R                                   0.00        0.07                 0.10              0.10              0.10              0.10
Number of firms                     4693        3789                 3093              3093              3073              3073




                                                                66
Table 8
Return predictive power of innovative originality – Fama-MacBeth regressions (subsamples)

This table reports the average slopes (in %) and their Newey-West (1987) autocorrelation-adjusted heteroscedasticity-robust t-statistics in parentheses
from monthly Fama and MacBeth (1973) cross-sectional regressions as in Model 3 of Table 7 within subsamples split by valuation uncertainty (VU),
investor attention (ATT), and the sensitivity of future profitability to innovative originality (InnOrig) in Panels A, B, and C, respectively. The proxies
of VU, ATT, and sensitivity are defined as in Table 6. The Low (High) subsample refers to the bottom (top) 30%. All variables are defined as in Tables
2 and 7.

    Panel A. Valuation uncertainty (VU) subsamples
                                           A1. VU based on age and opacity                       A2. VU based on analyst forecast dispersion
                                        Model 3A                    Model 3B                        Model 3A                    Model 3B
                                  Low VU       High VU       Low VU        High VU            Low VU       High VU        Low VU       High VU
                               Slope t -stat Slope t -stat Slope t -stat Slope t -stat     Slope t -stat Slope t -stat Slope t -stat Slope t -stat
    Innovative originality      0.01 (0.25) 0.21 (2.74) 0.04 (0.78) 0.24 (3.24)             0.07 (1.34) 0.15 (1.95) 0.08 (1.49) 0.16 (2.06)
    Size                       -0.12 (-1.05) -0.41 (-2.53) -0.11 (-0.95) -0.41 (-2.52)     -0.04 (-0.38) -0.07 (-0.57) -0.03 (-0.34) -0.08 (-0.64)
    Book-to-market              0.10 (1.20) 0.19 (1.62) 0.09 (1.06) 0.20 (1.74)             0.18 (1.81) 0.08 (0.77) 0.18 (1.87) 0.07 (0.69)
    Momentum                    0.08 (0.59) -0.01 (-0.05) 0.08 (0.61) -0.02 (-0.12)         0.15 (1.32) 0.06 (0.49) 0.15 (1.28) 0.06 (0.47)
    Institutional ownership    -0.03 (-0.45) 0.22 (1.89) -0.03 (-0.39) 0.22 (1.93)          0.10 (1.56) 0.04 (0.45) 0.09 (1.49) 0.03 (0.40)
    Illiquidity                -0.08 (-0.83) 0.35 (1.76) -0.08 (-0.84) 0.35 (1.76)         -0.42 (-0.77) 0.14 (0.52) -0.46 (-0.82) 0.14 (0.55)
    Short-term return reversal -0.54 (-7.03) -1.15 (-6.53) -0.54 (-6.96) -1.16 (-6.51)     -0.80 (-7.19) -0.82 (-7.68) -0.80 (-7.14) -0.83 (-7.67)
    Asset growth               -0.12 (-1.92) -0.31 (-3.37) -0.12 (-1.83) -0.30 (-3.26)     -0.07 (-0.93) -0.06 (-0.65) -0.07 (-0.93) -0.05 (-0.55)
    Capex/Assets               -0.08 (-1.16) 0.20 (2.78) -0.08 (-1.13) 0.21 (2.79)         -0.09 (-1.12) 0.02 (0.26) -0.10 (-1.18) 0.04 (0.44)
    Patents/Assets             -0.01 (-0.12) 0.13 (1.53) 0.01 (0.19) 0.16 (1.60)            0.07 (1.00) 0.09 (1.30) 0.11 (1.49) 0.11 (1.39)
    R&D/Market equity           0.06 (1.50) 0.28 (1.99) 0.07 (1.71) 0.28 (2.01)             0.28 (2.14) 0.37 (3.62) 0.27 (2.12) 0.37 (3.67)
    Net stock issuance         -0.07 (-1.28) -0.05 (-0.38) -0.07 (-1.26) -0.06 (-0.49)     -0.12 (-1.49) 0.00 (0.01) -0.11 (-1.43) 0.00 (-0.01)
    Return on assets            0.03 (0.47) 0.26 (2.52) 0.02 (0.34) 0.26 (2.48)             0.30 (3.07) 0.10 (1.31) 0.30 (3.11) 0.10 (1.31)
    Idiosyncratic volatility    0.18 (1.41) 0.35 (1.80) 0.18 (1.40) 0.34 (1.77)             0.10 (0.50) 0.01 (0.04) 0.10 (0.51) -0.01 (-0.05)
    Skewness                   -0.10 (-1.64) -0.19 (-2.32) -0.10 (-1.68) -0.19 (-2.28)     -0.12 (-2.09) -0.15 (-2.09) -0.11 (-1.95) -0.15 (-2.11)
    Citations-based IE          0.10 (1.97) 0.06 (1.02)                                     0.02 (0.48) 0.00 (0.01)
    Patents-based IE                                       0.02 (0.65) -0.04 (-0.46)                                   -0.03 (-0.89) -0.06 (-0.85)
     2
    R                           0.20           0.16           0.20           0.16           0.25          0.26           0.25           0.26
    Number of firms             770            736            770            736            517           497            517            497

                                                                           67
                           Panel B. Investor attention (ATT) subsamples               Panel C. Profitability sensitivity (Sen) subsamples
                                     Model 3A                     Model 3B                    Model 3A                        Model 3B
                             High ATT       Low ATT        High ATT     Low ATT        Low Sen        High Sen         Low Sen       High Sen
                           Slope t -stat Slope t -stat Slope t -stat Slope t -stat   Slope t -stat Slope t -stat Slope t -stat Slope t -stat
Innovative originality      0.00 (-0.06) 0.16 (2.91) 0.03 (0.58) 0.17 (3.15)         0.05 (0.69) 0.23 (3.22) 0.05 (0.61) 0.24 (3.41)
Size                       -0.26 (-3.24) -0.12 (-1.34) -0.26 (-3.28) -0.13 (-1.35)   0.01 (0.10) -0.16 (-1.24) -0.01 (-0.08) -0.15 (-1.15)
Book-to-market              0.33 (4.19) -0.04 (-0.51) 0.32 (4.13) -0.05 (-0.67)      0.15 (1.43) 0.04 (0.36) 0.15 (1.44) 0.04 (0.35)
Momentum                    0.07 (0.75) 0.31 (2.95) 0.07 (0.73) 0.31 (2.93)          0.14 (0.85) 0.51 (3.50) 0.14 (0.86) 0.51 (3.54)
Institutional ownership     0.05 (1.02) -0.08 (-1.55) 0.05 (1.15) -0.08 (-1.54)      0.03 (0.51) 0.03 (0.33) 0.04 (0.72) 0.02 (0.21)
Illiquidity                 0.14 (1.45) -0.10 (-0.98) 0.14 (1.43) -0.10 (-0.98)      -0.03 (-0.06) 0.23 (0.45) -0.05 (-0.09) 0.25 (0.48)
Short-term return reversal -1.04 (-8.98) -0.58 (-7.38) -1.03 (-8.89) -0.58 (-7.40)   -0.81 (-7.55) -0.60 (-5.45) -0.82 (-7.58) -0.61 (-5.43)
Asset growth               -0.12 (-1.79) -0.10 (-1.50) -0.13 (-1.87) -0.09 (-1.43)   -0.27 (-2.05) -0.15 (-1.25) -0.25 (-1.89) -0.15 (-1.20)
Capex/Assets               -0.09 (-1.14) -0.05 (-0.64) -0.09 (-1.06) -0.06 (-0.77)   0.16 (1.51) 0.02 (0.17) 0.15 (1.45) 0.01 (0.11)
Patents/Assets              0.10 (1.43) 0.09 (1.14) 0.13 (1.53) 0.08 (0.92)          0.14 (0.66) -0.25 (-1.36) 0.14 (0.56) -0.28 (-1.39)
R&D/Market equity           0.35 (2.57) 0.16 (2.22) 0.35 (2.60) 0.16 (2.21)          0.08 (0.57) 0.17 (1.30) 0.07 (0.47) 0.18 (1.38)
Net stock issuance         -0.22 (-3.26) -0.15 (-3.23) -0.22 (-3.16) -0.15 (-3.36)   -0.19 (-1.95) -0.26 (-2.74) -0.19 (-1.89) -0.25 (-2.64)
Return on assets            0.22 (3.23) -0.02 (-0.28) 0.23 (3.29) -0.02 (-0.25)      0.30 (1.68) 0.20 (1.07) 0.29 (1.61) 0.19 (1.01)
Idiosyncratic volatility   -0.01 (-0.06) -0.13 (-0.94) -0.01 (-0.08) -0.14 (-0.96)   0.29 (1.02) -0.17 (-0.60) 0.26 (0.92) -0.18 (-0.64)
Skewness                    0.00 (0.02) -0.13 (-2.90) 0.00 (0.02) -0.12 (-2.85)      -0.04 (-0.51) -0.12 (-1.37) -0.04 (-0.54) -0.12 (-1.40)
Citations-based IE          0.12 (1.93) 0.01 (0.30)                                  -0.08 (-1.54) 0.00 (-0.02)
Patents-based IE                                          0.02 (0.27) 0.01 (0.17)                                    -0.09 (-0.96) 0.01 (0.11)
 2
R                         0.26          0.30           0.26          0.30            0.30          0.28           0.30           0.28
Number of firms           902           914            902           914             814           972            814            972




                                                                    68
Table 9
Return predictive power of innovative originality versus innovative efficiency – portfolio sorts

At the end of June of each year t, we conduct independent double sorts on innovative originality (InnOrig) and innovative efficiency measures. In Panel
A, we use citations-based innovative efficiency (CIE). In Panel B, we use patents-based innovative efficiency (PIE). The Low (High) portfolio refers
to the bottom (top) 30%. We also construct a high-minus-low InnOrig portfolio in each innovative efficiency group and hold these portfolios for the
next 12 months. For each portfolio, we report monthly value-weighted excess return (Exret), industry-adjusted returns (Ind-adjret), characteristic-
adjusted returns (Char-adjret), and alphas from different factor models as defined in Table 5. All returns and alphas are in percentage. The t-statistics
are reported in parentheses. The sample period for returns is from July 1982 to June 2008. R-square is adjusted.

Panel A. Return predictive power of InnOrig and citations-based innovative efficiency (CIE)
                                                                                                                                    2
                                                             Alphas from different factor models                                    R of different models
                                                                                    4F +                                                           4F +
                          Ind- Char-              4F + 4F + 4F + 4F + RMW + 4F +                                Mis-      4F + 4F + 4F + 4F + RMW 4F +       Mis-
CIE InnOrig      Exret adjret adjret       4F     IMC      LIQ EMI1 EMI2 CMA UMO                     HXZ      pricing 4F IMC LIQ EMI1 EMI2 + CMA UMO HXZ pricing
Low Low           0.57 -0.10 -0.05 -0.05 -0.04 -0.03 0.04                  0.07      0.03    0.01    0.04       0.00 0.91 0.91 0.91 0.92 0.92 0.92 0.91 0.91 0.90
                 (1.87) (-1.22) (-0.17) (-0.46) (-0.39) (-0.33) (0.43) (0.64) (0.29) (0.09)         (0.33)    (-0.02)
     Middle       0.80 0.04       0.14    0.12    0.13     0.17    0.14    0.12      0.16    0.11    0.22       0.06 0.85 0.85 0.85 0.85 0.85 0.85 0.84 0.84 0.85
                 (2.96) (0.46) (0.55) (1.17) (1.22) (1.54) (1.27) (1.09) (1.50) (0.97)              (1.93)     (0.53)
     High         0.67 0.01       0.03    0.11    0.12     0.12    0.16    0.08      0.09    0.09    0.03       0.03 0.78 0.78 0.78 0.78 0.78 0.78 0.78 0.78 0.78
                 (2.23) (0.15) (0.11) (0.71) (0.73) (0.74) (1.00) (0.52) (0.57) (0.54)              (0.18)     (0.17)
     High-Low 0.10 0.12           0.08    0.16    0.16     0.15    0.11    0.02      0.06    0.13    -0.01      0.03 0.05 0.05 0.05 0.06 0.09 0.07 0.04 0.06 0.03
                 (0.65) (1.00) (0.48) (1.00) (0.97) (0.90) (0.71) (0.10) (0.36) (0.80)              (-0.04)    (0.18)
High Low          0.39 -0.26 -0.31 -0.07 -0.04 -0.12 -0.27 -0.29                     0.20    0.07    0.06       0.06 0.81 0.81 0.81 0.82 0.82 0.81 0.81 0.79 0.77
                 (0.91) (-1.30) (-0.82) (-0.36) (-0.17) (-0.58) (-1.38) (-1.41) (0.90) (0.35)       (0.28)     (0.22)
     Middle       0.89 0.06       0.16    0.44    0.45     0.40    0.23    0.22      0.51    0.48    0.44       0.44 0.75 0.76 0.76 0.79 0.77 0.75 0.76 0.74 0.74
                 (2.74) (0.48) (0.53) (2.55) (2.59) (2.27) (1.40) (1.28) (2.70) (2.78)              (2.29)     (2.18)
     High         1.17 0.32       0.48    0.63    0.64     0.55    0.46    0.52      0.73    0.69    0.72       0.64 0.76 0.76 0.76 0.78 0.76 0.77 0.76 0.74 0.76
                 (3.06) (1.94) (1.28) (3.05) (3.05) (2.63) (2.34) (2.55) (3.41) (3.23)              (3.34)     (2.73)
     High-Low 0.78 0.57           0.80    0.70    0.67     0.67    0.73    0.81      0.53    0.61    0.66       0.59 0.15 0.16 0.15 0.15 0.15 0.17 0.15 0.13 0.13
                 (2.92) (2.29) (2.92) (2.79) (2.60) (2.56) (2.84) (3.17) (2.03) (2.39)              (2.52)     (2.09)




                                                                                       69
Panel B. Return predictive power of InnOrig and patents-based innovative efficiency (PIE)
                                                                                                                                     2
                                                             Alphas from different factor models                                    R of different models
                                                                                    4F +                                                           4F +
                          Ind- Char-              4F + 4F + 4F + 4F + RMW + 4F +                                Mis-      4F + 4F + 4F + 4F + RMW 4F +       Mis-
PIE InnOrig      Exret adjret adjret       4F     IMC      LIQ EMI1 EMI2 CMA UMO                     HXZ      pricing 4F IMC LIQ EMI1 EMI2 + CMA UMO HXZ pricing
Low Low           0.53 -0.16 -0.07 -0.08 -0.08 -0.06 0.02                  0.06     -0.03 -0.03      -0.02     -0.04 0.91 0.91 0.91 0.92 0.92 0.91 0.91 0.91 0.90
                 (1.78) (-2.19) (-0.28) (-0.86) (-0.80) (-0.67) (0.19) (0.64) (-0.34) (-0.33)       (-0.23)   (-0.39)
     Middle       0.78 0.08       0.20    0.25    0.23     0.27    0.23    0.17      0.24    0.24    0.21       0.21 0.85 0.85 0.85 0.85 0.85 0.85 0.85 0.84 0.85
                 (3.04) (1.24) (0.87) (2.38) (2.27) (2.47) (2.30) (1.63) (2.15) (2.22)              (1.87)     (1.90)
     High         0.92 0.18       0.27    0.51    0.51     0.48    0.44    0.47      0.57    0.54    0.47       0.49 0.83 0.83 0.83 0.84 0.83 0.83 0.83 0.81 0.81
                 (2.93) (1.99) (0.86) (3.31) (3.41) (3.06) (2.84) (3.06) (3.50) (3.25)              (3.00)     (2.72)
     High-Low 0.39 0.35           0.34    0.59    0.59     0.55    0.42    0.40      0.60    0.58    0.49       0.53 0.05 0.05 0.06 0.14 0.11 0.06 0.04 0.02 0.01
                 (2.50) (2.82) (2.03) (3.32) (3.38) (3.05) (2.52) (2.30) (3.34) (2.98)              (2.93)     (2.46)
High Low          0.25 -0.24 -0.32 -0.36 -0.35 -0.37 -0.38 -0.52 -0.29 -0.25                         -0.53     -0.21 0.73 0.73 0.73 0.73 0.73 0.73 0.73 0.71 0.73
                 (0.67) (-1.26) (-0.92) (-1.69) (-1.65) (-1.69) (-1.78) (-2.48) (-1.27) (-1.10)     (-2.28)   (-0.85)
     Middle       1.02 0.16       0.32    0.44    0.45     0.37    0.26    0.18      0.49    0.46    0.42       0.42 0.72 0.72 0.72 0.74 0.74 0.72 0.72 0.71 0.71
                 (3.05) (1.25) (1.05) (2.28) (2.28) (1.90) (1.41) (1.00) (2.43) (2.35)              (2.08)     (1.96)
     High         0.72 0.03       0.13    0.13    0.12     0.15    0.12    0.05      0.01    0.11    -0.05      0.03 0.74 0.74 0.74 0.74 0.74 0.75 0.74 0.73 0.74
                 (2.13) (0.17) (0.38) (0.70) (0.64) (0.77) (0.61) (0.28) (0.06) (0.52)              (-0.28)    (0.14)
     High-Low 0.46 0.27           0.45    0.50    0.47     0.52    0.50    0.57      0.31    0.31    0.48       0.24 0.05 0.06 0.05 0.05 0.06 0.08 0.07 0.02 0.05
                 (1.79) (1.15) (1.65) (1.93) (1.89) (2.00) (1.96) (2.34) (1.05) (1.19)              (1.64)     (0.85)




                                                                                       70
Table 10
Return predictive power of innovative originality versus innovative efficiency – Fama-MacBeth regressions (subsamples)

This table reports the average slopes (in %) and their Newey-West (1987) autocorrelation-adjusted heteroscedasticity-robust t-statistics in parentheses
from monthly Fama and MacBeth (1973) cross-sectional regressions as in Model 3 of Table 7 within subsamples split by citations-based (patents-
based) innovative efficiency measure. The Low (High) IE subsample refers to the bottom (top) 30%. All variables are defined as in Tables 2 and 7.

                                                             Citations-based IE            Patents-based IE
                                                           Low IE           High IE     Low IE          High IE
                                                       Slope t -stat Slope t -stat Slope t -stat Slope t -stat
                         Innovative originality        0.10    (2.72) -0.02 (-0.44) 0.17    (4.14) -0.01 (-0.13)
                         Size                          -0.28 (-2.33) -0.11 (-0.90) -0.26 (-2.65) -0.08 (-0.80)
                         Book-to-market                0.30    (3.81)    0.18 (2.19) 0.27   (3.53)   0.15   (1.80)
                         Momentum                      -0.07 (-0.59) 0.07 (0.73) -0.06 (-0.63) 0.03         (0.41)
                         Institutional ownership       0.22    (3.44)    0.05 (0.79) 0.17   (2.97)   0.06   (1.07)
                         Illiquidity                   0.28    (3.27)    0.13 (1.28) 0.33   (3.78) -0.11 (-1.39)
                         Short-term return reversal    -1.16 (-10.17) -0.79 (-9.70) -1.14 (-10.18) -0.90 (-10.22)
                         Asset growth                  -0.27 (-3.36) -0.11 (-1.66) -0.29 (-4.08) -0.09 (-1.29)
                         Capex/Assets                  0.02    (0.36) -0.06 (-0.97) -0.04 (-0.74) -0.01 (-0.17)
                         Patents/Assets                -0.03 (-0.64) 0.05 (0.66) 0.00       (0.00)   0.07   (0.83)
                         R&D/Market equity             0.14    (1.58)    0.23 (2.49) 0.14   (1.86)   0.25   (2.49)
                         Net stock issuance            -0.03 (-0.45) -0.12 (-1.83) -0.08 (-1.26) -0.16 (-2.53)
                         Return on assets              0.06    (0.66)    0.22 (2.69) 0.10   (1.24)   0.09   (1.06)
                         Idiosyncratic volatility      0.34    (2.10)    0.29 (1.96) 0.36   (2.38)   0.22   (1.59)
                         Skewness                      -0.12 (-2.26) -0.03 (-0.57) -0.12 (-2.22) -0.10 (-2.49)
                          2
                         R                             0.17               0.21             0.15              0.20
                         Number of firms               586                381              725               415




                                                                          71
Table 11
Return predictive power of innovative originality and R&D intensity – portfolio sorts

At the end of June of each year t, we conduct independent double sorts on innovative originality (InnOrig) and R&D intensity (measured by R&D
expenses scaled by total assets). The Low (High) portfolio refers to the bottom (top) 30%. We also construct a high-minus-low InnOrig portfolio in
each R&D group and hold these portfolios for the next 12 months. For each portfolio, we report monthly value-weighted excess return (Exret), industry-
adjusted returns (Ind-adjret), characteristic-adjusted returns (Char-adjret), and alphas from different factor models as defined in Table 5. All returns
and alphas are in percentage. The t-statistics are reported in parentheses. The sample period for returns is from July 1982 to June 2008. R-square is
adjusted.

                                                                                                                                           2
                                                                     Alphas from different factor models                                  R of different models
                                                                                            4F +                                                        4F +
R&D/                        Ind-    Char-                4F +      4F + 4F + 4F + RMW 4F +                          Mis-       4F + 4F + 4F + 4F + RMW + 4F +             Mis-
Assets InnOrig  Exret     adjret    adjret       4F      IMC        LIQ EMI1 EMI2 + CMA UMO                  HXZ pricing 4F IMC LIQ EMI1 EMI2 CMA UMO HXZ pricing
Low Low          0.55      -0.18     -0.12     -0.06     -0.06     -0.06 0.03      0.05 -0.20 -0.12          -0.27 -0.13 0.71 0.71 0.71 0.73 0.72       0.72    0.71 0.72 0.71
                (1.98)   (-1.94)   (-0.46)   (-0.41)   (-0.38)   (-0.40) (0.22) (0.34) (-1.27) (-0.78)     (-1.49) (-0.76)
       Middle    0.86       0.13      0.14      0.28      0.29      0.29   0.28    0.30     0.25    0.29      0.27   0.24 0.67 0.67 0.67 0.67 0.67      0.68    0.67 0.69 0.67
                (3.50)    (1.76)    (0.60)    (1.96)    (2.04)    (1.98) (1.95) (2.09) (1.59) (1.90)        (1.78) (1.44)
       High      0.59       0.12      0.02     -0.08     -0.08     -0.04 -0.08 -0.12 -0.23 -0.08             -0.40 -0.08 0.66 0.66 0.66 0.66 0.66       0.67    0.66 0.65 0.63
                (1.79)    (0.80)    (0.08)   (-0.35)   (-0.34)   (-0.16) (-0.35) (-0.52) (-0.99) (-0.33)   (-1.68) (-0.32)
       High-Low 0.04        0.30      0.14     -0.02     -0.02     0.03 -0.11 -0.17 -0.02           0.05    -0.13 0.05 0.02 0.02 0.02 0.04 0.04         0.02    0.02 0.00 0.00
                (0.17)    (1.77)    (0.59)   (-0.06)   (-0.06)   (0.09) (-0.42) (-0.65) (-0.08) (0.17)     (-0.46) (0.15)
High   Low       0.27     -0.25     -0.23      0.01      0.02      0.05    0.01    0.01     0.32    0.16     0.44 -0.01 0.88 0.88 0.88 0.88 0.88        0.90    0.88 0.83 0.80
                (0.52)   (-1.06)   (-0.53)   (0.03)    (0.11)    (0.24) (0.07) (0.05) (1.62) (0.68)        (1.52) (-0.04)
       Middle    0.73      0.15      0.04      0.27      0.27      0.35    0.23    0.15     0.33    0.20     0.33   0.13 0.83 0.83 0.83 0.83 0.83       0.83    0.83 0.78 0.80
                (2.01)   (1.39)    (0.13)    (1.75)    (1.72)    (2.23) (1.44) (0.95) (2.14) (1.28)        (1.64) (0.67)
       High      1.18      0.49      0.41      1.08      1.08      0.90    0.96    0.94     1.51    1.30     1.40   1.23 0.69 0.69 0.71 0.70 0.70       0.72    0.70 0.67 0.66
                (2.43)   (2.48)    (0.92)    (3.22)    (3.26)    (2.80) (2.91) (2.78) (4.52) (3.59)        (3.75) (3.15)
       High-Low 0.91       0.74      0.64      1.08      1.06      0.84    0.95    0.93     1.19    1.14     0.97   1.24 0.15 0.15 0.21 0.18 0.16       0.17    0.15 0.12 0.12
                (3.10)   (2.97)    (2.28)    (3.27)    (3.29)    (2.68) (2.98) (2.74) (3.74) (2.95)        (2.93) (3.41)




                                                                                             72
Table 12
Return predictive power of innovative originality and R&D intensity – Fama-MacBeth regressions (subsamples)

This table reports the average slopes (in %) and their Newey-West (1987) autocorrelation-adjusted heteroscedasticity-robust t-statistics in parentheses
from monthly Fama and MacBeth (1973) cross-sectional regressions as in Model 3 of Table 7 within subsamples split by R&D intensity. R&D intensity
is defined as R&D expenses scaled by total assets. The Low (High) R&D subsample refers to the bottom (top) 30%. All variables are defined as in
Tables 2 and 7.

                                                                 Model 3A                               Model 3B
                                                        Low R&D          High R&D              Low R&D         High R&D
                                                     Slope   t -stat  Slope    t -stat      Slope   t -stat  Slope   t -stat
                      Innovative originality         0.05    (1.07)    0.14    (2.01)        0.13   (1.64)    0.18   (2.66)
                      Size                           0.07    (0.80) -0.34 (-2.65)            0.08   (0.90) -0.34 (-2.65)
                      Book-to-market                 0.29    (4.70)    0.19    (1.73)        0.29   (4.76)    0.18   (1.72)
                      Momentum                       0.20    (2.52) -0.10 (-0.76)            0.20   (2.51) -0.10 (-0.76)
                      Institutional ownership        0.01    (0.20)    0.18    (1.87)        0.01   (0.21)    0.20   (2.04)
                      Illiquidity                    0.27    (3.41)    0.53    (4.14)        0.27   (3.38)    0.53   (4.13)
                      Short-term return reversal     -0.82 (-10.30) -1.33 (-10.43)          -0.83 (-10.33) -1.33 (-10.44)
                      Asset growth                   -0.27 (-4.33) -0.25 (-2.85)            -0.27 (-4.26) -0.24 (-2.72)
                      Capex/Assets                    0.00   (0.01)    0.02    (0.27)        0.00   (0.00)    0.02   (0.24)
                      Patents/Assets                  0.02   (0.42)    0.02    (0.25)        0.12   (1.81)    0.06   (0.59)
                      Net stock issuance             -0.08 (-1.84) -0.02 (-0.17)            -0.08 (-1.82) -0.01 (-0.16)
                      Return on assets                0.15   (2.29)    0.26    (2.57)        0.14   (2.19)    0.26   (2.56)
                      Idiosyncratic volatility        0.17   (1.43)    0.07    (0.50)        0.17   (1.39)    0.07   (0.48)
                      Skewness                       -0.07 (-1.90) -0.07 (-0.90)            -0.07 (-1.89) -0.07 (-1.03)
                      Citations-based IE              0.10   (2.08)    0.12    (1.72)
                      Patents-based IE                                                      -0.13    (-2.36)   -0.02    (-0.24)
                        2
                      R                               0.16              0.15                 0.16              0.15
                      Number of firms                 717               438                  717               438




                                                                          73
Figure 1. Monthly Average Alphas of InnOrig Spread Portfolio over the Five Post-Sorting Years

Figure 1 plots the value-weighted monthly average alphas for the high-minus-low innovative originality portfolio (as formed in Table 5) over the five
post-sorting years. All the factor models used are described in Table 5.




                                                                         74
Figure 2. High-minus-Low Innovative Originality Portfolio Returns

Figure 2 plots the value-weighted return on the high-minus-low innovative originality portfolio (as formed in Table 5) on a per annum basis from July
of 1982 to June of 2008. There are only six months in 1982 and 2008.

     30.00%



     25.00%



     20.00%



     15.00%



     10.00%



      5.00%



      0.00%
               1982 1983 1984 1985 1986 1987 1988 1989 1990 1991 1992 1993 1994 1995 1996 1997 1998 1999 2000 2001 2002 2003 2004 2005 2006 2007 2008

      -5.00%



     -10.00%



     -15.00%




                                                                               75
