                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                     NATION-BUILDING, NATIONALISM AND WARS

                                       Alberto Alesina
                                        Bryony Reich
                                      Alessandro Riboni

                                      Working Paper 23435
                              http://www.nber.org/papers/w23435


                    NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                             1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                               Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    May 2017




We are grateful to Hector Galindo-Silva, Mickael Melki, Jean-Baptiste Michau, Kenneth Shepsle,
Romain Wacziarg, and seminar participants at several institutions for valuable feedback. We
thank Igor Cerasa and Matteo Ferroni for research assistantship. The views expressed herein are
those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic
Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2017 by Alberto Alesina, Bryony Reich, and Alessandro Riboni. All rights reserved. Short
sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission
provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Nation-Building, Nationalism and Wars
Alberto Alesina, Bryony Reich, and Alessandro Riboni
NBER Working Paper No. 23435
May 2017
JEL No. P16

                                        ABSTRACT

The increase in army size observed in early modern times changed the way states conducted
wars. Starting in the late 18th century, states switched from mercenaries to a mass army by
conscription. In order for the population to accept to fight and endure war, the government
elites began to provide public goods, reduced rent extraction and adopted policies to
homogenize the population with nation-building. This paper explores a variety of ways in
which nation-building can be implemented and studies its effects as a function of
technological innovation in warfare.

Alberto Alesina                              Alessandro Riboni
Department of Economics                      École Polytechnique
Harvard University                           Departement d'Economie
Littauer Center 210                          Palaiseau, France
Cambridge, MA 02138                          alessandro.riboni@polytechnique.edu
and IGIER
and also NBER
aalesina@harvard.edu

Bryony Reich
Northwestern University
Kellogg School of Management
GLOBAL Hub 4263
2211 Campus Drive
Evanston, IL 60208
bryony.reich@kellogg.northwestern.edu
                                     Alesina, Reich and Riboni                                              1


                                           1.    Introduction

The interplay between war and the fiscal capacity of the state is well known.1 However, guns
are not enough to win wars; one also needs motivated soldiers. In modern times, the need
for large armies led to a bargain between the rulers and the population. The elite had to
make concessions to induce citizens to comply with war related demands. Rulers promoted
nationalism to motivate citizens and extract “ever-expanding means of war - money, men,
materiel, and much more - from reluctant subject populations” (Tilly, 1994; see also Levi,
1997).

       The “ancient regimes” in Europe used to fight wars with relatively small armies of mer-
cenaries, sometimes foreigners, paid out with the loots of war. As a consequence of the
evolution of warfare, countries changed the conduct of war, switching from mercenaries to
mass armies recruited or conscripted almost entirely from the national population. Roberts
(1956) explained how warfare underwent a “military revolution” starting between 1560 and
1660 and reaching a completion with the “industrialization of war” (McNeill, 1982) that oc-
curred in the nineteenth century.2 The source of this revolution was due to changes in tactics
and weapons, such as, the use of gunpowder technology and the invention of new styles of
artillery fortification, higher population growth, changes in communications and transport
technology which allowed states to put a large army in the field, and the adoption of tech-
niques of mass weapon production. The electromagnetic telegraph, developed in the 1840s,
allowed the deployment and the control of the army at distance. Steamships and railroads
moved weapons, men and supplies on an entirely unprecedented scale (Onorato et al., 2014).
In the middle of the 19th century, the adoption of semiautomatic machinery to manufacture
rifled muskets made it possible, and relatively affordable, to equip a large number of soldiers
(McNeill, 1982, p. 253). As a result, the size of armies increased and, as Clausewitz (1832)
put it, “war became the business of the people”.3

   1
     Among others, Brewer (1990), Tilly (1990), and Besley and Persson (2009).
   2
     Roberts (1956), Tallett (1992), Rogers (1995) and Parker (1996) study innovations in warfare in the early
modern period. For more recent developments, see McNeill (1982) and Knox and Murray (2001).
   3
     According to Finer (1975) the number of French troops called up for campaigns was 65,000 (in 1498),
155,000 (in 1635), 440,000 (in 1691), and 700,000 (in 1812). In England and Prussia, which were less populous
countries than France, armies were smaller but nevertheless impressive relative to the population size. For
instance, in 1812 Prussia sent 300,000 soldiers (equivalent to about 10 per cent of the population) to war
(Finer, 1975, p. 101). These figures increased dramatically in the 20th century: during WWI, 8 millions of
soldiers were recruited in France (Crepin, 2009, and Crepin and Boulanger, 2002).
                            Nation-Building, Nationalism and Wars                                             2


       This paper examines nation-building in times of war. Mass warfare favored the transfor-
mation from the ancient regimes (based purely on rent extraction) to modern nation states
in two ways. First, the state became a provider of mass public goods in order to buy the
support of the population. Second, the state developed policies geared towards increasing
national identity and nationalism. In particular the states had to hold in distant provinces
to avoid the breakdown of the country, which would have interfered with war effort, and to
motivate soldiers and civilians located far away from the core of the country. In addition,
nation-building in times of war also included aggressive negative propaganda against the
enemy and supremacy theories.
       When the armies had to increase in size, the elites needed to build tax capacity. This is a
well studied point as we argued above, and we return to it at the end to close our argument.
We focus here on a different issue, the selection on how to spend fiscal revenues to motivate
the population to endure wars. The composition of spending is quite relevant. For instance
Aidt et al. (2006) argue that total spending as a fraction of GDP did not increase that
much in the 19th century up until WW2. What mostly changed was the composition of the
budget: in the 19th century and early 20th century, spending on defense and policing was
partly substituted by spending on public services (transport, communication, construction)
and later on public provision of public goods (education and health).4
       The citizens face punishment from illegally avoiding conscription and the soldiers from
defecting or cowardice; however it is hard to imagine that wars can be won by soldiers
who are fighting only to avoid punishment and citizens who are uncooperative.                       So, when
war became a mass enterprise, the elites had to reduce their rents and spend on public
goods which were useful to the populations. On this point, Levi (1997, p. 204) writes that
citizens’ voluntary “compliance [with conscription] is a quid pro quo for services provided by
the government.” Along similar lines, Tilly (1990, p. 120) writes that in order to mobilize
resources for war states had to bargain with their subject population and concede rights,
privileges, services and protective institutions: in Europe at the end of the 19th century,
“central administration, justice, economic intervention and, especially, social services all grew
as an outcome of political bargaining over the state’s protection of its citizens.” In other
words the citizens and soldiers have to believe that a loss in the war would imply a loss of

   4
     As reported by Table 5 in Aidt et al. (2006), on average in Europe, defence, judiciary and police accounted
for 59.7 per cent of total spending in 1850-1870, and 30.5 per cent in 1920-1938.
                                    Alesina, Reich and Riboni                                            3


useful national public goods and services provided by their government, which they learned
to appreciate because of nation-building. With heterogenous populations, governments used
indoctrination (via, for instance, education policies) to homogenize the population within
the state, instill patriotism and increase the value of common public goods and a common
language.5 Soldiers from regions without any national identity do not put much effort in
fighting or may even break away to join the enemy since their national identity is nil.6
National sentiments may be “positive” in the sense of emphasizing the benefit of the nation,
or “negative” in terms of aggressive propaganda against the opponent. When states have low
fiscal capacity and thus cannot provide mass public goods to increase positive nationalism,
their only option is negative nationalism and supremacy theories.

       Our paper is related to several others and some of our results are consistent with the
historical arguments presented above. Acemoglu and Robinson (2000) argue that elites gave
concessions in response to internal threats of revolutions. In this paper we argue that conces-
sions occurred also, perhaps mainly, as a response to external threats. Moreover, while they
focus on democratization, we focus on nation building. Whether the main motivation for the
elite’s concessions were internal or external threats may vary in different cases and it is worth
further investigation. Our theory is also complementary to the work of Lizzeri and Persico
(2004), who show that the expansion of voting rights, by increasing the electoral value of
policies with diffuse benefits, has determined a shift from pork-barrel politics to public good
provision. Alesina et al (2017) consider nation-building but they do not consider wars. They
focus on the incentive to nation-build as a response to democratization which in non homoge-
nous countries would lead to (threats of) secessions. Democratization and external threats
may in fact interplay and exacerbate the need to “nation build”. In Besley and Persson
(2009, 2011) wars give rulers the incentive to build an effective state that can successfully tax
its citizens in order to finance military expenses. However, as pointed out by Gennaioli and
Voth (2015), governments have always been subjects to external threats. Before the era of
modern states, this threat did not lead to the creation of strong and centralized states. The
effect of wars on state capacity seems a more recent phenomenon. Their explanation is that


   5
     States sometimes homogenize the population thorugh mass killings and forced displacements. This pos-
sibility, which is not considered in this paper, is studied in Esteban et al. (2015).
   6
     For instance Weber (1976, p. 101) describes episodes of hostility of French border regions towards the
national army during the 1870 war against Prussia.
                          Nation-Building, Nationalism and Wars                                         4


before the military revolution, the probability of winning a war was somewhat independent on
fiscal resources. In the modern era, instead, they argue that the odds of the fiscally stronger
power winning a conflict increased dramatically, thus giving strong incentives to build fiscal
capacity. Gennaioli and Voth (2015) model the military revolution as an increase of the
sensitivity of the war outcome to fiscal revenues. In our paper, it is modeled as an increase
of the size of the army. Aghion et al. (2014) study which regime (democracy or autocracy)
invests more on education. They also investigate whether spending in education is related
to external threats.7 Their model is different from ours in several respects. They do not focus
on government spending per se (they only focus on education) and more importantly they
do not model the mechanism through which spending can increase the effort in the conflict.
The paper is obviously also related to the literature on conflict, e.g., Jackson and Morelli
(2007). In the model by Esteban and Ray (2001, 2011) there is an exogenous parameter
which determines the importance of the public and private good components in the conflict.
In our model, the relative publicness of the conflict is endogenous and is a choice of the elite.




       The paper is organized as follows. Section 2 presents the basic structure of the model
and examines the working of it in peace. Section 3 considers the situation of war between
the two countries. Section 4 discusses the elite’s trade-off between providing public goods
and paying the soldiers with monetary transfers. Sections 5-6 study various forms of nation
building, including nationalism and propaganda. Section 7 discusses endogenous taxation.
The last section concludes. All the proofs are in the Appendix




   7
    For a discussion of education policies as instruments of cultural homogenization, see Weber (1976, ch.
18), Posen (1993), Bandiera et al., (2016) and Darden and Mylonas (2016).
                                 Alesina, Reich and Riboni                                    5


                                               2.   Peace

The world consists of two countries, A and B, for the moment with no war. Country A is
represented by the linear segment [0, q] and country B by the segment (q, 1]. We let CA ∈ [0, q]
and CB ∈ (q, 1] denote the location of the “capitals” of the two countries as in Figure 1. In
each country, there are two types of individuals: the members of the elite and the ordinary
citizens. The elite has measure sj in country j = A, B. Ordinary citizens have measure q in
country A and 1 − q in country B. Each individual has a specific “location”. All members
of the elite are located in the “capital”, where the public good is provided, while citizens
are uniformly distributed over the country.         Each country is run by its own elite and the
latter is not threatened by internal revolutions. The elite controls the tax revenue, engages
in rent-extraction and may choose to provide a certain amount of the public good and nation
building. More on this below.


                                 Figure 1: The two countries


                           0          CA             q          CB      1



                                   Country A                Country B



   Income and taxes are exogenous. We show below how to generalize our model to endoge-
nous taxation; for now we focus on the issue of how to allocate the tax revenues. In country
j all individuals, including the elite, receive a fixed income yj . Ordinary citizens (but not
the elite) pay a tax tj . This could be easily generalized to elites paying taxes and/or having
higher income, with no gain of insights and with more notation. When A and B are not in
conflict, there is no linkage between the two countries and, consequently, policies in B have
no effect on A so that we can completely disregard country B. In other words the peace
equilibrium in country B could be computed exactly as we do for country A.

   The citizens and the elite derive utility from private consumption and from the public
good. In country A the utility of an individual located at i ∈ [0, q] is

                                Ui,A = θgA (1 − a |i − CA |) + ci,A .                        (1)
                        Nation-Building, Nationalism and Wars                                  6


where gA denotes the public good that is provided in the capital of country A.    Consumption
of an ordinary citizen in country A is ci,A = yA − tA , while consumption by a member of the
elite is
                                        ce,A = yA + φA ,                                     (2)

where φA are the endogenous rents.

    As in Alesina and Spolaore (2003), the public good has a geographical and a preference
interpretation: it is located in the country’s capital and individuals located close to the capi-
tal benefit more from the public good. The proximity can be interpreted as geographical or in
terms of preferences, culture, or language. The parameter θ is the marginal benefit of public
spending for an individual at zero distance from it, |i − CA | is the distance of individual i
from the location of the public good and a is the marginal cost of distance. A low (respec-
tively high) value for the parameter a captures homogeneity (respectively heterogeneity) of
preferences within the country. We assume a < 1 so that everybody’s utility is increasing in
the public good.

    We also assume that the government has access to an homogenizing (nation-building)
technology.   The latter makes the public good more attractive to individuals who are far
away from it. In other words, “homogenized” citizens feel like members of the nation rather
than of their specific village, region, ethnic or religious groups. States homogenize the pop-
ulation by creating state-controlled educational systems, promoting national symbols and
traditions, celebrating the cultural roots in national museums, using print-based media and
so on. Nation-building can also be achieved in other ways, such as, building roads (or rail-
roads or airports) in order to reduce the costs of distance from the capital or teaching a
common language (the one spoken by the elite in the capital) so that individuals can better
communicate with the government and access public services. Homogenization can take a
variety of odious forms such as, prohibiting local culture, repression or even genocide. In our
model, however, we do not consider genocide since the size of the population is constant.

    The variable λ ∈ [0, 1] denotes the homogenization policy (or indoctrination, terms which
we will use interchangeably) while h is the linear cost of it. Homogenization changes individual
preferences by shifting the ideal point of an individual “located” at i and bringing it closer
to CA :
                                        (1 − λ)i + λCA .                                     (3)
                                Alesina, Reich and Riboni                                       7


Thus the higher is λ, the more the citizens benefit form the public good provided in the
capital.   We assume that the citizens do not (or cannot) resist homogenization.          Future
research may address this case as well.
   The share of tA q (the tax revenue) that is appropriated by the elite as political rent is
(1 − πA ) ∈ [0, 1] and is derived endogenously below. If πA > 0, the tax revenue is partly used
to either provide the public good or to “nation build” (financing a positive λ). The budget
constraint of the government is given by

                                       πA tA q = gA + hλ.                                     (4)


   The elite is located in the capital. Each member of the elite has the following utility which
is maximized under the budget constraint above:

                                                    (1 − πA )tA q
                               Ue,A = θgA + yA +                  .                           (5)
                                                         sA

The last term of (5) is given by φA , the political rents appropriated by each member of the
elite (of measure sA ). Note that the utility of the elite is not affected by λ since the elite
is already located in the “capital” (i.e., they have the public good which they like). Then,
clearly the elite sets λ = 0 since homogenization is costly. Given the linearity of (5) it
immediately follows that the elite either invests all tax revenue in the public good or diverts
all tax revenue as rent.


Proposition 1: For all parameters values, λ = 0. When

                                             1 − sA θ > 0,                                    (6)

      the elite chooses to have no public good and the entire tax revenue is appropriated as
      rents. When instead (6) does not hold, the elite does not extract rents and chooses
      maximal spending in public good – i.e., we have gA = tA q.


   Condition (6) implies that if the elite’s measure sA is relatively small and if the benefits of
the public good are not extraordinarily large (small θ) then the elites prefer extracting rents
rather than delivering public goods (such as, roads to the provinces or public education)
                           Nation-Building, Nationalism and Wars                                         8


which benefit every one, including the elite.8 This captures the case of the ancient regimes:
small elites and small public sectors (with not many public goods) except possibly in case of
wars, as we shall see. Throughout the rest of the paper we assume that (6) holds. Thus:

Assumption 1: 1 − sA θ > 0.

                                      3.   The Model of War
                          3.1.   The Determinants of Victory: War Effort

We now study a conflict between country A and B without modelling why a conflict erupts.9
The elite does not fight and the proportion of ordinary citizens fighting in the war is χ ∈ [0, 1]
in both countries.10 Therefore, the size of the army in country A and B is χq and χ(1 − q).
We assume that the army fully represents the heterogenous population in the country. That
is, the elite cannot selectively send to the front citizens on the basis of their location. The
citizens cannot resist to being called to the army. These could be interesting extensions of
our model for future research. The parameter χ plays a key role in our analysis; an increase
in χ captures the evolution of military technologies which we described in the introduction.
       The defeated country loses its sovereignty and its capital becomes the capital of the
winning country; the losing country forgoes its entire tax revenue to the winner. If country
A wins, for instance, the tax revenue raised in country B is shared between A’s elite and
A’s soldiers according to the proportions 1 − γA and γA , respectively derived endogenously.
This is of course an extreme case; we could model partial loss of sovereignty with additional
notation but without affecting the thrust of our results.
       Each soldier in A exerts effort eA , derived in Section 3.3.       Total effort in country A is
therefore χqeA . Effort in country B is taken as exogenous and set equal to χ(1 − q)eB > 0.
The probability of victory of a country is given by the ratio between the war effort of that
country and the sum of efforts by A and B. The probability of country A winning is given
by:
                                                          χqeA
                                  PA (eA , eB ) =                                                      (7)
                                                    χqeA + χ(1 − q)eB

   8
     If utility were not linear in gA , public good provision would not be necessarily zero (see Appendix).
Linearity is assumed to keep the analysis tractable.
   9
     The thrust of our results would not change if a conflict is expected to arise with some probability.
  10
     This could be generalized with no major insight but cluttering the notation.
                                     Alesina, Reich and Riboni                                              9


In our model the probability of winning depends on soldiers’ effort and motivation. Needless
to say, in reality the probability of victory depends upon not only the effort of the soldiers
but also their guns. More generally, we could have assumed that the military strength of a
country is the product of two inputs, soldiers’ effort and guns, and that the cost of effort is
reduced by having more efficient guns. In this case, the effort of the soldiers would increase
with the quantity and quality of military equipment, so that effort may also be taken more
generally as a catchall term for having a more efficient army.
       The timeline is as follows. First, the government of country A chooses the policy vec-
tor (πA , gA , λ, γA ) subject to (4) and given eB , tB, gB > 0.11 Second, war effort eA is chosen.
Finally, the winner of the conflict is determined, and individuals’ payoffs are computed ac-
cording to the policy choices selected at the beginning of the game. We will solve the game
backward by first computing the war effort in A (Section 3.3) and then solving the elite’s
problem.

                                  3.2.   Citizens’ and Elite’s Payoffs

Consider an ordinary citizen i ∈ [0, q] who is a soldier in country A.               His utility in case of
                                                 +        −
victory and defeat is denoted, respectively, by Ui,A and Ui,A . Using (1) and (3):


                 +                                                                 tB (1 − q)
                Ui,A = θgA − θgA a |(1 − λ)i + λCA − CA | + yA − tA + γA                                  (8)
                                                                                       χq
       The first terms in (8) are as in peace. The last term is the “pay” that each soldier
receives out of the spoils of war. In case of victory a proportion γA of the tax revenue of B is
distributed among A’s private soldiers, whose measure is χq.               If country A is defeated, the
capital of country A moves to CB . Citizens continue to pay taxes but the tax revenue goes
to country B. Then, citizen i’s utility is

                         −
                        Ui,A = θgB − θgB a[CB − (1 − λ)i − λCA ] + yA − tA                                (9)


       In writing (9) we have assumed that when the capital moves to CB , citizens in A evaluate

  11
    To make the problem interesting, gB should not be too large otherwise individuals in A would like to be
invaded by country B. Similarly, eB cannot be too high in order to give soldiers in A the incentive to exert
positive effort. Also the size of the two countries cannot be too different otherwise the larger country would
win with almost certainty. We discuss these bounds in the Appendix.
                           Nation-Building, Nationalism and Wars                                            10


the new capital according to their preferences after indoctrination, i.e. for given λ.                   This
implies that homogenization makes the defeat more costly for citizens to the right of CA
because they find themselves with preferences further away from CB . Instead, citizens to
the left of CA would see their utility in case of defeat increase with homogenization because
they are getting closer to CA but also to CB . We return to these issues below considering
alternative hypotheses regarding this point. In (9) we have also assumed that the elite of
the winning country does not homogenize the losers. Homogenization of the losers would be
necessary to prevent revolts after the war. We do not model insurrections in this paper; if
we did so, homogenization would be useful even in peace.12 Future research could investigate
how the prospects of future insurrections of conquered territories may influence, first, the
decision to go to war and then the choice to homogenize after victory.
       The utility of each elite member in country A in case of a success and a defeat is denoted,
                  +        −
respectively, by Ue,A and Ue,A .


                         +                               tA q             tB (1 − q)
                        Ue,A = θgA + yA + (1 − πA )           + (1 − γA )                                 (10)
                                                          sA                  sA
The last two terms in the above expression are the political rents and the share of loots
appropriated by the elite, respectively. The elite’s utility of losing is


                                   −
                                  Ue,A = θgB − θgB a(CB − CA ) + yA                                       (11)

Payoff (11) assumes (without loss of generality) that the elite continues to not pay taxes in
case of defeat.13

                                          3.3.    Effort Decision

We abstract from the free-riding problem that may arise when individuals choose effort levels
in wars. The latter would be extremely severe in a model with a continuum of soldiers given
that each soldier would see his contribution to the winning probability as negligible, leading
to no effort in equilibrium. Yet, we do observe that soldiers exert a significant amount of effort
in many wars. Threat of harsh punishment for cowardice (not modelled here) is certainly a

  12
    Note that Alesina et al. (2017) study a model of homogenization without wars.
  13
    Assuming that the elite pays taxes in case of defeat would reinforce our results because it gives the elite
even stronger incentives to avoid a defeat.
                                         Alesina, Reich and Riboni                                            11


reason but it is not the only one. In this paper we bypass free-riding problems by assuming
(1) that all soldiers in A exert the same effort level eA and (2) that this common effort level
is the one that maximizes the average expected payoff of ordinary citizens. In analogy to the
concept of rule-utilitarianism by Harsanyi (1980), the idea is that soldiers, regardless of their
differences, want to “do their part” by abiding to an effort rule that, when followed by all
soldiers, would maximize average utility.14 The results would be qualitatively unchanged if
one assumes that everybody puts in the effort of soldiers with the average or median distance
from the capital of country A. Note that homogenization may also be used to remedy a
collective-action problem, an interesting extension which we leave for future research.
       Given the policy vector (πA , gA , λ, γA ) chosen at the beginning of the game, the effort rule
is chosen to maximize the average expected payoff of all citizens. That is,

                              Z     q                               Z   q                      
                         1
                     max                  −
                                         Ui,A di   + PA (eA , eB )             +
                                                                             (Ui,A −U −
                                                                                      i,A )di       − eA .   (12)
                      eA q       0                                   0

The last term is the cost of effort, which we assume linear in eA .

                                   Figure 2: Net benefit of winning


                                     Net
                                     benefit

                                aθg(CB-CA)




                                               0           CA            q




       Optimal effort in the conflict depends on the utility that soldiers would get in case of
victory relative to the utility in case of defeat. Effort is higher if soldiers perceive a higher
net gain from victory. Depending on their location, individuals have different stakes in the
conflict. Individuals closer to the border have (relatively) low stakes as moving the capital
to CB in case of a defeat would be less costly for them. People closer to CA , have higher

  14
    A similar behavioral assumption is made, for instance, in Aghion et al., (2014), who also study effort
in conflict, and in Feddersen and Sandroni (2006) and Coate and Conlin (2004), who investigate turnout in
elections.
                          Nation-Building, Nationalism and Wars                                            12


net benefits.      For all citizens i < CA the net benefit is further increasing (respectively.
decreasing) in i depending if gA > gB (respectively. gA < gB ). Figure 2 draws the net benefit
of winning for all citizens in the country for a given set of policies: we select γA = 0, gA = gB
and we assume that citizen q (at the border of the two countries) is equally distant from
the two capitals. An increase of γA would shift the net benefit up by the same amount for
all citizens, while an increase of gA would have a stronger positive upward effect on the net
benefit of winning of individuals close to the capital. Problem (12) aggregates the net gains
of winning of all ordinary citizens in order to determine the common effort which is exerted
by all soldiers.
   We let N BA denote the average net benefit of winning in country A

                                                          q    +
                                                              Ui,A −U −
                                                     Z
                                                                      i,A
                                        N BA≡                             di                              (13)
                                                      0            q

                                      CA2
                                                q
and define the parameter ∆ ≡           q
                                            +   2
                                                    − CA > 0. Since optimal effort increases in N BA ,
policies chosen by the elite raise war effort if they increase the soldiers’ net benefit of winning.


Lemma 1: War effort in A is increasing in gA and γA , and it is decreasing in gB . In fact,

                          ∂N BA                                           ∂N BA           tB (1−q)
                           ∂g A
                                  = θ − aθ(1 − λ)∆ > 0                     ∂γA
                                                                                   =         χq
                                                                                                     >0
                                                                                                          (14)
                                  ∂N BA
                                                                                  λ) 2q
                                                                                          
                                   ∂gB
                                        =   −θ + aθ CB −λC A −(1 −                            <0

      War effort does not depend on tA , is increasing in tB and increases in λ if and only if

                                    ∂N B A                    q
                                           = θg A a∆ + θg B a( −C A ) > 0                                 (15)
                                     ∂λ                       2


   From (14) a larger government in country A has a positive effect on effort. When the
country is relatively homogenous (small a) a given increase of government in A has a stronger
effect on citizens’ welfare and, consequently, a larger effect on war effort. The promise of a
higher share of the spoils of war raises soldiers’ effort, especially when χ is small. If B has
larger government, effort in A decreases because citizens are less worried by the perspective
of moving the capital to CB ; when the capital of country B is more distant, the disincentive
                                      Alesina, Reich and Riboni                                                 13


effect of higher foreign public good is smaller. Because taxes tA are paid regardless of the war
outcome, the net benefit of winning (hence, war effort) does not depend on tA . Conversely,
an opponent with higher fiscal capacity tB provides larger spoils of war and raises war effort
of soldiers of country A.
       The sign of the effect of λ on war effort is ambiguous as the first term of (15) is positive but
the second term might be negative. To see why indoctrination might reduce the incentives
to fight, notice that nation-building has the biggest effect on the desired effort of the citizens
between CA and the border with country B. Due to indoctrination they would get higher
utility from gA and smaller utility from gB .             As a result, bringing them closer in spirit to
their original capital is especially valuable. On the other hand, for citizens who are to the
left of CA a higher λ reduces the “distance” to CA but also to CB , increasing the utilities of
both victory and defeat. In some cases, for these individuals indoctrination decreases their
net benefit of winning. Obviously this effect would be eliminated if there were a fixed cost of
losing sovereignty. We return to these issues below.
       Finally, from (15) notice that the cross partial derivative of N BA with respect to spending
and indoctrination is θa∆ > 0. There is a complementarity: a larger government in A makes
indoctrination policy more effective.

                            4.    Public Good Provision versus Loots

In what follows we show that wars, and especially mass warfare, induce the elite to allocate a
larger share of tax revenue to public good provision and lead to a reduction of rent extraction.
In order to build intuition, we begin to solve a simplified version of the model with no
indoctrination (λ = 0). Using the government budget constraint, the policy vector reduces
to (γA , gA ).    The optimal policy vector maximizing the elite’s expected payoff is given by:

                                          +      −              χqeA             −
                 (γA? , gA? ) = arg max (Ue,A − Ue,A )(                     ) + Ue,A − eA                    (16)
                                  gA ,γA                  χqeA + χ(1 − q)eB

The last term of (16) is the linear cost of effort; the underlying assumption is that the elite
internalizes the effort cost exerted by ordinary citizens in the war.15 Note that policies have
a direct effect on the elite’s payoff and an indirect effect via soldiers’ effort. When country

  15
    This assumption is completely inessential. If the elite totally disregarded soldiers’ effort, the results would
be qualitatively unchanged.
                            Nation-Building, Nationalism and Wars                                              14


A faces an external threat the elite must make some concession. In fact if both gA and γA
were equal to zero, soldiers’ net benefit of winning would be negative, there would be no
war effort, leading to a sure defeat. In choosing gA and γA the elite compares the costs (in
terms of its utility) with the benefits (in terms of providing incentives) of both instruments.
When equilibrium policies do not hit their upper constraint (i.e., γA? < 1 and gA? < tA q), only
the most efficient instrument is used. That is, under some conditions, the elite gives citizens
incentives to fight by providing public goods but no monetary transfers (that is, soldiers are
not paid). Under some other conditions it provides incentives by paying its soldiers, but
without delivering public goods.


Proposition 2: Suppose that equilibrium policies are bounded away from their maximal levels
        –i.e., γA? < 1 and gA? < tA q. When army size is small so that χ < χ, where

                                                         1 − θsA
                                                 χ≡               ,                                       (17)
                                                       qθ(1 − a∆)

        we have γA? > 0 and gA? = 0. When instead χ ≥ χ, we have gA? > 0 and γA? = 0.


      In Appendix we deal with the case in which the policies can also reach their maximal
level. Proposition 2 states that there is a cutoff in army size describing when the elite of
a country resorts to either public goods or to monetary payoffs. This proposition captures
the evolution of wars and nation-building. When armies were small, the elite motivated
professional soldiers (mercenaries) by paying them with loots of war. With the advent of
mass armies, the loots of wars were not sufficient, or to put it differently the elites had to
give up too much of the loots of war to create incentives for the soldiers. The elites started
to provide public goods, and soldiers, who were recruited mainly by conscription, fought in
order to keep their own sovereignty and public goods.
      Figures 3 and 4 show the equilibrium levels of γA and gA as a function of χ. As army
size increases, the elite must concede to soldiers a growing share of spoils of war. This is
why in Figure 3, γA initially increases in χ. When the military participation ratio reaches the
threshold χ, spending jumps up and soldiers are not paid anymore.16 Note that this discon-
tinuity arises because we assume linearity of individuals’ utility. In the Appendix we solve

 16
      Since χ cannot be larger than one, if χ > 1 the transition to public good provision never takes place.
                                                  Alesina, Reich and Riboni                                                                 15


a model with quasi-linear utility in consumption and show that results are qualitatively the
same, i.e., public spending increases continuously in army-size and loots are not distributed
for large values of χ.

                                      Figure 3                                                Figure 4
                    Spoils promised to soldiers                                          Public goods

                       1                                                       1
                                                         share of loots                                          public goods
                      0.9                                                     0.9

                      0.8                                                     0.8

                      0.7                                                     0.7

                      0.6                                                     0.6

                      0.5                                                     0.5

                      0.4                                                     0.4

                      0.3                                                     0.3

                      0.2                                                     0.2

                      0.1                                                     0.1

                       0                                                       0
                            0   0.2     0.4       0.6   0.8               1         0   0.2     0.4       0.6   0.8             1
                                              χ                                                       χ




       From (17), note that the value of χ depends only on parameters of country A. The cutoff
χ is decreasing in θ and increasing in societal heterogeneity. A more homogeneous country
(lower a) switches “earlier” (i.e. has a lower threshold on army size) to public good provision
since the latter are more valued on average in a more homogeneous country. On the contrary,
a more heterogeneous society may require more direct payments to soldiers since the latter
disagree and do not value much (on average) the benefits of public goods.17                                                         Moreover, χ
is decreasing in sA and, since ∆ is convex and minimized when the capital is in the middle
of the country, χ is higher when CA is located at the borders (either at 0 or q). In these
cases, in fact, most citizens perceive the public good as less valuable. Finally, the effect of
q, is ambiguous. On the one hand, a larger population makes the dilution problem of loots
more severe, favoring public good provision. But on the other hand, by affecting ∆, a larger
country might make the public good located in the capital less valuable to most citizens.
       In Figure 5, we show individual effort (solid line) and total effort (dashed line) as a function
of army size. Individual effort, which is computed according to (12), is strictly decreasing in

  17
     Consistently with this, Levi (1997, p. 124) argues that countries with class, social, ethnic and religious
cleavages mainly relied on professional soldiers and were least able to mobilize their population to support con-
scription. For instance, in Canada and Britain universal male conscription was strongly opposed, respectively,
by the Francophone and Irish population.
                             Nation-Building, Nationalism and Wars                                                                          16


χ as long as χ < χ. This is because the share of spoils of war promised to soldiers increases
less than army size. Total effort is however increasing in χ, thus capturing the fact that the
increase of army size did indeed make wars more disruptive.

                                  Figure 5                                                       Figure 6
                                   Effort                                      Resources captured by the elite

                   1                                                              15
                                                           tot effort                                                  rents + loots
                  0.9                                      indiv. effort
                                                                                  14
                  0.8

                  0.7                                                             13

                  0.6
                                                                                  12
                  0.5
                                                                                  11
                  0.4

                  0.3                                                             10

                  0.2
                                                                                   9
                  0.1

                   0                                                               8
                        0   0.2     0.4        0.6   0.8                   1           0   0.2       0.4       0.6   0.8               1
                                           χ                                                               χ




   While public spending jumps up at χ, the resources captured by the elite (namely, the
sum of rents and loots of war) drop at that cutoff (see Figure 6). In fact at χ the elite is
indifferent between distributing loots and providing spending. Since public good spending
is valued by the elite, indifference is possible only if monetary transfers to the elite drop.
Figure 4 shows that the increase in army size makes the elite worsen off by expanding the
concessions to the population.
   To determine the levels of gA and γA chosen by the elite we need to solve the first order
                                                                                +      −
conditions. To save on space, we only present the one for gA . We let N Be,A ≡ Ue,A − Ue,A
denote the net benefit from winning for the elite which can been obtained from (10) and (11).
If the solution for gA is interior to the interval [0, tA q] the first order condition is

                                          ∂P (eA ,eB )
                                             ∂gA                     1 − θsA
                                                  (N Be,A − N BA ) =                                                                       (18)
                                     P (eA , eB ) |       {z      }    sA
                                     | {z       }    disagreement    | {z  }
                                    ef f ort ef f ect                                            elite0 s mc

The right-hand side of (18) is the elite’s marginal cost of reducing political rents by providing
more public good. The left-hand side has two terms. The first term is large if the winning
probability and effort are highly sensitive to increasing public good provision. The second
term measures the difference between the net benefit of winning of the elite and the average
                                     Alesina, Reich and Riboni                                               17


one in the country. This term captures the extent of disagreement between the two groups
regarding the right amount of effort that should be exerted. When the elite has much bigger
stakes in the conflict, disagreement is high, increasing the elite’s incentives to deliver more
public goods in order to raise war effort.
       From (18) it is possible to show that if the other country has a bigger government, the
elite increases spending in A to “match” the foreign level of spending. That is, there is a
sort of “spending contagion” across countries.


Proposition 3: Suppose CA ≤ 2q . When χ ≥ χ, public spending in A increases in gB .


       Finally, it is interesting to study the effect of preference heterogeneity on public good
provision. As discussed earlier, homogenous countries switch “earlier” to public good provision
than heterogenous countries. However, if we compare two countries that both have χ > χ,
from the first order condition (18) it is ambiguous whether the more homogenous country
will choose to provide higher spending levels. On the one hand, a lower a raises the first
term of the left-hand side of (18) and makes public spending a more effective instrument to
raise effort, pushing gA up. On the other hand, when a is low, disagreement between the
elite and citizens generally decreases (as the elite and most citizens equally enjoy the national
public good), weakening the incentives of the elite to boost effort levels chosen by the soldiers.
Because of the latter effect, the elite can therefore provide less spending and afford to keep
higher rents.18


                              5.   Indoctrination and Public Goods

 The elite now selects (gA , γA , λ) to maximize its expected payoff.                 As before, the elite’s
rents are determined residually using (4). In order to limit the multiplication of cases we
derive these results under the assumption that the capital of country A is in the middle of
the country.19


Assumption 2:          CA = q/2.

  18
     In the literature (e.g., Alesina et al, 1999) the effect of homogeneity on public good provision is usually
unambiguously positive.
  19
     Alesina and Spolaore (1997, 2005) show how in some ways this is a “natural” assumption.
                         Nation-Building, Nationalism and Wars                                    18


   Unlike public good spending, which is also enjoyed by the elite, nation-building policies do
not directly affect the elite’s payoff. Nation-building is pursued only if it is effective in raising
war effort. As we noted above, homogenization has the biggest effect on citizens who are close
to the borders of the rival country. On the other hand, citizens who are to the left of CA are
not much affected by indoctrination. In some cases, indoctrination decreases their net benefit
of winning because it reduces the “distance” to CA but also to CB , increasing the utilities
of both victory and defeat. Assumption 2 guarantees that the effect of homogenization is
unambiguously positive and does not depend on gB .
   As stated in the following lemma, since public spending and nation-building are comple-
ments, they are generally provided jointly.


Lemma 2: In equilibrium, homogenization and public spending are positively related accord-
      ing to the following function
                                                                      
                                               1 − θsA      (1 − a∆)
                           λ = min max                 gA −          ,0 ,1                      (19)
                                                  h             ∆

   From (19), note that while one can observe public good provision without nation-building,
the converse is not possible: if country A does not provide any public good in CA (or gA is small
enough), it is worthless to reduce the citizens’ distance to the capital. This result explains
why, despite the high degree of heterogeneity of most pre-modern states, nationalism and
nation-building become a key force in politics only in the last two centuries. When soldiers
were exclusively motivated by monetary payoffs, preference heterogeneity within the country
and the distance of preferences with the opponent country have no impact on effort.
   Proposition 4 below shows that nation-building makes the public good a more effective
instrument to boost war effort, lowering the size of the army at which the public good starts
being provided. As before, we suppose that equilibrium policies do not hit their upper
constraint, γA? < 1 and gA? < tA q. In the online Appendix, we also solve this case.



Proposition 4: Suppose that equilibrium policies are bounded away from their maximal lev-
      els, that is, γA? < 1 and gA? < tA q. When nation-building is feasible, the χ cutoff after
      which public good is provided decreases.      That is, there exists a new cutoff χ
                                                                                       b, where
                                Alesina, Reich and Riboni                                     19


      χ                         b, we have γA? > 0 and λ? = gA? = 0. When χ ≥ χ
      b ≤ χ, such that when χ < χ                                             b we
      have γA? = 0, gA? > 0 and λ? given by (19).


   Conditional on being above the cutoff, the effect of homogenization on spending levels is
however ambiguous. On the one hand, since nation-building is costly, the adoption of nation-
building policies crowds out public good spending. On the other hand, since indoctrination
and public good are complements, spending is more effective in raising soldiers’ effort, which
pushes spending levels up.
   The effect on expected citizens’ welfare is also not straightforward. On the one hand,
homogenization lowers (respectively. increases) the utility in case of defeat of the citizens
located to the right (respectively. left) of the capital. On the other hand, homogenization
improves welfare in case of victory for all citizens.

                          6.   Nation-Building and Propaganda

In this section, we consider two different forms of nation-building and compare them to the
one that we have described in Section 2.1, which we denote as “benchmark” nation-building.
    All three forms of nation-building will have a unitary cost h. First, we consider a form
of indoctrination (denoted as “enemy-neutral”) which does not affect citizens’ utility in case
country B wins the war. It only raises the value of the public good provided in A. The utility
if A wins is
                           e + = θgA [1 − a(1 − λ1 ) |i − CA |] + ci,A
                           U                                                                 (20)
                            i,A


where λ1 ∈ [0, 1]. In case of defeat the utility of A’s citizens is unchanged and equal to

                               e − = θgB [1 − a |i − CB |] + ci,A
                               U                                                             (21)
                                i,A



Language policies might fit well this type of nation-building. In fact, it is reasonable to
suppose that making, say, Bretons learn French improves their ability to feel “French” and
enjoy the public goods provided in Paris, but should have little or no consequence on the way
they would enjoy the German public good in case of a defeat in a Franco German war. When
considering the effect of this alternative form of nation-building on war effort, there are two
considerations. On the one hand, relative to the benchmark, citizens located to the left of CA
have stronger incentives to fight. In fact, when nation-building is enemy-neutral, it cannot be
                           Nation-Building, Nationalism and Wars                                            20


the case that for these citizens the public good provided by the enemy may actually increase
in value. On the other hand, there is a negative effect on the desired war effort of citizens
located to the right of CA because for these citizens it is not the case anymore that nation-
building worsens their utility in case of defeat. It can be shown that when Assumption 2
holds, the two effects exactly balance out, thus explaining the following Proposition.

Proposition 5: Suppose that the elite has access to “enemy-neutral” nation-building and
         the capital is in the middle of the country. In this case, equilibrium war effort, elite’s
         payoffs and public policies coincide with the ones obtained under the “benchmark” form
         of nation-building.

       This equivalence result hinges crucially on the assumption that the capital is in the middle.
If the capital of country A were close to “zero”, the “benchmark” form of nation-building
would be more effective because bringing the population “closer” to the capital of A would
also bring most of the citizens further away from B’s capital. Conversely, if the capital were
close to the border with country B, “enemy-neutral” nation-building would be more effective.
       Next, we consider a third form of indoctrination (labelled “anti-foreign nationalism”)
which does not make citizens enjoy more the public good in their own capital, but homogenizes
the country by making citizens dislike the public good provided by B.20 If country A is
defeated and the capital moves to CB , we assume that citizen i’s utility is

                               b − = (1 − λ2 )θgB [1 − a |i − CB |] + ci,A
                               U                                                                          (22)
                                 i,A



where λ2 ∈ [0, 1]. A higher λ2 lowers the value of the foreign public good. Conversely, if
country A wins, preferences towards the public good in A are unchanged:

                                    b + = θgA [1 − a |i − CA |] + ci,A
                                    U                                                                     (23)
                                     i,A



In considering this form of nation-building, we assume that the elite itself is not affected by
its own propaganda: propaganda against the enemy affects ordinary citizens’ utility only.

  20
    Tilly (1994) stresses that homogenization benefits from the existence of a well-defined other. For example,
he writes that, “anti-German sentiment reinforced the desirability of becoming very French, as anti-French,
anti-Polish, or anti-Russian feeling reinforced the desirability of becoming very German”. As shown by
Voigtländer and Voth (2015), these forms of propaganda have long-lasting effects. Guiso et al (2009) find
that countries with a history of wars tend to trust each other less.
                                     Alesina, Reich and Riboni                                                21


This form of indoctrination is totally inefficient from a welfare point of view as it worsens
agents’ utility in case of defeat and does not improve utility in case of victory.                   The elite
wastes resources to convince the country to distrust the opponent. Many country leaders
have resorted to this form of nation-building on several occasions.21
       Before stating the next proposition, we define the following cutoff

                                                        h
                                        e≡
                                        χ                                                                   (24)
                                              qθgB (1 − a(CB − 2q ))

and the parameter
                                     1 − a∆    gB (1 − a(CB − 2q ))
                                  ϕ≡         −                      .                                       (25)
                                     1 − θsA            h
As before, suppose that equilibrium levels of λ2 , γA and gA are bounded away from their
maximal levels – i.e., λ?2 < 1, γA? < 1 and gA? < tA q. (See the online Appendix on this point)

Proposition 6: Suppose that the elite has access to anti-foreign propaganda. When army
         size is sufficiently small, so that χ < min {χ, χ
                                                         e}, the elite gives monetary transfers to its
         soldiers without providing any public good and without doing anti-foreign propaganda.
                                                                           e}, the elite stops
         When instead, army size is sufficiently large so that χ ≥ min {χ, χ
         paying its soldiers and creates incentives for them by using either public good provision
         (when ϕ ≥ 0) or anti-foreign propaganda (when ϕ < 0), but not both.

       Notice that public good provision and anti-foreign propaganda are substitutes and no
longer complements.         Therefore, we could observe anti-foreign propaganda (hence, strong
nationalistic feelings) without any provision of national public good. This result is consistent
with the evidence of several countries with high levels of nationalism and national pride but
limited ability to provide public goods and implement good policies.22 Instead, when nation-
building takes the other (more “positive”) forms, state-building nationalism and public-good
provision are observed together.

  21
     For example, Kallis (2005, p. 65) argues that in the final years of WW2, when beliefs in National Socialism
started to crumble, German propaganda switched from “positive” and self-congratulatory discourses to a more
“negative” content, stressing anti-Bolshevism, anti-Semitism, and anti-plutocratic themes. The goal was to
bolster war effort by convincing the population that resistance was a lesser evil than losing the war. Similarly,
in Padro-i-Miquel (2007) citizens support kleptocratic rulers because they fear of falling under an equally venal
ruler who would favor other groups.
  22
     On this, see Ahlerup and Hansson (2011).
                         Nation-Building, Nationalism and Wars                                  22


   Assume that the elite can pursue only one of the three forms of nation-building. In the
remainder of this section, we study which form of nation-building is preferable from the elite’s
point of view.     Given that all the forms of nation-building analyzed so far have no direct
effect on the elite’s utility, the elite would simply choose the type of indoctrination that allows
to increase the effort of the citizens at minimum cost. In the next proposition, we provide
a sufficient condition that guarantees that anti-foreign propaganda dominates other forms of
nation-building.

Proposition 7: When fiscal capacity is sufficiently low so that

                                            gB ( a1 − (CB − 2q ))
                                       tA <                       ,                           (26)
                                                     ∆q

       the elite’s preferred form of nation-building is of the “negative” type.

   Proposition 7 states that countries with low fiscal capacity which face an enemy with
high levels of public goods will prefer to pursue (if at all) negative propaganda. This result
is intuitive: countries which cannot match the level of public goods in the foreign country
are discouraged from providing public good. These countries prefer negative propaganda
over other (more “positive”) forms of nation-building because the former does not require
public good provision in the home country to be effective. An implication of Proposition 7 is
that in countries with a low level of heterogeneity (low a), citizens already have preferences
closer to the national public good so that the marginal benefit of further homogenization
is quite small.     Therefore, homogenous countries will be more likely to satisfy sufficient
condition (26) and implement negative propaganda. This seems intuitive: a very homogenous
country emphasizes the superiority of its (homogeneous) “culture”, ethnicity or identity over
everybody else.

                                 7.   Endogenous Taxation

The intuition of what endogenous taxes (or fiscal capacity) would do in our model is quite
straightforward although a formal treatment is potentially involved.         Let us first consider
the case of no external threat. In this case the elite would raise taxes with the only goal of
extracting rents. The choice of fiscal capacity would be shaped by the trade-off between the
benefits of extracting higher rents and the cost of raising fiscal capacity.      When facing an
                                     Alesina, Reich and Riboni                                               23


external threat the elite has reasons to collect more taxes (building fiscal capacity) but also to
collect lower taxes. Let us begin with the first. The most obvious one is that the elites need
tax revenue to buy guns and military equipment. In our model one could add another public
good, military spending: a larger amount (holding constant the other country’s behavior)
would increase the probability of winning. In a more general model, if the enemy responds to
military spending of the “home” country with more spending, the two opponents will enter
in a “spending” race. Similarly, in order to motivate the soldiers the elite has the incentive
to raise taxes to spend more on the “peaceful” public good and on homogenization. On the
other hand, there are also reasons to invest less in fiscal capacity when facing an external
threat. First, as pointed out by Gennaioli and Voth (2015), war discourages investment in
fiscal capacity because with some probability the additional fiscal revenues will be grabbed
by the opponent country. Moreover, more taxes might lower soldiers’ utility and thus their
effort; the latter effect would of course depend on the tax rates in the home country relative to
the tax rates in the foreign country. Finally, a larger government would increase the incentive
for the enemy to conquer, increasing the enemy’s effort and thus lowering the probability
of victory of the “home” country.           A set of first order conditions would equalize all these
margins and it is likely that the former forces give us a solution in which external threats
lead to an increase in tax revenues as argued in the literature.23 In other words when wars
become more expensive the need for guns may predominate all the other effects and require
higher taxes than in peacetime. Nevertheless, and this is where the contribution of our paper
lies, in addition to raising state capacity to buy military equipment, the elites also face the
question of how to allocate state revenues. To close where we started, one needs a motivated
population not only guns to win wars.

                                            8.    Conclusions

In this paper we have explored several issues related to the question of how “wars make
states”. The literature on this point has mostly focused on how wars induce states to raise
their fiscal capacity to buy military equipment. Instead, this paper focuses on other (com-
plementary) issues, namely how to motivate the population (soldiers in particular) to endure
war. Besides promising monetary payoffs, the elites have two means to increase war effort.

  23
     As Gennaioli and Voth (2014) have shown, this occurs if the sensitivity of war’s outcome to fiscal revenues
is high.
                       Nation-Building, Nationalism and Wars                                 24


One is to provide public goods and services in the home country so that soldiers would lose a
lot if the war is lost. This would lead to investment in “peaceful” public goods and contribute
to state building from a different angle relative to the need to collect taxes to buy guns. Sec-
ond, the elite may need to homogenize or indoctrinate the citizens to make them appreciate
victory and dislike living under foreign occupation. We have explored a variety of ways in
which this can be done and depending on the situation a different type of nation-building
(leading to anti-foreign nationalism) might be chosen. A key implication of our analysis is
that as warfare technologies led to a military revolution with larger armies, the elite had to
change the way it motivated the soldiers: from the loots of wars for relatively small armies
of mercenaries to public goods and nation building and/or nationalism for large conscripted
armies.


                                         References

   • Acemoglu Daron and James Robinson (2000) “Why Did the West Extend the Franchise?
     Democracy, Inequality, and Growth in Historical Perspective” The Quarterly Journal
     of Economics, 2000, vol. 115, issue 4, pages 1167-1199

   • Aghion, Philippe, Xavier Jaravel, Torsten Persson, and Dorothee Rouzet (2014). “Ed-
     ucation and Military Rivalry” mimeo Harvard.

   • Ahlerup Pelle and Gustav Hansson (2011) “Nationalism and government effectiveness”
     Journal of Comparative Economics, 39: 431-451.

   • Aidt, Toke, Jayasri Dutta, and Elena Loukoianova (2006). “Democracy comes to Eu-
     rope: franchise extension and fiscal outcomes 1830–1938.” European Economic Review,
     50(2): 249-283.

   • Alesina, Alberto and Enrico Spolaore (2005). “War, peace, and the size of countries.”
     Journal of Public Economics, 89(7): 1333-1354.

   • Alesina Alberto and Enrico Spolaore (2003) The Size of Nations, MIT Press, 2003.

   • Alesina, Alberto, and Enrico Spolaore (1997). “On the Number and Size of Nations”
     Quarterly Journal of Economics, vol. 90(5), pages 1276-1296, November 1997
                           Alesina, Reich and Riboni                                 25


• Alesina, Alberto, Paola Giuliano and Bryony Reich (2017) “Nation-Building” mimeo
  Harvard University

• Alesina, Alberto, Reza Baqir and William Easterly, (1999) “Public Goods and Ethnic
  Divisions” The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 1243-1284.

• Bandiera Oriana, Myra Mohnen, Imran Rasul, Martina Viarengo (2017) “Nation-
  Building Through Compulsory Schooling During the Age of Mass Migration” mimeo
  LSE

• Besley, Timothy, and Torsten Persson (2009). “The origins of state capacity: Property
  rights, taxation, and politics.” The American Economic Review, 99(4): 1218-1244.

• Besley, Timothy, and Torsten Persson (2011). Pillars of Prosperity: The Political
  Economics of Development Clusters. Princeton University Press.

• Brewer, John (1990). The sinews of power: War, money, and the English state, 1688-
  1783. Harvard University Press.

• Clausewitz, Carl (1832) Vom Kriege, Berlin.

• Coate, Stephen, and Michael Conlin (2004). “A group rule–utilitarian approach to voter
  turnout: theory and evidence.” The American Economic Review, 94(5): 1476-1504.

• Crépin, Annie (2009) Histoire de la Conscription, Gallimard, Paris.

• Crépin, Annie, and Philippe Boulanger (2001). Le soldat-citoyen: une histoire de la
  conscription: le dossier. La documentation française. 328(1): 258-259

• Darden Keith and Harris Mylonas (2015) “Threats to Territorial Integrity, National
  Mass Schooling, and Linguistic Commonality” Comparative Political Studies 1-34

• Esteban, Joan, and Debraj Ray (2001). “Collective Action and the Group Size Para-
  dox.” American Political Science Review, 95(3), 663-672.

• Esteban, Joan, and Debraj Ray (2011). “Linking conflict to inequality and polariza-
  tion.” The American Economic Review, 101(4): 1345-1374.
                      Nation-Building, Nationalism and Wars                          26


• Esteban Joan, Massimo Morelli, and Dominic Rohner (2015) Strategic Mass Killings
  Journal of Political Economy, 123:5, 1087-1132

• Feddersen, Tim, and Alvaro Sandroni (2006). “A theory of participation in elections.”
  The American Economic Review, 96(4): 1271-1282.

• Finer, Samuel Edward, (1975). “State and nation-building in Europe: the role of the
  military.” The Formation of National States in Western Europe, Ed. Charles Tilly,
  Princeton University Press, p. 84-163.

• Gennaioli, Nicola, and Hans-Joachim Voth (2015). “State capacity and military con-
  flict.” The Review of Economic Studies, 82(4): 1409-1448.

• Guiso Luigi Paola Sapienza Luigi Zingales (2009) “Cultural Biases in Economic Ex-
  change?” Quarterly Journal of Econmics: 124 (3): 1095-1131

• Harsanyi, John C, (1980). “Rule Utilitarianism, Rights, Obligations and the Theory of
  Rational Behavior.” Theory and Decision, 12(2): 115-133.

• Kallis, Aristotle (2005). Nazi propaganda and the second world war. Springer.

• Knox MacGregor and Williamson Murray (2001) The Dynamics of Military Revolution,
  1300-2050. Cambridge University Press

• Levi, Margaret. (1997). Consent, dissent, and patriotism. New York: Cambridge
  University Press.

• Lizzeri, Alessandro and Nicola Persico, (2004) “Why Did the Elite Extend the Suffrage?
  Democracy and the Scope of Government, with an Application to Britain’s Age of
  Reforms”, The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 119, 707-765.

• Jackson, Matthew and Massimo Morelli (2007) “Political Bias and War,” American
  Economic Review, 97:4, 1353-1373.

• McNeil, William H. (1982). The Pursuit of Power: Technology, Armed Force, and
  Society since AD 1000. University of Chicago Press.
                             Alesina, Reich and Riboni                               27


• Mjøset, L., and S. Van Holde (Eds.)(2002). The comparative study of conscription in
  the armed forces. Emerald Group Publishing Limited.

• Onorato, Massimiliano, Kenneth Scheve, and David Stasavage (2014). “Technology
  and the Era of the Mass Army.” The Journal of Economic History, 74(02): 449-481.

• Padró i Miquel, Gerard (2007). “The control of politicians in divided societies: the
  politics of fear.” The Review of Economic Studies, 74(4): 1259-1274.

• Parker, Geoffrey (1996). The Military Revolution: Military Innovation and the Rise of
  the West, 1500-1800. Cambridge; New York: Cambridge University Press.

• Posen, Barry R. (1993). “Nationalism, the mass army, and military power.” Interna-
  tional Security, 18(2): 80-124.

• Roberts, Michael (1956). The Military Revolution, 1560-1660: An Inaugural Lecture
  Delivered Before the Queen’s University of Belfast. Belfast: M. Boyd.

• Rogers Clifford J., ed., (1995). The Military Revolution Debate. Readings on the Mili-
  tary Transformation of Early Modern Europe. Westview Press

• Tallett, Frank (1992). War and Society in Early Modern Europe: 1495-1715. Rout-
  ledge.

• Tilly, Charles (1994). “States and nationalism in Europe 1492–1992.” Theory and
  Society, 23(1): 131-146.

• Tilly, Charles (1990). Coercion, capital, and European states, AD 990-1992. Oxford:
  Blackwell.

• Voigtländer Nico and Hans-Joachim Voth (2015) “Nazi indoctrination and anti-Semitic
  beliefs in Germany” Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences vol. 112 no. 26
  pp 7931-7936.

• Weber, Eugen (1976). Peasants into Frenchmen: The Modernization of Rural France,
  1870-1914. Stanford University Press.
                             Nation-Building, Nationalism and Wars                                                                 28


                                                               Appendix
Proof of Proposition 1: The elite chooses λ = 0 because the elite does not gain from homogenizing the
country. Then, plugging λ = 0 into (4), the government budget constraint becomes πA tA q = gA . This allows
us to write the elite’s problem as
                                                                                             tA q
                                               max θπA tA q + yA + (1 − πA )                                                    (A.1)
                                                πA                                            sA
                                                                                          1
    This expression is linear in πA and is increasing when θ >                           sA .   Then, public good provision is maximal
when 1 − sA θ ≤ 0 and zero otherwise.                   


Proof of Lemma 1: We proceed by steps.


    Step 1. We show that effort is increasing in N BA .


    Optimal effort solves the following problem:

                                     Z    q                                  Z    q                      
                                 1
                           max                  −
                                               Ui,A di      + PA (eA , eB )              +
                                                                                       (Ui,A −U −
                                                                                                i,A )di        − eA             (A.2)
                           eA ≥0 q     0                                       0

    Using (7) and (13) we obtain

                                                        −
                                                                                                    !
                                           Z       q   Ui,A         qeA
                                max                       di +                N BA                      − eA                    (A.3)
                                 eA            0        q      qeA +(1 − q)eB

    If the solution is interior, the first order condition is:

                                                                                         2
                                                        q[qeA + (1 − q)eB ] − q eA
                                          N BA                                     =1                                           (A.4)
                                                            [qeA +(1 − q)eB ]2

    After taking the square root


                                                                    1/2
                                       [q(1 − q)eB N BA ]                 = [qeA +(1 − q)eB ]                                   (A.5)

This leads to the optimal effort in country A:
                                                   (                                                       )
                                                                              1/2
                                           [q(1 − q)eB N BA ]                            (1 − q)eB
                               e∗A   = max                                             −           , 0                          (A.6)
                                                     q                                       q

From (A.6) it is immediate that optimal effort is increasing in N BA . Note that for an interior solution one
needs that
                                                                      q
                                                            eB <           N BA .                                               (A.7)
                                                                   (1 − q)
                                                          Alesina, Reich and Riboni                                                     29


    Step 2. We compute N BA


    First, from (8) we have:
                     Z       q
                 1                +
                                 Ui,A di
                 q       0
                                                         CA                      q
                                                                                                                         tB (1 − q)
                                                 Z                           Z
               1
            = − θgA a(1 − λ)[                                 (CA − i)di +           (i − CA )di] + θgA + yA − tA + γA
               q                                     0                       CA                                              χq
               1                      i2 A      i2                                   tB (1 − q)
            = − θgA a(1 − λ)([CA i − ]C  0 +[      − CA i]qCA ) + θgA + yA − tA + γA
               q                       2        2                                        χq
                                       2     2              2
               1                2    C     q            C         2                        tB (1 − q)
            = − θgA a(1 − λ)(CA   − A+         − CA q − A + CA      ) + θgA + yA − tA + γA
               q                      2    2              2                                    χq
                              2
                            C      q                                  tB (1 − q)
            = −θgA a(1 − λ)( A + − CA ) + θgA + yA − tA + γA
                             q     2                                      χq



    Similarly, from (9)
                     Z   q                             Z q
                 1                −             1                                      1
                                 Ui,A di     = − θgB a     [(CB − λCA ) − (1 − λ)i]di + [θgB − tA + yA ] q
                 q   0                          q       0                              q
                                                1                             i2 q
                                             = − θgB a[(CB − λCA )i − (1 − λ) ]0 + θgB − tA + yA
                                                q                              2
                                                1                              q2
                                             = − θgB a[(CB − λCA )q − (1 − λ) ] + θgB − tA + yA
                                                q                              2
                                                                          q
                                             = −θgB a[CB − λCA − (1 − λ) ] + θgB − tA + yA
                                                                          2

    Then
                                                 Z   q
                                             1             +      −
                     N BA            =                   (Ui,A − Ui,A )di
                                             q   0
                                                        2
                                                     CA     q                           tB (1 − q)
                                     = −θgA a(1 − λ)(     + − CA ) + θgA + yA − tA + γA
                                                       q    2                               χq
                                                                     q
                                         +θgB a[CB − λCA − (1 − λ) ] − θgB + tA − yA
                                                                     2
                                                                 2
                                                               C      q
                                     = θ[gA − gB − gA a(1 − λ)( A + − CA )]
                                                                q     2
                                                                   q    tB (1 − q)
                                       +θgB a[CB − λCA − (1 − λ) ] + γA                                                               (A.8)
                                                                   2        χq

    The derivatives in Lemma 1 can be computed from the above expression. Throughout we assume that
parameters are such that there exist policies gA and γA for which (A.7) holds. If this were not the case, the
analysis would not be interesting because we would either have that the elite (and the citizens) would like to
be invaded for all combinations of public policies or that it would be impossible to motivate citizens to exert
strictly positive effort.                
                            Nation-Building, Nationalism and Wars                                             30




Proof of Proposition 2: Define

                                                        χqeA             −
                                EUe = N Be,A (                      ) + Ue,A − eA                          (A.9)
                                                  χqeA + χ(1 − q)eB

                                                                                        ?      ?
The elite chooses gA ∈ [0, tA q] and γA ∈ [0, 1] to maximize EUe .        We denote by γA and gA the optimal
solutions. Using (10) and (11) we compute the net benefit of winning for the elite

                                          gA tA q (1 − γA )tB (1 − q)
                 N Be,A = θgA + (1 −         )   +                    − θgB (1 − a(CB − CA ))             (A.10)
                                         tA q sA          sA



                                                   ?    ?
    Step 1. We show that it is not optimal to set γA = gA = 0.

    Suppose that parameters are such that it is feasible to choose public policies (i.e., γA and gA ) such that
(i) N BA satisfies (A.7) and (ii) and N Be,A > N BA .          It is immediate from (A.8) and (A.10) that these
requirements are easily satisfied provided that gB and eB are not very large, and tA very low. If it is possible
to choose a policy vector that satisfies the two requirements above, that policy vector would be preferable to
a policy vector γA = gA = 0. In that case, in fact, soldiers’s effort would be zero, leading to a sure defeat – a
suboptimal outcome for the elite. This shows that the elite would never chose γA = gA = 0: some concessions
are made to the population, either in the form of monetary transfers or in the form of public good provision.

    The Lagrangian of the problem is

                                               +      −        χqeA               −
                     L(gA , γA ; ψ, ω)   =   (Ue,A − Ue,A )(                 ) + Ue,A − eA                (A.11)
                                                         χqeA + χ(1 − q)eB
                                                          b A q − gA ) + ω
                                             +ψgA + ωγA + ψ(t            b (1 − γA )

where ψ, ω, ψ,    b are the multipliers of the constraints gA ≥ 0, γA ≥ 0, gA ≤ tA q, and γA ≤ 1.
            b and ω


    Step 2. We prove that it cannot be that the solution is interior for both public good and transfers. That
                  ?                  ?
is, it cannot be gA ∈ (0, tA q) and γA ∈ (0, 1)

   We take the derivative of (A.11) with respect to γA and gA assuming an interior solution, meaning
ψ = ω = ψb = ω
             b = 0.

                                [ ∂P (eA ,eB )
                                     ∂eA       N Be,A − 1] ∂eA ∂N BA    ∂N Be,A
                                                                     =−                                   (A.12)
                                        P (eA , eB )      ∂N BA ∂γA      ∂γA


                                [ ∂P (e
                                     ∂eA
                                        A ,eB )
                                                N Be,A − 1] ∂eA ∂N BA    ∂N Be,A
                                                                      =−                                  (A.13)
                                         P (eA , eB )      ∂N BA ∂gA      ∂gA
                                            Alesina, Reich and Riboni                                          31


Assuming an interior condition for effort eA ,

                                                    ∂P (eA , eB )
                                                                  N BA = 1                                 (A.14)
                                                        ∂eA

we can write

                                                                                      tB (1−q)
                                     ∂P (eA , eB ) N Be,A − N BA ∂eA                     sA
                                                                        =             tB (1−q)
                                                                                                           (A.15)
                                         ∂eA         P (eA , eB ) ∂N BA
                                                                                         χq


                                    ∂P (eA , eB ) N Be,A − N BA ∂eA      ( 1 − θ)
                                                                       = sA                                (A.16)
                                        ∂eA         P (eA , eB ) ∂N BA  θ(1 − a∆)

     Note that the left-hand sides of (A.15) and (A.16) are identical, implying that the right-hand sides must
also be identical, which holds non-generically.

                                1−θsA           ?                ?          ?              ?
     Step 3. Suppose χ <       qθ(1−a∆) .   If γA ∈ (0, 1) then gA = 0 and gA > 0 only if γA = 1. Suppose instead
        1−θsA           ?                   ?          ?              ?
χ≥     qθ(1−a∆) .   If gA ∈ (0, tA q) then γA = 0 and γA > 0 only if gA = tA q.

     Taking the first-order conditions and proceeding as in Step 2,

                    ∂P (eA , eB ) N Be,A − N BA ∂eA ∂N BA     ∂N Be,A       ω            ω
                                                           =−         −
                                                                                         b
                                                                                    +                      (A.17)
                        ∂eA         P (eA , eB ) ∂N BA ∂γA     ∂γA      P (eA , eB ) P (eA , eB )


                    ∂P (eA , eB ) N Be,A − N BA ∂eA ∂N BA     ∂N Be,A       ψ            ψb
                                                           =−         −             +                      (A.18)
                        ∂eA         P (eA , eB ) ∂N BA ∂gA     ∂gA      P (eA , eB ) P (eA , eB )
Rearranging terms, and scaling the multipliers, we can write

                                                                                 tB (1−q)
                                ∂P (eA , eB ) N Be,A − N BA ∂eA                     sA
                                                                   =             tB (1−q)
                                                                                            − ω0 + ω
                                                                                                   b0      (A.19)
                                    ∂eA         P (eA , eB ) ∂N BA
                                                                                    χq


                               ∂P (eA , eB ) N Be,A − N BA ∂eA      ( 1 − θ)
                                                                  = sA       − ψ 0 + ψb0                   (A.20)
                                   ∂eA         P (eA , eB ) ∂N BA  θ(1 − a∆)

              ?
     Suppose gA ∈ (0, tA q). Then, ψ 0 = ψb0 = 0 and we have

                                    ∂P (eA , eB ) N Be,A − N BA ∂eA      ( 1 − θ)
                                                                       = sA                                (A.21)
                                        ∂eA         P (eA , eB ) ∂N BA  θ(1 − a∆)

If
                                                     tB (1−q)
                                                        sA          ( s1A − θ)
                                                     tB (1−q)
                                                                ≥                                          (A.22)
                                                                    θ(1 − a∆)
                                                        χq

                                             ∂EUe
or equivalently χ > χ, we have that           ∂γA   < 0 implying that ω 0 > 0 and γA
                                                                                   ?
                                                                                     = 0. If instead χ ≤ χ we have
       ∂EUe                      ?                            ?                             ?         ?
that    ∂γA   > 0 implying that γA = 1. In other terms, when gA ∈ (0, tA q) we either have γA = 1 or γA = 0.
                               Nation-Building, Nationalism and Wars                                         32

                 ?                                                                                    ∂EUe
Suppose instead γA ∈ (0, 1). Following a similar argument as above, we find that if (A.22) holds,      ∂gA   >0
           ?                               ∂EUe                  ?
so that   gA   = tA q. If instead χ ≤ χ,    ∂gA   < 0 so that   gA   = 0.


    To claim sufficiency, we show that the LHS of (A.20) is strictly decreasing when γA = 0 and that the LHS
of (A.19) is decreasing when gA = 0. If this is the case, there exists a single critical point. The first-order
conditions with respect to gA and γA are
                                                                 p
                           q(1 − q)eB (N Be,A − N BA )             (1 − q)qeB     1
                                                       θ(1 − a∆)     √        =(    − θ)                (A.23)
                              qeA (qeA + (1 − q)eB )              2q N BA        sA

                                                                p
                          q(1 − q)eB (N Be,A − N BA ) tB (1 − q) (1 − q)qeB   tB (1 − q)
                                                                   √        =                           (A.24)
                             qeA (qeA + (1 − q)eB )       χq     2q N BA          sA

    where

                                                         gA tA q (1 − γA )tB (1 − q)
                     N Be,A − N BA     = θgA + (1 −         )   +
                                                        tA q sA           sA
                                             −θgB (1 − a(CB − CA ))
                                                                             q       tB (1 − q)
                                             −θgA (1 − a∆) + θgB (1 − a(CB − )) − γA            .       (A.25)
                                                                             2           χq

    It can be shown that the LHS of (A.23) is decreasing in gA because eA and N BA are increasing in gA and
N Be,A − N BA is decreasing in gA (given Assumption 1). Similarly, the LHS of (A.23) is decreasing in γA
because eA and N BA are increasing in γA and N Be,A − N BA is decreasing in γA .

                          ?          ?
    Step 4. Suppose that γA < 1 and gA < tA q. Expected monetary transfers to the elite – i.e., rents and
spoils of war – jump down discontinuously at χ.




    From the previous step, at χ the elite switches the tool to incentivize the soldiers: when χ ≥ χ the elite
provides spending while for χ < χ the elite pays soldiers. Maximized elite’s utility is continuous at χ = χ.
Similarly, soldiers’ optimal effort is continuous at the threshold. If this were not the case, the elite would
                                                                           ?
improve its payoff by not switching policy at the threshold. We denote by γA (χ) the left-hand limit of the
                                                                                   ?          ?
optimal share of loots as χ → χ. Then, at χ = χ, the elite is indifferent between gA (χ) and γA (χ)

                           ?                        1       1       tA q         ?      tB (1 − q)
                         θgA (χ) + yA + (1 −       ? (χ) ) s = yA + s    + (1 − γA (χ))                 (A.26)
                                                  gA        A        A                      sA

             ?
Given that θgA (χ) > 0, monetary transfers to the elite – i.e., the sum rents and spoils of war– must drop at
χ = χ. That is,
                                             1       1  tA q         ?      tB (1 − q)
                                   (1 −     ? (χ) ) s < s    + (1 − γA (χ))                             (A.27)
                                           gA        A   A                      sA

                                      Alesina, Reich and Riboni                                                   33


Proof of Proposition 3:         Expression (18) is the first order condition with respect to gA , which can be
written as                                                   p
                       q(1 − q)eB (N Be,A − N BA )             (1 − q)qeB     1
                                                   θ(1 − a∆)     √        =(    − θ)                          (A.28)
                          qeA (qeA + (1 − q)eB )              2q N BA        sA

     We can rewrite (A.25) as

                                                                       q
                           N Be,A − N BA = θgB a(CB − CA ) − aθgB (CB − ) + Ω                                 (A.29)
                                                                       2
                                                                          q
where Ω is a term that does not depend on gB . When CA ≤                  2   we have that N Be,A − N BA increases in
gB . By Lemma 1, N BA and eA decrease in gB . Then, we have that the LHS of (A.28) increases in gB . This
                                         q
proves Proposition 3. Note that CA ≤     2   is a sufficient condition (not a necessary one).        




Proof of Lemma 2: Equalizing the first order conditions with respect to λ and gA in the elite’s problem,
we obtain

                                 θ(1 − (1 − λ)a∆)   θ(gA a∆ − gB a(CB − 2q ))
                                       1          =             h
                                                                                                              (A.30)
                                      sA − θ                   sA

Solving λ as a function of gA gives us
                                                                     
                                              1 − θsA      (1 − a∆)
                                λ = min max           gA −          ,0 ,1                                     (A.31)
                                                 h             ∆

              


Proof of Proposition 4: Suppose that at the optimum gA and γA do not hit their upper bunds. We take
the first order conditions with respect to gA , γA and λ


                                                                                tB (1−q)
                                  ∂P (eA , eB ) N Be,A − N BA ∂eA                  sA
                                                                     =          tB (1−q)
                                                                                                              (A.32)
                                      ∂eA         P (eA , eB ) ∂N BA
                                                                                   χq


                           ∂P (eA , eB ) N Be,A − N BA ∂eA          ( s1A − θ)
                                                              =                                               (A.33)
                               ∂eA         P (eA , eB ) ∂N BA   θ(1 − a(1 − λ)∆)

                                                                                   h
                                  ∂P (eA , eB ) N Be,A − N BA ∂eA
                                                                     = sA                                     (A.34)
                                      ∂eA         P (eA , eB ) ∂N BA  θgA a∆
              ?
     Suppose gA ∈ (0, tA q). Then (A.33) holds.           From Lemma 2, the optimal level of homogenization is
 ?
λ ≥ 0. If
                                          tB (1−q)
                                             sA              ( s1A − θ)
                                                     >                                                        (A.35)
                                          tB (1−q)       θ(1 − a(1 − λ? )∆)
                                             χq
                            Nation-Building, Nationalism and Wars                                            34

                                                                                          ?
(or equivalently χ ≥ χ
                     b), we have that ∂EUe /∂γA < 0 implying that (A.32) cannot hold and γA = 0. Note
that when nation-building is feasible, we have that the right-hand side of (A.35) decreases, enlarging the set
of parameters for which public good is provided. If

                                            tB (1−q)
                                               sA              ( s1A − θ)
                                                       <                                               (A.36)
                                            tB (1−q)       θ(1 − a(1 − λ? )∆)
                                               χq

                         ?
or χ < χ
       b, we would have gA = 0.             


Proof of Proposition 5: Under the benchmark utility, the average net benefit of winning in the country is

                                                                 2
                                                               CA    q
                          N BA       = θ(gA − gB − gA a(1 − λ)(    + − CA ))
                                                                q    2
                                                                   q      tB (1 − q)
                                         +θgB a(CB − λCA − (1 − λ) ) + γA                              (A.37)
                                                                   2          χq

    Under “enemy neutral” nation-building the average net benefit of winning in the country is

                                                                      2
                                                                   CA     q
                            N
                            g BA       = θ(gA − gB − gA a(1 − λ1 )(     + − CA ))
                                                                    q     2
                                                       q       tB yB (1 − q)
                                            +θgB a(CB − ) + γA                                         (A.38)
                                                       2            χq

    Both net benefits are identical when CA = 2q . It also follows that if CA > q/2, “enemy neutral” would
                                                                                                      q
be preferable for the elite to the “benchmark” one, and vice versa when CA < q/2. When CA =           2,   since
the two forms of nation-building affects the elite utility only through the probability of winning, and since
the elite’s payoffs do not depend on nation-building, we have that economic outcomes under the two forms
of nation-building are identical.       




Proof of Proposition 6: We take the derivative with respect to gA , γA and λ2 .



                                                                                tB (1−q)
                                    ∂P (eA , eB ) N Be,A − N BA ∂eA                sA
                                                                       =        tB (1−q)
                                                                                                       (A.39)
                                        ∂eA         P (eA , eB ) ∂N BA
                                                                                   χq



                               ∂P (eA , eB ) N Be,A − N BA ∂eA      ( 1 − θ)
                                                                  = sA                                 (A.40)
                                   ∂eA         P (eA , eB ) ∂N BA  θ(1 − a∆)

                                                                                   h
                          ∂P (eA , eB ) N Be,A − N BA ∂eA               sA
                                                             =                                         (A.41)
                              ∂eA         P (eA , eB ) ∂N BA   θgB (1 − a(CB − 2q ))
                                           Alesina, Reich and Riboni                                          35

                                                                               ?
The analysis is simplified because the right-hand sides are constant. Suppose γA ∈ (0, 1). If

                                tB (1−q)
                                                   (                                     )
                                   sA                  ( s1A − θ)                h
                                                                                sA
                                           < min                ,                                          (A.42)
                                tB (1−q)               θ(1 − a∆) θgB (1 − a(CB − 2q ))
                                   χq


we have that gA and λ2 are equal to zero.                 Condition (A.42) is equivalent to χ < min {χ, χ
                                                                                                        e} . When
            e} , the choice between using gA or λ2 is driven by the sign of
χ ≥ min {χ, χ

                                            ( s1A − θ)                  h
                                                                       sA
                                                          −                                                (A.43)
                                           θ(1 − a∆)          θgB (1 − a(CB − 2q ))

which gives us the sign of ϕ.       

Proof of Proposition 7: Since Assumption 2 holds, “enemy-neutral” and benchmark nation-building yield
the same outcomes.     De facto, the elite must therefore choose between two forms of nation-building: the
“negative” (denoted λ2 ) and “positive” one (denoted λ). First, note that when λ = λ2 = 0 the net benefit of
winning is the same for both types of nation-building. The net benefit in case of “negative” indoctrination
can be written as

                                         C2  q                                  q
                     N
                     d B A = θ(gA − gA a( A + − CA )) − θ(1 − λ2 )gB (1 − a(CB − ))                        (A.44)
                                          q  2                                  2
The derivative of the average net benefit with respect to λ2 is

                                             ∂N
                                              d BA                  q
                                                   = θgB (1 − a(CB − ))                                    (A.45)
                                              ∂λ2                   2

From (A.8) the derivative of the net benefit with respect to λ is

                                                       ∂N BA
                                                             = θgA a∆                                      (A.46)
                                                        ∂λ

Therefore, if
                                                                     q
                                             θgA a∆ < θgB (1 − a(CB − ))                                   (A.47)
                                                                     2
we have that N
             d B A ≥ N BA , implying that “positive” nation-building is not used. Since fiscal capacity puts
an upper bound on spending, that is gA < qtA , we have that if

                                                         θgB (1 − a(CB − 2q ))
                                               tA <                                                        (A.48)
                                                                 qθa∆

nation-building, if it is used, will be of the negative type.               

                                  Binding fiscal-capacity and loots of war

    Assume λ = 0. Suppose that equilibrium policies are not bounded away from their maximal levels –i.e.,
        ?         ?
either γA = 1 or gA = tA q. Simulations show that public spending might be provided before the cutoff
                             Nation-Building, Nationalism and Wars                                           36

                        ?
χ. This occurs because γA hits the upper constraint and the elite might also want to use the less efficient
instrument (public good) to boost effort. In fact, note from Figures A.1 and A.2 that when χ ≤ χ, spending
                                     ?
is strictly positive precisely when γA = 1. Similarly, from Figure A.2 we observe that soldiers’ pay is positive
when χ > χ. This occurs because the elite is already using public spending, the most efficient instrument,
at full capacity. The graphs below show that qualitatively results are similar to what stated in Proposition
2. It bears stressing that the cutoff is the same one derived in Proposition 2.


              Figure A.1                                Figure A.2                            Figure A.3
              public goods                              soldiers’ pay                      quasi linear utility




                                             Quasi-Linear Utility

    In this Appendix, we solve the model when the marginal utility of public good consumption is not
constant. Assume the following quasi-linear utility function for all i ∈ [0, q]

                                      Ui,A = ln(gA )θ(1 − a |i − CA |) + ci,A                            (A.49)

Under peace, the elite maximizes

                                                                (1 − πA )tA q
                                      Ue,A = θ ln(gA ) + yA +                 .                          (A.50)
                                                                     sA

    subject to the government’s budget constraint.        It is immediate to compute that under peace, if the
solution is interior (i.e., fiscal capacity is not too low), optimal spending is

                                                      ?
                                                     gA = θsA                                            (A.51)

Compared to Proposition 1, there is public good provision under peace as well and public spending increases
                                                              ?      ?
in θ and sA . Under war (assume λ = 0), if the solutions for gA and γA are both interior, we have

                                             ?
                                            gA = θsA + χqθ(1 − a∆),                                      (A.52)
                                     Alesina, Reich and Riboni                                                37


This implies that an increase in army size raises spending, as in the model in the main text, but in a continuous
way. We can simulate a path for spending and soldiers’ pay as a function of army size. When army size
is small, the solution is interior and public spending increases in χ according to (A.52). As army size gets
sufficiently large, soldiers are not paid anymore and public spending is constant thereafter.
