NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

HEALTH PLAN PAYMENT IN U.S. MARKETPLACES:
REGULATED COMPETITION WITH A WEAK MANDATE
Timothy Layton
Ellen J. Montz
Mark Shepard
Working Paper 23444
http://www.nber.org/papers/w23444

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
May 2017

This essay was prepared as a chapter in "Risk Adjustment, Risk Sharing, and Premium
Regulation in Health Insurance Markets: Theory and Practice" edited by Thomas McGuire and
Richard van Kleef and published by Elsevier. We thank the editors for helpful comments. Layton
acknowledges funding from the Laura and John Arnold Foundation and from the National
Institute of Mental Health (R01 MH094290). Montz acknowledges support from grant number
T32HS000055 from the Agency for Healthcare Research and Quality. The content is solely the
responsibility of the authors and does not necessarily represent the official views of the Agency
for Healthcare Research and Quality. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do
not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
At least one co-author has disclosed a financial relationship of potential relevance for this
research. Further information is available online at http://www.nber.org/papers/w23444.ack
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.
© 2017 by Timothy Layton, Ellen J. Montz, and Mark Shepard. All rights reserved. Short
sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission
provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Health Plan Payment in U.S. Marketplaces: Regulated Competition with a Weak Mandate
Timothy Layton, Ellen J. Montz, and Mark Shepard
NBER Working Paper No. 23444
May 2017
JEL No. I11,I13
ABSTRACT
The Affordable Care Act Marketplaces were introduced in 2014 as part of a reform of the U.S.
individual health insurance market. While the individual market represents a small slice of the
U.S. population, it has historically been the market segment with the lowest rates of take-up and
greatest concerns about access to robust coverage. As part of the reform of the individual
insurance market, the Marketplaces invoke many of the principles of regulated competition
including (partial) community rating of premiums, mandated benefits, and risk adjustment
transfers. While the Marketplaces initially appeared to be successful at increasing coverage and
limiting premium growth, more recent outcomes have been less favorable and the stability of the
Marketplaces is currently in question. In this paper, we lay out in detail how the Marketplaces
adopt the tools of regulated competition. We then discuss ways in which the Marketplace model
deviates from the more conventional model and how those deviations may impact the eventual
success or failure of these new markets.
Timothy Layton
Harvard Medical School
Department of Health Care Policy
180 Longwood Avenue
Boston, MA 02115
and NBER
layton@hcp.med.harvard.edu
Ellen J. Montz
Harvard Medical School
Department of Health Care Policy
180 Longwood Avenue
Boston, MA 02115
emontz@fas.harvard.edu

Mark Shepard
Harvard Kennedy School
Mailbox 114
79 JFK Street
Cambridge, MA 02138
and NBER
mark_shepard@hks.harvard.edu

1. Introduction
The Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act (ACA) of 2010 called for the creation
of state-based health insurance markets known as Health Insurance Exchanges or Health
Insurance Marketplaces. These markets are intended to provide a new, affordable source for
health insurance for Americans who do not receive insurance through their employers or
through public programs providing coverage for the elderly (Medicare) and for low- income
families (Medicaid). The law included a number of reforms to the non-employer-based
private health insurance market (the “individual” market) in the United States that shifted
this market toward a model of regulated competition. These reforms included (partial)
community rating of premiums, mandated coverage of a basket of “essential health
benefits,” and guaranteed issue and renewal provisions prohibiting insurers from rejecting
applicants based on their health status. These reforms represented a dramatic shift in the
individual market in most states, where previously many insurance products were limited in
the scope of what they covered, insurers were allowed to charge higher premiums for sicker
enrollees, and some individuals with chronic conditions were unable to find insurers willing
to sell them coverage.
The U.S. health insurance market can be broken down into three sectors: employersponsored insurance, public insurance (i.e. Medicare and Medicaid), and individual private
insurance. The first two sectors, employer and public, are perceived to function relatively
well, at least in terms of coverage (although high costs are a perennial concern). These
sectors feature relatively high rates of take-up among eligible people and benefits that are
perceived as adequate. The individual market is the third and smallest sector, covering only
1

around 11 million Americans prior to the implementation of the ACA. It also acts as a sort
of “market of last resort” for individuals without access to employer or public coverage.
Unlike employer and public coverage, the individual market has historically featured low
take-up (contributing to the high rate of uninsurance in the U.S.) as well as insurer
underwriting and limited benefits driven by adverse selection. In an attempt to increase
take-up and address adverse selection problems in this market, the ACA created the
Marketplaces and made income-based premium subsidies available to individuals
purchasing Marketplace plans. Additionally, a new tax penalty (or “mandate”) was
introduced for individuals neglecting to purchase coverage.
As of 2016, about 18 million Americans are enrolled in a Marketplace plan, 85% of
whom receive premium subsidies. This represents over 60% of the individual market (US
Department of Health and Human Services 2016). Recent research has shown that the
premium subsidies have had a meaningful impact on the rate of uninsurance in the U.S.,
accounting for 40% of the decrease in the uninsurance rate due to the ACA (Frean et al.
2016).1 Overall growth in the individual market has been significant post- implementation
of the ACA. This can be seen in Figure 1, which plots enrollment in the individual market
between 2011 and 2015, with the ACA reforms going into effect in 2014.
Data from the first 3 years (2014-2016) suggested that (despite initial technical
difficulties) the Marketplaces were functioning reasonably well. Insurer premiums came in
below the levels expected by the Congressional Budget Office (Adler and Ginsburg 2016),

1

The ACA has had much larger impacts on the uninsurance rate, but most of those impacts seem to have
come v ia expansion of the Medicaid program and the “woodwork” effect of increasing take -up of Medicaid
among already eligible indiv iduals who were not enrolled.

2

Textbox: Marketplace vs. Individual-market
While the introduction of the Marketplaces reformed the individual market, the
Marketplaces did not replace the individual market. Instead, the Marketplaces entered as a
platform where insurers could choose to compete and consumers could choose to purchase
coverage within the larger individual market. Private individual health insurance can still be
purchased outside of a Marketplace.
This generates two types of plans in the individual market: on-Marketplace plans and offMarketplace plans. Many ACA reforms apply to both on-Marketplace and off-Marketplace
plans such that both sets of plans are subject to the same regulations on premium rating rules,
cost-sharing categories, and minimum benefit standards. Importantly, both on- and offMarketplace plans are part of a single risk pool, meaning (1) risk adjustment transfers occur at
the level of the entire individual market, not separately for the on- and off-Marketplace subsets
of the market, and (2) insurers cannot assign different prices to the on-Marketplace and offMarketplace versions of the same plan due to anticipated differences in health status of onMarketplace and off-Marketplace enrollees.
While the same rules apply on- and off-Marketplace, insurers are not typically required to
participate in the Marketplaces. In most states insurers can choose to offer off-Marketplace
plans but not to offer on-Marketplace plans. The reverse is not true: Any plan offered onMarketplace must also be offered off-Marketplace. The biggest difference between on- and
off-Marketplace plans is that when an individual purchases off-Marketplace coverage they are
ineligible to receive a subsidy.

and premium growth was relatively slow. Many Marketplaces were initially highly
concentrated – the average federally facilitated market in 2014 had 3.9 insurers, and almost
30% had just one or two insurers (Dafny, Gruber, and Ody 2015). In 2014, Marketplaces
were more concentrated than the wider individual market (U.S. Government Accountability
Office 2016). However, there was net insurer entry in 2015-16, with large national
companies like United Healthcare expanding their presence.
More recent developments make for a less favorable picture. Two large national
insurers (United and Aetna) exited many Marketplaces in 2017, and many smaller “co-op”
insurers (which were established and subsidized as part of the ACA) have exited amid
insolvency. Additionally, premiums rose markedly among the remaining insurers, with an
average premium increase of 24% between 2016 and 2017. These developments became an
3

important political issue in the 2016 U.S. presidential election, with Donald Trump elected
on promises to repeal the ACA (and by implication, end the Marketplaces).
There is much speculation about the reasons for these disruptions in the Marketplaces.
Many insurers have cited a sicker-than-expected risk pool, an inadequate risk adjustment
system, the only partially- funded risk corridor program, and the end of federal reinsurance
payments as important reasons for exiting and raising premiums. A key factor potentially
behind many of these issues – and a difference from the standard ideas of managed
competition – is that many (likely healthier) eligible individuals have remained uninsured
due to a relatively weak coverage mandate (Newhouse 2017). These developments suggest
that the future success of the Marketplaces is unknown and likely depends on continual
adaptation of the health plan payment system to the new issues raised in the ACA.
We proceed as follows. In Section 2, we describe the organization of the individual
market in the United States under the ACA. In Section 3, we describe the payment system
used to pay health plans in the individual market. In Section 4, we review the (limited)
literature evaluating the Marketplace payment system. Finally, in Section 5 we discuss
several issues with the Marketplace payment system and their potential implications for the
future stability of the individual health insurance market.

2. Organization of the Health Insurance System
The ACA created Marketplaces within the individual market as part of a package of
reforms, and also as a vehicle to increase access to and affordability of health insurance
coverage. Each state has its own Marketplace, operated either by a state entity or the federal
government in accordance with the state’s choice. As of 2016, the federal government ran
4

34 of the 51 Marketplaces. All Marketplaces must be operated according to federal
regulations, but states can set standards that go beyond federal rules.
Health insurers offering coverage in the individual market (both on- and offMarketplace) must offer plans that cover a minimum set of benefits, called “essential health
benefits.” They must offer plans that fall within four levels of increasing generosity:
bronze, silver, gold, and platinum. Plans include a number of cost-sharing parameters,
including deductibles, coinsurance rates, copays for various drugs and services, and out-ofpocket maximum payments. Due to the complexity of the cost sharing, generosity is
summarized by the plan’s “actuarial value,” the percentage of spending on covered services
the plan is expected to pay, on average, for a fixed sample of individuals. 2 Actuarial values
must be 90% for platinum plans, 80% for gold, 70% for silver, and 60% for bronze. 3 Plans
must also meet other minimum requirements set by federal and state regulators, including
network adequacy rules, maximum out-of-pocket cost caps, and marketing standards.
While some of these additional regulations are related to plan actuarial value, they are
separate requirements.
Each state defines rating areas within the state, and eligible individuals within each
rating area can choose from among all plans offered to them. The Marketplace functions as
a common platform where all on-Marketplace competing plans are offered to consumers in
one place. Health insurance issuers meeting minimum federal and state standards are
generally allowed to offer as many health plan options in as many rating areas within the

2

In practice, the regulator selected a large sample of individuals with employer-p rovided health insurance and
used that sample to construct an actuarial value calculator used by the regulator to determine p lan actuarial
value (and, thus, metal t ier) and by the insurer to design the cost-sharing features of their plans.
3
For reference, 90% actuarial value (p latinu m) is similar to a generous employer-sponsored insurance plan,
while 60% actuarial value (bronze) is equivalent to a high-deductible plan.

5

state as they wish – although a few states, most notably California (see “Covered
California” textbox) and Massachusetts, take a more active role in managing the number
and type of plans available to consumers. As such, health insurers typically have wide
discretion in plan pricing and flexibility in designing cost-sharing rules (conditional on
actuarial value), provider network size, coverage for out-of-network spending, care
management rules, and other difficult-to-observe measures of quality and generosity. This
flexibility differentiates the Marketplaces from regulated insurance markets in other
countries and provides potentially important avenues through which insurers can engage in
behaviors related to risk selection.
Plans for the upcoming year are available to consumers on the first day of open
enrollment, which now runs from November 1 to January 31st. Outside of open enrollment,
health insurers are not required to accept new enrollees unless they fall under special
enrollment rules – cases such as losing eligibility for employment-based insurance or
Medicaid or the birth of a baby.
Textbox: Covered California
Covered California, California’s Health Insurance Marketplace, is widely viewed as one of
the most successful of the ACA Marketplaces. Covered California chose to adopt an “active
purchaser” model where the state chooses to play a more active role than other states following
the “clearinghouse” model. California has implemented the active purchaser role by limiting
insurer entry (only allowing one-third of the insurers who originally expressed interest to
actually enter the market), standardizing cost sharing benefit designs, and negotiating prices
and benefits with insurers (including provider network size and composition and insurers’ use
of non-FFS “alternative” payment arrangements with providers). California has also limited
new entry after the initial year of 2014. Entry has been restricted to insurers newly entering
California after 2012, insurers that offer MediCal plans, and insurers entering low competition
areas (Qualified Health Plan Recertification 2015). The goal of this entry limitation was to
stabilize the Marketplace. The regulator also prevented insurers from charging prices that they
deemed “too low” as well as “too high.” While state regulators rarely ask insurers to raise their
premiums, Covered California wanted to ensure that insurers were not engaging in “investthen-harvest” dynamic pricing strategies, where insurers offer low prices and take losses in
order to capture market share the first year but then ramp up prices over time, exploiting
6

consumer inertia. Finally, Covered California used their access to administrative hospital
discharge data to aid insurers in pricing by providing estimates of each plan’s risk adjustment
transfer payments based on information about the relative rates of various chronic conditions
for each insurer’s members.
In addition to using active purchasing, Covered California also chose to implement an
“active marketer” strategy where the Marketplace invested substantial resources in outreach to
groups of enrollees (such as non-English speakers) that insurers were not targeting with their
own outreach campaigns. In addition, insurers were required to invest substantial marketing
dollars of their own. The rationale for this form of centralized marketing is that individual
insurers may underinvest in outreach due to a free riding problem, since consumers induced by
marketing efforts to purchase insurance through Covered California may choose to buy a
competitor’s plan. Covered California’s active marketer strategy may help solve this free
riding problem.
While the effects of California’s active purchaser and active marketer strategies are still
unclear, what is clear is that Covered California has achieved several measures of success in
its individual market. First, Covered California has high levels of enrollment, with around 1.5
million enrollees in 2016. This comprises 47% of eligible individuals, placing California 9 th
among states with respect to this measure of Marketplace success (Marketplace Enrollment
2016). Second, adverse selection between on- and off- Marketplace plans seems to be fairly
limited. Finally, and most importantly, adverse selection between the insured and uninsured
populations in California also seems to be fairly limited (Hsu et al. 2017).

3. Health Plan Payment Design
Health plan payment in the Marketplaces consists of a number of components. First,
insurers set and collect premiums for each of their plans. Second, insurers receive premium
and cost-sharing subsidies from the government for their subsidy-eligible enrollees. Third,
insurers receive or pay risk adjustment, reinsurance, and risk corridor transfers. Figure 2
describes payment flows across the different actors in the market. We will discuss each of
these components of the plan payment system in this section.
3.1 Premiums
Plan premium setting in the Marketplaces is subject to a variety of regulations that
makes the process differ from a textbook insurance market. Typically, economists think of
7

firm pricing decisions as taking place at the level of the product (i.e., a specific plan in a
given market), with product-specific demand and cost factors determining firm pricing
incentives. In insurance markets, economists also consider the possibility that insurers price
discriminate across enrollees based on observable risk factors like age and pre-existing
conditions. The ACA Marketplaces limit both of these aspects of the insurer premiumsetting decision.
First, the Marketplaces regulate how insurers set the premium for a given plan in a
given market. Insurers are supposed to adhere to a “single risk pool rating” requirement,
which means that insurers must consider all enrollees in all health plans (both on- and offmarketplace) in a given state as one single risk pool when developing premiums. The ACA
limits the reasons that an insurer can vary premiums across its individual market plans in a
state and subjects these decisions to regulatory oversight.
In practice, this works as follows. Each insurer first develops an “index rate” for a given
state. This index rate can be thought of as an “insurer price” that will influence the price of
every plan the insurer offers. The index rate then acts as the starting point for building the
“plan price” that is assigned to a particular plan offered by the insurer in a particular rating
area. 4 Regulation allows the insurer price and plan price to vary only based on specific
factors (which differ between the two). The insurer price is allowed to incorporate average
claims for essential health benefits for the insurer’s anticipated risk pool (which can be
influenced by risk selection) as well as market-wide adjustments for items such as risk
adjustment, fees, and reinsurance. The plan price then builds off the insurer price via a set

4

Throughout this section a plan refers to a product-by-rating area pair, so we consider the same plan offered
in two rat ing areas as two plans.

8

of allowed plan-specific adjustments. Plan-specific adjustments to the insurer price are
allowed based on geographic factors, benefit generosity (captured in the metal level and the
provision of any additional benefits), network size, and plan management factors (e.g.
HMO versus PPO).
Importantly, plan prices – i.e., for different plans offered by the same insurer – are not
supposed to incorporate differential selection on health status across plans. 5 Nonetheless,
since insurers may adjust plan-specific premiums for a number of other plan factors (listed
above), insurers do have flexibility to incorporate selection- and demand-related factors
into plan prices via tweaks to their expectations of the allowed adjustment factors. For
example, an insurer anticipating that its HMO plans will attract healthier individuals than
its PPO plans might tweak its HMO/PPO adjustment factor to incorporate differential
selection in addition to structural cost differences between these two plan types.
After the premium for a particular plan (in a particular rating area) is determined in the
manner just described, the Marketplaces also restrict how this plan’s premium can vary
across individuals. Plan prices may vary across individuals only by age and smoking status.
Age-based premium variation is fixed by regulation. Insurers first submit a base price for
each plan. Then, the base price is multiplied by a fixed set of age weights (varying from 1.0
for a 21 year-old to 3.0 for a 64 year-old) to produce age-specific premiums. Smoking
status is incorporated by multiplying a “smoking” weight by the individual’s age-specific
premium. The smoking weight is chosen by the insurer, but it must be between 1.0 and 1.5.

5

Recall that the “insurer price” is allowed to vary because of risk selection. A single insurer, however, is not
supposed to vary premiu ms across its plans because of anticipated risk selection. The motivation for this
asymmetric restriction on including risk selection factors in premiu ms is not totally clear.

9

All insurers seeking to offer coverage in the individual market in a given year must
submit their plan offerings and premium proposals by June 1 of the prior year. Plan and
pricing submissions are reviewed by state and/or federal regulators. 6 The interactions
between regulators and issuers often leads to changes – generally minor but sometimes
larger for premiums. This pricing process applies to the entire individual market, not just
on-Marketplace plans.
3.2 Subsidies
There are two forms of subsidies in the Marketplaces: (1) premium tax credits, which
lower the premiums that low-income enrollees must pay, and (2) cost-sharing subsidies,
which make silver plans more generous for a subset of low- income enrollees. We describe
these two forms of subsidies in turn.
While the same plans available on-Marketplace are available off-Marketplace,
individuals below 400% of the Federal Poverty Line (FPL) have access to premium tax
credits only if they buy an on-Marketplace plan. Additionally, those households eligible for
cost-sharing subsidies have access to those subsidies only when purchasing an onMarketplace silver plan. Premium tax credits are applied directly to reduce health insurance
premiums owed by eligible enrollees. They are calculated based both on an individual’s
household income for the year and on the second- lowest price silver plan available on the
Marketplace. Specifically, the tax credit is set so that the post-subsidy enrollee premium for
the second-cheapest silver plan equals a target amount intended to be affordable based on

6

Regulators review not only the premiu ms themselves but the assumptions that map fro m the insurer
premiu m to the plan premiu ms. It is this review that allo ws the regulator to (loosely) enforce the regulations
outlined above regarding what factors can and cannot be considered in the development of plan premiu ms.

10

an enrollee’s income. This target amount rises on a sliding scale from 2% of income for a
household with income of 100% of FPL up to 9.7% of income for a person with income of
400% of FPL.
This calculation – the premium of the second-cheapest silver plan minus the incomespecific target amount – determines the dollar amount of the tax credit. This tax credit can
then be used toward the purchase of any plan on the Marketplace. However, the tax credit
cannot be used to reduce the enrollee premium of a plan below $0 – a constraint that has
been binding for some bronze plans for lower- income households.
Individuals may claim their tax credit in two wa ys. First, an individual can receive an
advance premium tax credit (APTC) based on projected household income for the year at
the time of enrollment. In this case, individuals pay premiums, net of the tax credit directly
to insurers each month, and the federal government pays the tax credit directly to the health
insurance issuers. APTCs are an estimate and the individual must reconcile the amount they
received based on actual income when they file their income taxes. 7 Second, an individual
may choose to pay the full amount of their premium directly to insurers during the year and
then use the tax credits against their tax obligations, receiving any remaining balance in the
form of a tax refund from the federal government.
The second type of Marketplace subsidies are cost-sharing reductions. Cost-sharing
reductions lower the amount eligible individuals have to pay for out-of-pocket costs like
deductibles, copayments, and coinsurance. To qualify, households must have income below
250% FPL and enroll in a silver plan on the Marketplace. Cost-sharing reductions increase

7

At the time of tax filing, households with incomes greater than 400% FPL must pay back the full difference
between the tax credit they actually received and the tax credit they should have received. Households with
incomes less than 400% FPL repay only part of this difference.

11

the actuarial value of the silver plan (70% at baseline) to 94% for individuals below 150%
FPL, to 87% for individuals between 151% and 200% FPL, and to 73% for individuals
between 201 and 250% FPL. When insurers submit their plans and rates for the year, they
also include 73%, 87% and 94% versions of all of their silver plans. Eligible individuals are
automatically enrolled in the increased actuarial value silver plan of their chosen silver plan
on the Marketplace and, unlike tax credits, do not need to reconcile any subsidy received
when filing their taxes. Health insurers receive money from the federal government based
on a per capita enrollee estimate of cost-sharing subsidies during the course of the year.
Then, during the following year, health insurers reconcile with the federal government the
per capita dollars they received during the year with the actual dollar amount of costsharing reductions received by the enrollees throughout the year.
3.3 Risk Adjustment
To mitigate problems caused by risk selection across plans in the individual market, the
ACA established a permanent risk adjustment program. This program transfers funds from
(both on- and off-Marketplace) plans with healthier enrollees to plans with sicker enrollees,
after accounting for age and other factors on which premiums already vary at an individual
level. Risk adjustment aims to make plan premiums charged to enrollees reflect differences
in scope of benefits and network coverage rather than differences in enrollee health status.
It also aims to mitigate incentives for plans to avoid high-cost individuals.
The individual market risk adjustment program is made up of two components: a risk
adjustment model (which determines individual risk scores) and a risk transfer formula

12

(which determines monetary transfers across plans). We will discuss these two components
of the program separately.
Risk Adjustment Model
The risk adjustment model assigns risk scores to enrollees based on their demographics
and observed diagnoses during the concurrent plan year (i.e. calendar year). The risk score
reflects the individual’s predicted costliness to the insurer relative to an average enrollee.
Risk scores are calculated using a model developed by the Department of Health and
Human Services (HHS), the HHS Hierarchical Condition Categories (HHS-HCC) model.
The HHS-HCC model predicts an enrollee’s medical spending in the current year by
mapping diagnoses coded on insurance claims into one of 100 HHS-selected HCCs, which
were selected from the full 264 HCCs in the diagnostic classification system (Kautter et. al.
2014). To determine which HCCs to include in the HHS-HCC model, HHS used four main
criteria: (1) that the HCC had to represent clinically-significant, well-defined, and costly
medical conditions; (2) that the HCCs are not especially vulnerable to discretionary
diagnostic coding; (3) that the HCCs do not primarily represent poor quality or avoidable
complications of medical care; and (4) that the HCCs should identify chronic, predictable,
or other conditions that are subject to insurer risk selection, risk segmentation, or provider
network selection, rather than random acute events that represent insurance risk. The HCC
indicators enter into a linear regression model predicting total cost.
The starting point for the HHS-HCC model is the model used in Medicare Advantage,
the CMS-HCC model. The CMS-HCC model was modified to reflect three major
differences between Medicare Advantage and the individual market. The HHS-HCC
13

model: (1) uses concurrent year diagnoses and demographics to predict spending (rather
than the past year’s variables used by the CMS-HCC model); (2) reflects HCCs more
relevant to the under-65 population (such as those related to childbirth); and (3) predicts
total spending including drug costs (which in Medicare are covered by Part D).

The full

HHS-HCC risk adjustment model incorporates 15 different variations—one model for each
age group- (adult, child, and infant) by cost-sharing level (platinum, gold, silver, bronze,
and catastrophic). The separate models are meant to capture major differences across the
age groups and differences across the cost-sharing levels in the portion of medical spending
covered by the insurer. The adult and child models include the same variables (with the
exception of a few interactions) but differ in the payment weights because the adult model
is estimated on a sample of adults and the child model is estimated on a sample of children.
The infant model uses a different set of risk variables: a set of 20 mutually exclusive
categories based on a subset of HCCs that are relevant to infant health status. Additional
details on the HHS-HCC risk adjustment model are provided in a textbox.
Textbox: Details of the Marketplace (HHS-HCC) Risk Adjustment Model
The HHS-HCC risk adjustment model is designed to determine individual risk scores,
which measure how costly an individual is relative to the average market enrollee, for
individuals enrolled in Marketplace plans. To determine such risk scores, HHS constructed a
linear model using age, sex, and diagnosis information to predict individual- level total costs.
The HHS-HCC model consists of separate models for adults (age > 20), children (age 1-20),
and infants (age < 1).
The HHS-HCC model uses the Hierarchical Condition Category (HCC) classification
system. The system consists of 254 Condition Categories (CCs) that map the universe of ICD10 diagnoses to unique clinical conditions. The system takes all of the diagnoses submitted for
a given individual and maps them to CCs. A binary variable for each CC is created, and if the
individual has at least one eligible diagnosis appearing on a health insurance claim that maps
to the CC, the individual is given a value of 1 for that CC. The system then takes the Condition
Categories and produces Hierarchical Condition Categories. For sets of related Condition
Categories, hierarchies are pre-specified so that more-severe conditions are higher in the
hierarchy than less-severe conditions. The HCCs are generated by setting to zero for an
individual any CCs for which there is a CC “higher up” in the CC’s hierarchy that is set equal
14

to 1. This ensures that for each individual, only the most severe CC in a hierarchy is turned
“on” and all less-severe CCs are turned “off.” The mapping from ICD-10 diagnoses to HCCs
is described in Figure 3.
Of the 254 HCCs, the same 127 were chosen for inclusion in the child and adult HHSHCC models. Variables were chosen based on how discretionary diagnoses were and how well
they predict spending as well as other considerations laid out in Kautter et al. (2014). Of these
127 HCCs, 53 were combined into 17 HCC groups for the adult model in order to improve the
precision of the coefficient estimates. For the child model 50 HCCs were combined into 17
groups. A “Severe Illness Indicator” was also formed, equal to 1 if one of 8 high-severity
HCCs is equal to 1. This indicator was not included in the model but was instead used to form
two interaction groups, indicating interactions between severe conditions. These interaction
groups were included in the adult model but not the child model. The final adult model
includes 18 age-by-sex groups, 74 individual HCCs, 17 groups of HCCs, and 2 interaction
groups for a total of 111 variables. The final child model includes 8 age-by-sex groups, 77
individual HCCs, and 17 groups of HCCs for a total of 102 variables.
The infant HHC-HCC model also starts with the HCC classification system. 108 relevant
HCCs are grouped into 5 severity groups. A hierarchy is then imposed on the severity group
such that each infant is only in the most severe severity group for which he has an HCC. HCCs
describing prematurity are then mapped to 5 maturity levels: extremely immature, immature,
premature multiples, term, and age 1. A hierarchy is then imposed on the maturity level so that
each infant is assigned only to the most severe maturity level for which he has an HCC.
Neither the maturity level nor the severity level variables are included directly in the infant
model. Instead, they are interacted with one another to form a set of 25 mutually exclusive
severity-by- maturity cells. The model then consist of these 25 cells.
In the absence of actual claims data from a yet-to-be formed Marketplace, HHS used data
from Truven MarketScan Commerical Claims and Encounter Data, a dataset of individuals in
employer-sponsored plans, to calibrate the model. For each of the three populations, 5 models
were estimated, one for each plan tier (platinum, gold, silver, bronze, catastrophic). For each
model, total spending was first calculated for each individual and then a standard cost-sharing
schedule (deductible, coinsurance, out-of-pocket maximum) was applied to determine the total
plan spending for the tier. Models were then estimated separately for adults, children, and
infants using ordinary least squares, constraining coefficients to be greater than or equal to
zero and constraining coefficients on more-severe categories within a hierarchy to be larger
than less-severe categories within the same hierarchy.

Risk Transfer Formula
Next, HHS inputs enrollee risk scores into a “risk transfer formula” that determines
transfer payments across insurers. Transfer payments are intended to offset cost differences
due to risk selection while preserving cost differences due to plan features (e.g., moral
15

hazard, actuarial value, provider network) and allowable rating factors like age. Transfer
payments depend on a plan’s average risk score relative to the market average risk score
and are constructed to be budget neutral in a given year. Payment transfers occur among
(both on- and off-Marketplace) platinum, gold, silver, and bronze plans as a single risk
adjustment pool, with a separate risk pool for catastrophic plans.
The risk transfer formula is complex and not always intuitive from an economic
standpoint. Here, we try to provide some insight into the regulator’s thought-process in
constructing the formula based on the discussion in Pope et al. (2014). Later, we will
discuss some of the potential problems that the formula may introduce.
First, the regulator constructs an estimate of what a plan’s premium would be without
risk adjustment. To do this, the regulator starts with the statewide (enrollment-weighted)
average premium and accounts for the following factors driving differences between the
underlying costs for a given plan and the statewide average: health risk, coverage (i.e.
actuarial value), demand-response (i.e. moral hazard), and geography. Other factors
contributing to differences in premiums across plans, such as plan type (HMO vs. PPO) and
demand, are not accounted for in the risk transfer formula. The regulator constructs her
estimate via the following formula:

represents the statewide (enrollment-weighted) average premium.
risk score among plan ’s enrollees,

is the average

is a plan-specific “induced demand factor”

calibrated by the regulator and meant to capture differences in costs across plans with
different actuarial values caused by demand-response (moral hazard) to the coverage level,
16

and

is a geographic factor meant to capture differences in costs across plans due to

differences in the geographic distribution of a plan’s enrollees. The denominator is a
statewide (enrollment-weighted) average of the product of these factors. Note that a plan’s
actuarial value does not explicitly enter the formula. The regulator argues that this is
because it implicitly enters via

due to the fact that there are different risk adjustment

models for plans with different actuarial value levels, as explained in the textbox describing
the HHS-HCC model (Pope et. al. 2014).
Next, the regulator constructs an estimate of what a plan’s premium would be without
risk selection, conditional on the “allowable rating factors.” To do this, the regulator again
starts with the statewide average premium, but this time accounting for all of the previous
factors contributing to differences in underlying costs across plans except for health risk
(

). The regulator constructs this estimate via the following formula:

For this estimate, the regulator again includes the induced demand factor,

, and the

geographic factor,

. But now two additional factors are also included: the actuarial

value of the plan,

, and an age factor equal to the average age weight (the age-based

premium factors discussed above) for the plan’s enrollees. While these two factors were not
explicitly included in the regulator’s estimate of the plan’s premium without risk
adjustment ( ), the regulator argues that they were implicitly included via the risk score
calculation, which incorporates both the plan’s actuarial value (different models for each
actuarial value level) and age distribution (age groups are included in the risk adjustment
model).
17

The risk adjustment transfer is defined as the difference between the estimate of the
premium with risk selection,

, and the estimate of the premium without risk selection,

:

The use of the statewide (enrollment-weighted) average premium combined with the
normalization of the numerators of both terms in brackets by their statewide averages
ensures that transfers are budget neutral within a given year and market. This is true even in
the presence of insurer “upcoding” of enrollee risk scores – in contrast to the Medicare
Advantage market where upcoding increases government spending (Geruso and Layton
2015). The transfer is meant to eliminate premium differences stemming from risk
selection. Thus, if the difference between the estimate of the premium with risk selection
and the estimate of the premium without risk selection is positive, a plan receives a transfer
payment, and if the difference is negative, a plan owes transfer funds.
Risk adjustment and payment transfer calculations occur annually after the coverage
year ends, following a period to allow all claims to be submitted by providers. Only the
summary measures necessary to calculate the transfer payments are provided to HHS.
Individual claims and risk score data are kept by the insurer and are not required to be
reported, except in the case of an audit. After health insurance issuers run the HHS software
to get a risk score for each of their enrollees, issuers report the average risk score for their
enrollees, the average enrollment-weighted premium for their enrollees, and other
demographic and enrollment details necessary for HHS to implement the risk adjustment
transfer formula.

After HHS completes the risk adjustment transfer calculation, HHS

18

reports balances to issuers and transfers across insurers are routed through HHS. Apart
from a small administrative fee to HHS, the transfers are budget neutral.
3.4 Risk Sharing
The Marketplace payment system features two risk sharing features. Both are
temporary, in place from 2014-2016, with the goal of stabilizing the market in the shortterm to encourage insurer entry. The first is a reinsurance policy, reimbursing insurers for a
portion of individual- level spending exceeding a threshold. The second is a risk corridor
program, compensating insurers for a portion of any losses exceeding a pre-specified
threshold and extracting a portion of profits.
Temporary Reinsurance Program
The ACA established a temporary reinsurance program for plans in the individual
market (both on- and off- Marketplace). The program was in place from 2014-16 and was
intended to stabilize premiums during the initial years of reform by helping cover the costs
of very high-cost enrollees. While it is not totally clear why reinsurance was temporary, a
possible reason was the hope that over time, insurers would learn the extent to which these
high-cost cases affected their costs and incorporate that information into plan premiums.
The program, run by HHS, collected per-capita fees from all commercial insurance
(both in the individual and group market, including self- insured plans) in amounts totaling
$10 billion in 2014, $6 billion in 2015, and $4 billion in 2016 and transferred these funds to
individual market plans when their enrollees incurred high costs. Individual market plans
received reimbursement for an enrollee’s annual costs above an attachment point – $45,000
for 2014-15 and $90,000 for 2016 – up to a reinsurance cap of $250,000. Because the
19

reinsurance program could not pay out more than the amount collected, the percentage of
costs reimbursed for a given year depended on the total funding available. In 2014, 100%
of the costs were reimbursed, but this fell to 51% in 2015.
The reinsurance program differed from risk adjustment in two notable ways. First, it
was based on enrollees’ actual costs – rather than predicted costs as used in the risk
adjustment model. Second, unlike risk adjustment, the reinsurance program involved a net
transfer of funds into the individual market from the group market (which helped fund the
fees). This meant that the end of reinsurance in 2017 involved a net funding reduction.
Insurers’ large premium increase in 2017 partly reflects the one-time loss of reinsurance as
a funding source.
Temporary Risk Corridors
The ACA also set up a temporary risk corridor program for 2014-16. Underlying this
program is the idea that, with uncertainty about the costliness of enrollees in a new market,
issuers might stay out of the market or price higher than otherwise. Because the
Marketplaces represented an entirely new market, and the risk mix of the individuals who
would enroll in the market was previously unknown, there was a great deal of uncertainty
around the consequences of entry for a particular insurer. Many of the insurers also had
little experience with risk adjustment in general, having previously participated mostly in
the individual market or in the employer market (neither of which used risk adjustment).
Additionally, the risk adjustment system used in the Marketplaces was different from the
systems used in other U.S. markets such as Medicaid and the Medicare Advantage
program, in that the Marketplace system was “balanced budget,” and depended on transfers
20

across insurers rather than from the government to insurers. Because of these issues, it was
difficult for insurers to predict (1) what the costs of their enrollees would be and (2) what
their risk adjustment payments would look like (including whether they would be positive
or negative). This uncertainty provided a rationale for implementing this temporary risk
corridor program.
The program – which applies only to Marketplace-certified plans (Qualified Health
Plans) – worked like a profit and loss sharing program between insurers and the
government. Plans first calculated a “benchmark” rate, equal to 80% of their premium
revenue, and the amount spent on health care plus quality- improvement. 8 The state shared
in “profits” when spending was less than 97% of the benchmark and shared in “losses”
when spending exceeded 103% of the benchmark. The profit sharing rate was 50% for the
first 5% of costs (i.e., between 92-97% or 103-108% of the benchmark). For instance, a
plan with spending between 92-97% of its benchmark owed HHS 50% of the difference
between 97% of the benchmark and their actual spending. The profit sharing rate was 80%
for all profits/losses beyond this amount.
As originally enacted, risk corridor payments were not required to be budget neutral. As
a result, the program gave insurers a strong incentive to lower premiums. Each $1 of lower
premiums could be passed onto enrollees, increasing demand, but a portion of the lower
per-enrollee profit (or increased losses) would be offset by additional risk corridor
payments. Perhaps as a result, many insurers “underpriced” their plans, setting premiums
such that spending exceeded their benchmark.

8

Costs are defined in the same manner in which the med ical loss ratio is defined fo r the same market.

21

However, following a backlash against what some Republicans labeled as a “bailout” of
money-losing insurers, Congress changed the original program by specifying that payments
could not exceed charges for a given year. Such a change meant that the risk corridor
program could pay out very little of its liabilities. HHS was only able to pay out 12.6% of
claims for 2014 and has announced that any revenues collected for 2015 will go toward
(but far from cover) existing 2014 issuer claims. This change was made after plan prices
were set for 2015, implying that any issuer that incorporated the original risk corridor
payments into their 2014 or 2015 pricing decision experienced an unexpected negative
shock to revenues. This shock may have contributed to the forced (co-ops) or voluntary
(Aetna and United) exit of many insurers from the Marketplaces in 2016 and 2017.

4. Evaluation of Health Plan Payment
Generally, evaluations of health plan payment systems come in two forms. The first is
ex-ante evaluations that use data from other markets and simulate plan payments and costs
under a given payment system. The second is ex-post evaluations that use data from the
actual market of interest to determine how well the payment system works in practice.
Because the Marketplaces are so new and access to data is so limited, most studies
evaluating the Marketplace plan payment system fall into the ex-ante category, with a few
notable exceptions that we discuss below.
Ex Ante Evaluations
All of the ex-ante studies of the Marketplace plan payment system use data from large
employers or the Medical Expenditure Panel Survey (MEPS). The first evaluation was
22

produced by the Marketplace payment system designers (Kautter et al. 2014). They found
that for the different risk score models (by age group and metal level, as described above)
the R-squared statistic (in a regression predicting costs) varied between 0.3 and 0.36. They
also looked at predictive ratios (the ratio of simulated revenues to realized costs) for
subgroups of the population, focusing largely on groups defined by quantile of the
distribution of predicted spending. They find that predictive ratios for most quantiles are
close to 1, indicating little incentive to attract or deter these groups of individuals. This
result is not surprising because individuals were grouped by quantile of predicted spending
rather than actual spending meaning that any spending not picked up by the risk adjustment
model would also not be picked up by the grouping of individuals.
McGuire et al. (2014) also evaluate the performance of the Marketplace plan payment
system. In their evaluation, McGuire et al. again use predictive ratios but for subgroups of
individuals with four chronic conditions: cancer, heart disease, diabetes, and mental health
conditions. In addition, they use measures based on Ellis and McGuire’s (2007)
“predictability and predictiveness” index of the incentives for a profit maximizing plan to
ration a particular service to attract healthy enrollees and avoid sick ones. They find that,
even after accounting for risk adjustment, strong incentives remain to avoid individuals
with chronic conditions, with the strongest disincentives attached to cancer and mental
health conditions.
Montz et al. (2016) delve further into the payment system’s performance with respect to
individuals with mental health conditions. They find evidence of service- level selection
incentives within the HHS-HCC risk adjustment system as individuals with mental health
conditions are undercompensated by the model, especially those with anxiety, mood, and
23

adjustment disorders. Examining differences between the HHS-HCC risk adjustment
system and those used in Medicare Advantage and Medicare Part D, the study suggests that
the treatment of prescription drugs in the HHS-HCC system may contribute to this undercompensation. The reliance on a model not optimized for predicting drug spending may
result in the HHS-HCC model failing to adequately account for conditions that do not
typically result in high medical spending but that do result in high prescription drug
spending.
Handel, Hendel, and Whinston (2015) and Layton (2015) e valuate the Marketplace
payment system with respect to its ability to limit welfare losses due to adverse selection.
Both focus on selection between bronze and platinum plans and both find that with no risk
adjustment, the platinum plan death spirals, leaving all enrollees in the limited coverage
bronze plan. Handel, Hendel, and Whinston find that a risk adjustment system that bases
transfers on realized costs corrects part of this market failure. Layton presents similar
findings for a simulation of the actual Marketplace payment system, implying that the
payment system seems to perform well with respect to its ability to weaken adverse
selection. Both of these studies simulate plan prices and consumer choices using data from
large employers.
Layton, Ellis, McGuire, and van Kleef (2017) introduce new measures of payment
system performance that are “valid, complete, and practical,” where valid refers to their
being based in a formal model of welfare economics, complete refers to their incorporation
of all components of the payment system, and practical refers to their ability to be readily
implemented by researchers and policymakers. The main measure they develop is
“payment system fit” which is the R-squared from a regression of individual- level spending
24

on the revenue (from premiums, risk adjustment, reinsurance, etc.) a plan would receive
from enrolling the individual. They also show the additional importance of “premium fit”
or how well premiums match an individual’s expected cost. They make the important
conceptual point that, because no single premium can typically achieve first-best sorting of
individuals across plans, any payment system evaluation must take account of premium fit
and payment system fit separately. Finally, they present a measure of incentives for
service- level selection under a given payment system recently developed by Layton,
McGuire, and van Kleef (2016). They use all of these measures to evaluate the Marketplace
plan payment system relative to an alternative system. They simulate the payment systems
using data from the Marketscan Database of employer-provided health insurance claims.
Unlike the other studies that use Marketscan data, they restrict the dataset to individuals
who look similar to individuals eligible for coverage through the Marketplaces, as
identified in the MEPS. 9 They find that the Marketplace’s concurrent risk adjustment
system performs well with respect to payment system fit and the service-level selection
measure. They also find that the reinsurance system in place in 2014 produces dramatic
improvements in these measures. Premium fit is weak because premiums vary only by age,
but it is better than in other markets where premium discrimination is not allowed at all.
Geruso and McGuire (2015) introduce a new evaluation criteria, the “power” of the
payment system, and apply it to the 2017 Marketplace payment system as well as several
alternatives. Power is defined as the portion of the marginal dollar a plan spends on an
enrollee that is borne by the plan. The concept stems from the observation that under a

9

See Rose et al. (2015) for a d iscussion of the methods that produced this dataset.

25

given payment system, when a plan spends an extra dollar on an individual, the revenue the
plan receives for that individual may be affected. Consider a payment system incorporating
reinsurance. Under such a payment system, a plan only bears (100-X)% of the marginal
dollar it spends on an individual whose spending exceeds the reinsurance cutoff, where X is
the reinsurance policy’s reimbursement rate. Intuitively, power captures the strength of a
plan’s incentive to control their enrollees’ costs. It is clear that reinsurance weakens power
by reimbursing plans for a portion of the marginal dollar spent on high-cost individuals.
Geruso and McGuire argue that risk adjustment has similar properties: risk scores are based
on diagnoses coded in insurance claims, and these diagnoses cannot appear unless an
enrollee visits a doctor. Thus, the first doctor visit for an individual with a chronic
condition generates a large increase in revenue, weakening the incentive to limit the cost of
physician visits. Geruso and McGuire operationalize power by randomly eliminating
outpatient days and inpatient admissions and observing how costs and simulated revenues
respond. They show via simulation that the power of the Marketplace’s concurrent risk
adjustment system is relatively low, around 0.25 with reinsurance and around 0.6 without it
(where 1.0 indicates full power). On the other hand, they find that payment system fit is
relatively high, around 0.6 with reinsurance and around 0.4 without. Finally, they bring
these two measures together with another novel measure, “balance,” to show that the 2017
Marketplace payment system is dominated by a payment system consisting of prospective
(rather than concurrent) risk adjustment and a reinsurance policy compensating plans for
80% of an individual’s annual spending above $60,000.
A final ex-ante evaluation is by Layton, McGuire, and Sinaiko (2016). They focus on
the final component of the Marketplace plan payment system, risk corridors, and compare
26

the Marketplace risk corridor and reinsurance programs with respect to insurer risk
protection and the power measure developed by Geruso and McGuire (2015). They find
that both Marketplace policies offer substantial risk protection, and that they perform
similarly when compared on both power and risk protection simultaneously.
Ex Post Evaluations
Due to the relatively young age of the Marketplaces as well as limited data availability,
there are few ex-post evaluations of the Marketplace payment system. One exception is
evidence from Massachusetts, which established a health insurance marketplace (the
Connector) in 2006 that was a model for the ACA Marketplaces. The Connector shared
many of the features of the ACA Marketplaces including strict limits on premium
discrimination, generous subsidies, a coverage mandate, and risk adjustment payments.
Shepard (2016) studies the subsidized portion of the Connector for low-income people,
called Commonwealth Care. He studies the role of adverse selection in affect ing insurers’
incentives to offer a more generous hospital network that covers certain “star” academic
hospitals. He finds that plans covering star hospitals attracted a much higher-cost set of
members – in particular those with existing relationships with the star hospitals and their
affiliated physicians. The Connector’s risk adjustment system compensated these plans for
about two-thirds of these patients’ higher costs. But even after risk adjustment, these
patients were substantially more expensive (about 28% higher) than other individuals.
Shepard shows that much of their higher costs reflect differential “moral hazard,” in the
sense that these enrollees’ costs increase more when their plan covers the star hospitals and
they shift their care to those hospitals and away from cheaper providers.
27

Geruso, Layton, and Prinz (2016) combine ex-ante and ex-post techniques to study the
performance of the Marketplace payment system with respect to insurer incentives to
inefficiently ration access to prescription drugs that attract unprofitable enrollees. They first
use Marketscan data and simulated revenues under the Marketplace payment system to
assess for each drug class the over-/underpayment for individuals taking drugs in the class
as well as the “predictability and predictiveness” measure of insurer incentives to distort
coverage developed by Ellis and McGuire (2007). They find that the Marketplace payment
system performs reasonably well. Figure 2 from their paper is reproduced here as Figure 4.
It plots for each drug class the average cost vs. the average revenue associated with people
taking drugs in the class. It is clear that most classes lie close to the 45-degree line,
implying an alignment of costs and revenues. A few classes, however, are far from the 45degree line. Geruso, Layton, and Prinz then go to ex-post data on the drug formularies of
Marketplace plans. They show that the generosity of the Marketplace formularies for a
given drug class is highly correlated with their measures of the insurer’s incentive to ration
access to the drugs in the class in order to avoid unprofitable enrollees. This result holds
even when adding data on employer formularies (where there is no selection incentive) and
including drug class fixed effects to control for drug characteristics that are fixed across the
employer and Marketplace markets. They also find that the result is largely driven by the
most salient drugs in a class, the drug spending component of an individual’s profitability,
and the drug classes in the far right tail of the distribution of selection incentives. They
conclude that while the Marketplace payment system performs well for the vast majority of
drug classes, it performs poorly with respect to a few (such as classes that include fertility

28

drugs and drugs used to treat multiple sclerosis) and that insurers respond to the incentives
generated by that poor performance.

5. Ongoing Issues and Reforms
5.1 High Cost Cases
One of the major issues cited by insurers exiting the Marketplaces between 2016 and
2017 was the end of the federal reinsurance program, described in Section 3. Under this
program, a per capita assessment was collected from most insurers (including from plans in
the separate group insurance market), and the proceeds of the assessment were paid out to
reimburse individual market insurers for spending on extremely high-cost cases. This
program was intended to limit insurer risk during the Marketplaces’ early years in order to
encourage entry and boost competition. It was intended to be a complement (rather than a
substitute) for private reinsurance that insurers themselves can purchase, in that it covered a
range of high cost cases that typically fall below the cutoffs in private reinsurance
contracts.
It also differed from private reinsurance in two important respects likely to favor
higher-cost plans (and those that attract sicker enrollees). First, the program involved a net
transfer of funds into the individual market, since fees were collected from both group and
individual market plans but payouts were made only to individual market plans. Second,
the fees funding the program were a flat per-capita amount for all plans, regardless of their
cost structure or likelihood to attract sicker enrollees. A private reinsurer, by contrast,
would likely charge a higher fee to plans that were predictably higher-cost or adversely
29

selected (e.g., plans with broad networks) and therefore more likely to draw on reinsurance.
Together, these factors suggest that the ACA reinsurance program involved a net subsidy to
the individual market and specifically to its highest-cost plans. 10
The recent exit of insurers citing the end of the reinsurance program as a factor in their
decision suggests that the program may have been successful at inducing entry into the
Marketplaces. Some insurers may have been induced to enter but later decided they could
not remain viable in these markets without the reinsurance subsidy. This has spurred some
discussion about a way to embed a permanent, budget-neutral version of the original
reinsurance program in the Marketplaces, while complying with statutory language
requiring the original reinsurance program to end in 2016.
There are several potential motivations for an extension of this program. First, the
program has the potential to reduce the risk faced by insurers in the Marketplaces. Many
insurers purchase private reinsurance, suggesting risk aversion (Layton and McGuire 2017).
A public reinsurance program can provide insurers with risk protection without the profit
margin collected by private reinsurers. Second, reinsurance acts as a subsidy to plans that
attract costly individuals, potentially combatting adverse selection problems and weakening
insurer incentives to distort plan benefits to attract healthy enrollees (Layton, Ellis,
McGuire, and van Kleef 2017). Of course, these motivations must be weighed against the
standard concern that reinsurance weakens plan incentives to control costs.
HHS recently proposed to modify the risk adjustment formula to include effective
reinsurance for high-cost cases, though budget-neutral transfers across plans within the

10

As a result, the end of reinsurance has been cited as contributing factor for the large (and politically
damaging) premiu m increases in 2017.

30

individual market rather than a transfer from group market plans to individual market plans
(US Department of Health and Human Services 2016). The proposal calls for extremely
high cost cases to be pooled across insurers via the risk adjustment transfer formula
discussed in Section 3. This option is explored along with an additional option of
incorporating reinsurance into the risk adjustment formula developed in Layton and
McGuire (2017) who show analytically that both the HHS proposal and their alternate plan
(which incorporates spending above a threshold as a risk adjustment factor) are equivalent
to a conventional budget neutral reinsurance policy. They also show that with a minor
modification (accounting for reinsurance when estimating risk adjustment weights ), these
methods actually improve upon conventional reinsurance in terms of payment system fit.
They argue that incorporating reinsurance into the risk adjustment system is better than a
conventional public reinsurance system because all reinsurance-related administrative costs
are eliminated. Finally, they show via simulation that all policies have significant effects on
the probability that a small insurer faces a catastrophic loss, but essentially no effect on the
level of risk faced by a large insurer. Notably, however, their proposal would not include
the inflow of funds into the individual market that occurred under the ACA’s reinsurance
program.
HHS is currently implementing the risk adjustment formula modification just discussed
for 2017. The current HHS rule calls for a policy that protects insurers from cases
exceeding $1 million in a year. Choosing the “correct” level of protection is a difficult task
because the benefits of insurer risk protection must be weighed against the possibility of
weakening insurer incentives to control costs (e.g., via care management or aggressive
price negotiations with providers). A policy providing partial coverage can mitigate this
31

problem but will not fully eliminate it. Despite these difficulties, it is likely that a great deal
of risk protection can be achieved with limited effects on insurer incentives: Layton and
McGuire show that with a cutoff of $500,000, only 0.02% of their sample is affected, but
risk of a large loss is greatly reduced for small insurers. Additionally, recent evidence
shows that in Medicaid managed care insurers’ ability to affect the spending of the high
cost cases affected by these reinsurance policies is fairly limited (Geruso, Layton, and
Wallace 2016), suggesting that the weakening of insurer cost-control incentives for these
extremely high cost cases may be a second-order concern. It is important to note, however,
that while this policy will protect insurers against risk, it will not provide a net subsidy to
individual market plans as the previous reinsurance policy did.
5.2 Selection Against the Marketplaces within the Individual Market
While the ACA established the Marketplaces, it did not require that all individual
market policies be sold through them. It is not widely known that 38% of individuals with
individual market coverage are enrolled in an off- Marketplace plan (US Department of
Health and Human Services 2016). When individuals purchase off- Marketplace coverage,
however, they are not eligible for the subsidies available when purchasing a plan on the
Marketplace.
While all new off-Marketplace plans are required to comply with ACA rating and
benefit rules, there are plans offered off-Marketplace in the individual market that are not
subject to some of the new rules. These so-called “grandfathered” and “grandmothered”
plans – the first a construct of the ACA law and the second the result of an administrative
ruling – were intended to create a smooth transition to the fully-reformed ACA individual
32

market. However, these plans likely contribute to adverse selection against the ACAcompliant market, since healthier individuals are more likely to find the pre-ACA healthrated premiums to be attractive. These plans are decreasing in number and will likely be all
but gone by 2018.
A grandfathered health plan is a plan that was in place on the date of enactment of the
ACA (March 23, 2010) which has continuously covered at least one person and has not
changed coverage terms. These plans are essentially exempt from all of the ACA market
changes. Grandmothered plans were created as a transitional policy (to end December 31,
2017) by the administration to allow plans newly created between March 23, 2010 and
January 1, 2014 to continue to operate under the post-2010 and pre-2014 rules for their
existing enrollees if allowed by their regulating states. Grandmothered plans must comply
with more ACA regulations than grandfathered plans (e.g., prohibition on annual and
lifetime limits on coverage) but do not have to comply with rating and benefit rules put in
place in 2014.
Even without the grandfathered and grandmothered plans, this off-Marketplace/onMarketplace distinction presents a potential for adverse selection. While the entire
individual market (both on- and off-Marketplace) makes up a single risk pool (for risk
adjustment) and is subject to the same pricing and guaranteed issue regulations, the offMarketplace individual market may still have more attractive enrollees. If lower- income
individuals eligible for subsidies are higher cost conditional on risk adjustment, plans may
wish to avoid them by only offering their products off-Marketplace where subsidies are not
available, an action allowed by most states. Many of the large insurers exiting the onMarketplace market in 2017 remained in the off-Marketplace individual market, suggesting
33

differential risk selection patterns in these two segments of the market (Families USA
2012).11 However, at this point there is no empirical evidence regarding the differential risk
profiles on- and off-Marketplace. More research is needed to understand whether and to
what extent this is a problem, and to what extent the price- linked subsidies available in the
Marketplaces counteract the consequences of adverse selection.
5.3 Adve rse Selection into the Individual Market
While in the previous section we discuss selection against the Marketplaces within the
individual market, we now turn to the topic of adverse selection into the entire individual
market, both on- and off-Marketplace. The ACA includes both carrots (subsidies) and
sticks (coverage mandates/penalties) to encourage Americans to obtain insurance. Both
subsidies and mandates/penalties can address the consequences of adverse selection (Einav
and Finkelstein 2011). In the Marketplaces, the system of carrots and sticks have not led to
complete take- up of insurance. Subsidies are only available to low- and middle- income
enrollees, and the size of the subsidy declines with income, reaching zero for people whose
incomes exceed 400% of the FPL. In contrast, in Medicare all consumers effectively
receive a voucher equal to (or approximately equal to in the case that they choose a
Medicare Advantage plan) their expected cost in Fee- for-Service Medicare. These limited
subsidies mean that healthy middle- to high- income people may be unwilling to buy
coverage at Marketplace prices, which reflect higher demand for insurance among the sick.

11

A HIPAA provision may also have contributed to the decision by these insurers to remain in the offMarketplace individual market. The provision states that if an insurer exits the individual market, it is banned
fro m re-entering the market for 5 years.

34

The stick in the ACA is an income-based tax penalty on all individuals who do not
obtain insurance. While this stick encourages coverage, it appears to not be large enough to
lead to universal take- up of insurance. In 2016, 10.7 million individuals eligible for
coverage through the Marketplaces remained uninsured. 8.1 million households paid a
penalty for not purchasing insurance in 2015, with the average annual penalty equal to
$210.
This mix of carrots and sticks makes the Marketplaces an experiment with regulated
competition that allows for empirically relevant levels of “opting out” of the market.
Allowing consumers to “opt-out” of coverage may interact in important ways with the
payment system. Specifically, a budget neutral risk adjustment system like the one
embedded in the Marketplace payment system can only alleviate problems of adverse
selection across plans within the market. Such a policy does nothing to weaken the forces of
adverse selection into the market (i.e. healthier people choosing to remain uninsured).
Newhouse (2017) considers the design choice between the “zero-sum” Marketplace risk
adjustment system versus the Medicare Advantage system. He makes the conceptual point
that the zero-sum system protects the government from payments increases due to
“upcoding” of conditions by insurers. But the cost is that the zero-sum system does not
protect insurers from adverse selection into the market. He argues that selection into the
market can still lead to death spirals, despite the presence of risk adjustment.
In fact, risk adjustment may have unintended consequences in this voluntary
environment. Consider the case of an insurer that offers low-cost basic coverage and an
insurer that offers high-cost enhanced coverage. With no risk adjustment, the price of the
basic plan will be low due to its low costs and its healthy enrollees. If risk adjustment is
35

implemented, the basic plan will be required to pay transfers to the enhanced plan to
compensate the enhanced plan for its sicker enrollees. This will increase the price of the
basic plan and decrease the price of the enhanced plan, leading some individuals to shift
from basic to enhanced coverage. But it may also lead some individuals in the basic plan to
drop out of the market due to the plan’s higher price, possibly worsening welfare. The net
efficiency consequences of risk adjustment in this environment are thus theoretically
ambiguous. 12
Panhans (2016) provides recent evidence on the extent of this problem. He exploits
price variation due to rating area boundaries to find that a 1% increase in premiums in a
given market leads to a 0.8% increase in the average cost in the market. He also estimates
willingness-to-pay for insurance, allowing him to use the Einav, Finkelstein, and Cullen
(2010) framework to assess the welfare losses due to adverse selection in these markets.
His analysis suggests that the current premium subsidies are “too low,” and t hat higher
subsidies would improve welfare. He also finds that age-targeted subsidies that are higher
for younger consumers are a more efficient way to improve welfare than the income-based
subsidies currently in place (a point also made by Tebaldi (2016)).
5.4 Transfer Formula
The mechanism by which risk adjustment is implemented in the Marketplaces is the socalled risk adjustment “transfer formula” presented in Section 3. Interestingly, the transfer
formula used in the Marketplaces differs from that of most other public health insurance

12

We note that the mechanism d iscussed in this paragraph applies only to the Marketplaces’ unsubsidized
enrollees. For subsidized enrollees, the ACA’s “price-linked” subsidy design (see discussion below) means if
there is adverse selection into the market, subsidies automatically increase to keep the post -subsidy price of
the basic plan equal to a target “affordable” amount.

36

programs. One key feature of the transfer formula may have important implications for
adverse selection and the incentive for an insurer to offer generous plans.
Other public insurance markets (e.g., Medicare Advantage (MA) and the pre-ACA
Massachusetts Connector) use an “own-price” transfer formula. After calculating an
enrollee’s risk score – which captures the person’s expected costliness relative to an
average individual – the risk score multiplies the plan’s price to determine what the insurer
receives. So a plan with price
payment of

that covers an enrollee with risk score

receives a

. This payment can be written as the sum of the plan’s price plus a transfer

amount:
(MA Formula)
The key feature of MA’s own price formula is that the transfer amount scales with both the
enrollee’s risk score and the plan’s price.
The ACA Marketplaces use a different transfer formula, which we call an “average
price” transfer. Conceptually, the transfer is based on the enrollee risk score times the
average plan price in the market, .13 Formally:
(ACA Formula)
Because Marketplace risk scores are normalized to have mean 1.0 (as discussed above), the
ACA formula ensures that transfers are budget neutral when averaged over all enrollees and
plans. Guaranteeing budget neutrality seems to be the practical reason this formula was
adopted (Pope et al. 2014).

13

The full A CA transfer formu la is conceptually similar but more co mplicated (see Section 3.3).

37

However, the different format has real implications for payments to different types of
plans and therefore insurer incentives. Specifically, high-price plans (i.e., P j  P ) that
attract sicker enrollees ( ri  1) do worse under the ACA’s average price formula than under
the MA own-price formula. If high-price plans have a higher cost structure (e.g., because
they have a broader provider network), then the transfer for sicker enrollees may not make
up for these enrollees’ extra costs. 14 Insurers would then have an incentive to discontinue
high-cost, high-price plans that are adversely selected on observable risk – even if there is
no unobserved risk selection. This dynamic would augment any incentive to reduce
generosity because of unobserved risk selection (as we discussed earlier). 15
This brief analysis of differences between these two risk adjustment systems serves to
cast light on a component of risk adjustment systems that has not received much attention
from researchers but that can have important implications for the plan payment and thus
market outcomes. All countries implicitly use some form of a transfer formula. This
analysis shows that it may be beneficial for policymakers and researchers to study these
formulas more explicitly. More research is needed in this area to understand the empirical
significance of the differences between transfer formulas. Additional work is also needed in
order to understand the efficiency consequences of transfer formula design. For example, in

14

Note that the logic we have discussed requires that the cost increase of a high -cost plan for sicker enrollees
must be greater than for healthier enrollees. This would be true, for instance, if a high-cost plan raised all
enrollees’ costs proportionally (e.g., by 20%), but would not be true if it raised all enrollees’ costs by a fixed
amount (e.g., $50).
15
Interestingly, low-price ( Pj  P ) plans that attract healthy ( ri  1 ) enrollees also do worse under the
ACA’s formula. This suggests that rather than a “race to the bottom” – as typically occurs under adverse
selection – there could be a “race to the middle.” In practice, if enrollees are highly price sensitive, the
average price will be close to the cheapest plans’ prices, making this issue more significant for high -price
plans. Additionally, if the “own-price” transfer fo rmula were modified to be budget neutral by adding a per
capita risk adjustment fee equal to the average risk adjustment transfer, low -cost plans would likely be worse
off under the “average price” formu la relat ive to the “budget neutral own -price” formu la.

38

the case of the MA vs. the Marketplace formula it is not clear whether the ACA’s formula
is more or less desirable than MA’s for achieving efficient market outcomes. It is possible
that the MA formula overpays high-price plans for sick enrollees, leading to levels of
generosity that are “too high” from a social efficiency perspective and too little competition
on prices.
5.5 Price-Linked Subsidies
A key feature of the Marketplaces’ subsidies is that they are linked to insurers’ prices,
specifically the price of the second-cheapest silver-tier plan in a given market. Subsidies are
set so that this plan’s post-subsidy price equals an “affordable” amount based on a
consumer’s income (which varies between 2-10% of monthly income). If a consumer buys
a higher- or lower-price plan, they pay or save the incremental price, as long as this does
not push their payment below zero.
Jaffe and Shepard (2017) and Tebaldi (2016) analyze what this “price- linked” subsidy
design means for competition, relative to a system in which policymakers set a “fixed”
subsidy amount based on their best estimate of what prices will be. They show that pricelinking weakens price competition, since insurers that expect to be “subsidy pivotal” have a
greater incentive to markup their plans’ prices.
However, the price- linked design also has desirable properties in the presence of
uncertainty about medical costs or the selection of consumers into the Marketplaces. In
particular, if all prices rise in tandem (e.g., because of a cost increase from an expensive
new drug), government subsidies automatically increase to bear the costs. Essentially, the
government bears the risk of unexpected price/cost shocks, which Jaffe and Shepard (2017)
39

argue is desirable in some circumstances. In particular, they argue that price linking may
stabilize participation and the level of coverage. For instance, if prices increase sharply – as
is occurring in the Marketplaces in 2017 – the automatic adjustment to subsidies means that
post-subsidy prices (for the benchmark plan) will not increase for the ~85% of enrollees
who are below 400% of poverty and receive federal subsidies. Therefore, it is unlikely that
there will be a substantial reduction in coverage for this group. Price- linked subsidies
therefore may be able to arrest an adverse selection death spiral before it starts. Of course,
the inverse is true as well: if costs decline unexpected ly, there will not be gains in coverage,
as federal subsidies will instead fall.

40

Figure 1: Growth of the Individual Market (2011-2015)

20,000,000
18,000,000
16,000,000
Total Covered Lives

14,000,000
12,000,000

Marketplace Covered
Lives

10,000,000

Off-Marketplace
Covered Lives

8,000,000
6,000,000

4,000,000
2011

2012

2013

2014

2015

Notes: Number of total covered lives in the individual market is calculated by summing the
“life years” reported across all insurers in the individual market in the Medical Loss Ratio
data from the Department of Health and Human Services (CMS 2015). Life years are
calculated by summing the number of individuals enrolled on a given day in each month
divided by 12). The number of Marketplace covered lives is taken from the “effectuated
enrollment” numbers as reported by the Office of the Assistant Secretary for Planning and
Evaluation at the Department of Health and Human Services. Effectuated enrollment
numbers represent the number of confirmed customer paying premiums at a given point
during the year, in this case, March. The number of off-Marketplace covered lives is
calculated by taking the different between total and on-Marketplace enrollment. The
authors note there is measurement error in this calculation because of the manner in which
covered lives are calculated in the MLR data compared to effectuated enrollment data.
There does not exist a consistent measure of total and on- and off-Marketplace enrollment
overtime. As such, Figure 1 should be taken as representative.

41

Figure 2: Payment Flows under the Marketplace Plan Payment System

Notes: This figure illustrates payment flows across actors in the U.S. health insurance
market under the Marketplace payment system. Six components of the Marketplace
payment system are illustrated: the penalty for remaining uninsured, premium tax credits,
cost-sharing subsidies, risk corridor payments, risk adjustment transfers, and reinsurance
transfers/payments. Penalties are paid by the uninsured to the government. The government
pays premium tax credits to Marketplace plans. Risk corridor payments are made by
profitable Marketplace and non-Marketplace insurers to the government and by the
government to unprofitable Marketplace and non-Marketplace insurers. Risk adjustment
payments are made by Marketplace and non-Marketplace insurers with low-risk enrollees
to Marketplace and non-Marketplace insurers with high-risk enrollees. All insurers
(individual and group market) make reinsurance contributions. Marketplace insurers and
non-Marketplace insurers with high-cost enrollees receive reinsurance payments.

42

Figure 3: Mapping of ICD-10 Diagnoses to Hierarchical Condition Categories (HCC): The
Case of Diabetes

Diagnosis Codes (ICD-10)
E1010 (Type 1 diabetes mellitus with
ketoacidosis without coma)

E0822 (Diabetes mellitus due to
underlying condition with diabetic
chronic kidney disease)

E089 (Diabetes mellitus due to
underlying condition without
complications)

Conditional Categories
19 (Diabetes with Acute
Complications)

20 (Diabetes with Chronic
Complications)

21 (Diabetes without Complication)

Hierarchical Condition Categories (HCCs)
19

20 (HCC should be set to zero if
individuals also has CC of 19)

21 (HCC should be set to zero if
individual also has CC of 19 or 20)

Source: Risk Adjustment: HHS-Developed Risk Adjustment Model Algorithm Software.
https://www.cms.gov/CCIIO/Resources/Regulations-and-Guidance/index.html#Premium
Stabilization Programs
Notes: The figure illustrates the mapping from ICD-10 diagnosis codes to Hierarchical
Condition Categories (HCCs) for the case of diabetes. The HCC system starts by mapping
every diagnosis code to a Condition Category (CC). HCCs are then generated by setting to
zero any CC for which the individual has a more severe CC in the same hierarchy.

43

Figure 4: Costs vs. Revenues for Individuals Taking Drugs in Different Therapeutic Classes

Notes: This figure is from Geruso, Layton, and Prinz (2016). Each point represents a drug
class, with the size of the point indicating the importance of the drug class in terms of
individuals. The x-axis shows average simulated revenue for individuals taking a drug in
the class. The y-axis shows average total (drug and non-drug) spending for individuals
taking a drug in the class.

44

References
“2016 Qualified Health Plan Recertification and New Entrant Regulation.” In Proceedings
of California Health Benefit Exchange Board Meeting. Sacramento, CA. January
15, 2015. Accessed January 10, 2017. http://board.coveredca.com/meetings/2015/115/QHP%20Recert%20and%20New%20Entrant%20Regulation%20text%20and%2
0docs.pdf
Adler, Laura and Paul Ginsburg. (2016, July 16). Obamacare Premiums Are Lower Than
You Think. Retrieved from: http://healthaffairs.org/blog/2016/07/21/obamacarepremiums-are- lower-than-you-think/.
Center for Medicare and Medicaid Services: The Center for Consumer Information &
Insurance Oversight. (2015). Medical Loss Ratio Data and System Resources. 10
Jan. 2017. Retrieved from: https://www.cms.gov/CCIIO/Resources/DataResources/mlr.html.
Ellis, Randall and Thomas McGuire. Predictability and Predictiveness in Health Care
Spending. Journal of Health Economics, 26(1): 25-48, 2007.
Kautter, J., Pope, GC., Ingber, M., Freeman, S., Patterson, L., Cohen, M. and Keenan, P.
(2014), “The HHS-HCC Risk Adjustment Model for Individual and Small Group
Markets under the Affordable Care Act,” Medicare & Medicaid Research Review.
4(3): E1-E11
Einav, Liran, Amy Finkelstein, and Mark Cullen (2010). Estimating Welfare in Insurance
Markets Using Variation in Prices. Quarterly Journal of Economics. vol. 123, no 3,
August, pp: 877-921.
Einav, Liran, and Amy Finkelstein (2011). Selection in Insurance Markets: Theory and
Empirics in Pictures Journal of Economic Perspectives, vol 25, Number 1, pp115138, Winter.
Families USA. (2012) “When a Health Insurer Leaves the Individual Market: What States
Can Do Before Certain Affordable Care Act Changes Take Effect in 2014. May 1.
Accessed 10 January 2017. Retrieved from: http://familiesusa.org/sites/default/files/
product_documents/When-Insurers-Leave-Individual-Market.pdf
Frean M, Gruber J, Sommers B. (2016). Premium Subsidies, the Mandate, and Medicaid
Expansion: Coverage Effects of the Affordable Care Act. NBER Working Paper
22213.
Geruso M, Layton T, and Prinz D. (2016). Screening in Contract Design: Evidence from
the ACA Health Insurance Exchanges. NBER Working Paper 22832.
45

Geruso M, Layton T, and Wallace J (2016). “Are All Managed Care Plans Created Equal?
Evidence from Random Plan Assignment in New York Medicaid Managed Care ”.
In preparation.
Geurso M, Layton TJ. Upcoding or Selection? Evidence from Medicare on Squishy Risk
Adjustment. NBER Working Paper 21222. 2015. Submitted at the Journal of
Political Economy
Handel, Ben, Igal Hendel and Michael Whinston (2015). “Equilibria in Health Exchanges:
Advrse Selection vs. Reclassification Risk Supplement. Econometrica 83(4): 12611313.
Jaffe, Sonia and Mark Shepard. (2017). Price-Linked Subsidies and Health Insurance
Markups. NBER Working Paper 23104.
Layton TJ. 2015. Imperfect Risk Adjustment, Risk Preferences, and Sorting in Competitive
Health Insurance Markets. Working paper.
Layton TJ, Ellis RP, McGuire TG. Assessing Incentives for Adverse Selection in Health
Plan Payment Systems. NBER Working Paper 21531. 2015.
Layton TJ, Ellis RP, McGuire TG, van Kleef R. 2017. Measuring Efficiency of Health Plan
Payment Systems in Managed Competition Health Insurance Markets. Journal of
Health Economics, forthcoming.
Layton TJ and McGuire TG. 2017. Marketplace Plan Payme nt Options for Dealing with
High-Cost Enrollees. American Journal of Health economics, forthcoming.
Layton TJ, McGuire TG, Sinaiko AD. Risk Corridors and Reinsurance in Health Insurance
Exchanges: Insurance for Insurers. American Journal of Health Economics 2016.
2(1): 66-95.
Kaiser Family Foundation. “Marketplace Enrollment as a Share of the Potential
Marketplace Population.” March 31, 2016. http://kff.org/health-reform/stateindicator/marketplace-enrollment-as-a-share-of-the-potential- marketplacepopulation-2015/?currentTimeframe=0#
McGuire, Thomas, Joseph Newhouse, Sharon-Lise T. Normand, Julie Shi, and Samuel
Zuvekas. Assessing Incentives for Service-Level Selection in Private Health
Insurance Marketplaces. Journal of Health Economics, 35(1): 47-63, 2014.
Montz EJ, Layton TJ, Busch AB, Ellis RP, Rose S, McGuire TG. Selection Incentives
Associated with Mental Health and Substance Use Disorders in Risk Adjustment of
Marketplace Health Plan Payments. 2016. Revisions Requested at Health Affairs
46

Newhouse, J. 2017. Risk Adjustment with an Outside Option. Journal of Health
Economics, forthcoming.
Panhans 2016. Adverse Selection in ACA Markets: Evidence from Colorado. Working
paper.
U.S. Department of Health and Human Services. “Patient Protection and Affordable Care
Act; HHS Notice of Benefit and Payment Parameters for 2018” 81 Fed. Reg. 61455
(September 6, 2016)
Pope et al. 2014. “Risk transfer formula for individual and small group markets under the
Affordable Care Act” Medicare and Medicaid Research Review. Vol. 4(3): E1-E23.
Shepard, Mark. 2016. Hospital Network Competition and Adverse Selection: Evidence
from the Massachusetts Health Insurance Exchange. NBER Working Paper 22600.
Tebaldi, Pietro. 2016. Estimating Equilibrium in Health Insurance Exchanges: Price
Competition and Subsidy Design under the ACA. Working paper.
U.S. Department of Health and Human Services (2016). ASPE Data Point: About 2.5
Million People Who Currently Buy Coverage Off-Marketplace May Be Eligible for
ACA
Subsidies.
https://aspe.hhs.gov/sites/default/files/pdf/208306/O ffMarketplaceSubsidyeligible.p
df. Updated October 4, 2016. Accessed January 10, 2017.
U.S. Department of Health and Human Services. (2015). March 31, 2015 Effectuated
Enrollment Snapshot. https://www.cms.gov/Newsroom/ MediaReleaseDatabase/
Fact-sheets/2015-Fact-sheets- items/2015-06-02.html. Updated March 31, 2015.
Accessed January 10, 2017.
U.S. Department of Health and Human Services (2014). ASPE Issue Brief: How Many
Individuals Might Have Marketplace Coverage After the 2015 Open Enrollment
Period?
https://aspe.hhs.gov/sites/default/files/pdf/208306/OffMarketplaceSubsidyeligible.p
df. Updated October 4, 2016. Accessed January 10, 2017.
U.S. Government Accountability Office. A Report to Congressional Committees on Private
Health Insurance.
GAO-16-724. http://www.gao.gov/assets/680/679500.pdf.
Published September 6, 2016. Accessed January 10, 2017.

47

