NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

SPECULATIVE DYNAMICS OF PRICES AND VOLUME
Anthony A. DeFusco
Charles G. Nathanson
Eric Zwick
Working Paper 23449
http://www.nber.org/papers/w23449

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
May 2017

We thank Andreas Fuster, Stefano Giglio, Edward Glaeser, Sam Hanson, Amir Kermani, Stijn Van
Nieuwerburgh, Alp Simsek, Johannes Stroebel, Lawrence Summers, Richard Thaler, and Rob Vishny
for helpful comments. William Cassidy, Jessica Henderson, Saul Ioffie, Laurence O'Brien, Harshil
Sahai, and Iris Song provided excellent research assistance. DeFusco and Nathanson thank the Guthrie
Center for Real Estate Research for financial support, and Zwick gratefully acknowledges financial
support from the Fama Miller Center and Booth School of Business at the University of Chicago. The
views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National
Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peerreviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2017 by Anthony A. DeFusco, Charles G. Nathanson, and Eric Zwick. All rights reserved. Short
sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided
that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Speculative Dynamics of Prices and Volume
Anthony A. DeFusco, Charles G. Nathanson, and Eric Zwick
NBER Working Paper No. 23449
May 2017, Revised July 2020
JEL No. E32,G02,G12,R3
ABSTRACT
Using data on 50 million home sales from the recent U.S. housing cycle, we document that much
of the variation in volume came from the rise and fall in short-term speculation. Cities with larger
speculative booms have larger price cycles, sharper increases in unsold listings as the market
turns, and more eventual foreclosures. We present a model in which predictable price increases
endogenously attract short-term buyers more than long-term buyers. Short-term buyers amplify
volume by selling faster and destabilize prices through positive feedback. Our model matches key
aggregate patterns, including the lead{lag price{volume relation and a sharp rise in inventories.

Anthony A. DeFusco
Northwestern University
Kellogg School of Management
2211 Campus Drive
Office 4463
Evanston, Illinois 60208
anthonydefusco@gmail.com
Charles G. Nathanson
Kellogg School of Management
Northwestern University
2211 Campus Drive, Room 4479
Evanston, IL 60208-0898
nathanson@kellogg.northwestern.edu

Eric Zwick
Booth School of Business
University of Chicago
5807 South Woodlawn Avenue
Chicago, IL 60637
and NBER
ezwick@chicagobooth.edu

The United States underwent an enormous housing market cycle between 2000 and 2011
(Figure 1). The rise and fall in house prices caused several problems for the U.S. economy.
During the boom, a surge in housing investment drew resources into construction from other
sectors (Charles et al., 2018) and contributed to a capital overhang that slowed the economic
recovery from the subsequent recession (Rognlie et al., 2017). During the bust, millions of
households lost their homes in foreclosure, and falling house prices led many others to cut
consumption (Mayer et al., 2009; Mian et al., 2013, 2015; Guren and McQuade, 2020). Large
real estate cycles are not unique to the U.S. (Mayer, 2011) or to this time period (Case, 2008;
Glaeser, 2013). Given the economic costs of these recurring episodes, understanding their
cause is critical for economists and policymakers.
This paper presents evidence that speculation was a key driver of this real estate cycle.1
Three stylized facts from the cycle guide our analysis. First, prices and volume jointly rise
and fall through the cycle. Second, volume falls before prices, resulting in a pronounced
lead–lag relation between prices and volume. Third, the period during which prices continue
to rise despite falling volume coincides with rapidly accumulating unsold listings. We refer
to this period as the quiet, which is preceded by the boom and followed by the bust. These
stylized facts hold on average across cities and are especially pronounced in cities with larger
cycles. They suggest that focusing on who was most active during each phase of the cycle
can shed light on the underlying mechanisms.
We study the behavior of speculative homebuyers during each phase of the housing cycle
using transaction-level data from CoreLogic on 50 million home sales between 1995 and 2011.
We measure speculative buying and selling across 115 metropolitan statistical areas (MSAs),
which represent 48% of the U.S. housing stock. We pursue two complementary approaches to
identifying speculative activity. First, following Bayer et al. (2020), we classify transactions
based on their realized holding periods, denoting those buyers who resell the property within
three years as short-term buyers. Second, following Chinco and Mayer (2015), we classify
transactions based on the inferred occupancy status of the property, denoting buyers who list
a mailing address distinct from the property address as non-occupant buyers. We supplement
our transaction data with a separate CoreLogic data set on homes listed for sale, sourced
from a consortium of local MLS boards. We link these data to transaction records to study
1

Harrison and Kreps (1978, p. 323) define speculation as follows: “Investors exhibit speculative behavior
if the right to resell a stock makes them willing to pay more for it than they would pay if obliged to hold it
forever.”

1

the role of speculative buyers for inventory dynamics across MSAs.
While overall volume increases substantially during the boom of 2000–2005, both shortterm and non-occupant volume rise dramatically more. In an accounting sense, growth in
speculative volume explains 40% to 50% of total volume growth. This relation is also strong
in the cross-section, as speculative volume growth can account for 30% to 50% of total
volume growth across MSAs. Cities with stronger speculative volume booms also experience
larger house price booms: MSAs with a one standard deviation larger short-volume and nonoccupant boom see 25 and 15 percentage point larger cumulative price increases, respectively.
As the volume boom ends, price growth remains positive but slows, and unsold listings accumulate. Across MSAs, these patterns are more pronounced in cities with larger
speculative volume booms. Our linked listing-transaction data further reveal that shortterm buyers disproportionately contribute to the surge in aggregate inventories. MSAs with
larger speculative volume booms also see substantially larger price busts, volume busts, and
total foreclosures in the final phase of the cycle.
Our results suggest that the differential entry of speculative buyers plays a central amplifying role in the cycle. In robustness analysis, we consider and rule out several alternative
explanations of the rise in speculative volume. These alternatives include move-up purchases
due to rising home equity, the entry of professional real estate arbitrageurs, and various mechanical concerns arising from the way we measure short-term volume. Together, these
analyses lend support to our preferred interpretation, which focuses on a class of inexperienced speculative entrants into the housing market during the boom.
Consistent with our interpretation of the data, a National Association of Realtors survey
reveals wide variation in expected holding times, shorter expected holding times among
investors, and increases in the short-term buyer share following recent price gains. We
confirm the statistical link between house price changes and speculative buyer entry using
monthly data and a panel VAR specification as in Chinco and Mayer (2015). Short-buyer
entry is strongly predictive of subsequent house price growth and predicted by recent past
price growth, whereas non-occupant entry can be predicted by past price growth but is less
informative for predicting subsequent prices. In lower-frequency horserace specifications,
short-term volume also tends to be a stronger predictor of cycle dynamics than the nonoccupant boom. At the same time, non-occupant buyers disproportionately contribute to
the growth in short-term volume, indicating significant overlap between these categories.

2

One interpretation of these results is that short-term volume is a more precise measure of
speculative activity than non-occupant volume, perhaps because non-occupant volume also
includes longer-term “cash flow” investors and vacation homebuyers.
The last part of the paper presents a model that accounts for the evidence and allows
us to quantify the relative contribution of different types of speculators to the cycle. Our
approach adapts core insights from Cutler et al. (1990), De Long et al. (1990), and Hong
and Stein (1999) to study the housing market.2 As in these papers, extrapolation—the belief
that prices continue to rise after recent gains—causes a predictable boom and bust in house
prices after a positive demand shock. In contrast to those papers, we relax the assumption
of Walrasian market clearing, so that homes listed for sale may not sell immediately. To do
so, we microfound extrapolation using the approach in Glaeser and Nathanson (2017) and
then extend their framework to a non-Walrasian setting.
In our model, a mover attempts to sell her house by posting a list price. A potential buyer
arrives and decides whether to purchase the house at that price. Potential buyers differ in the
benefits they derive from owning a house; non-occupants benefit less than occupants. Buyers
also differ in the expected amount of time until becoming a mover; short-term buyers have
shorter horizons ex ante. The average flow benefit of potential buyers fluctuates randomly
over time. Agents cannot observe this demand process, but they can observe the history of
price growth and the share of listings that sell each period. Using this market data, agents
infer the current level and growth rate of the demand process and optimally make decisions
in light of these beliefs—the choice of list price for movers, and whether or not to purchase
for potential buyers. As in Glaeser and Nathanson (2017), agents mistakenly believe that
potential buyers neglect time-variation in the growth rate when deciding whether to buy.
We study how our housing market responds to a large, unexpected increase to the growth
rate of the demand process. We choose parameter values to match facts about the housing
market, including the boom–bust cycle in prices and volume and the baseline speculative
share of volume. In the model, the quiet occurs when agents overestimate the level of the
demand process and believe it continues to grow. This mistaken belief causes movers to
increase their list prices despite falling transaction volume.
We then use this setting to explore the relative importance of short-term and nonoccupant volume, because the model allows us to separate a buyer’s horizon from the utility
2

Section 6 motivates our model by reviewing related theoretical work. We also highlight the aspects of
our empirical results that prior work can and cannot explain.

3

she receives from buying a house. Much of the rise in volume comes from non-occupant
purchases and short-term sales because speculators disproportionately buy housing as prices
rise. In a counterfactual without short-term potential buyers, the price bust nearly disappears. The same holds in a counterfactual without non-occupants, but only because many
non-occupants have short horizons. Eliminating non-occupants while keeping the horizon
distribution constant fails to attenuate the housing cycle. These results suggest that shortterm speculation causes the house price cycle in the model.
Previous work has examined short-term buyers (Adelino et al., 2016; Bayer et al., 2020,
2016) and non-occupant buyers (Haughwout et al., 2011; Bhutta, 2015; Gao et al., 2019;
Chinco and Mayer, 2015) during this cycle. We add to this empirical literature in four ways.
First, unlike many studies, we use deeds records instead of mortgage records, allowing us to
observe speculation among all-cash buyers. Because all-cash purchases disproportionately
come from speculators and constitute a large share of total sales, relying on mortgage records
likely undercounts speculation. Second, the number of MSAs in our sample—115—is considerably larger than in some other work, allowing us to establish cross-MSA relations between
speculation and other aspects of the cycle. Third, we introduce new microdata on homes
listed for sale that allow us to study the joint dynamics of prices, volume, and inventories
in the cross-section of cities, and document the role of recent buyers in driving the surge
of listings during the quiet. Finally, we relate the price cycle to both types of speculation
simultaneously, whereas the previous literature has tended to look at only one type. We find
substantial overlap between the two types and, interestingly, a more robust relation of the
price cycle to short-term than non-occupant buying. Our model sheds light on this result.

1

Dynamics of Prices, Volume, and Inventory

In this paper, we present evidence and a model showing that short-term speculation was a
central amplifying force of the last U.S. housing cycle. This section presents three stylized
facts from that cycle that guide our analysis. First, prices and volume jointly rise and fall
through the cycle. Second, volume falls before prices, resulting in a pronounced lead–lag
relation between prices and volume. Third, the period during which prices continue to rise
despite falling volume coincides with rapidly accumulating unsold listings. We refer to this
period as the quiet, which is preceded by the boom and followed by the bust.
Figure 1, Panel A, plots aggregate trends in prices and transaction volume between 2000
4

and 2011. Panels B through E plot analogous series for four cities that represent regions with
the largest boom–bust cycles during this time: Phoenix, AZ; Las Vegas, NV; Orlando, FL;
and Bakersfield, CA. During the 2000s housing cycle, volume peaks before prices, and there
is a sustained period during which volume is falling rapidly on high prices. This dynamic
holds consistently across regions that experienced large price cycles. At the aggregate level,
volume rises to 150% of its level in 2000 and then falls back to this level before prices begin
to fall. In the four cities in Panels B through E, volume more than doubles during the boom.
Prices subsequently peak between 200% and 300% of their 2000 levels.
Figure 2 shows that this lead–lag relation between prices and volume also holds on average
across all MSAs in our sample. We search for the horizon over which a given change in volume
has the most predictive power for the contemporaneous change in prices at the MSA level.
Changes in volume generally lead changes in prices if the correlation between prices and
volume is maximized at a positive lag.
To implement this search, we build a monthly panel of log house prices and transaction
volume at the MSA level running from January 2000 to December 2011.3 We normalize
transaction volume in each MSA-month by dividing by the total housing stock for the MSA
recorded in the 2000 Census. We run a series of simple regressions of the form:
pi,t = βτ vi,t−τ + ηi,t ,

(1)

where p is log price, v is volume, i indexes MSAs, and time is measured in months. To
account for the seasonal adjustment in the CoreLogic price indices, for each regression we
demean prices at the MSA level and demean volume at the MSA–calendar month level.4
The coefficient βτ provides an estimate of how movements in volume around MSA–
calendar month averages at a τ -month lag are correlated with contemporaneous movements
in prices around MSA averages. We run these regressions separately for up to 4 years of lags
(τ = 48) and one year of leads (τ = −12). Figure 2, Panel A, plots the implied correlation
from each regression along with its 95% confidence interval. The correlation is positive at
most leads and lags but reaches its maximum at a positive lag of 24 months. Thus, changes
in volume generally lead changes in prices by about two years.
Figure 3, Panel A, plots aggregate trends in prices and inventories of homes listed for
3

The data used to construct this panel and the sample restrictions we impose are discussed in detail in
Section 2.1 below.
4
For other work regressing house prices on lagged transaction volume, see Leung et al. (2002), Clayton
et al. (2010), and Head et al. (2014).

5

sale between 2000 and 2011. Panels B through E plot analogous series for four cities that
represent the same regions as in Figure 1.5 During the period when the relation between
volume and prices reverses, aggregate inventories rise dramatically to nearly double their
level during the early years of the cycle. This pattern also characterizes the joint dynamic of
prices and inventories across cities in Panels B through E. In Phoenix, Reno, and Bakersfield,
inventories rise during the quiet to between double and triple their levels during the boom.
In Daytona Beach, inventories rise to 450% of their pre-quiet levels.
These stylized facts suggest that focusing on the dynamic of quantities—both volume
and inventories—can shed light on the drivers of the cycle. In particular, determining who
was most heavily participating in the housing market during each phase of the cycle may
differentiate between various explanations for that cycle.

2

Data

The primary goal of our empirical analysis is to study the behavior of speculative home
buyers during each phase of the housing cycle. This section describes our data and how we
identify speculative buyers. Further information is in Appendix A.

2.1

Data Sources and Sample Selection

We use data on individual housing transactions from CoreLogic, a private vendor that collects
and standardizes publicly available tax assessments and deeds records from across the U.S.
Our main analysis data span the years 1995 through 2014 and include observations from 115
MSAs, which together represent 48% of the U.S. housing stock. In analyses that require us
to identify an owner’s occupancy status we use a subset of 102 MSAs for which we can be
sure that there were no major changes in the way that mailing addresses were coded during
our sample period. Appendix A describes how we select these MSAs. Our analysis of the
housing cycle covers the time period 2000 through 2011 because measuring realized holding
periods requires observing consecutive transactions.
We include all transactions of single-family homes, condos, or duplexes that pass the
following filters: (a) the transaction is categorized by CoreLogic as arm’s length, (b) there
5

Data on unsold inventory is unavailable for Las Vegas, NV and Orlando, FL. Because of this, Figure 3,
Panels C and D, use data from Reno, NV and Daytona Beach, FL instead. We plot aggregate inventories
from the NAR, which are available starting in 2000. Our MSA-level inventory data are available for these
cities starting in 2001.

6

is a nonzero transaction price, and (c) the transaction is not coded by CoreLogic as being
a nominal transfer of title between lenders following a foreclosure. We then drop a small
number of duplicate transactions where the same property is observed selling multiple times
at the same price on the same day or where multiple transactions occur between the same
buyer and seller at the same price on the same day. Appendix A specifies the steps followed
to arrive at a final sample of 51,080,640 transactions. Given the geographic coverage of these
data and their source in administrative records, our analysis sample serves as a proxy for
the population of transactions in the U.S. during the sample period.
In addition to this transaction-level data, we use data on the listing behavior of individual homeowners. Our listings data is also provided by CoreLogic and is sourced from a
consortium of local Multiple Listing Service (MLS) boards throughout the country. For each
listing, we observe the date the home was originally offered for sale, an indicator for whether
the listing ever sold, and the date of sale for those that did. We link these data to the deeds
data using the assessor’s parcel number (APN) for the property. When analyzing listings,
we focus our attention on a subset of the 115 MSAs for which we can be relatively certain
that the listings data is representative of the majority of owner-occupied home sales in the
area. Appendix A describes in detail the approach we use to select these MSAs, leaving us
with a final sample of 57 MSAs for our listings analysis.
We supplement these transaction- and listing-level data with national and MSA-level
housing stock counts from the U.S. Census, national counts of sales and listings of existing homes from the National Association of Realtors (NAR), and national, MSA, and ZIP
code-level nominal house-price indices from CoreLogic. We also use survey data to study
heterogeneity in expected holding horizons in the cross-section and over time. Each March,
as part of the Investment and Vacation Home Buyers Survey, the NAR surveys a nationally
representative sample of around 2,000 individuals who purchased a home in the previous
year. The survey asks respondents to report the type of home purchased (investment property, primary residence, or vacation property) as well as the “length of time [the] buyer plans
to own [the] property.” Data on expected holding times and the share of purchases of each
type are available between 2008 and 2015.

2.2

Identifying Speculators

We identify speculators using two complementary approaches, each of which has been used
in prior work. In the first approach, we categorize transactions based on the their realized
7

holding periods. We denote transactions held for less than 3 years as “short-term” sales and
track the evolution of these sales over time. This approach follows Bayer et al. (2020) who
classify speculators in a similar way based on the argument that those holding homes for
short time periods are more likely to have purchased those homes for investment purposes.
One potential concern with this classification is that holding periods are not fixed at the
time of purchase. Thus, changes in the distribution of realized holding periods over the course
of a housing cycle could be driven not by differential entry and exit of speculative buyers,
but rather by endogenous changes in holding periods at the individual level and mechanical
changes in underlying market liquidity. We address this concern in several ways in our
analysis. Our main strategy, however, simply uses an alternative approach to classifying
speculators that does not suffer from this limitation.
Our second approach classifies homebuyers based on their occupancy status. Those who
purchase a home without the intent to occupy it immediately are more “speculative” in
the sense that a larger portion of their overall expected return is derived from capital gains
rather than from the consumption value of living in the home. To identify these buyers, we
follow Chinco and Mayer (2015) and mark buyers as non-occupants when the transaction
lists the buyer’s mailing address as distinct from the property address. While this proxy may
misclassify some non-occupants as living in the home if they choose to list the property’s
address for property-tax-collection purposes, we believe it to be a useful gauge of the level
of non-occupant purchases. Moreover, this measure of speculation does not suffer from the
same issue as our short-term buyer measure since it is based only on characteristics of the
buyer that are fixed at the time of purchase.
One key advantage of both methods we use to identify speculators is that they are based
on the full sample of housing transactions. Other work has identified speculators based on
the presence of multiple first-lien mortgage records in credit reporting data or self-reported
occupancy status on loan applications (Haughwout et al., 2011; Gao et al., 2019; Mian
and Sufi, 2019). While based on similar ideas, such approaches run the risk of omitting a
substantial fraction of speculative activity.
Table 1 demonstrates this point using summary statistics on the proportion of all-cash
purchases in our data. Column 1 shows that in our sample, 29 percent of short-term buyers
and 38 percent of non-occupant buyers did not use a mortgage when purchasing their property. These shares exceed the all-cash share among all buyers, which is 20 percent, suggesting

8

that mortgage-based measures of speculation may differentially underrepresent speculative
activity. The remaining columns of the table, which report averages at the MSA-by-month
level, show that the role of all-cash transactions among buyers we identify as speculative
remains high at all points in the housing cycle.6 The behavior of these buyers would go
unobserved in any analysis of speculative activity based on mortgage data alone.

3

Speculators During the Boom

3.1

Quantities and Prices

Figure 4 presents a simple illustration of the quantitative importance of speculative activity
during the 2000–2011 U.S. housing cycle. The figure plots monthly aggregate time series for
total transaction volume (with and without new construction), short-holding-period volume,
and non-occupant volume calculated using our underlying sample of CoreLogic deed transfers. Each series is separately normalized relative to its average value in the year 2000 and
seasonally adjusted by removing calendar-month fixed effects. For reference, the raw counts
of each type of transaction in the years 2000, 2005, and 2010 are also reported in the upper
right corner of the figure. To abstract from the effect of foreclosures on speculative volume
during the bust, we exclude foreclosures from the series in this figure.
While overall volume increased by roughly 40% during the boom years of 2000–2005,
speculative volume increased dramatically more. Both short-term sales and purchases by
non-occupants approximately doubled between 2000 and 2005. Not only did these speculative
components of volume increase more rapidly, but their increase also accounted for a nontrivial portion of the overall increase in volume during this period. For example, total volume
increased from 2.73 million transactions in 2000 to 3.82 million in 2005. During the same
time period, short-holding-period volume increased from 510 to 940 thousand transactions,
which implies that volume growth in this category alone can account for 39%(= 0.43/1.09)
of the total volume increase during the boom. A similar calculation for non-occupant volume
(in the 102 MSAs with reliable non-occupant data) implies that this measure of speculative
activity can account for 53%(= 0.52/0.98) of the volume increase in the boom. If we exclude
new construction from the total volume statistics—because short-term sales can only involve
homes previously sold—short-term volume accounts for 57%(= 0.43/0.75) of the aggregate
6

Studying the role of speculators during the recovery from the crash is not a central focus of our paper.
Nevertheless, it is interesting to note that the all-cash share rises to 50 percent of speculative purchases
during the bust.

9

increase in existing home sales. These calculations illustrate that speculators were, in an
accounting sense, a key driver of the volume boom.
The shift in the composition of volume toward speculative buyers also correlates highly
with changes in total volume across local markets. This correlation can be seen in the
top two panels of Figure 5. Panel A presents scatter plots of the percent change in total
volume at the MSA-level from 2000–2005 versus the percent change in volume for short
holding periods and long holding periods separately. Not only does the growth in volume of
short-holding-period transactions correlate strongly with the increase in total volume across
MSAs, but the magnitude of this relation is also much stronger for short holding periods
relative to long holding periods. A similar conclusion arises from Panel B, which presents
analogous scatter plots grouping transactions according to the occupancy status of the buyer
rather than the holding period of the seller. The relation between total volume growth and
non-occupant volume growth across MSAs is strong, positive, and larger in magnitude than
the corresponding relation with growth in sales to owner-occupants.
Panels C and D further show that these cross-MSA differences in the growth rate of
speculative volume explain a significant portion of the differences in the growth in total
volume. For each MSA, we plot the change in either short-holding-period volume (Panel C)
or non-occupant volume (Panel D) divided by initial total volume on the y-axis against the
percent change in total volume on the x-axis. The slope provides an estimate of how much
of a given increase in total volume during this period came in the form of short-holdingperiod or non-occupant volume. For short-holding-period volume, the answer is 30%.7 For
non-occupant volume the slope is even larger and implies that for the average MSA in our
sample 54% of the increase in total volume between 2000 and 2005 came from non-occupant
purchases. Thus, shifts in the composition of volume toward speculative buyers appear to
have been a major determinant of changes in total transaction volume during the boom.
Table 2 shows how speculative volume relates to the size of the price and quantity cycles
in the cross-section of MSAs. We estimate the correlation between growth in each speculative
measure and housing market outcomes and perform a horserace analysis that regresses these
outcomes on both measures of speculative activity. To aid interpretation of these relations,
we scale the change in outcomes for all quantity measures relative to total volume in 2003.
The regressions do not annualize changes, so we report annualized coefficients separately in
7

If we exclude new construction from total volume the 30% figure rises slightly to 36%. This relation is
indicated in the figure by the hollow squares in Panel C.

10

the table. Table IA1 reports summary statistics.
We focus here on the house price boom (Panel A, columns 1-3) and return to the other
outcomes in Section 4. House price booms are strongly related to the size of speculative
booms across cities. Cities with a one standard deviation larger short-volume boom (12.9%)
see a 24.9 percentage point larger cumulative price increase during the boom.8 Cities with a
one standard deviation larger non-occupant boom (27.1%) see a 15.4 percentage point larger
cumulative price increase during the boom. On average across cities, prices rise by 97% in the
boom and quiet. Thus, the relation between speculative volume and prices is economically
large in the cross-section. Notably, in the horserace specification, the short-volume boom
retains a strong positive association while the non-occupant boom reverses sign.
To further investigate the link between house price changes and speculative entry, we
examine higher frequency data. Speculative buyers may both cause and respond to house
price changes. Because of the potential for this type of feedback mechanism, we do not
attempt to directly identify the “causal” effect of speculators on house prices.9 Instead, we
follow the approach in Chinco and Mayer (2015), who estimate predictive regressions that are
flexible enough to allow for some types of feedback between speculative entry and prices. In
particular, we estimate a series of panel vector auto-regressions (pVARs) that relate house
price growth to the share of purchases made by non-occupant buyers and “short buyers”
(i.e., those who will sell within three years of purchase) at a monthly frequency in each MSA
between January 2000 and December 2006 (the year when prices peaked).
Table 3 reports results from three different pVAR specifications. In column 1, we estimate
a simple two-equation model that jointly links both month-over-month house price growth
to the lagged share of transactions by short-buyers (top panel) and the contemporaneous
short-buyer share to lagged house price appreciation (middle panel). Both equations also
include lags of the relevant dependent variable (house price appreciation in the top panel
and the short-buyer share in the middle panel).
The results indicate that a 1 percentage point increase in the fraction of purchases made
by short-term buyers in a given month is associated with a 0.02 percentage point increase
in the house-price appreciation rate in the following month. That is, short-buyer entry is
predictive of subsequent house price growth, though we stress that these predictive regres8

Adelino et al. (2016) and Bayer et al. (2020) also document positive relations between short-term buying
and price booms across regions during this period.
9
Gao et al. (2019) exploit state capital gains tax changes as an instrument for speculation and use this
variation to measure the consequences of housing speculation for the real economy.

11

sions do not necessarily imply a causal relation. Interestingly, the results in the middle panel
indicate that short-buyer entry can also be predicted by recent house price growth. A 1
percentage point increase in house price growth in the prior month is associated with a 0.16
percentage point increase in the short-buyer share of entrants.
In column 2, we estimate a similar model swapping out the short-buyer share for the
non-occupant share of purchases. Unlike short-buyer entry, non-occupant entry does not
appear to be predictive for house price growth. The coefficient on the lagged non-occupant
share in the top panel is roughly half the magnitude of its short-buyer analog from column 1
and is not statistically significant. Non-occupants do, however, appear to respond similarly
to past price growth. The estimate in the bottom panel indicates that a 1 percentage point
increase in house price growth in the prior month is associated with a 0.12 percentage point
increase in the non-occupant share of entrants. This estimate is qualitatively similar to and
statistically indistinguishable from the analogous coefficient for short-term buyers.
Finally, in column 3 of the table we estimate a three-equation pVAR that allows for
joint relations between all three variables of interest. The results from this specification are
both qualitatively and quantitatively similar to those from columns 1 and 2. Short-buyer
entry is strongly predictive of subsequent house price growth and predicted by recent past
price growth, whereas non-occupant entry can be predicted by past price growth but is less
informative for predicting subsequent prices. Stronger predictive power for the short-buyer
share is also consistent with the horserace specification in Table 2.
These results are similar both qualitatively and quantitatively to those in Chinco and
Mayer (2015) (see their Table 7). They find coefficients for lagged out-of-town second-house
buyers versus house price growth of 0.02 percentage points, which matches our short-buyer
share coefficient. They find that local second-house buyers do not predict future house
price growth. Combining their two groups of second-house buyers would deliver an estimate
identical to our non-occupant coefficient. Relative to their specification, we consider a sample
of MSAs that is five times as large and focus on the distinction between short-term buyers
and non-occupants rather than differences within the group of non-occupants.

3.2

Characterizing Speculative Buyers

Our results thus far indicate that short-term buyers were a major driver of changes in
transaction volume over time and across MSAs during the boom, and that more speculative
entry is associated with more price growth. In this section, we use our detailed microdata
12

to shed further light on the nature of these speculative short-term purchases.
First, we ask what share of short-term volume was from sellers who were non-occupant
buyers. The results above indicate that both short-term and non-occupant buyers were
disproportionately active during the run-up in house prices from 2000 to 2005, though with
potentially different amplification effects on house prices. However, there may be overlap
between these two groups. Focusing on the 102 MSAs with reliable non-occupant data, of
the 2000–2005 short-term volume, we find that 800 thousand out of 3.00 million (27%) were
non-occupant buyers (excluding developer buyers, defined below). Between 2000 and 2005,
the number of short-term-non-occupant-buyer transactions increases from 90 thousand to
230 thousand, or 39% of the overall growth in short-term transactions (which grew from 370
thousand to 730 thousand, excluding developer buyers). Non-occupant buyers thus account
for an excess share of the growth in short-term buyers, further suggesting that speculative
motives drive short-term trading behavior.
Second, we ask what share of short-term buyers were experienced investors versus inexperienced speculators in one or two homes. We count the total number of transactions for
each unique buyer name in an MSA and then ask what share of total transactions in that
MSA are associated with buyers with few purchases during the entire sample period versus
buyers with many purchases. We classify buyers with one or two purchases as inexperienced
and those with three or more as experienced. Of the 2000–2005 short-term volume, 2.52 million of 3.44 million (73%) were inexperienced buyers (excluding developer buyers). Between
2000 and 2005, the number of inexperienced short-term-buyer transactions increases from
320 thousand to 590 thousand, or 71% of the growth in short-term transactions.
Consistent with the evidence in Bayer et al. (2020), who use a similar methodology, entry
of inexperienced buyers is critical for understanding the growth in aggregate volume. The
relative lack of experience among this class of investors may also be relevant for understanding
the contemporaneous patterns in prices. Bayer et al. (2020) and Bayer et al. (2016) show that
inexperienced short-term investors in Los Angeles and some other cities pursue a momentumtrading strategy and that their behavior is influenced by that of other nearby speculators,
respectively. Both of these patterns are consistent with the notion of extrapolation-induced
entry of short-term buyers we consider in our model.
Third, we ask what role credit played in enabling short-term volume. We evaluate this
question by decomposing the increase in short-term selling into transactions based on how

13

much leverage the buyer originally used. We focus on a low-leverage group (purchase loanto-value (LTV) < 60%), a medium-leverage group (purchase LTV ∈ [60%, 85%)), and a
high-leverage group (purchase LTV > 85%). Of the 2000–2005 short-term volume, 1.19
million (31%) were low-LTV buyers, 1.32 million (34%) were medium-LTV buyers, and 1.33
million (35%) were high-LTV buyers. In contrast, for the long-term volume transactions
for which we observe purchase LTVs (i.e., with initial purchase during or after 1995), the
distribution skews more toward high-leverage buyers, with 22% in the low-LTV, 30% in the
medium-LTV, and 48% in the high-LTV groups, respectively. Between 2000 and 2005, the
number of low-LTV, medium-LTV, and high-LTV short-term-buyer transactions increases
from 200 to 250 thousand, from 140 to 370 thousand, and from 170 to 280 thousand, or 13%,
59%, and 28% of the growth in short-term transactions, respectively.
As in our analysis of cash transactions among speculative buyers (Table 1), short-term
volume is associated with lower use of leverage in the cross-section relative to the general
population.10 At the same time, the proportional growth in short-term buying is stronger
among high-LTV sellers, making a larger relative contribution to the overall growth in shortterm volume. This evidence is consistent with high credit growth among speculative buyers
during the boom, as documented by Haughwout et al. (2011), Bhutta (2015), and Mian and
Sufi (2019). While speculative buyers may not all have been credit-constrained, our results
align with the idea that credit supply can enable speculative entry into the housing market.
Thus, although our theoretical analysis abstracts from shifts in credit supply, we view our
extrapolation-based story as complementary to credit-supply explanations of the boom.
Last, we ask what share of short-term volume was due to developers rather than individuals. We mark transactions as developer purchases when the buyer name is both not
parsed as a person by CoreLogic and contains strings reflecting developer names.11 In our
sample, these transactions account for 6% of total volume and 10% of the growth in volume
between 2000 and 2005. Of the 4.02 million transactions in 2000–2005 made by buyers with
short-holding periods, 580 thousand (14%) were developer buyers. From 2000 to 2005, the
number of short-term-buyer transactions increases from 510 thousand to 950 thousand while
the number of short-term-developer-buyer transactions increases from 80 thousand to 130
thousand, or 12% of the growth in short-term volume. We conclude that, though developers
10

Table IA2 extends Table 1 to look at average purchase LTVs for short-term and non-occupant buyers.
Both speculative buyer types have lower average LTVs, which is exclusively driven by their higher cash
transaction shares.
11
We identify developer names using CoreLogic’s internal new construction flag, as Appendix A describes.

14

were actively involved in the housing market, they did not contribute disproportionately to
the growth in short-term volume during the boom. A possible reason is that developers were
more likely to engage in speculation in the raw land market (Nathanson and Zwick, 2018).
Taken together, the results point to the importance of a class of inexperienced speculative entrants into the housing market during the cycle. These short-term speculators are
increasingly likely to be non-occupant purchasers over the course of the boom, and they
depend less on credit on average than the general population of homebuyers. These findings
both suggest these buyers are not renters transitioning to homeownership. In Section 5.3,
we also find that a relatively small share of the new buyers are existing homeowners trading
up to a new house. The evidence is therefore most consistent with the interpretation that
these buyers are amateur investors buying additional property in pursuit of capital gains.
Figure IA1 presents further evidence for this interpretation based on the Federal Reserve
Survey of Consumer Expectations.12 First, consistent with extrapolation, the share of respondents reporting that housing is a good investment is strongly increasing in recent local
house price appreciation. Second, those who view housing as a good investment also state
a higher probability of buying a non-primary home. Third, there is a significant positive
relation between recent house price appreciation and the probability of buying a non-primary
home, which is driven by those with high liquid savings. This last result suggests the speculative behavior we document is not only due to a home equity effect.

4

Speculators During the Quiet and Bust

The previous section documented that speculative buyers played an outsized role in driving
the increase in transaction volume during the boom and that their entry was strongly correlated with price changes across local markets. We now turn to studying the behavior of
these investors during the later stages of the cycle.
One of the key stylized facts about the aggregate housing cycle is the existence of a
long “quiet” period during which prices rise while transaction volumes rapidly fall. This
period is also accompanied by a large increase in unsold listings. Table 2, Panel B, columns
4–6, shows that the rise in listings during the quiet correlates strongly with the run-up of
speculative volume during the boom across MSAs. Cities with a one standard deviation
larger short-volume boom (12.9%) see a larger cumulative increase in listings during the
12

We thank Andreas Fuster for sharing this evidence with us.

15

quiet of 76.9 percentage points relative to 2003 total volume.13 Cities with a one standard
deviation larger non-occupant boom (27.1%) see a cumulative increase in listings during the
quiet of 71.7 percentage points relative to 2003 total volume. Across cities, the mean increase
in inventories during the quiet is 178% of 2003 total volume with a standard deviation of
144%. Thus, the relation between speculative booms and the rise of listings is quantitatively
important in accounting for the cross-section of inventories.
Consistent with the aggregate evidence in Figure 3, which shows only a modest increase in
listings during the boom, we find a small and statistically insignificant relation in the crosssection between speculative booms and the change in listings during the boom.14 Given
the strong cross-sectional relation between the short-term and total volume booms, this fact
suggests that the increase in demand during the boom was sufficient to absorb the increasing
flow of listings from short-term buyers. As demand slowed, the continuing flow of listings
from recent buyers saturated the market, resulting in accumulating inventories in the quiet.
Figure 6 demonstrates this point with listings data linked to transaction data at the
property level. The link to past transactions allows us to see whether recent purchases
disproportionately contribute to the surge of listings in the quiet. We plot monthly aggregate
series for total listings and short-holding-period listings, defined as a listing where the prior
sale occurred within the past three years. These data only count a home listed for sale the
first time it appears during a listing spell, thhus measuring the flow of short-holding-period
listings without double counting unsold listings. Each series is normalized relative to its
average value in the year 2003 and seasonally adjusted by removing calendar-month effects.
The increase in listings during the quiet comes largely from recent purchases. While
total listings rise to 150% of their 2003 average at the peak of the quiet, short-holdingperiod listings rise to 250% of their 2003 average and remain above 200% well into the bust.
We see an aggregate rise of listings within sample from 1.17 million in 2003 to 1.73 million in
2007. Short-holding-period listings rise from 280 to 590 thousand, thus accounting for 55%
13
Table 2 reports the change in the inventory of unsold listings. Table IA3 reports analogous results using
the change in the flow of new listings and shows qualitatively similar results. The rise in unsold listings during
the quiet was driven both by an increase in the rate at which homes were listed for sale and a reduction in
the probability of sale conditional on listing.
14
Table IA1 shows that the mean cumulative increase in listings from 2003 to 2005 is 92% relative to 2003
total volume with a standard deviation across cities of 95%. Of 57 MSAs in the sample, 12 see a decline in
listings during this time. In terms of percentage changes, the mean cumulative increase is equivalent to a
25% (s.d.=33%) increase in accumulated listings between 2003 and 2005. This increase is modest compared
with the mean price boom across MSAs of 98% (s.d.=48%) and the mean volume boom across MSAs of 48%
(s.d.=43%).

16

of the rise in total listings. In later stages of the bust, short-holding-period listings fall well
below their 2003 level, consistent with the idea that purchases during this phase of the cycle
are more likely to include fundamental buyers and longer-term investors.
This evidence complements Genesove and Mayer (1997) and Genesove and Mayer (2001),
who document the role of home equity and loss aversion, respectively, in preventing list prices
from adjusting downward during a market downturn in Boston. Short-holding-period buyers
are more likely to maintain high list prices because—in the home equity view—they will have
paid down less of their mortgages when they turn to sell and because—in the loss aversion
view—they will have paid higher initial prices than long-holding-period buyers. In our model,
extrapolation creates another force causing recent buyers to set overly optimistic list prices,
the same force that helps explain their initial entry into the market. Each of these forces
likely plays a role in accounting for the facts.
Table 2, Panel C, considers how the size of the speculative boom is associated with
the severity of the bust. Both total volume and prices fall substantially more after their
respective peaks in cities with larger speculative booms. Cities with a one standard deviation
larger short-volume boom and non-occupant boom respectively see cumulative declines in
total volume (relative to 2003 volume) 13.5 and 13.9 percentage points larger. The results
correspond to 7.4 and 4.5 percentage point larger cumulative price declines during the bust.
Total volume falls on average across cities by 63% in the quiet and bust relative to
2003 volume. Prices fall on average across cities by 28% during the bust. Thus, the size
of the speculative volume boom is associated with larger busts in both volume and prices.
These facts are consistent with the aggregate pattern in Figure 4, in which speculative
volume declines more sharply during the quiet and bust than does total volume. Turning
points in both short-holding-period volume and non-occupant volume exactly coincide with
the turning point in aggregate volume, the sharp rise in listings during the quiet, and the
slowing of price growth before its reversal.
Finally, we look at whether speculative booms are associated with higher foreclosures in
the bust. Beyond policy relevance, this outcome is relevant for three reasons. First, in Section
2.2, we note that a large share of speculative purchases are all-cash purchases. However, more
than half of speculative purchases involve mortgages. If speculators derive lower use benefits
from housing, they may be more likely to default when under water. Second, as speculative
entry increases following past price growth, speculators are increasingly likely to buy when

17

prices are higher, including later in the cycle. Third, to the extent the speculative boom
amplifies the price cycle, it may cause more non-speculative buyers to become under water
in the bust, as these buyers happened to be unlucky in market timing.
We find that the short-term speculative boom coincides with a larger number of foreclosures in the bust, while the non-occupant boom does not. A one standard deviation increase
in the short-volume boom is associated with 11.5 percentage points more foreclosures (relative to 2003 volume) in the bust, equal to 370 thousand more foreclosures. During this
time, there were 2.68 million foreclosures across the 115 MSAs in our data. Cities with
larger short-term speculative booms therefore experienced more severe foreclosure crises. In
contrast, the relation between foreclosures and the non-occupant boom is insignificant and
small in the pairwise specification and meaningfully negative in the horserace specification.15
One interpretation of this result is that short-holding-period volume is a more precise
measure of speculative activity than non-occupant volume, perhaps because non-occupant
volume also includes longer-term “cash flow” investors and vacation homebuyers. Given significant overlap between the short-holding-period and non-occupant category, conditioning
on the level of short-term volume would leave these latter types of non-occupants in the residual variation. This residual activity might actually mitigate the speculative cycle because
these buyers are less likely to enter and exit the market concurrently with the short-term
buyers. We explore this idea in the model, which allows us to separate a buyer’s horizon
from the utility she receives from buying a house.

5
5.1

Robustness and Alternative Explanations
Endogenous Holding Periods

The evidence above indicates that the differential entry of speculative buyers played a major
role in driving the volume boom. However, the results for short-term volume growth are
based on realized rather than expected holding periods. This way of measuring short-term
speculation may complicate the interpretation of our results if buyers’ intended holding
periods endogenously respond to changes in economic conditions during the boom. The
15

Related work documents a disproportionate share of investors among delinquencies and foreclosures.
See, e.g., Haughwout et al. (2011) and Piskorski and Seru (2018). Because this work relies on mortgage data
sets, it does not consider the significant number of all-cash investors, which may explain our different results
for non-occupants relative to these papers. Guren and McQuade (2020) also relate the extent of foreclosures
to the size of the boom in the cross-section.

18

results on non-occupant buyers partially address this concern as they are based on a measure
of speculative entry that does not suffer from the same issue. However, to address this issue
further, we provide two direct pieces of evidence suggesting that the results for short-term
volume are not just driven by endogenous changes in holding periods.
Our first approach instruments for realized short-term volume growth using ex-ante demographic characteristics of an area that are likely to be correlated with intended short
holding periods among potential homebuyers. We use the 2000 Census 5% microdata to calculate the share of recent homebuyers (within the last 5 years) in each MSA that were either
younger than 35 or aged 65 and older at the time of questioning and include both shares
as instruments for 2000–2005 short-term volume growth. This approach follows Edelstein
and Qian (2014), who use data from the American Housing Survey to study demographic
and mortgage characteristics as predictors of ex-ante investment horizon. Both older and
younger buyers tend to have shorter horizons than middle-aged buyers, likely due to life
cycle forces that affect the propensity to move, which gives the instrument its relevance.16
The strength of this instrument is that it is predetermined relative to the realized holding
periods for sellers in the boom and may therefore help purge our estimates of mechanical
bias arising from endogenous changes in holding periods over the course of ownership spells.
We stress this instrument does not remove the influence of age-specific shocks, so we do not
interpret the IV regressions as demonstrating a causal relation. Rather our goal with this
exercise is to mitigate potential mechanical feedback between total and short-term volume.
Table 4 presents the results. As a baseline, we first show that a basic OLS regression
of the 2000–2005 percent change in total volume on the 2000–2005 change in short-term
volume divided by year-2000 total volume replicates the conclusion from Figure 5, Panel C.
Column 1 presents this result. Because we are interested in instrumenting for short-volume
growth, the left- and right-hand-side variables in this regression are swapped relative to
their analogs in Figure 5. Thus, the coefficient estimate of 2.3 reported in Panel A is not
directly comparable to the 0.3 number from Figure 5, Panel C. Panel B of the table, however,
reports a variance decomposition indicating that 33 percent of the variation in total volume
growth across MSAs can be explained by changes in short-term volume, which matches the
short-term volume result from Figure 5. Column 2 shows that the same regression using
non-occupant volume on the right-hand-side replicates the corresponding Figure 5 result for
16

Table IA4 reports the first stage regressions of the short volume boom on the old and young shares.

19

that measure of speculation. Columns 3 and 4 report quantitatively similar relations in
ZIP-code level regressions with MSA fixed effects.17
In Table 4, column 5, the short-term volume coefficient does not fall when we instrument
using year-2000 homebuyer age. If a mechanical relation were driving this correlation, we
would expect the IV coefficient to fall relative to the OLS. Instead, the coefficient modestly
(and insignificantly) increases from 2.30 to 2.85. Thus, the change in realized short-term
volume is quantitatively important for determining overall volume growth even when using
only the portion of short-term volume growth predicted by ex-ante buyer characteristics.
Our second approach to addressing the measurement issues associated with studying
realized rather than expected holding periods leverages survey data from the National Association of Realtors (NAR) that asks recent buyers about their intended holding period.
Unfortunately these data are only available at the national level from 2008 onward. However, the data that are available suggest that expected investment horizons vary considerably
across individuals and commove strongly with recent price changes.
Figure 7, Panel A, reports the substantial cross-sectional heterogeneity in expected holding times among participants in the NAR Investment and Vacation Home Buyers Survey.
Each bar reports an equal-weighted average across survey years of the share of recent buyers
reporting a given expected holding time. We report averages separately by type.
We emphasize three facts from this data. First, the vast majority of recent homebuyers
(roughly 80%) report knowing what their expected holding time will be. Second, there is
wide variation in expected holding times among those who report. About half of the expected
holding times are between 0 and 11 years and are distributed somewhat uniformly over that
range. The survey question groups the remaining half of the responses into a single expected
holding time of greater than or equal to 11 years; however, there may be substantial variation
within that group as well. Third, expected holding times also vary in an intuitive way across
property types. Recent buyers of investment properties report substantially shorter expected
17
Throughout the paper, we focus our empirical analysis on MSA-level outcomes for two reasons. First,
while there is independent and interesting variation across ZIP codes within cities, the variation across cities
is likely more informative for the aggregate housing cycle. Focusing on ZIP-level analysis would effectively
place much of the interesting variation into MSA-by-time fixed effects. Second, and related to the first,
spatial correlation across ZIP codes within cities hinders interpretation of cross-sectional results for some
housing market outcomes. For example, MSA fixed effects account for 86% of the variation in house price
booms across ZIP codes, but only 16% of the variation in volume booms across ZIP codes. It is likely this
difference is due to data limitations in house price index estimation, with local price indices often derived
from spatial interpolation. This issue may help explain differences in results in cross-MSA analyses, as in
our paper, and cross-ZIP, within-MSA analyses, as in Griffin et al. (2020).

20

holding periods than recent buyers of primary residences.
This baseline heterogeneity in expected holding periods correlates strongly in the time
series with recent house price changes. We separately calculate for each year of the survey
the fraction of respondents (except those reporting “don’t know”) who report an expected
holding time of less than 3 years or had already sold their home by the time of the survey.
Figure 7, Panel B, plots this short-term buyer share against annual house price growth at the
national level. A regression of the short-term buyer share on the equal-weighted average yearover-year change in the nominal quarterly FHFA U.S. house price index during the survey
year yields a statistically significant coefficient estimate of 0.82. This coefficient implies that
a recent nominal gain of 10% in house prices is associated with an increase in the short-term
buyer share of 8.2 percentage points. For reference, nominal house price appreciation was
11% in the U.S. in 2005 and much larger in some metropolitan areas. Thus, changes in
house prices during the 2000–2005 boom period may have induced significant shifts in the
distribution of expected holding times among homebuyers entering the market at that time.

5.2

Mechanical Short-Term Volume

In Figure 4 we document a rise in the share of volume coming from short-term sales during
the boom. Our interpretation of this pattern is that short-term volume rises due to a shift
in the composition of buyers toward those with shorter intended holding periods. However,
even in the absence of such a shift, any increase in total volume during the early part of
the boom will generate a mechanical increase in the share of late-boom volume coming from
short-term sales. The richness of our data allows us to quantify the contribution of this
mechanical force relative to changes in the composition of buyers.
For each pair of distinct months between 1995 and 2005, we compute a conditional selling
hazard πt0 ,t . This hazard is the share of homes purchased in month t0 —and that have not
yet sold by month t—that sell in month t. By focusing on selling hazards instead of total
volume, we remove the mechanical force that comes from volume increasing over the cycle.
We estimate the following regression at the month-pair level:
buy
sell
duration
+ t0 ,t ,
πt0 ,t = αy(t
0 ) + αy(t) + αt−t0
buy
where y(·) gives the year of the month. The first set of fixed effects, αy(t
0 ) , captures the

average propensity of buyer cohorts from year y(t0 ) to sell in any future year. The second
sell
set of fixed effects, αy(t)
, captures the average propensity of all owners to sell in year y(t).

21

duration
The third set of fixed effects, αt−t
, measures time-invariant selling hazard profiles as a
0
buy
function of time elapsed since purchase t − t0 . We interpret year-to-year movements in αy(t
0)

as changes in the composition of buyers across those years, holding fixed both year-specific
shocks to selling hazards that affect all cohorts equally and duration-specific drivers of selling
hazards that do not vary over the cycle.
buy
0
0
Appendix B reports a sharp increase in α̂y(t
0 ) from y(t ) = 2000 to y(t ) = 2005. The

magnitude implies a 3.2 percentage point larger annual selling hazard of buyers later in the
buy
boom. Using these estimates, we perform a counterfactual in which αy(t
0 ) remains constant at

its estimate in 2000 throughout the boom, representing a situation in which the composition
of buyers remains constant. In this counterfactual, the disproportionate rise in short-term
volume falls by 88%. Therefore, the changing composition of buyers during the boom can
explain almost all of the disproportionate rise in short-term volume.

5.3

Repeat Buyers

The patterns we document are consistent with speculative motives leading short-term buyers
to enter and exit the market in response to expected capital gains. But some short-term
sellers likely do not exit the market and instead choose to buy another house within the same
MSA. Such a pattern may reflect move-up purchases enabled by higher home equity in the
boom (Stein, 1995; Ortalo-Magné and Rady, 2006), or repeated buying and selling of homes
within the same market by experienced “flippers” (Choi et al., 2014; Bayer et al., 2020).
To explore this alternative explanation, we follow the methodology of Anenberg and
Bayer (2013) and construct a direct measure of repeated within-MSA purchases. We use the
names of buyers and sellers to match transactions as being possibly linked in a joint buyerseller event. For each sale transaction, we attempt to identify a purchase transaction in
which the seller from the sale matches the buyer from the purchase. To allow the possibility
that a purchase occurs before a sale or with a lag, we look for matches in a window of plus or
minus one quarter around the quarter of the sale transaction. We only look for within-MSA
matches, as purchases associated with cross-city moves are similar in spirit to our model.
Our match accounts for several anomalies that would lead a naive match strategy to
understate the match rate.18 Our approach is likely to overstate the number of true matches,
18

These include: inconsistent use of nicknames (e.g., Charles versus Charlie), initials in place of first
names, the presence or absence of middle initials, transitions from a couples buyer to a single buyer via
divorce, transitions from a single buyer to a couples buyer via cohabitation, and reversal of order in couples
purchases.

22

because it does not use address information to restrict matches, and it allows common names
to match even if they represent different people. Because we find a low match rate even with
this aggressive strategy, we do not make use of address information in our algorithm or
otherwise attempt to refine matches.
We focus on transactions between 2002 and 2011 because the seller name fields are
incomplete in prior years for several cities. We also restrict sales transactions to those
with human sellers, as indicated by the name being parsed and separated into first and last
name fields by CoreLogic. The sample includes 16.3 million sales transactions. Of these, we
are able to match 3.9 million to a linked buyer transaction, or 24%. Thus, three-quarters of
transactions do not appear to be associated with joint buyer-seller decisions. Among sellers
who had bought within the last three years, the match rate is slightly higher, equal to 31%,
consistent with move-up purchase or flipper behavior. In addition, the match rates peak in
2005 at 29% and 38% for all transactions and short-term transactions, respectively.19 These
patterns confirm and extend the findings in Anenberg and Bayer (2013), who conduct a
similar match for the Los Angeles metro area and show that internal moves account for a
substantial share of the volatility of transaction volume in that city. However, the evidence
supports the notion that sellers not engaging in repeat purchases account for most of the
short-term volume and its growth, even during the cycle’s peak.

6

Summary of Findings and Theoretical Motivation

Our findings support a narrative in which short-term speculation amplifies the housing cycle.
Moreover, short-term speculation is quantitatively first order in the following senses. First,
at the aggregate level, short-term speculation accounts for a large share of transactions
during the cycle. Second, across cities, those with larger speculative booms experience much
larger overall cycles, both in terms of a larger boom and a more severe bust. We also find
evidence consistent with extrapolative expectations driving the differential entry of shortterm speculators across cities and with that entry amplifying the price cycle.
While this evidence is consistent with the short-term speculation narrative, we are not
19

In terms of growth between 2002 and 2005, internal moves account for approximately 40% of the growth
in aggregate volume in our data, and the growth in internal short-volume accounts for 46% of total short
volume growth. The importance of internal volume varies across cities and years during the boom, with the
internal move share of MSA-level short-volume growth ranging from 35% to 46% on average. On average
across MSAs, growth in internal short-volume accounts for 35% of the growth in total short volume in 2005,
the peak year in total volume.

23

documenting a sharply identified causal link between speculators and the cycle. For example,
our instrumental variables analysis primarily addresses concerns with simultaneity but not
more general endogeneity concerns. The analysis of predictability running from the size
of the speculative boom or the share of speculative activity to subsequent housing market
outcomes similarly does not permit strong causal statements. The next section presents a
model consistent with the empirical evidence that permits stronger causal statements within
the model’s framework and allows us to study the speculative mechanism in more detail.
Three strands of the literature theoretically explain the comovement of prices and volume
in the housing market and asset markets more generally. The first consists of models in which
investors disagree about asset values, such as Scheinkman and Xiong (2003). The second
exploits features specific to the housing market, such as credit constraints (Stein, 1995;
Ortalo-Magné and Rady, 2006) or search and matching frictions (see the review in Han and
Strange (2015)). Finally, two recent papers incorporate insights from psychology into models
with extrapolative expectations to generate trade (Barberis et al., 2018; Liao and Peng, 2018).
Some papers straddle multiple categories. Guren (2014) incorporates extrapolation into a
search model of the housing market, while Piazzesi and Schneider (2009) and Burnside et al.
(2016) incorporate disagreement into the same. While all of these papers can explain the
comovement of prices and volume during the boom and bust, there are three additional
results from our empirical work that no prior model seems able to explain simultaneously.
First, the increase in volume during the boom, and listings during the boom and quiet,
come disproportionately from short-term sales (Figures 4 and 6). Search-and-matching models struggle to generate this pattern if the decision to list is independent of homeowner characteristics, as in Wheaton (1990), Piazzesi and Schneider (2009), Dı́az and Jerez (2013),
Guren (2014), Head et al. (2014) and Anenberg and Bayer (2020).20 These models may
generate a mechanical increase in short-term volume, but they cannot explain the result in
Section 5.2 that homeowners who bought later in the boom were more likely to resell than
homeowners who bought earlier. In contrast, the disagreement and extrapolation–psychology
papers seem able to generate a disproportionate short-term volume boom, as long as rising
prices generate more disagreement or psychological urge to both buy and sell the asset.
Second, non-occupants constitute a disproportionate share of the increase in buying ac20

Two exceptions are Hedlund (2016) and Ngai and Sheedy (2016), who respectively focus on credit
constraints and within-market moves. As we explain in Section 5.3, short-term volume increases significantly
among low-LTV sellers, and most short-term sellers do not relocate within the same MSA. Therefore, these
two papers do not explain all of the disproportionate rise in short-term volume during the boom.

24

tivity during the boom (Figure 4). Non-occupant purchasing is absent from many searchand-matching models, either because the owner-occupied and rental markets are separate
(Guren, 2014), or because all non-occupant owners are previous occupants of the same house
(Head et al., 2014; Burnside et al., 2016). The extrapolation–psychology papers also provide
no role for non-occupants, as they model more general asset markets where all owners receive
the same flow benefits from the asset. Nathanson and Zwick (2018) present a disagreement
model in which non-occupants disproportionately buy housing during a boom, but their
model is static and is therefore not suited to explain the dynamics at the heart of this paper.
The third result is the existence of the quiet, during which prices and volume diverge
while listings accumulate (Figures 1 and 3). Disagreement papers and credit-constraint
housing models predict a monotonic relation between prices and volume, and therefore do
not explain a period when these outcomes move in opposite directions.21 Barberis et al.
(2018) and Liao and Peng (2018) can generate a divergence of prices and volume, but listings
fall with volume because of Walrasian market clearing. A similar pattern of prices, volume,
and listings appears in Burnside et al. (2016). In contrast, Guren (2014) matches all three
variables. However, listings sharply decline during his boom (more than one-for-one with
respect to prices), and they never rise above their pre-shock level in his impulse response.
Empirically, we find that listings modestly rise during the boom in aggregate and in most
MSAs (Section 4). The sharp rise in listings during the quiet, far above their 2000 level, is
perhaps the most salient aspect of Figure 3.
The goal of our model is to match the joint dynamics of prices, volume, and listings in a
way that matches the disproportionate role of non-occupants and short-term sales in driving
up volume during the boom and listings during the boom and quiet. Additionally, the model
should explain the cross-sectional and time-series relations between speculative volume and
other outcomes in Tables 2 and 3. Finally, the model should clarify the differences between
short-term and non-occupant volume: the short-holding-period boom tends to be a stronger
predictor of quiet and bust dynamics than the non-occupant boom, and short-term volume
is associated with more house price predictability in the pVARs.
21
Disagreement also struggles to explain the widespread optimism about house price growth during the
boom we study (Case et al., 2012; Foote et al., 2012; Cheng et al., 2014), although it can generate the
dispersion in these beliefs (Piazzesi and Schneider, 2009; Burnside et al., 2016) and surely accounts for some
of the average prices and volume in the housing market (Bailey et al., 2016).

25

7

The Model

7.1

Environment and Preferences

We present a discrete-time model of a city with a fixed amount of perfectly durable housing,
normalized to have measure one. Agents go through a life cycle with three possible phases:
potential buyer, stayer, and mover. Each period, movers list their houses for sale. After
posting a list price, each mover matches to a randomly selected potential buyer, who decides
whether to purchase at the listed price or exit the housing market permanently.22 If the
potential buyer chooses to purchase then the mover receives the list price and exits the
market. A purchasing potential buyer becomes a stayer and receives flow utility edi at the
beginning of each future period until he randomly becomes a mover, which happens with
Poisson hazard λi .
At t, potential buyer flow utility satisfies
di = dt + ai ,

(2)

where dt is a time-varying demand shifter, and ai varies across potential buyers at a given
time. Each potential buyer has one of two occupancy types, ni ∈ {0, 1}. The distribution of
ai across potential buyers of type n is N (µn , σa2 ). We normalize µ0 = 0 so that µ1 gives the
average log difference in flow utility between occupants (ni = 1) and non-occupants (ni = 0).
The demand shifter, dt , is a difference-stationary process with a persistent growth rate:
dt = dt−1 + gt + dt
gt = (1 − ρ)µ + ρgt−1 + gt ,
where dt and gt are mean-zero independent normals with variances (1−γ)σ 2 and γ(1−ρ2 )σ 2 ,
so that σ 2 is the variance of ∆d and γ ∈ (0, 1) is the share of that variance coming from g.
Potential buyers vary in λi , ai , and ni . The mover hazard, λ, follows a discrete distribution β λ . The share of each occupancy type is βn ; βnλ is the share of each (n, λ) pair. To match
the data on expected holding times (Figure 7), we allow non-zero correlation between λi and
ni . We denote the CDF of ai across potential buyers by F , a mixture of two normals.23
22

In other models, some movers fail to match to a potential buyer due to search frictions (Head et al.,
2014; Guren, 2018). We abstract from this possibility.
23
Potential buyer types in our model bear some similarities to the taxonomies in Frankel and Froot (1986),
Cutler et al. (1990) and De Long et al. (1990), which feature positive feedback traders, fundamentalists, and
rational arbitrageurs. Whereas those papers assume different objectives or beliefs across agents, we derive
heterogeneous investment behavior arising from exogenous differences in horizons. Hong and Stein (1999)

26

Agents are risk-neutral and act to maximize their expectation of the net present value of
their utility. The flow utility of living outside the city equals zero, a normalization constant.
Perfect credit markets exist with a constant interest rate equal to r. Potential buyers discount
the time until becoming a mover at r. Movers discount time while being a mover at the rate
rm ≥ r, which captures possible costs of moving. To rule out rational bubbles, we assume
that 1 + r > eµ+σ

2 /2

, the unconditional expected growth of demand, and guarantee that this

inequality holds by setting µ = −σ 2 /2 in the quantitative exercise so that the unconditional
expected growth rate of edt is 0.

7.2

Information and Beliefs

We denote the average list price at t by Pt , and the share of those listings that sell by πt . At
t, agents observe the history of price changes and sales shares, Pt0 /Pt0 −1 and πt0 for t0 < t.
Potential buyer i also observes her flow utility, di , occupancy type, ni , horizon type, λi ,
and the list price to which he matches, Pi,t . Agents cannot observe the demand shifter, d,
or its growth rate, g, and must infer current values of these latent demand variables using
historical market data and their private information.
Glaeser and Nathanson (2017) propose a behavioral approximation called the cap rate
error that agents use to solve this inference problem. The cap rate error is the belief that
another potential buyer i decides to purchase a listing if and only if
edi ≥ κPi,t ,

(3)

where κ is a time-invariant constant. By employing the cap rate error, agents infer demand
growth from market data without taking a stand on the evolution of the beliefs of other
market participants. Because agents neglect the sensitivity of market outcomes to others’
beliefs, the cap rate error endogenously leads to extrapolative beliefs about house price
growth as well as predictable booms and busts in house prices. We follow Glaeser and
Nathanson (2017) in assuming that the cap rate error characterizes the beliefs of agents in
our model. Our contribution is analyzing the implications for quantity dynamics. In Glaeser
and Nathanson (2017), volume is constant and listings sell immediately.
We focus on equilibria in which all movers at a given time post the same list price
also connect investment to horizons, and we differ from that paper primarily by departing from Walrasian
market clearing.

27

(conditions for this outcome are below). Substituting (2) into (3) and taking logs yields
d˜t = log Pt − F −1 (1 − πt ) + log κ,

(4)

where the tilde denotes an inference true under the cap rate error (but not necessarily in
reality). Movers at t deduce the history of price levels, Pt0 for t0 < t, from the history of
price changes as well as the price they faced when they purchased their house. They directly
observe πt0 for t0 < t. Therefore, using (4), they infer the full history of demand before time
t as d˜t0 for t0 < t. Kalman filtering produces the following posterior beliefs about dt and gt :
Lemma 1. Movers at t have a normal posterior on gt and dt with means
∞


X
ĝt = µ + (1 − α)ρ
(αρ)j−1 ∆d˜t−j − µ
j=1

and dˆt = d˜t−1 + ĝt , where α ∈ (0, 1) is a constant depending on σ, γ, and ρ.
Proof. Appendix C.1.
We denote the perceived posterior variance on dt by σ̃ 2 . In the quantitative exercise, we
choose κ so that the average value of dt − dˆt equals zero, as in Glaeser and Nathanson
(2017). Lemma 1 implies the recursions


ĝt+1 = (1 − ρ)µ + ρĝt + ρ(1 − α) d˜t − dˆt


dˆt+1 = dˆt + ĝt+1 + d˜t − dˆt ,

(5)
(6)

which are useful for defining value functions below. Intuitively, due to (4), ĝt rises with past
price growth, as in Glaeser and Nathanson (2017), and also with the growth of π, so that
movers infer a higher demand growth rate when the speed at which listings sell is increasing.

7.3

Prices

Movers choose prices optimally given their mistaken belief about potential buyer demand.
The demand curve that movers believe they face is
π̃(P, dt ) = 1 − F (log P + log κ − dt ).
The mover value function satisfies the recursion


V m (dˆt , ĝt ) = sup E π̃(P, dt )P + (1 + rm )−1 (1 − π̃(P, dt ))V m (dˆt+1 , ĝt+1 ) ,
P

28

(7)

where the expectation is over dt ∼ N (dˆt , σ̃ 2 ). Because movers believe that d˜t = dt , each
potential realization of dt determines dˆt+1 and ĝt+1 via (5) and (6), so (7) is well-defined.
Movers at a given time post the same list price when a unique solution to (7) exists, which
we verify at each point of the state space of our quantitative exercise.24 The following lemma
clarifies how this list price depends on mover beliefs, dˆt and ĝt .
ˆ

Lemma 2. The optimal list price takes the form edt p(ĝt ) for some function p(·).
Proof. Appendix C.2.
The log list price scales one-for-one with the current belief about the level of demand dˆt .
It also depends on the belief about the demand growth rate ĝt because the option of selling
next period becomes more valuable when movers expect faster demand growth. In the limit
of infinite mover impatience (rm → ∞), this option is irrelevant, so p(·) is constant. In
this case, price setting closely resembles the extrapolative rule of thumb that Guren (2018)
assumes, and price growth expectations satisfy a condition analogous to the reduced form
extrapolation formulas that Barberis et al. (2015, 2018) and Liao and Peng (2018) assume
(see Appendix C.3).25 In our quantitative exercise, we use a finite rm and measure the extent
to which price growth expectations depend on recent price growth.

7.4

Buyer Composition

Potential buyers decide whether to buy in light of their beliefs and flow utility. The value to
potential buyer i at time t of owning a house is
Vi,tb

=

∞
X
j=1

λi (1 − λi )

j−1

j
X
k=1

edi
Ei,t V m (dˆt+j , ĝt+j )
+
(1 + r)k
(1 + r)j

!
,

(8)

where Ei,t denotes the potential buyer’s expectation conditional on her information set.
Potential buyer i imputes dˆt using the equation
dˆt = log Pi,t − log p(ĝt ),
24

In general, movers may be indifferent between different list prices, or they may prefer to set an infinite
list price when the right side of (7) is unbounded. We rule out these possibilities by verifying that a unique
price in a fine mesh maximizes the right side of (7), and that the value function at this price exceeds the
limiting value as P → ∞.
25
In particular, price growth expected over the next period is an affine function of an exponential weighted average of past growth. In our context, that affine function is Et ∆ log Pt+1 = µ +
ρ2 (1−α) P∞
j
j=0 ρ (∆ log Pt−j − µ).
1+ρ(1−α)

29

which holds due to Lemma 2. Because she observes the history of price growth and sales
shares, she directly calculates ĝt using Lemma 1. By (5) and (6), future values of these
variables depend on the innovations d˜t+j − dˆt+j for j ≥ 0. From the standpoint of the
potential buyer, these innovations are distributed independently as N (0, σ̃ 2 ) for j > 1. For
j = 0, however, her information about her own flow utility is informative, and her posterior
on this innovation is
dt − dˆt ∼ N

σ̃ 2 (di − µni − dˆt ) σ̃ 2 σa2
, 2
σ̃ 2 + σa2
σ̃ + σa2

!
.

(9)

A purchase occurs when Vi,tb ≥ Pi,t . Lemma 3 uses (8) to simplify this decision rule.
Lemma 3. Potential buyer i purchases a house at t if and only if
edi ≥ κλnii (ĝt )Pi,t .
Proof. Appendix C.4.
The cutoff rule that potential buyers use to determine whether to purchase resembles the
belief that movers have under the cap rate error except for the functions κλn (·), which are no
longer constant and instead depend on the potential buyers’ expected horizon λi , occupancy
type ni , and demand growth expectations ĝt .
While it is difficult to fully characterize the properties of the κλn (·) functions analytically,
in the quantitative exercise below we document three properties of these functions that are
helpful for understanding how the composition of buyers varies over the housing cycle. First,
each κλn (·) decreases in ĝt , with steeper slopes for larger values of λ. Intuitively, when ĝt is
high potential buyers expect larger capital gains in the future and will therefore be willing
to purchase at higher prices today. Moreover, potential buyers with larger λ expect to sell
sooner, so their demand is more sensitive to expected capital gains. In the limiting case of
an infinite horizon investor (λ → 0), equation (8) makes clear that the buying decision does
not depend on ĝt ; in this case, κλn limits to a constant value of r. Second, κλ0 (·) is nearly
identical to κλ1 (·) for each λ. The cutoffs depend very little on occupancy type because σa
is much larger than σ̃. Finally, κλn (·) is typically larger for greater values of λ, reflecting
higher cutoffs for short-term buyers. Because listings do not sell immediately, there is an
endogenous illiquidity cost to becoming a mover. Short-term buyers expect to pay this cost
sooner, so they are less inclined to purchase a house ex ante.
30

Together with Lemma 2, Lemma 3 gives the following equation for the realized share of
listings that sell:
πt = 1 −

X



βnλ Φ log p(ĝt ) + log κλn (ĝt ) + dˆt − dt − µn ,

(10)

n,λ

where Φ is the CDF of N (0, σa2 ). Holding dˆt and dt constant, πt increases in ĝt when each
κλn (·) decreases and when rm is large, so that p(·) is nearly constant. In this case, ĝt tends to
raise d˜t due to (4), leading agents to overestimate time-t demand when the expected growth
rate is high that period. This error raises ĝt+1 via (5), leading to positive feedback over time.
The share of sales going to each type of buyer is



bλn,t = πt−1 βnλ 1 − Φ log p(ĝt ) + log κλn (ĝt ) + dˆt − dt − µn .

(11)

When µ1 > 0—so that non-occupants benefit less from housing on average—log non-occupant
demand is more sensitive than log occupant demand to the demand shifter, dt , and the belief about its growth rate, ĝt . This result holds because the normal distribution has the
monotone likelihood property, so that Φ0 /(1 − Φ) is an increasing function. Because κλn (·)
quantitatively does not depend on n, the argument of Φ(·) is always larger for non-occupants
than occupants of the same λ type when µ1 > 0.
In the quantitative exercise, the log of short-term buyer demand is more sensitive than
long-term buyer demand to ĝt for two reasons. First, κλn (·) decreases more sharply for larger
values of λ. Second, κλn is greater for larger values of λ, meaning that an equal decrease
in log κλn (ĝt ) boosts demand more for short-term buyers than long-term buyers due to the
monotone likelihood property. For a similar reason, the demand shifter, dt , increases shortterm buying more strongly than long-term buying.

7.5

Quantities

The following accounting identities characterize the evolution of inventories, It , new listings,
Lt , and volume, Vt , given sales probabilities, πt , and the composition of buyers, bλn,t :
It = (1 − πt−1 )It−1 + Lt ,
Vt = πt It ,
X
λ
Lt =
λSt−1
,
λ
λ
+ (bλ0,t + bλ1,t )Vt ,
Stλ = (1 − λ)St−1

31

where Stλ measures end-of-period stayers of type λ. Volume to buyers of occupancy type n
P
equals λ bλn,t Vt . To track realized short-term sales, as observed in the data, define Itk to be
the inventory of listings at t of homes purchased at time t − k. This quantity satisfies the
recursion

k−1
+
Itk = (1 − πt−1 )It−1

X

λ(1 − λ)k−1 (bλ0,t−k + bλ1,t−k )Vt−k

λ

It0

= 0. The sales volume of houses purchased within the
for k > 0, with initial condition
P
last j periods equals Vtj = jk=1 πt Itk . In the data we track new short-term listings; here,
new listings of homes purchased within the last j periods equals
Ljt

=

j
X
X
k=1

λ(1 − λ)k−1 (bλ0,t−k + bλ1,t−k )Vt−k .

λ

As these equations make clear, the current composition of buyers affects the composition
of stayers, thereby altering future listings and volume. Volume rises when there are more
listings or when the selling probability is higher.

8

Model Results

8.1

Simulation Methodology

Solving the model requires calculating the functions p(ĝt ) and κλn (ĝt ). To do so, we discretize
ĝ using the Rouwenhorst (1995) method and then calculate the function values at these
discrete points. To evaluate the functions outside these points, we use cubic splines between
mesh points and linear splines beyond the boundaries.
Each simulation of our model corresponds to 148 sequential realizations of dt and gt . The
first 100 periods burn in the simulation, leaving 48 analysis periods. Each period represents
a quarter, so our analysis spans 12 years. We draw a control sample of 1,000 independent
simulations to analyze the model’s baseline properties. To analyze the impulse response to
a shock, we draw a treatment sample of 1,000 additional simulations identical to the control
except in periods 101–104 during which the growth rate shocks gt are two standard deviations
higher.26 Impulse responses are average differences between treatment and control outcomes.
We set r = 0.012 and ρ = 0.880, corresponding to annual values of 5% and 0.51 in Guren
(2018) and Glaeser and Nathanson (2017), respectively. We select values of the remaining
26

We shock g instead of d so that in the rational benchmark, prices never overshoot. A sequence of 4
shocks matches the experiment in Barberis et al. (2018). We choose 2 standard deviations to explore a large
but plausible increase in demand.

32

parameters so that moments from our simulation match the empirical counterparts in Table
5. The composition of buyers and the volatility of demand growth determine βnλ and σ,
respectively, and the selling hazard disciplines rm , as more patient movers take longer to sell
by setting higher prices. We target three features of the national U.S. housing cycle: the ratio
of price boom to bust, the volume boom relative to the price boom, and the degree to which
the non-occupant volume boom exceeds the occupant boom. Intuitively, these moments
determine γ, σa , and µ0 through quantifying extrapolation, the elasticity of demand, and
the excess sensitivity of non-occupants.

8.2

Parameter Estimates and Buyer Cutoff Rules

Table 6 reports parameter values that match the moments in Panels B and C of Table 5.
Non-occupant flow utility is 0.9% less than occupant flow utility on average, corresponding to
less than a standard deviation in each group’s flow utility distribution. The mover discount
rate is 14%. To map this number into a flow cost of moving, we calculate how much higher
the mover value function would be if the mover discount rate were r for a single period. The
average difference is 3.7% of the list price, in line with the typical costs of selling a house
(Han and Strange, 2015) and smaller than the estimate in Guren (2018) of 2.1% per month.
Panel B reports the magnitude of extrapolative expectations implied by our parameter
estimates. Following Armona et al. (2019), we focus on the coefficients on last year’s price
growth of expected annualized price growth over the next 1 and 2–5 years. We calculate
these coefficients by regressing movers’ expectations in period 105 of the control simulations
against price growth in the prior 4 periods. The values of 0.127 and 0.042 are somewhat
smaller than corresponding values of 0.226 and 0.047 that Armona et al. (2019) find through
a survey (see their Table 5). Therefore, to match the key housing cycle moments in panel C
of Table 5, our model requires a smaller amount of extrapolation than these authors found.
Figure 8 plots the potential buyer cutoff functions κλn (ĝt ) given our chosen parameters for
a wide range of expected demand growth rates. These functions determine the relative sensitivity of buyer demand across buyers with different expected holding periods and occupancy
types. Three features stand out: (1) each κλn (·) decreases, with steeper slopes for larger
values of λ, (2) κλ0 (·) and κλ1 (·) are nearly identical for each λ, and (3) κλn (·) are generally
larger for greater values of λ. These results imply that the sensitivity of buyer demand to
the expected growth rate will be larger among buyers with shorter expected holding periods
and that short-term buyers are more likely to be marginal. Because holding periods and oc33

cupancy status are correlated according to our estimates in Table 6, the similarity in cutoff
rules between occupants and non-occupants implies that non-occupants are also more likely
to be marginal entrants when expected capital gains are high.

8.3

Impulse Responses

Figure 9 plots impulse responses. As with the national U.S. cycle in Figures 1 and 3, the
cycle in the model progresses through a boom, quiet, and bust (Panels A and B). We use
grey shading to mark the transition points between these phases, defined as the peaks of
volume and prices. The quiet lasts 8 quarters, close to the duration in Figure 1 and the
correlation-maximizing lag in Figure 2.
In the boom, demand rises because its true level, dt is higher and because the expected
growth rate, ĝt , rises in response to price growth. Both channels differentially stimulate
buying from potential buyers with higher λ (Panel C) and non-occupants (Panel D). The
overall increase in housing demand pushes up the share of listings that sell, πt (Panel E).
Short-term buyers re-list their houses quickly, increasing the flow of listings during the boom
(Panel F). Prices and volume increase as a result. Tempering the volume boom is the decline
in inventory (Panel B), which occurs as the stock of unsold listings diminishes.
The qualitative behavior of volume, inventories, and sale probabilities during the boom
is similar in search and matching models, such as Guren (2014). The key difference is
the increasing flow of listings coming differentially from short-term buyers (Panel F). This
flow limits the decline in inventories to 1.5 log points, amplifying and sustaining the rise
in volume. Relative to the price boom, this decline in inventories is an order of magnitude
smaller than in Guren (2014). Furthermore, the differential flow of short-term listings leads
to the short-term volume boom in Panel C, which matches Figure 4. The disproportionate
increase in demand from non-occupants, together with the overall rise in volume, produces
the strong non-occupant volume boom in Panel D that also matches Figure 4.
In the quiet, demand begins to fall because the price level has risen so high. Due to the
cap rate error, agents misattribute demand growth during the boom entirely to dt , though
much of it comes from ĝt , the expected capital gains channel. Thus, agents over-estimate the
demand level, and dˆt − dt becomes increasingly positive. As (10) shows, sales probabilities
then fall (Panel E). Movers increase their list prices throughout the quiet because they
continue to revise upward dˆt , their estimate of the level of demand, for two reasons. First,
because of past price growth, the expected growth rate, ĝt , remains high, which mechanically
34

causes upward revisions to the expected level of demand. Second, the sale probability, πt ,
remains high even though it is falling, and these high realizations constitute positive surprises
about demand that cause movers to increase their beliefs. Eventually, πt falls below its preshock average, ending these upward revisions and the concomitant increase in list prices.
One of the distinguishing features of the quiet in both the model and the data is the
sharp rise in unsold inventories. At their peak, unsold listings are 1.4 log points above their
pre-shock level. The two causes of the glut of inventories are the fall in selling probabilities
(Panel E) and the elevated flow of short-term listings continuing throughout the quiet (Panel
F), which matches the data in Figure 6. This second cause is novel to our model and may
explain why inventories rise above their pre-shock level here whereas they fail to do so in
models lacking this channel, such as Guren (2014).27
The bust begins as movers cut list prices. Agents revise down their expectations of the
growth rate, which further depresses demand and sale probabilities. Because the cap rate
error leads movers to ignore this channel, movers do not cut prices enough to restore demand,
and the bust continues over several periods. Volume falls below its pre-shock level, as in
Figure 1. The decline in ĝt leads to a smaller share of short-term buyers, depressing the flow
of new listings (Panel F), which allows inventories to recover (Panel B).
The model generates a second boom in prices, volume, and listings in the last 5 years
of the simulation. This second boom occurs because prices overshoot on the way down, as
is common in models with extrapolative expectations (Hong and Stein, 1999; Glaeser and
Nathanson, 2017). Underpricing occurs when agents think that demand is lower than its
true value, so that dˆt − dt becomes negative. As (10) shows, sale probabilities then rise,
increasing volume. This increase in demand disproportionately affects short-term buyers, so
short-term volume and listings rise during the second boom.

8.4

Counterfactuals

Many features of the impulse responses discussed above closely match the patterns observed
in the data. However, the fact that our model matches these patterns does not directly speak
to the role that speculators play in generating those patterns. To quantify the contribution
of speculators to the housing cycle, we rerun the simulation under counterfactuals with only
27

Our model understates the rise in listings during the quiet because of our simplifying assumption that
each mover matches to a potential buyer regardless of the number of contemporaneous movers. With a
more realistic matching function, such as the one in Guren (2014), our model might hit the peak of listings
(relative to price growth) that appears in Figure 3.

35

long-term buyers or occupants. Doing so allows us to make causal statements within the
model’s framework that are not feasible in our empirical analysis.
To study the role of short-term buyers, we re-run the simulations setting β λ = 0 for all
values of λ except for λ = 0.03, which is close to the reciprocal of the average horizon among
potential buyers in the baseline. By assigning all potential buyers the same (low) value
of λ this counterfactual removes both short-term buyers and the heterogeneity in holding
periods that generates variation in the composition of buyers. We run two versions of this
counterfactual: one in which we keep the share of non-occupants among potential buyers
with λ = 0.03 equal to its baseline, and one in which we change this ratio to the non-occupant
share in the whole baseline population. The second version controls for the non-occupant
share as we alter the λ distribution.
We perform a similar pair of counterfactual exercises to measure the effect of removing
non-occupant buyers. The first counterfactual sets the non-occupant shares, β0λ , to zero, and
then scales up the occupant shares, β1λ , so that they sum to one. This method skews the
λ distribution toward long-term buyers because occupants have longer horizons than nonoccupants (Table 6). Therefore, we explore a second counterfactual in which we maintain
the original λ distribution while eliminating non-occupants. We continue to set each β0λ to
zero, but now we update β1λ to the baseline λ share among all potential buyers.
Table 7 reports key outcomes from the impulse responses under the baseline and each
of these four counterfactuals. In the counterfactuals with only long-term buyers, the price
bust nearly disappears, the volume boom is half its baseline size, and sale probabilities rise
less. Inventories fall more during the boom and attain a smaller level at the end of the
quiet.28 Therefore, eliminating short-term buyers prevents the model from matching the
key aggregate facts (Figures 1 and 3). Interestingly, short-term volume still rises more than
total volume, even though the composition of buyers remains the same throughout the boom
(by construction). This pattern is a manifestation of the mechanical increase in short-term
volume that we quantify in Section 5.2.
We obtain similar results in the first counterfactual with only occupants: the price bust,
volume boom, rise in sale probabilities, and end-of-quiet listings become significantly smaller.
However, when we adjust the λ distribution in the last counterfactual, eliminating non28

These counterfactuals do a better job matching inventory levels during the bust, which reach 1.6 log
points, a higher level than the baseline. In the baseline, new listings fall sharply during the bust because
short-term buyers exit the market (Panel F of Figure 9). Thus, the baseline does a better job matching
listing behavior in the boom and quiet than in the bust.

36

occupants fails to attenuate the cycle. In fact, the cycle outcomes grow in this scenario.
Evidently, non-occupants amplify the housing cycle, but only because many of them have
short horizons. Long-term non-occupants fail to amplify the cycle and may even dampen it.
These results speak to the finding in Tables 2 and 3 that a short-volume boom more
robustly predicts price booms and busts than does a non-occupant boom. Our findings are
consistent with Gao et al. (2019), who find that non-occupants amplify the housing bust, as
that paper does not look separately at long-term versus short-term non-occupants. Chinco
and Mayer (2015) find a stronger effect of out-of-town than local non-occupants buyers on
subsequent price growth. This finding is consistent with our results if out-of-town buyers have
shorter horizons than local ones. Finally, our results echo Nathanson and Zwick (2018), who
theoretically predict larger house price booms in cities with a greater share of non-occupant
buyers when those buyers disagree about future prices and the housing stock is fixed. Static
disagreement in that model functions similarly to how, in this model, variation in horizons
interacts with extrapolative expectations to generate heterogeneous expected returns.
To gauge the role of various model ingredients for producing the results, Appendix D
simulates a rational version of our model and a version with Walrasian market clearing. The
rational model dampens or eliminates most cycle dynamics, except for the disproportionate
non-occupant volume boom. In the Walrasian model, prices and volume go through a boom
and bust cycle, but volume peaks after prices, thus eliminating the quiet. Therefore, departing from rationality seems necessary to fit the price and quantity dynamics in the data, and
relaxing Walrasian market clearing appears necessary to fit the quiet.

9

Final Remarks

Our paper raises additional lines of inquiry within the housing market. We have argued, theoretically and empirically, that short-term investors play a crucial role in the housing cycle.
Do the expansions in credit that typically accompany housing booms appeal disproportionately to short-term investors? Barlevy and Fisher (2011) document a strong correlation
across U.S. metropolitan areas between the size of the 2000s house price boom and the takeup of interest-only mortgages. These mortgages back-load payments by deferring principal
repayment for some amount of time and thus might appeal especially to buyers who expect
to resell quickly. The targeting of credit expansions to short-term buyers might explain the
amplification effects of credit availability on real estate booms documented by Favara and
37

Imbs (2015), Di Maggio and Kermani (2017), and Rajan and Ramcharan (2015). Mian and
Sufi (2019) explore this channel in contemporaneous work.
A second line of inquiry within housing concerns tax policy. The capital gains tax discourages housing speculation by lowering expected after-tax capital gains. However, it discourages productive residential investment as well. Is this tax optimal, and if not, what
type of tax policy would be better? Many economists have analyzed or proposed transaction taxes (Tobin, 1978; Stiglitz, 1989; Summers and Summers, 1989; Dávila, 2015). It is
unclear whether these taxes would particularly discourage short-term investors, given that
the incidence of this tax might fall more on buyers than sellers.
A third research question involves new construction, which is absent from our model. In
a static model, Nathanson and Zwick (2018) predict that undeveloped land amplifies house
price booms by facilitating speculation by developers. Developers have short investment
horizons because the time from land purchase to home sale ranges from a few months to a
few years. Moreover, because developers do not receive flow utility, their payoffs resemble
those of the non-occupants in our model. Adding construction to the model in this paper
might further clarify the role of land markets and new construction in housing cycles.
Although this paper focuses on the housing market, many of the patterns we study
appear in other asset markets. Several famous bubbles involve large movements in volume
(Cochrane, 2011). The lead–lag relation between prices and volume holds, albeit at different
frequencies, in four other boom-bust episodes shown in Figure 10: the 1995–2005 market in
technology stocks, the 1985–1995 Japanese stock market, the experimental bubbles studied
by Smith et al. (1988), and the 1985–1995 bubble in Postwar art. Short-horizon trading was
prevalent during the tech boom (Cochrane, 2002; Ofek and Richardson, 2003). Outside of
bubbles, stock market volume increases following high returns and predicts negative returns
(Lee and Swaminathan, 2000; Jones, 2002; Statman et al., 2006; Griffin et al., 2007).
Cutler et al. (1991) document price dynamics such as momentum and mean reversion in
many asset classes. They conclude the generality of these patterns suggests that inherent
features of the speculative process likely explain them. Can our model of speculation explain
the joint dynamics of prices and volume outside the housing market? In the Walrasian variant
of our model, we do not generate a consistent lead–lag relation, but we find that some movers
do not sell when the expected growth rate is very large. We conjecture that it may be possible
to generate price and volume outcomes that resemble the quiet but in a market design that

38

more closely resembles the Walrasian benchmark. We hope that future work will investigate
the striking similarity of volume dynamics in other markets.

References
Adelino, Manuel, Schoar, Antoinette and Severino, Felipe. (2016). ‘Loan Originations and
Defaults in the Mortgage Crisis: The Role of the Middle Class’, Review of Financial Studies
29(7), 1635–1670.
Anenberg, Elliot and Bayer, Patrick. (2013), Endogenous Sources of Volatility in Housing
Markets: The Joint Buyer-Seller Problem, Technical report, National Bureau of Economic Research.
Anenberg, Elliot and Bayer, Patrick. (2020). ‘Endogenous Sources of Volatility in Housing
Markets: The Joint Buyer-Seller Problem’. Forthcoming, International Economic Review.
Armona, Luis, Fuster, Andreas and Zafar, Basit. (2019). ‘Home Price Expectations and
Behavior: Evidence from a Randomized Information Experiment’, Review of Economic Studies
86(4), 1371–1410.
Bailey, Michael, Cao, Ruiqing, Kuchler, Theresa and Stroebel, Johannes. (2016), Social
Networks and Housing Markets. Working Paper.
Barberis, Nicholas, Greenwood, Robin, Jin, Lawrence and Shleifer, Andrei. (2015).
‘X-CAPM: An Extrapolative Capital Asset Pricing Model’, Journal of Financial Economics
115(1), 1–24.
Barberis, Nicholas, Greenwood, Robin, Jin, Lawrence and Shleifer, Andrei. (2018).
‘Extrapolation and bubbles’, Journal of Financial Economics 129(2), 203–227.
Barlevy, Gadi and Fisher, Jonas D.M. (2011). ‘Mortgage Choices and Housing Speculation’.
Working Paper, Federal Reserve Bank of Chicago.
Bayer, Patrick, Geissler, Christopher, Mangum, Kyle and Roberts, James W. (2020).
‘Speculators and Middlemen: The Strategy and Performance of Investors in the Housing Market’,
Review of Financial Studies .
Bayer, Patrick, Mangum, Kyle and Roberts, James W. (2016), Speculative Fever: Investor
Contagion in the Housing Bubble. NBER Working Paper 22065.
Bhutta, Neil. (2015). ‘The Ins and Outs of Mortgage Debt during the Housing Boom and Bust’,
Journal of Monetary Economics 76, 284–298.
Burnside, Craig, Eichenbaum, Martin and Rebelo, Sergio. (2016). ‘Understanding Booms
and Busts in Housing Markets’, Journal of Political Economy 124(4), 1088–1147.
Case, Karl E. (2008). ‘The Central Role of Home Prices in the Current Financial Crisis: How
Will the Market Clear?’, Brookings Papers on Economic Activity 2, 161–193.

39

Case, Karl E., Shiller, Robert J. and Thompson, Anne K. (2012). ‘What Have They
Been Thinking? Homebuyer Behavior in Hot and Cold Markets’, Brookings Papers on Economic
Activity Fall, 265–298.
Charles, Kerwin Kofi, Hurst, Erik and Notowidigdo, Matthew J. (2018). ‘Housing Booms
and Busts, Labor Maket Opportunities, and College Attendance’, American Economic Review
108(10), 2947–94.
Cheng, Ing-Haw, Raina, Sahil and Xiong, Wei. (2014). ‘Wall Street and the Housing Bubble’,
American Economic Review 104(9), 2797–2829.
Chinco, Alex and Mayer, Christopher. (2015). ‘Misinformed Speculators and Mispricing in
the Housing Market’, Review of Financial Studies 29(2), 486–522.
Choi, Hyun-Soo, Hong, Harrison G. and Scheinkman, José. (2014). ‘Speculating on Home
Improvements’, Journal of Financial Economics 111(3), 609–624.
Clayton, Jim, Miller, Norman and Peng, Liang. (2010). ‘Price-volume Correlation in the
Housing Market: Causality and Co-movements’, Journal of Real Estate Finance and Economics
40(1), 14–40.
Cochrane, John H. (2002). ‘Stocks as Money: Convenience Yield and the Tech-Stock Bubble’.
Working Paper.
Cochrane, John H. (2011). ‘Discount Rates’, Journal of Finance 66, 1047–1108.
Cutler, David M., Poterba, James M. and Summers, Lawrence H. (1990). ‘Speculative
Dynamics and the Role of Feedback Traders’, American Economic Review, Papers and Proceedings 80(2), 63–68.
Cutler, David M., Poterba, James M. and Summers, Lawrence H. (1991). ‘Speculative
Dynamics’, Review of Economic Studies 58(3), 529–546.
Dávila, Eduardo. (2015). ‘Optimal Financial Transactions Taxes’. Working Paper, NYU Stern.
De Long, J. Bradford, Shleifer, Andrei, Summers, Lawrence H. and Waldmann,
Robert J. (1990). ‘Positive Feedback Investment Strategies and Destabilizing Rational Speculation’, Journal of Finance 45(2), 379–395.
Dı́az, Antonia and Jerez, Belén. (2013). ‘House Prices, Sales, and Time on the Market: A
Search-Theoretic Framework’, International Economic Review 54(3), 837–872.
Di Maggio, Marco and Kermani, Amir. (2017). ‘Credit-Induced Boom and Bust’, The Review
of Financial Studies 30(11), 3711–3758.
Edelstein, Robert and Qian, Wenlan. (2014). ‘Short-Term Buyers and Housing Market Dynamics’, Journal of Real Estate Finance and Economics 49, 654–689.
Favara, Giovanni and Imbs, Jean. (2015). ‘Credit Supply and the Price of Housing’, American
Economic Review 105(3), 958–992.

40

Foote, Christopher L., Gerardi, Kristopher S. and Willen, Paul S. (2012). ‘Why Did So
Many People Make So Many Ex Post Bad Decisions? The Causes of the Foreclosure Crisis’,
Federal Reserve Bank of Boston Public Policy Discussion Papers 12(2).
Frankel, Jeffrey A. and Froot, Kenneth A. (1986). ‘Understanding the U.S. Dollar in the
Eighties: The Expectations of Chartists and Fundamentalists’, Economic Record pp. 24–38.
Gao, Zhenyu, Sockin, Michael and Xiong, Wei. (2019). ‘Economic Consequences of Housing
Speculation’. NBER Working Paper 26457.
Genesove, David and Mayer, Christopher. (2001). ‘Loss Aversion and Seller Behavior: Evidence from the Housing Market’, Quarterly Journal of Economics 116(4), 1233–1260.
Genesove, David and Mayer, Christopher J. (1997). ‘Equity and Time to Sale in the Real
Estate Market’, American Economic Review pp. 255–269.
Glaeser, Edward L. (2013). ‘A Nation of Gamblers: Real Estate Speculation and American
History’, American Economic Review 103(3), 1–42.
Glaeser, Edward L. and Nathanson, Charles G. (2017). ‘An extrapolative model of house
price dynamics’, Journal of Financial Economics 126(1), 147 – 170.
Griffin, John M, Kruger, Samuel and Maturana, Gonzalo. (2020). ‘What drove the 2003–
2006 house price boom and subsequent collapse? Disentangling competing explanations’, Journal
of Financial Economics .
Griffin, John M., Nardari, Federico and Stulz, René M. (2007). ‘Do Investors Trade More
When Stocks Have Performed Well? Evidence from 46 Countries’, Review of Financial Studies
20(3), 905–951.
Guren, Adam. (2014), The Causes and Consequences of House Price Momentum. Working paper,
Harvard University.
Guren, Adam. (2018). ‘House Price Momentum and Strategic Complementarity’, Journal of
Political Economy 126(3), 1172–1218.
Guren, Adam M and McQuade, Timothy J. (2020). ‘How Do Foreclosures Exacerbate
Housing Downturns?’, Review of Economic Studies 87(3), 1331–1364.
Han, Lu and Strange, William C. (2015), The Microstructure of Housing Markets: Search,
Bargaining, and Brokerage, in Gilles Duranton, J. Vernon Henderson and William C.
Strange., eds, ‘Handbook of Regional and Urban Economics’, Vol. 5B, Elsevier, chapter 13,
pp. 813–886.
Harrison, J. Michael and Kreps, David M. (1978). ‘Speculative Investor Behavior in a Stock
Market with Heterogeneous Expectations’, Quarterly Journal of Economics 92(2), 323–336.
Haughwout, Andrew, Lee, Donghoon, Tracy, Joseph and van der Klaauw, Wilbert.
(2011). ‘Real Estate Investors, the Leverage Cycle, and the Housing Market Crisis’. Federal
Reserve Bank of New York Staff Report no. 514.

41

Head, Allen, Lloyd-Ellis, Huw and Sun, Hongfei. (2014). ‘Search, Liquidity, and the Dynamics of House Prices and Construction’, American Economic Review 104(4), 1172–1210.
Hedlund, Aaron. (2016). ‘The Cyclical Dynamics of Illiquid Housing, Debt, and Foreclosures’,
Quantitative Economics 7, 289–328.
Hong, Harrison and Stein, Jeremy C. (1999). ‘A Unified Theory of Underreaction, Momentum
Trading, and Overreaction in Asset Markets’, Journal of Finance 54(6), 2143–2184.
Jones, Charles M. (2002). ‘A Century of Stock Market Liquidity and Trading Costs’. Working
Paper.
Lee, Charles and Swaminathan, Bhaskaran. (2000). ‘Price Momentum and Trading Volume’,
Journal of Finance 55(5), 2017–2069.
Leung, Charles K. Y., Lau, Garrion C. K. and Leong, Youngman C. F. (2002). ‘Testing
Alternative Theories of the Property Price-Trading Volume Correlation’, Journal of Real Estate
Research 23(3), 253–264.
Liao, Jingchi and Peng, Cameron. (2018), Price and Volume Dynamics in Bubbles. Working
Paper.
Mayer, Christopher. (2011). ‘Housing Bubbles: A Survey’, Annual Review of Economics 3, 559–
577.
Mayer, Christopher, Pence, Karen and Sherlund, Shane M. (2009). ‘The Rise in Mortgage
Defaults’, Journal of Economic Perspectives 23(1), 27–50.
Mian, Atif, Rao, Kamalesh and Sufi, Amir. (2013). ‘Household Balance Sheets, Consumption,
and the Economic Slump’, Quarterly Journal of Economics 128(4), 1687–1726.
Mian, Atif and Sufi, Amir. (2019), Credit supply and housing speculation, Technical report.
NBER Working Paper 24823.
Mian, Atif, Sufi, Amir and Trebbi, Francesco. (2015). ‘Foreclosures, House Prices, and the
Real Economy’, Journal of Finance 70(6), 2587–2634.
Nathanson, Charles G. and Zwick, Eric. (2018). ‘Arrested Development: Theory and Evidence
of Supply-Side Speculation in the Housing Market’, Journal of Finance 73(6), 2587–2633.
Ngai, L. Rachel and Sheedy, Kevin D. (2016). ‘The Decision to Move House and Aggregate
Housing-Market Dynamics’. Working Paper.
Ofek, Eli and Richardson, Matthew. (2003). ‘Dotcom Mania: The Rise and Fall of Internet
Stock Prices’, Journal of Finance 58(3), 1113–1137.
Ortalo-Magné, François and Rady, Sven. (2006). ‘Housing Market Dynamics: On the Contribution of Income Shocks and Credit Constraints’, Review of Economic Studies 73(2), 459–485.
Penasse, Julien and Renneboog, Luc. (2016), Bubbles and Trading Frenzies: Evidence from
the Art Market. Working Paper.

42

Piazzesi, Monika and Schneider, Martin. (2009). ‘Momentum Traders in the Housing Market:
Survey Evidence and a Search Model’, American Economic Review 99(2), 406–411.
Piskorski, Tomasz and Seru, Amit. (2018), Debt Relief and Slow Recovery: A Decade after
Lehman, Working Paper 25403, National Bureau of Economic Research.
Rajan, Raghuram and Ramcharan, Rodney. (2015). ‘The Anatomy of a Credit Crisis: The
Boom and Bust in Farm Land Prices in The United States in the 1920s’, American Economic
Review 105(4), 1439–1477.
Rognlie, Matthew, Shleifer, Andrei and Simsek, Alp. (2017). ‘Investment Hangover and
the Great Recession’, American Economic Journal: Macroeconomics 10(2), 113–53.
Rouwenhorst, K. Geert. (1995), Asset Pricing Implications of Equilibrium Business Cycle Models, in Thomas F. Cooley., ed., ‘Frontiers of Business Cycle Research’, Princeton University
Press, Princeton, NJ, pp. 294–330.
Scheinkman, Jose A. and Xiong, Wei. (2003). ‘Overconfidence and Speculative Bubbles’,
Journal of Political Economy 111(6), 1183–1220.
Smith, Vernon L., Suchanek, Gerry L. and Williams, Arlington W. (1988). ‘Bubbles,
Crashes, and Endogenous Expectations in Experimental Spot Asset Markets’, Econometrica
56(5), 1119–1151.
Statman, Meir, Thorley, Steven and Vorkink, Keith. (2006). ‘Investor Overconfidence and
Trading Volume’, Review of Financial Studies 19(4), 1531–1565.
Stein, Jeremy C. (1995). ‘Prices and Trading Volume in the Housing Market: A Model with
Down-Payment Effects’, Quarterly Journal of Economics 110(2), 379–406.
Stiglitz, Joseph E. (1989). ‘Using Tax Policy To Curb Speculative Short-Term Trading’, Journal
of Financial Services Research 3, 101–115.
Summers, Lawrence H. and Summers, Victoria P. (1989). ‘When Financial Markets Work
Too Well: A Cautious Case For a Securities Transaction Tax’, Journal of Financial Services
Research 3, 261–286.
Tobin, James. (1978). ‘A Proposal for International Monetary Reform’, Eastern Economic Journal 4(3), 153–159.
Wheaton, William C. (1990). ‘Vacancy, Search, and Prices in a Housing Market Matching
Model’, Journal of Political Economy 98(6), 1270–1292.

43

Prices

100

CoreLogic Price Index
125
150
175

Volume

50
75
100
125
150
Monthly Transaction Volume (Relative to 2000, %)

200

FIGURE 1
The Dynamics of Prices and Volume
Panel A. National

2001m1

2003m1

2005m1

2007m1

Panel B. Phoenix, AZ

2005m1

2007m1

2009m1

20
60
100
140
180
220
Monthly Transaction Volume (Relative to Mean in 2000, %)

100

140

CoreLogic Price Index
180
220

260

300

20
60
100
140
180
220
Monthly Transaction Volume (Relative to Mean in 2000, %)

300
260
CoreLogic Price Index
140
180
220

2003m1

2011m1

2001m1

2005m1

2007m1

2009m1

2005m1

2007m1

2009m1

2011m1

20
60
100
140
180
220
Monthly Transaction Volume (Relative to Mean in 2000, %)

300
260
CoreLogic Price Index
180
220
140
100

300
260
CoreLogic Price Index
180
220
140
100

2003m1

2003m1

Panel E. Bakersfield, CA
20
60
100
140
180
220
Monthly Transaction Volume (Relative to Mean in 2000, %)

Panel D. Orlando, FL

2001m1

2011m1

Panel C. Las Vegas, NV

100

2001m1

2009m1

2011m1

2001m1

2003m1

2005m1

2007m1

2009m1

2011m1

Notes: This figure displays the dynamic relation between prices and volume in the U.S. housing market
between 2000 and 2011. Panel A plots monthly prices and sales volume at the aggregate level. Panels B
through E plot analogous series for a set of cities that represent regions with the largest boom–bust cycles
during this time: Phoenix, AZ; Las Vegas, NV; Orlando, FL; and Bakersfield, CA. Monthly price index
information comes from CoreLogic and monthly sales volume is based on aggregated transaction data from
CoreLogic for 115 MSAs representing 48% of the U.S. housing stock. We apply a calendar-month seasonal
adjustment for volume. Shaded regions denote the quiet, defined as the period between the peak of volume
and the last peak of prices before their pronounced decline.

44

FIGURE 2
The Lead–Lag Relationship between Prices and Volume
1

Correlation

.5

0

-.5
-12

0

12
24
Volume Lag (Months)

36

48

Notes: This figure shows that the correlation between prices and lagged volume is robust across MSAs and
maximized at a positive lag of 24 months. We regress the demeaned log of prices on seasonally adjusted
lagged volume divided by the 2000 housing stock following equation (1) for each lag from -12 months to
48 months and plot the implied correlation and its 95% confidence interval calculated using standard errors
that are clustered by month. The implied correlation equals βτ std(vi,t−τ )/ std(pi,t ), where vi,t−τ and pi,t
are the demeaned regressors.

45

125
150
175
200
Monthly Inventory (Relative to 2000, %)

CoreLogic Price Index
125
150
175

200

FIGURE 3
The Dynamics of Prices and Inventories
Panel A. National

Prices

2001m1

2003m1

100

100

Inventories
2005m1

2007m1

2003m1

2005m1

2007m1

2009m1

120
200
280
360
440
Monthly Inventory (Relative to Mean in 2001, %)

300
260
CoreLogic Price Index
180
220
140

2011m1

40

40

100

300
260
CoreLogic Price Index
180
220
140
100

2001m1

2001m1

2007m1

2009m1

2007m1

2009m1

2011m1

120
200
280
360
440
Monthly Inventory (Relative to Mean in 2001, %)

300
260
CoreLogic Price Index
180
220
140

2011m1

40

40
2005m1

2005m1

100

260
CoreLogic Price Index
180
220
140
100

2003m1

2003m1

Panel E. Bakersfield, CA
120
200
280
360
440
Monthly Inventory (Relative to Mean in 2001, %)

300

Panel D. Daytona Beach, FL

2001m1

2011m1

Panel C. Reno, NV
120
200
280
360
440
Monthly Inventory (Relative to Mean in 2001, %)

Panel B. Phoenix, AZ

2009m1

2001m1

2003m1

2005m1

2007m1

2009m1

2011m1

Notes: This figure displays the dynamic relation between prices and inventory in the U.S. housing market
between 2000 and 2011. Panel A plots monthly prices and the inventory of listings at the aggregate level.
Panels B through E plot analogous series for a set of cities that represent regions with the largest boom–
bust cycles during this time: Phoenix, AZ; Reno, NV; Daytona Beach, FL; and Bakersfield, CA. Aggregate
inventory information comes from the National Association of Realtors, which are available starting in 2000.
Our MSA-level inventory data are available for these cities starting in 2001. Monthly price index information
comes from CoreLogic and monthly inventory by MSA is based on aggregated data from CoreLogic for 57 of
the 115 MSAs in our main sample for which listings data are available. We apply a calendar-month seasonal
adjustment for inventories. Shaded regions denote the quiet, defined as the period between the peak of
volume and the last peak of prices before their pronounced decline.

46

250%
200%
150%

2000

2005

2010

ShortS1
ExistingS1
TotalS1
Non-OccupantS2
TotalS2

510
2,130
2,730
510
2,310

940
2,880
3,820
1,030
3,290

150
930
1,150
290
990

50%

100%

Volume (000s)

0%

Monthly Volume Relative to Average Volume in 2000

FIGURE 4
Normalized Aggregate Volume by Transaction Type

2001m1

2003m1

2005m1

Short-Holding-Period Volume
Non-Occupant Volume

2007m1

2009m1

2011m1

Total Volume (Excluding New Construction)
Total Volume (Including New Construction)

Notes: This figure plots monthly aggregate time series for total transaction volume (navy triangles), total volume excluding new construction (blue circles), short-holding-period volume (red squares), and non-occupant
volume (orange diamonds) between 2000 and 2011. All series exclude foreclosures. The non-occupant volume
series only includes observations from the 102 MSAs for which we can consistently identify these transactions; the other series include observations for all 115 MSAs. Each series is separately normalized relative
to its average value in the year 2000 and seasonally adjusted by removing calendar-month fixed effects. For
reference, the raw counts of each type of transaction in the years 2000, 2005, and 2010 are reported in the
upper right corner of the figure. In the table, S1 refers to the short-holding-period sample of 115 MSAs and
S2 refers to the non-occupant sample of 102 MSAs.

47

FIGURE 5
Short-Holding-Period, Non-Occupant, and Total Volume Growth Across MSAs

50%

100%

150%

200%

600%
400%
200%

Percent Change in Volume by Group

0%

0%

600%
400%
200%
0%

Percent Change in Volume by Group

800%

Panel B. Total Volume Versus
Volume by Occupancy Status

800%

Panel A. Total Volume Versus
Volume by Holding Period

250%

0%

50%

Percent Change in Total Volume
Holding Period ≥ 3 Years

Non-Occupant Buyers

100%

150%

200%

250%

Percent Change in Total Volume
Including New Construction

250%

Occupant Buyers

100% 125%
75%
50%

slope = 0.54

25%

Change in Non-Occupant Volume as a
Percent of Initial Total Volume

100% 125%
75%
25%

50%

slope = 0.36
slope = 0.30

50%

200%

Panel D. Role of Non-Occupant Volume
in Total Volume Growth

0%

Change in Short-Holding-Period Volume as a
Percent of Initial Total Volume

Panel C. Role of Short Volume
in Total Volume Growth

0%

150%

0%

Holding Period < 3 Years

100%

Percent Change in Total Volume

0%

50%

100%

150%

200%

250%

Percent Change in Total Volume

Excluding New Construction

Notes: This figure illustrates the quantitative importance of short-holding-period and non-occupant volume
in accounting for the increase in total volume across MSAs between 2000 and 2005. The top two panels
present MSA-level scatter plots of the percent change in total volume from 2000 to 2005 versus the percent
change in volume for short and long holding periods (Panel A) and the percent change in volume for occupant
and non-occupant buyers (Panel B). The bottom two panels show that the growth in short-holding-period
and non-occupant volume were quantitatively important components of the growth in total volume across
MSAs. For each MSA, we plot the change in short-holding-period volume (Panel C) and non-occupant
volume (Panel D) divided by initial total volume on the y-axis against the percent change in total volume on
the x-axis. Because short-holding-period volume is based on the holding period of the seller and therefore
cannot, by definition, include sales of newly constructed homes, Panel C also includes a version of the scatter
plot that excludes new construction from total volume for reference.

48

250%
200%

2003

2007

2010

Short
Total

280
1,170

590
1,730

170
1,380

50%

100%

150%

Listings (000s)

0%

Monthly Listings Relative to Average Listings in 2003

FIGURE 6
The Flow of Listings for Short-Holding-Period Buyers

2003m1

2005m1

2007m1
Short-Holding-Period Listings

2009m1

2011m1

Total Listings

Notes: This figure illustrates the time variation in propensities to list among recent buyers versus all buyers
between 2000 and 2011 in the U.S. We link listings micro data to transaction data at the property level to
identify short-holding-period listings. We plot monthly aggregate time series for total listings (blue circles)
and short-holding-period listings (red squares), defined as a listing where the previous sale occurred within
the past three years. The series include observations for the 57 MSAs in our listings sample. Each series
is separately normalized relative to its average value in the year 2003 and seasonally adjusted by removing
calendar-month fixed effects. For reference, the raw counts of each type of listing in the years 2003, 2007,
and 2010 are also reported in the upper right corner of the figure.

49

FIGURE 7
Expected Holding Times of Homebuyers, 2008–2015
Panel A. Response Heterogeneity by Property Type

Response Frequency

40%

Investment Properties
Non-Investment Properties

30%

20%

10%

0%

[0,1)

[1,3)
[3,6)
[6,11)
[11,Inf)
Years Buyer Plans to Own Property

Don't know

Panel B. Short-Term Buyers and Recent House Price Growth
.3

Short-Term Buyer Share

2013

2014

.25
2015
2008

.2

2011

2012

2010

.15
2009

.1
-.1

-.05

0
Annual House Price Growth

.05

.1

Notes: This figure presents evidence on heterogeneity in expected holding times among recent homebuyers
and the correlation between expected holding times and recent price changes from the National Association
of Realtors’ Investment and Vacation Home Buyers Survey. Panel A plots the response frequency averaged
equally over each survey year from 2008 to 2015. In Panel B, “annual house price growth” equals the average
across that year’s four quarters of the log change in the all-transactions FHFA U.S. house price index from
four quarters ago, and “short-term buyer share” equals the share of respondents other than those reporting
“don’t know” who report an expected horizon of less than three years. We reclassify buyers who have already
sold their properties by the time of the survey as having an expected holding time in [0,1). We use the FHFA
index here because, unlike the CoreLogic indices used elsewhere in the paper, the FHFA house price index
covers the period 2015–2016.

50

.05

FIGURE 8
Buying Cutoffs for Different Expected Growth Rates

λ = 0.50
λ = 0.17
λ = 0.05

.03

λ = 0.01

.01

.02

Buyer Cutoff

.04

λ = 0.03

-.02

-.01

0

.01

.02

Expected Growth Rate

Notes: The buying cutoff, κλn (ĝt ), determines how large a potential buyer’s flow utility must be relative to
the price of a house for her to decide to buy. It depends on the potential buyer’s quarterly moving hazard,
λ, her occupancy type, n, and the current expected quarterly growth rate of the demand process, ĝt . We
plot values of these functions for the λ values in our calibration, which appear in the legend. Solid lines
correspond to occupants (n = 1); dashed lines correspond to non-occupants (n = 0). The horizontal grey
dashed line gives κ, which agents mistakenly believe is the time-invariant buying cutoff for other potential
buyers.

51

FIGURE 9
Impulse Responses

.005
0
-.005
-.01
-.015

0

10

20

30

.16

.16

.16

Panel D. Volume By Occupancy
Non-Occupant

50

.12
.08

.12

.04

.08

0

.04

-.04

0

-.08

-.08

40

-.12

30

-.04

.08
.04
0
-.04

20

-.08

10

-.12

0

10

20

30

50

Panel E. Pr(Sale | Listing)

Panel F. New Listings by Holding Period
.06

40

50

Quarter

.12
.08
.04
0
-.04
-.08

Log Deviation from Initial Value

.12
.08
.04
0

0

10

20

30

40

50

-.12

30

-.12

20

-.04

Log Deviation from Initial Value

-.08

.04
.02
0
-.04

-.02

All Holding Periods

Log Deviation from Initial Value

.06
.04
.02
0
-.02

10

Short Holding-Period

.16

Quarter

-.04

0

40

Quarter

.16

0

Log Deviation from Initial Value

.12

Occupant

Log Deviation from Initial Value

.12
.08
.04
0
-.04
-.12

-.08

Log Deviation from Initial Value

50

Panel C. Volume by Holding Period
Long Holding-Period

Log Deviation from Initial Value

40

Quarter

Short Holding-Period

Log Deviation from Initial Value

.01
.005
0
-.005
-.01

Log Deviation from Initial Value

-.015

50

-.02

40

.16

30

Quarter

Log Deviation from Initial Value

20

-.12

10

-.02

0

.01

.015

.06
-.04

-.02

.05

0

.02

.1

.04

Volume

.015

Panel B. Inventory of Listings
Log Deviation from Initial Value (Volume)

Prices

0

Log Deviation from Initial Value (Prices)

.15

Panel A. Prices and Volume

Quarter

Notes: Impulse responses are average differences between log outcomes in control simulations and treatment
simulations, in which a 2-standard-deviation shock to gt (the demand growth innovation) occurs in quarters
0 through 3. The shaded grey area denotes the beginning and end of the quiet. A short holding period is
defined as less than or equal to 12 quarters and a long holding period is defined as greater than 12 quarters.

52

FIGURE 10
The Joint Dynamics of Prices and Volume

1997m1

1999m1

2001m1

2003m1

2005m1

1985m1

40000
1989m1

1991m1

1993m1

10000
20000
30000
Aggregate Volume (Millions of Shares)
1995m1

Prices

Volume

2

-2

1

4
6
8
Average Transaction Volume

Deviation from Fundamental Price
-1
0
1

1987m1

Panel D. Art Market (1985–1995)
Aggregate Price (Normalized to 1980 Value)
1
1.5
2
2.5

Prices

10

2

Panel C. Experimental Markets, SSW (1988)
Volume

Prices

1.2
1.4
1.6
1.8
Aggregate Volume (Normalized to 1980 Value)

.2

0
1995m1

Volume

0

Aggregate Closing Value (Billions Yen)
200000
300000
400000
500000
600000

Prices

Volume

Panel B. Japan Equities (1985–1995)

.4
.6
.8
1
1.2
Value-Weighted Average Monthly Turnover

Aggregate Dotcom Closing Value ($ Billions)
500
1000
1500

Panel A. U.S. Equities, Tech (1995–2005)

0

3

6

9

12

1985

15

1990
Year

1995

Notes: These figures display the dynamic relation between prices and transaction volume for four distinct
bubble episodes: the 1995–2005 market in technology stocks (Panel A), the 1985–1995 Japanese stock market
(Panel B), the bubbles in experimental asset markets (Panel C), and the 1985–1995 bubble in the Postwar
art market (Panel D). Panel A data come from CRSP and cover the Dotcom sample in Ofek and Richardson
(2003). For prices, we plot aggregate Dotcom market capitalization. For volume, we plot average monthly
turnover (shares traded/shares outstanding), weighted by market cap. Panel B data come from the Tokyo
stock exchange online archive and cover all first- and second-tier (i.e., large and micro-cap) stocks. For
volume, we plot total shares traded per month (shares-outstanding data are not available). For prices, we
plot aggregate market capitalization. Panel C data were manually entered from the published Smith et al.
(1988) manuscript and cover all eight experiments that include a price boom and bust (IDs are 16, 17, 18,
26, 124xxf, 39xsf, 41f, 36xx). For prices, we plot average deviations from fundamental value. For volume,
we plot the average number of trades. Panel D data come from Figure 1 of the working paper version of
Penasse and Renneboog (2016) and cover aggregate art prices and transaction volume from auction houses
for paintings and works on paper for more than 10,000 artists.

53

TABLE 1
All-Cash Buyer Shares
MSA-Level

Transaction-Level
All Months

All Months

Boom

Quiet

Bust

Short Buyers

0.29

0.38
(0.21)

0.29
(0.16)

0.28
(0.17)

0.52
(0.20)

Non-Occupant Buyers

0.38

0.41
(0.18)

0.36
(0.15)

0.32
(0.14)

0.50
(0.18)

All Buyers

0.20

0.25
(0.16)

0.22
(0.15)

0.20
(0.14)

0.30
(0.16)

Notes: This table presents statistics on the share of buyers of various types who purchased their homes
without the use of a mortgage (“all-cash buyers”). In column 1, the all-cash buyer share is measured at the
transaction level and includes all transactions recorded between January 2000 and December of 2011 from the
CoreLogic deeds records described in Section 2.1. The first row includes only transactions by homebuyers
who are observed to have sold the home within three years of purchase. The second row includes only
non-occupant buyers. The third row includes all buyers. In columns 2–5, all-cash buyer shares are first
calculated at the MSA-by-month level and then averaged across MSA-months within a given time period.
The standard deviation of these MSA-month means is reported in parentheses for reference. Column 2
includes all MSA-months between January 2000 and December 2011. Column 3 includes only MSA-months
between January 2000 and August 2005. Column 4 includes only MSA-months between August 2005 and
December 2006. Column 5 includes only MSA-months between December 2006 and December 2011. All
statistics are calculated in the full sample of 115 MSAs with the exception of those for non-occupants, which
are calculated in the sample of 102 MSAs with valid non-occupancy data.

54

TABLE 2
Speculative Booms and Housing Market Outcomes
Panel A. MSA-Level Prices
Price Boom
Short-Volume Boom

1.930***
(0.297)

Non-Occupant Volume Boom
Number of Observations
R-squared

Price Bust
-0.571***
(0.083)

0.570***
(0.173)

3.104***
(0.564)
-0.714**
(0.279)

102
0.098

102
0.309

115
0.293

115
0.272

-0.166***
(0.049)

-0.898***
(0.158)
0.206***
(0.078)

102
0.103

102
0.323

Panel B. MSA-Level Inventories
∆ Listings Boom
Short-Volume Boom

-1.133
(1.027)

Non-Occupant Volume Boom
Number of Observations
R-squared

∆ Listings Quiet
5.961***
(1.353)

-0.070
(0.505)

-1.564
(1.956)
0.545
(0.922)

48
0.000

48
0.014

57
0.261

57
0.022

2.645***
(0.718)

7.022***
(2.593)
-0.119
(1.222)

48
0.228

48
0.336

Panel C. MSA-Level Volume Quiet and Bust
∆ Volume Quiet + Bust
Short-Volume Boom

-1.047***
(0.096)

Non-Occupant Volume Boom
Number of Observations
R-squared

115
0.515

-0.663***
(0.177)
-0.512*** -0.237***
(0.051)
(0.087)
102
0.505

102
0.567

Foreclosures Bust
0.895**
(0.398)

115
0.043

-0.060
(0.215)

2.863***
(0.746)
-1.245***
(0.368)

102
0.001

102
0.130

Notes: This table reports estimates of the relation between speculative volume and housing cycle measures at
the MSA level. Short-Volume Boom has a mean of 16.0% and a standard deviation of 12.9%. Non-Occupant
Volume Boom has a mean of 29.3% and a standard deviation of 27.1%. ∆ Volume Quiet + Bust is defined
as the change in total volume from 2005 through 2011. ∆ Listings Boom is defined as the change in total
listings from 2003 through 2005. ∆ Listings Quiet is defined as the change in total listings from 2005 through
2007. Foreclosures Bust is defined as total foreclosures from 2007 through 2011. Price Boom is defined as
the change in prices from 2000 through 2006. Price Bust is defined as the change in prices from 2006 through
2011. To aid interpretation of these relations, we scale the change in outcomes for all quantity measures
relative to total volume in 2003 and multiply by 100. Table IA1 presents summary statistics for each sample.
Significance levels 10%, 5%, and 1% are denoted by *, **, and ***, respectively.

55

TABLE 3
House Price Appreciation and Speculative Buyer Shares (Monthly Panel VAR)
House Price Appreciation Rate
Lagged Price Appreciation

0.375*** 0.387***
(0.026)
(0.027)
Lagged Short-Buyer Share
0.021***
(0.005)
Lagged Non-Occupant Share
0.009
(0.008)

0.372***
(0.026)
0.023***
(0.005)
0.006
(0.006)

Short-Buyer Share
Lagged Price Appreciation
Lagged Short-Buyer Share

0.163***
(0.048)
0.780***
(0.024)

0.162***
(0.048)
0.781***
(0.023)
0.001
0.017

Lagged Non-Occupant Share

Non-Occupant Share
Lagged Price Appreciation

0.124***
(0.044)

0.172***
(0.045)
-0.071***
(0.016)
0.892*** 0.900***
(0.025)
(0.021)

Lagged Short-Buyer Share
Lagged Non-Occupant Share

Notes: This table presents estimates from MSA-by-month panel vector autoregressions (pVARs) describing
the relation between house price growth and the share of purchases made by non-occupant buyers and “short
buyers,” defined as buyers who will sell within three years of purchase. The left-hand-side variables are house
price appreciation from t − 1 to t, the short-buyer share of total volume in t, and the non-occupant share of
total volume in t. The right-hand-side variables are lagged versions of these variables. The sample includes
8,568 observations for 102 MSAs for which we can consistently identify non-occupant buyers. House price
appreciation has a mean of 0.84% and a standard deviation of 1.32%. Short-buyer share has a mean of 21.0%
and a standard deviation of 5.5%. Non-occupant share has a mean of 32.8% and a standard deviation of
18.9%. Column (1) includes only house price appreciation and the short-buyer share. Column (2) includes
only house price appreciation and the non-occupant share. Column (3) includes both speculative volume
measures. The sample period includes the boom and quiet, which runs from January 2000 through December
2006. Regressions include MSA and month fixed effects and thus report the average autoregressive relations
within MSAs over time. We seasonally adjust house prices by removing MSA-by-calendar-month fixed effects
before computing house price growth. Standard errors are clustered at the MSA level.

56

TABLE 4
The Speculative Share of Total Volume in the Boom

Panel A. Accounting Regressions
OLS: Volume Boom
Short-Volume Boom

2.30
(0.11)

Non-Occupant Volume Boom

2.67
(0.12)
1.25
(0.08)

MSA-level
ZIP-level (MSA Effects)

X

Number of Observations
R-squared

115
0.78

IV: Volume Boom
2.28
(0.18)

2.84
(0.46)

1.74
(0.11)

X

X
X

X

102
0.69

6826
0.67

5662
0.66

0.093
0.041
55

0.268
0.020
20

0.289
0.057
34

X
102
0.79

6826
0.60

Panel B. Variance Decomposition
Variance of LHS
Variance of RHS
Contribution to Boom (%)

0.083
0.012
33

Notes: This table presents regressions at the MSA and ZIP levels of the percentage change in total volume
from 2000 to 2005 on the change in short-holding-period volume or the change in non-occupant volume from
2000 to 2005 relative to total volume in 2000. Panel A presents OLS regressions and IV regressions, where
the short-volume boom is instrumented with demographic data from the 2000 Census 5% microdata. The
instruments are the share of recent buyers under 35 and the share of recent buyers aged 65 or older. The
ZIP-level regression is estimated with MSA fixed effects and with standard errors clustered at the MSA level.
Census microdata was not available for 13 MSAs in our sample, hence the lower sample count in column 5.
See Table IA4 for first-stage regressions. The F-statistics in the MSA-level and ZIP-level (Kleibergen-Paap
Wald F-statistic reflecting MSA-level clustering) regressions are 40 and 8, respectively. Panel B presents the
inputs needed to interpret the Panel A regressions in terms of a variance decomposition that matches the
plots in Figure 5.

57

TABLE 5
Inputs into model calibration

Parameter or target

Value

Source

Panel A: Assumed parameters
r (non-mover discount rate)
Potential λ values
ρ (demand growth persistence)

0.012
{0.50, 0.17, 0.05, 0.03, 0.01}
0.880

Guren (2018)
Figure 7
GN (2017)

Panel B: Steady-state targets
Occupant buyer shares
Non-occupant buyer shares
Annual volatility of demand growth
Quarterly selling hazard
Mean demand error
Mean demand growth

(0.06, 0.07, 0.16, 0.16, 0.34)
(0.04, 0.03, 0.04, 0.04, 0.06)
0.023
0.75
0
0

Figure 7
Figure 7
GN (2017)
Guren (2018)
Model
Model

Panel C: Cycle targets
Price overshoot
Volume boom/price boom
Non-occupant boom/occupant boom

2.3
0.4
3.1

Figure 1
Figure 1
Figure 4

Notes: This table reports parameters that we assume in the calibration, as well as targets we use to determine
the remaining parameters. In the model, we target the mean buyer shares, quarterly selling hazard, and
demand error across all analysis periods in control simulations. We theoretically derive the annual volatility
of demand growth as well as the mean demand growth as functions of parameters. Price overshoot is the
ratio of log price growth from the beginning to peak to log price growth from the beginning to the trough
after the peak. Volume boom/price boom is the ratio of log existing volume growth from the beginning
to the peak of volume (2000 to 2005, using numbers from Figure 4) to aforementioned log price growth.
Non-occupant boom/occupant boom is the ratio of each category of log volume growth from 2000 to 2005
in the sample of MSAs we use for non-occupant analysis. In the model, we use quarterly minimums and
maximums instead of aggregating at the year level. We match all targets to within rounding. GN (2017)
denotes Glaeser and Nathanson (2017).

58

TABLE 6
Outputs from model calibration

Parameter or outcome

Interpretation

Value

Panel A: Derived parameters
σa
µ1
γ
κ
σ
µ
rm
β0λ
β1λ

Flow utility dispersion
Occupant premium
g variance share
Cap rate error
Demand volatility
Mean demand growth
Mover discount rate
Non-occupant shares
Occupant shares

0.066
0.009
0.070
0.029
0.011
−0.000
0.141
(0.143, 0.022, 0.030, 0.030, 0.045)
(0.185, 0.052, 0.119, 0.119, 0.254)

Panel B: Steady-state outcomes
1-year extrapolation
–
2–5-year extrapolation –

0.127
0.042

Notes: See text for definitions of parameters in Panel A. We find these values by searching for parameters
such that moments from the model match targets in Table 5. Panel B reports regression coefficients of
annualized price growth in the next year and between 2 and 5 years from now on last year’s price growth.
We run these regressions across control simulations at the beginning of the analysis period.

59

TABLE 7
Model counterfactuals
All long-term buyers
Outcome
Price boom
Price bust
Volume boom
Listings, end of boom
Listings, end of quiet
Short volume boom
Non-occupant volume boom
Sale probability boom

All occupants

Baseline

No occupant
adjustment

Occupant
adjustment

No short-term
adjustment

Short-term
adjustment

14.5
−8.2
5.8
−1.3
1.4
14.1
12.3
7.1

8.7
−0.4
2.9
−3.1
0.4
3.4
3.6
6.0

8.7
−0.4
2.9
−3.1
0.4
3.4
3.6
6.0

9.4
−0.6
2.1
−0.2
0.0
6.4
–
2.3

14.6
−8.3
5.8
−1.3
1.4
14.1
–
7.1

Notes: We report 100 times changes in log outcomes between treatment and control simulations. We define
the end of the quiet as the first local maximum in the impulse response of log prices, and we measure the
following outcomes at that time: price boom and listings end of quiet. We define the end of the boom as
the first local maximum in the impulse response of log volume before the end of the quiet, and we measure
the following outcomes at that time: volume boom, listings end of boom, short volume boom, non-occupant
volume boom, and sale probability boom. The price bust is the change from the end of the quiet to the first
local minimum of the impulse response of log prices after the end of the quiet. A two-sided minimum does
not occur in the 48 analysis periods in the fourth column, so we extend the analysis 60 additional periods to
find such a minimum. The counterfactals involve different values of the underlying distribution of potential
buyers, βnλ , that the text describes. We alter κ in each counterfactual to maintain a zero demand error while
keeping other parameters the same. The baseline values correspond to Figure 9.

60

Internet Appendix
A

Data Appendix

To conduct our empirical analysis we make use of a transaction-level data set containing
detailed information on individual home sales taking place throughout the US between 1995
and 2014. The raw data was purchased from CoreLogic and is sourced from publicly available
tax assessment and deeds records maintained by local county governments. In some analyses
we supplement this transaction-level data with additional data on the listing behavior of
individual homeowners. Our listings data is also provided by CoreLogic and is sourced from
a consortium of local Multiple Listing Service (MLS) boards located throughout the country.
Selecting Geographies
To select our sample of transactions, we first focus on a set of counties that have consistent
data coverage going back to 1995 and which, together, constitute a majority of the housing
stock in their respective MSAs. In particular, to be included in our sample a county must
have at least one “arms length” transaction with a non-negative price and non-missing date
in each quarter from 1995q1 to 2014q4.1 Starting with this subset of counties, we then
further drop any MSA for which the counties in this list make up less than 75 percent of
the total owner-occupied housing stock for the MSA as measured by the 2010 Census. This
leaves us with a final set of 250 counties belonging to a total of 115 MSAs. These MSAs are
listed below in Table IA5 along with the percentage of the housing stock that is represented
by the 250 counties for which we have good coverage. Throughout the paper, when we refer
to counts of transactions in an MSA we are referring to the portion of the MSA that is
accounted for by these counties.
Selecting Transactions
Within this set of MSAs, we start with the full sample of all arms length transactions of single
family, condo, or duplex properties and impose the following set of filters to ensure that our
final set of transactions provides an accurate measure of aggregate transaction volume over
the course of the sample period:
1. Drop transactions that are not uniquely identified using CoreLogic’s transaction ID.
2. Drop transactions with non-positive prices.
3. Drop transactions that are recorded by CoreLogic as nominal transfers between banks
or other financial institutions as part of a foreclosure process.
4. Drop transactions that appear to be clear duplicates, identified as follows:
(a) If a set of transactions has an identical buyer, seller, and transaction price but are
recorded on different dates, keep only the earliest recorded transaction in the set.
1

We rely on CoreLogic’s internal transaction-type categorization to determine whether a transaction
occurred at arms length.

1

(b) If the same property transacts multiple times on the same day at the same price
keep only one transaction in the set.
5. If more than 10 transactions between the same buyer and seller at the same price
are recorded on the same day, drop all such transactions. These transactions appear
to be sales of large subdivided plots of vacant land where a separate transaction is
recorded for each individual parcel but the recorded price represents the price of the
entire subdivision.
6. Drop sales of vacant land parcels in MSAs where the CoreLogic data includes such
sales.2 We define a vacant land sale to be any transaction where the sale occurs a year
or more before the property was built.
Table IA6 shows the number of transactions that are dropped from our sample at each stage
of this process as well as the final number of transactions included in our full analysis sample.
Identifying Occupant and Non-Occupant Buyers
We identify non-occupant buyers using differences between the mailing addresses listed by
the buyer on the purchase deed and the actual physical address of the property itself. In
most cases, these differences are identified using the house numbers from each address. In
particular, if both the mailing address and the property address have a non-missing house
number then we tag any instance in which these numbers are not equal as a non-occupant
purchase and any instance in which they are equal as occupant purchases. In cases where
the mailing address property number is missing we also tag buyers as non-occupants if both
the mailing address and property address street names are non-missing and differ from one
another. Typically, this will pick up cases where the mailing address provided by the buyer
is a PO Box. In all other cases, we tag the transaction as having an unknown occupancy
status.
Restricting the Sample for the Non-Occupant Analysis
Our analysis of non-occupant buyers focuses on the growth of the number of purchases by
these individuals between 2000 and 2005. To be sure that this growth is not due to changes
in the way mailing addresses are coded by the counties comprising the MSAs in our sample,
for the non-occupant buyer analysis we keep only MSAs for which we are confident such
changes do not occur between 2000 and 2005. In particular, we first drop any MSA in which
the share of transactions in any one year between 2000 and 2005 with unknown occupancy
status exceeds 0.5. Of the remaining MSAs, we then drop those for which the increase in the
number of non-occupant purchases between any year and the next exceeds 150%, with the
possible base years being those between 2000 and 2005.3 The 102 MSAs that remain after
these two filters are marked with an “x” in columns 3 and 7 of Table IA5.
2

MSAs are flagged as including vacant land sales if more then 5 percent of the sales in the MSA occur
more then two years before the year in which the property was built.
3
This step drops only Chicago-Naperville-Elgin, IL-IN-WI.

2

Restricting the Sample for Listings Analysis
The geographic and time series coverage of the CoreLogic MLS data is not as comprehensive
as the transaction-level data. As a result, our analysis of listings behavior is restricted to a
subset of markets for which we can be relatively certain that the MLS data is representative
of the majority of owner-occupied home sales in the area. We impose several filters to
identify this subset of MSAs. First, starting with the full set of 115 MSAs contained in
the transaction-level data, we drop any MSA for which there is not at least one new listing
in every month and in every county subcomponent of the MSA between January 2000 and
December 2014. Within the remaining set of MSAs we then drop any MSA for which the
number of new listings between 2006 and 2008 is more than 2.5 times the number of new
listings between 2003 and 2005. This filter eliminates MSAs that experience large jumps
in coverage during the quiet. Finally, we also drop any MSA for which the number of sold
listings (from the MLS data) is less than 25 percent of total sales volume (from the transaction
data) over the period 2003-2012. This filter eliminates MSAs for which the listings data is
likely to be unrepresentative of sales activity during our main sample period. This leaves a
final sample of 57 MSAs for our listings analysis. These MSAs are marked with an “x” in
columns 4 and 8 of Table IA5.
Identifying New Construction Sales
In several parts of our analysis we omit new construction sales from the calculation of total
transaction volume. To identify sales of newly constructed homes, we start with the internal
CoreLogic new construction flag and make several modifications to pick up transactions that
may not be captured by this flag. CoreLogic identifies new construction sales primarily using
the name of the seller on the transaction (e.g. “PULTE HOMES” or “ROCKPORT DEV
CORP”), but it is unclear whether their list of home builders is updated dynamically or
maintained consistently across local markets. To ensure consistency, we begin by pulling
the complete list of all seller names that are ever identified with a new construction sale
as defined by CoreLogic. Starting with this list of sellers, we tag any transaction for which
the seller is in this list, the buyer is a human being, and the transaction is not coded as a
foreclosure sale by CoreLogic as a new construction sale. We use the parsing of the buyer
name field to distinguish between human and non-human buyers (e.g. LLCs or financial
institutions). Human buyers have a fully parsed name that is separated into individual first
and name fields whereas non-human buyer’s names are contained entirely within the first
name field.
This approach will identify all new construction sales provided that the seller name is
recognized by CoreLogic as the name of a homebuilder. However, many new construction
sales may be hard to identify simply using the name of the seller. We therefore augment this
definition using information on the date of the transaction and the year that the property
was built. In particular, if a property was not already assigned a new construction sale using
the builder name, then we search for sales of that property that occur within one year of
the year that the property was built and record the earliest of such transactions as a new
construction sale.
Finally, for properties that are not assigned a new construction sale using either of the

3

two above methods, we also look to see if there were any construction loans recorded against
the property in the deeds records. If so, we assign the earliest transaction to have occurred
within three years of the earliest construction loan as a new construction sale. We use a
three-year window to allow for a time lag between the origination of the construction loan
and the actual date that the property was sold. Construction loans are identified using
CoreLogic’s internal deed and mortgage type codes.

B

Mechanical Short-Term Volume

Table IA7 reports the buy-year fixed effects estimates for years 2000 to 2005 relative to
2000. The fixed effects are linear differences of a monthly selling hazard, so multiplying by
12 roughly gives the effect on the annualized selling probability. Therefore, buyers in 2005
have a 3.2 percentage point larger annual selling hazard than buyers in 2000 (12 times 0.0027
equals 0.0324).
We use these estimates to construct counterfactual growth of short-term volume from
2000 to 2005. For each 2000m1 ≤ t0 < t ≤ 2005m12, we construct the counterfactual selling
hazard as


buy
buy
πtc0 ,t = πt0 ,t − α̂y(t
,
0 ) − α̂2000
which subtracts away any increase due to the change in the composition of buyers from 2000
to the year of t0 . We then compute the counterfactual of vt0 ,t , the volume of homes bought
in t0 and sold in t, using the following iterative procedure. Let et0 ,t count homes bought in t0
that have not yet sold by t, and let c superscripts mark counterfactual values. We initialize
counterfactuals with actuals: for each 1995m1 ≤ t0 < 2005m12,
ect0 ,t0 = et0 ,t0
vtc0 ,t0 = vt0 ,t0 .
We then iteratively update the counterfactuals over t running from t0 + 1 to 2005m12:
ect0 ,t = ect0 ,t−1 − vtc0 ,t−1
vtc0 ,t = πtc0 ,t ect0 ,t .
To compute short-term volume in year y, we sum vt0 ,t across all subscripts for which y(t) = y
and 0 < t−t0 < 36; we sum vtc0 ,t across the same indices for counterfactual short-term volume.
The remaining columns of Table IA7 report the results. Between 2000 and 2005, total
volume grows 36.7% and short-term volume grows 77.5% in the actual data. The disproportionate rise in short-term volume is the difference, 40.8%. Counterfactual short-term
volume rises 41.5% between 2000 and 2005, giving a disproportionate rise of 4.8%. Therefore, 4.8%/40.8% = 11.8% of the disproportionate rise in short-term volume remains in the
counterfactual. We attribute the 88.2% that disappeared to the changing composition of
buyers between 2000 and 2005.

4

C
C.1

Omitted Proofs of Mathematical Statements
Proof of Lemma 1

Movers at t believe that they observe dt−j = d˜t−j for all j > 0. Let gt∗ denote the mean of
the posterior on gt−1 from this information, and σl2 its variance. We solve for these outcomes
using standard Kalman filtering. Denote σd2 = (1 − γ)σ 2 and σg2 = γ(1 − ρ2 )σ 2 .
We have gt−1 = gt∗ + ζtg , where ζtg ∼ N (0, σl2 ). Therefore, gt = (1 − ρ)µ + ρgt−1 + gt =
(1 − ρ)µ + ρgt∗ + ρζtg + gt . The prior on gt at t + 1 is thus N ((1 − ρ)µ + ρgt∗ , ρ2 σl2 + σg2 ). The
information is ∆d˜t , which according to movers equals gt + dt . Therefore, the new posterior
variance satisfies σl2 = σd2 (ρ2 σl2 + σg2 )(σd2 + ρ2 σl2 + σg2 )−1 . Solving yields
σl2

2 −1

= (2ρ )



−(1 − ρ

2

)σd2

−

σg2

q

2
2 2
2
2
2
2
+ ((1 − ρ )σd + σg ) + 4ρ σd σg .

∗
= (1 − α)∆d˜t + α((1 − ρ)µ + ρgt∗ ), where α = σd2 /(σd2 +
The new posterior mean satisfies gt+1
2 2
2
ρ σl + σg ). Iterating (and then subtracting one from the time subscripts everywhere) gives

gt∗

= µ + (1 − α)

∞
X

(αρ)

j−1




˜
∆dt−j − µ .

j=1

Because ĝt = (1−ρ)µ+ρgt∗ , we have proved the Lemma formula. We have dt = dt−1 +gt +dt =
(dt−1 − d˜t−1 ) + d˜t−1 + (1 − ρ)µ + ρgt−1 + gt + dt = (dt−1 − d˜t−1 ) + d˜t−1 + ĝt + ρζtg + gt + dt ,
which immediately gives dˆt = d˜t−1 + ĝt , with σ̃ 2 = ρ2 σl2 + σg2 + σd2 .

C.2

Proof of Lemma 2

ˆ
ˆ
Write V m (dˆt , ĝt ) = edt v m (dˆt , ĝt ) and P = edt p. Denote ζt = dt − dˆt . Then π̃(P, dt ) =
1 − F (log p + log κ − ζt ), which we denote π̃(p, ζt ) by abuse of notation. Substituting these
expressions into (7) and using (5) and (6) yield
!
(1−ρ)µ+ρĝt +(1+ρ−αρ)ζt m ˆ
v
(
d
,
ĝ
)
(1
−
π̃(p,
ζ
))e
t
t+1 t+1
, (12)
v m (dˆt , ĝt ) = sup E π̃(p, ζt )p +
1
+
r
p
m

with the expectation over ζt ∼ N (0, σ̃ 2 ). Because dˆt appears only through the first argument
of v m , this function does not depend on dˆt . It follows that the argmax also does not depend
on dˆt . We denote it p(ĝt ).

C.3

Limit of Infinite Mover Impatience

When rm → ∞, p(·) becomes constant, as is clear from the equation for v m . In that case,
E log(Pt+j /Pt ) = E(dˆt+j − dˆt ). From the point of view of movers at t, we can iteratively

5

apply (5) and (6) to obtain

Et log

Pt+j
Pt


= jµ +

ρ(1 − ρ)j
(ĝt − µ) .
1−ρ

Therefore, ĝt proxies for expected future price growth, with ρ controlling the term structure
of future expectations. We can also express ĝt in terms of past price growth. In particular,
making substitutions to (5) gives ĝt+1 = (1−ρ)µ+ρĝt +ρ(1−α)(∆ log Pt+1 −ĝt+1 ). Recursively
expanding this equation and moving back time subscripts gives
∞

ρ(1 − α) X j
ĝt − µ =
ρ (∆ log Pt−j − µ) .
1 + ρ(1 − α) j=0
Therefore, beliefs about future price growth endogenously extrapolate from past price growth,
as in Glaeser and Nathanson (2017). In contrast to that paper, here we allow forward-looking
movers through finite rm , in which case prices become less extrapolative. We choose rm to
match moments in our quantitative exercise.
We can also derive price setting at t + 1 as a function of market data. In particular,
log Pt+1 − log Pt = dˆt+1 − dˆt . From (5) and (6), we know that this difference equals (1 −
ρ)µ + ρdˆt + (1 + ρ(1 − α))(d˜t − dˆt ), and from (4), we have d˜t − dˆt = log κp − F −1 (1 − πt ).
Substituting the equation just derived for ĝt yields
log Pt+1 − log Pt =
µ + (1 + ρ(1 − α)) log κp − F

−1

∞

ρ2 (1 − α) X j
ρ (∆ log Pt−j − µ) .
(1 − πt ) +
1 + ρ(1 − α) j=0

Therefore, movers set list prices as a markup over last period’s price, where the markup
is the sum of three terms: the mean growth rate µ, the information learned from sales
probabilities at t, and a weighted sum of past price growth. This rule closely resembles the
“backward-looking rule of thumb” that Guren (2018) assumes. The formula there, however,
lacks a term corresponding to the one here with πt , as his rule-of-thumb sellers do not adjust
list prices in response to market data other than past prices.

C.4

Proof of Lemma 3

P
j−1
We define Vλs (dˆt , ĝt ) = ∞
(1 + r)−j Et V m (dˆt+1 , ĝt+1 ), where the expectation
j=1 λ(1 − λ)
is conditional on mover information at t. This expression gives the resale value of owning
a house at t for a stayer of type λ conditional on public information. We write this value
recursively as


Vλs (dˆt , ĝt ) = (1 + r)−1 Et (1 − λ)Vλs (dˆt+1 , ĝt+1 ) + λV m (dˆt+1 , ĝt+1 ) .

6

ˆ
We write Vλs (dˆt , ĝt ) = edt vλs (dˆt , ĝt ). Plugging in the result from the proof of Lemma 2 that
ˆ
V m (dˆt , ĝt ) = edt v m (ĝt ), we get



vλs (dˆt , ĝt ) = (1 + r)−1 E e(1−ρ)µ+ρĝt +(1+ρ−αρ)ζt (1 − λ)vλs (dˆt+1 , ĝt+1 ) + λv m (ĝt+1 ) , (13)

with the expectation over ζt ∼ N (0, σ̃ 2 ). Because dˆt enters only vλs , that function does not
ˆ
depend on dˆt , so we can write Vλs (dˆt , ĝt ) = edt vλs (ĝt ). Substituting this expression into (8),
using the recursive formulation for the resale value, and using the potential buyer imputation
of dˆt give
Vi,tb


edi
Pi,t
=
+
Ei,t e(1−ρ)µ+ρĝt +(1+ρ−αρ)ζt (1 − λi )vλs i (ĝt+1 ) + λi v m (ĝt+1 ) ,
r + λi (1 + r)p(ĝt )

where the expectation is over ζt drawn from the normal in (9). Letting Ψλi (ĝt , ζt ) denote the
argument inside the expectation, we can then simplify the buying decision, Vi,tb ≥ Pi,t , as

edi ≥ Pi,t (r + λi ) 1 −

R∞

Ψ
−∞

λi



ĝt , ζ +

σ̃ 2 (di −µni −dˆt )
σ̃ 2 +σa2

(1 + r)p(ĝt )



φ(ζ)dζ


,

where φ is a mean-zero normal pdf with variance σ̃ 2 σa2 (σ̃ 2 + σa2 )−1 . Write edi = κi Pi,t . Then
the equation becomes



R∞ λ 
σ̃ 2 (log κi +log p(ĝt )−µni −dˆt )
i
Ψ
ĝ
,
ζ
+
φ(ζ)dζ
t
2
2
σ̃ +σa
−∞
.
κi ≥ (r + λi ) 1 −
(1 + r)p(ĝt )
In Appendix C.5, we prove that v m (·) and vsλ (·) are continuous functions that weakly increase.
As a result, the right side of the above inequality continuously and weakly decreases in κi .
The left side continuously and strictly increases in κi . Therefore, if the right side limits to a
non-positive number as κi → 0, then the inequality holds for all κi > 0, meaning we can set
κλnii (ĝt ) = 0. If the right side limits to a positive number as κi → 0, then by the Intermediate
Value Theorem, there exists a unique κλnii (ĝt ) > 0 such that the inequality holds if and only
if κi ≥ κλnii (ĝt ), which proves the Lemma.

C.5

Value Function Monotonicity

This section establishes that the functions v m (·) and vλs (·), which we define in the proofs of
Lemmas 2 and 3, weakly and continuously increase. We follow Stokey et al. (1989). To
apply their results, we need to work with a one-point (Alexandroff) compactification of a
subset of the real numbers. For a topological set X, the Alexandroff compactification is the
set X ∗ = X ∪ {∞}, whose open sets are those of X together with sets whose complements
are closed, compact subsets of X; X ∗ is compact (Kelley, 1955).
Lemma IA1. Let f : (0, ∞) × R → R be continuous. Suppose there exists functions g0 :
R → R and g∞ : R → R such that limx→0 f (x, y) = g0 (y) and limx→∞ g∞ (y) uniformly.
7

Define f˜ : [0, ∞)∗ × R → R by f˜(x, y) = f (x, y) for x ∈ (0, ∞) and f˜(x, y) = gx (y) for
x ∈ {0, ∞}. Then f˜ is continuous.
Proof. Let Z ⊂ R be open. We show that f˜−1 (Z) is open by demonstrating that for each
(x, y) ⊂ f˜−1 (Z), there exists an open set U such that (x, y) ∈ U ⊂ f˜−1 (Z). If x ∈ (0, ∞),
then set U = f −1 (Z), which is open by the continuity of f . Consider the case x = 0.
Because Z is open, there exists  > 0 such that all z with |z − g0 (y)| <  are in Z. By
uniform convergence, there exists δ > 0 such that |f (x0 , y 0 ) − g0 (y)| <  for all x ∈ [0, δ) and
y ∈ R. Therefore, U = [0, δ) × R suffices. Consider the case x = ∞. There likewise exists
 > 0 such that all z with |z − g∞ (y)| <  are in Z. By uniform convergence, there exists
N > 0 such that |f (x0 , y 0 ) − g∞ (y)| <  for all x > N and y ∈ R. Therefore, U = (N, ∞) × R
suffices.
We next establish the existence of a continuous solution v m (·) to (12). Let C be the space
of bounded continuous functions from R to itself. Let a > 0 be a constant. For v ∈ C, we
define the operator T by (T v)(ĝ) = supp f (p, ĝ), where
Z

∞

f (p, ĝ) =
−∞

(1 − π̃(p, ζ))e(1−ρ)µ+ρĝ+(1+ρ−αρ)ζ
×
1 + rm
a+e



ρ2 (1−α)ζ
ρ2 ĝ
ρµ+ 1−ρ
+ 1−ρ
a+e
v((1 − ρ)µ + ρĝ + ρ(1 − α)ζ) 
 φ(ζ)dζ,
ρĝ

1−ρ
a+e
π̃(p, ζ)p
ρĝ
1−ρ

+

where φ(·) is the probability density function of N (0, σ̃ 2 ). If v is a fixed point of T , then
ρĝ
v m (ĝ) = (a + e 1−ρ )v(ĝ) solves (12). We find a fixed point by demonstrating that T : C → C
and then showing that for a sufficiently small value of a, T satisfies the Blackwell conditions
and is hence a contraction mapping.
We first show that T v ∈ C. We have the bound
Z ∞
||T v|| ≤ sup
a−1 π̃(p, ζ)pφ(ζ)dζ+
p

−∞

(1 + rm )−1 e(1−ρ)µ ||v|| sup
x

ae

ρx+

(1+ρ−αρ)2 σ̃ 2
2

ρx
ρµ+ 1−ρ
+

+e

ρx

a + e 1−ρ

(1−αρ)2 σ̃ 2
2(1−ρ)2

,

so T v is bounded.
Demonstrating continuity is much more complicated. We first apply Lemma 12.14 of
Stokey et al. (1989) to establish the continuity of f (·, ·).
In their terminology, X = (0, ∞), Z = R2 , their y corresponds to our p, their z corresponds to our (ĝ, ζ), and the transition function Q puts mass φ(ζ 0 ) on (ĝ, ζ 0 ) and mass 0
on other elements of Z. To apply their lemma,
that Q has the Feller propR we 0must show
0
0
erty, which means (see their page 375) that h(z )Q(z, z )dz is continuous in z as long
as h is continuous and bounded.4 Given our specification of Q, this integral reduces to
4

Their lemma also requires that the term inside the integral defining f (·, ·), other than φ(ζ)dζ, is bounded

8

R∞

h(ĝ, ζ 0 )φ(ζ 0 )dζ 0 , which is trivially continuous in ζ. To demonstrate continuity in ĝ, we
closely
9.5. Choose
ĝn converging to ĝ. Then
R ∞ follow0 the0 proof
Rof∞their Lemma
R ∞ a sequence
0
0
0
0
0
| −∞ h(ĝn , ζ )φ(ζ )dζ − −∞ h(ĝ, ζ )φ(ζ )dζ | ≤ −∞ |h(ĝn , ζ ) − h(ĝ, ζ 0 )|φ(ζ 0 )dζ 0 . Each function ζ 0 7→ |h(ĝn , ζ 0 ) − h(ĝ, ζ 0 )| converges pointwise to the zero function (by the continuity of
h), so by the Lebesgue Dominated
Theorem (their Theorem 7.10), this integral
R ∞ Convergence
0
0
limits to zero. Therefore, ĝ 7→ −∞ h(ĝ, ζ )φ(ζ )dζ 0 is continuous in ĝ, and Q has the Feller
property. As a result, f (·, ·) is continuous on (0, ∞) × R.
The next step is to invoke our Lemma IA1. To do so, we must show uniform converge
of f (p, ĝ) for p → 0 and p → ∞. In the first limit, f (p, ĝ) → 0, and this convergence is
uniform because terms with ĝ multiplying the terms with p are uniformly bounded in ĝ. In
the second limit, the convergence is to the integral in which π̃ = 0, and the convergence is
uniform for the same reason. Hence, Lemma IA1 applies, and the induced f˜ is continuous.
The final step is to show that (T v)(ĝ) is continuous. This statement follows immediately
from Berge’s Maximum Theorem on general topological spaces (see, for instance, page 570
of Aliprantis and Border (2006)) because supp∈(0,∞) f (p, ĝ) = supp∈[0,∞)∗ f˜(p, ĝ) and because
[0, ∞)∗ is compact. Therefore, T v ∈ C.
We next verify the Blackwell conditions for T (Theorem 3.3 in Stokey et al. (1989)).
Monotonicity is trivial. Given the bound above, discounting holds as long as
−∞

(1 + rm )−1 e(1−ρ)µ sup

aeρx+

(1+ρ−αρ)2 σ̃ 2
2

ρx
+
ρµ+ 1−ρ

+e

(1−αρ)2 σ̃ 2
2(1−ρ)2

ρx

a + e 1−ρ

x

< 1.

We are free to choose any positive value of a. By considering the limit as a → 0, we find
that we can choose such an a to satisfy this inequality as long as
(1 + rm )−1 e

µ+

(1−αρ)2 σ̃ 2
2(1−ρ)2

< 1.

2

Because 0 ≤ α ≤ 1, it is sufficient for eµ+σ̃ /2 < 1 + rm . If we can show that σ̃ ≤ σ, then we
2
are done because we assumed in Section 7 that eµ+σ /2 < 1 + r ≤ 1 + rm . From the proof of
Lemma 1, we have
q
2
((1 − ρ2 )σd2 + σg2 )2 + 4ρ2 σd2 σg2
2
2
σg
(1 + ρ )σd
2
+
+
σ̃ =
2
2
2
!
p
2
2
2
2
2
(1
−
ρ
)
+
4(1
−
γ)γρ
(1
−
ρ
)
1 + ρ (1 − 2γ)
= σ2
+
.
2
2
We want to show that the term inside the large parentheses is no greater than 1. By isolating
the square root and then squaring, we reduce this inequality to
(1 − ρ2 )2 + 4(1 − γ)γρ2 (1 − ρ2 ) ≤ (1 − ρ2 (1 − 2γ))2 ,
which simplifies to 0 ≤ γ(2 − ρ2 ), which is true because 0 ≤ γ, ρ ≤ 1. Therefore, by Theorem
in p, ĝ, and ζ. This boundedness holds because v is bounded, because limp→∞ p̃(ζ, p)p = 0, and because
limζ→∞ (1 − π̃(p, ζ))ecζ = 0 for any c > 0.

9

3.3 of Stokey et al. (1989), T is a contraction mapping. By the Contraction Mapping
Theorem (their Theorems 3.1 and 3.2), T has a unique fixed point in C, as desired. Call this
ρĝ
function v ∗ . As mentioned above, v m (ĝ) = v ∗ (ĝ)(a + e 1−ρ ) then solves (12); this function
clearly inherits the continuity of v ∗ .
Finally, we show that v m is weakly increasing. Let C 0 ⊂ C be the set of v such that
ρĝ
v(ĝ)(a + e 1−ρ ) weakly increases. We claim that C 0 is closed. Let {vn } be in C 0 converging in C
ρĝ1

ρĝ0

to v. For any ĝ0 < ĝ1 , vn (ĝ1 )(a+e 1−ρ )−vn (ĝ0 )(a+e 1−ρ ) ≥ 0. Because vn converges pointwise
ρĝ1

ρĝ0

to v, we must have v(ĝ1 )(a + e 1−ρ ) − v(ĝ0 )(a + e 1−ρ ) ≥ 0 as well. Therefore, Corollary 1 to
Theorem 3.2 of Stokey et al. (1989) shows that v m ∈ C 0 as long as T : C 0 → C 0 , which is
immediate from (12).
The task remaining for this appendix is to show that each v s (·) weakly and continuously
increases. The argument proceeds as with v m (·), but we use (13), and we can skip the steps
involving a supremum. Define the map T on C by
−1

∞

ae(1−ρ)µ+ρĝ+(1+ρ−αρ)ζ

−∞

a + e 1−ρ

Z

(T v)(ĝ) =(1 + r)

ρĝ

ρĝ

eµ+ 1−ρ +
a+e

(1−αρ)ζ
1−ρ
ρĝ
1−ρ

+

!
((1 − λ)v(g 0 ) + λv ∗ (g 0 ))φ(ζ)dζ,

where g 0 = (1 − ρ)µ + ρĝ + ρ(1 − α)ζ, and a > 0 is a constant to be specified later. If
ρĝ
v is a fixed point of T , then vλs (ĝ) = (a + e 1−ρ )v(ĝ) solves (13). Clearly, T v is bounded.
To prove continuity, we again apply Lemma 12.14 of Stokey et al. (1989), this time with
X = Z = R, our ĝ corresponding to their y, and our ζ corresponding to their z. In order
to apply their lemma, we have to absorb the ζ terms into the Q transition function so that
2
2
2 2
2 2
2
their f is bounded. Using the identity e−z /(2σ )+bz = eσ b /2 e−(z−σ b) /(2σ ) , we have
e(1+ρ−αρ)ζ φ(ζ) = eσ̃

2 (1+ρ−αρ)2 /2

and
e

(1−αρ)ζ
1−ρ

φ(ζ) = e

σ̃ 2 (1−αρ)2
2(1−ρ)2

φ(ζ − σ̃ 2 (1 + ρ − αρ))



σ̃ 2 (1 − αρ)
φ ζ−
.
1−ρ

These functions serve as constants times a valid transition function (we showed above that
the normal distribution with 0 mean and variance σ̃ 2 has the Feller property), and the
remainder of the integrand is bounded in both ĝ and ζ. Thus, Lemma 12.14 applies and T v
is continuous. As a result, T : C → C.
Next we verify the aforementioned Blackwell conditions for T . Monotonicity again is
trivial. Discounting holds if
1−λ
ae(1−ρ)µ+ρĝ+
sup
1 + r ĝ

(1+ρ−αρ)2 σ̃ 2
2

ρĝ
µ+ 1−ρ
+

+e
ρĝ

a + e 1−ρ

10

(1−αρ)2 σ̃ 2
2(1−ρ)2

< 1.

Because we are free to pick any a > 0, the inequality holds for some such a if
µ+

(1 − λ)e

(1−αρ)2 σ̃ 2
2(1−ρ)2

< 1 + r,
2

which always holds, because α ∈ (0, 1), σ̃ ≤ σ (see above), eµ+σ /2 < 1 + r by assumption,
and λ ∈ (0, 1). Therefore, T satisfies the Blackwell conditions and is a contraction mapping.
ρĝ
As a result, it has a unique fixed point in C. Call it v ∗∗ . Then vλs (ĝ) = (a + e 1−ρ )v ∗∗ (ĝ) solves
(13).
Finally, we show that vλs weakly and continuously increases. Continuity follows from the
continuity of v ∗∗ . As argued above, weak monotonicity holds as long as T : C 0 → C 0 , where
this set is defined as above. That T maps C 0 into itself is immediate from (13) and the fact
that v m weakly increases. QED

D

Model Variants

Rational
In the fully rational variant of our model, movers know the true cutoff functions κλn (ĝt )
that potential buyers use. These functions affect the mover value function, which in turn
determines the κλn (·), so we iterate until finding a fixed point to solve the model, using the
same parameters as the baseline.
We now spell out this procedure in more detail. Movers recognize that the true demand
curve is
X

βnλ Φ log P + log κλn (ĝt ) − dt − µn .
π(P, dt , ĝt ) = 1 −
n,λ

Their value function is then


m ˆ
−1
m ˆ
V (dt , ĝt ) = sup E π(P, dt , ĝt )P + (1 + rm ) (1 − π(P, dt , ĝt ))V (dt+1 , ĝt+1 ) ,
P

where the expectation is over dt ∼ N (dˆt , σ̃ 2 ). By an argument analogous to the proof of
ˆ
ˆ
Lemma 2, the solution takes the form edt v m (ĝt ) with argmax edt p(ĝt ), although v m (·) and
p(·) may differ from the corresponding functions in the baseline model. Because the mover
value function takes this form, an argument analogous to the proof of Lemma 3 confirms
the existence of functions κλn (·) such that potential buyers buy when edi ≥ κλn (ĝt )Pi,t . These
functions depend on v m (·), which depends on the κλn (·) functions. We iteratively solve for
these functions using the same discretization as in the baseline model and then compute
impulse responses using the same sequences of shocks.
The results appear in Figure IA2. For ease of comparison with Figure 9, we use the
same axis ranges for corresponding panels. Prices no longer overshoot, inventories never rise
above their pre-shock value, and the volume boom lasts only four quarters and is only about
one quarter of its size in the baseline model. Interestingly, non-occupant volume continues
to rise much more than occupant volume. As Section 7 discusses, non-occupant demand is
more elastic to the level of the demand shifter, dt , because µ0 < 0 and due to a property of

11

the normal distribution. Therefore, even when potential buyers have rational expectations,
non-occupants react more strongly to the demand shock underlying the impulse response.
Walrasian
In the Walrasian version of our model, a mechanism selects a price each period so that the
number of potential buyers willing to buy at that price equals the number of movers willing to
sell. The main model assumes that each mover matches to a potential buyer with probability
one, which implicitly assumes that the potential buyer population moves in proportion to the
mover population. To maintain comparability with the main model, we make an analogous
assumption in the Walrasian variant that the number of potential buyers at time t is N It ,
where N > 1 is a constant.
Here, we describe equilibrium in which all movers sell. In this case, the cap rate error
implies the equation
It = N It (1 − F (log κ + log Pt − dt )) .
Solving for Pt yields what agents believe is the equilibrium pricing function:
P̃ (dt ) = κ−1 eF

−1 (1−N −1 )

edt = p̃edt .

In equilibrium, movers must weakly prefer selling at this price versus waiting to sell next
period. Therefore, we must have edt ≥ (1 + rm )−1 Et edt+1 , where Et denotes the mover
expectation that we now specify. By observing the current and past prices, movers believe
that they observe the history of demand as d˜t−j = log(p̃−1 Pt−j ) for j ≥ 0. By a Kalman
filtering argument similar to the proof of Lemma 1, the mover posterior on gt at t has mean
ĝtm

= µ + (1 − α)

∞
X

(αρ)

j



∞

X
˜
∆dt−j − µ = µ + (1 − α)
(αρ)j (∆ log Pt−j − µ)

j=0

j=0

and variance σl2 . We have dt+1 = dt + gt+1 + dt+1 = dt + (1 − ρ)µ + ρgt + gt+1 + dt+1 =
dt + (1 − ρ)µ + ρĝtm + ρζtg + gt+1 + dt+1 . Therefore,
m

Et edt+1 = edt e(1−ρ)µ+ρĝt e(ρ

2 σ 2 +σ 2 )/2
l

.

Mover optimality therefore requires that

ĝtm ≤ ρ−1 log(1 + rm ) − (1 − ρ)µ − (ρ2 σl2 + σ 2 )/2 .
This inequality cannot hold at all times because ĝtm is unbounded. Therefore, when the
expected growth rate is sufficiently high, some movers will refrain from selling their homes
at the Walrasian equilibrium price. However, we check that the inequality holds for all ĝtm
in the discrete mesh and also for all realized values in the simulations. For our parameters,
the right side equals 0.15, which is much larger than the maximal realized value of 0.03.
Therefore, in our simulations, we assume the approximation that the equilibrium always
features full sale by all movers at all times.
We now solve for the optimal potential buyer decision, which determines the true pricing
12

function. For j ≥ 1, potential buyers set ∆d˜t−j = ∆ log Pt−j . They face the same filtering
problem on gt as potential buyers in the main model, so their posterior mean ĝt follows
the formula in Lemma 1. Because they sell immediately in the approximate equilibrium we
˜
consider, the mover value is just the price, Vtm = p̃edt . (In fact, even in the exact equilibrium,
the mover value coincides with the price because movers are indifferent between selling and
not.) The remainder of the derivation follows the proof of Lemma 3 closely, so we omit it.
That is, there exist functions κλ (ĝt ) such that a potential buyer purchases a house if and
only if edi ≥ κλi (ĝt )Pt . The functions no longer depend on n because the private flow utility
di is uninformative about dt , as potential buyers believe that they observe dt perfectly via
d˜t = log(p̃−1 Pt ). The actual equilibrium price must satisfy
!
X
It = N It 1 −
β λ F (log κ(ĝt ) + log Pt − dt ) ,
λ

for which it is clear that a unique solution always exists of the form Pt = p(ĝt )edt . We
discretize the ĝt space and solve for the pricing function p(·) and the κλ (·) functions at these
values, interpolating/extrapolating in between and beyond the mesh.
We then simulate the model as in the main text. The price paths seem to be explosive
under the baseline parameters. We believe that prices explode because they adjust more
quickly with Walrasian market clearing. In any event, to maintain comparability with the
main model, we decrease γ to 0.042 so that the price overshoot is the same in the Walrasian
model as in the main model, and we update κ so that the demand error is still zero on
average. Other parameters remain the same.
Results appear in Figure IA3. Prices and volume both go through a boom and bust cycle
in the Walrasian model, as in the main model. However, volume now peaks after prices
so there is no longer a quiet. The price boom is faster, with prices reaching their peak 9
quarters after the shock instead of 15. Under Walrasian market clearing, prices react more
quickly to new information, explaining the absence of the quiet and the shorter duration of
the price boom. Short-term and non-occupant volume continue to rise disproportionately in
the Walrasian model, so these aspects of the baseline model do not depend on our departure
from Walrasian market clearing.

References
Aliprantis, Charalambos D. and Border, Kim C. (2006), Infinite Dimensional Analysis: A Hitchhiker’s Guide, Springer.
Kelley, John L. (1955), General Topology, Springer-Verlag.
Stokey, Nancy L., Lucas, Jr., Robert E. and Prescott, Edward C. (1989), Recursive
Methods in Economic Dynamics, Harvard University Press.

13

FIGURE IA1
Non-Primary Homebuying and House Price Appreciation
Panel B. View of Housing as Investment
vs. Recent House Price Appreciation
30

Panel A. View of Housing as Investment
vs. P(Buying Non-Primary Home)

Share of Respondents (%)
10
20

Very good

Good

Neither

0

Bad

Very bad

-20
0

5
10
Average Probability of Buying Non-Primary Home (%)

20
40
5-year Cumulative Local HPA (%)

Very Good Investment

60

Bad or Very Bad Investment

Panel D. P(Buying Non-Primary Home) vs.
Recent House Price Appreciation, Savings

0

Probability of Buying Non-Primary Home (%)
8
10
12

Probability of Buying Non-Primary Home (%)
5
10
15
20

Panel C. P(Buying Non-Primary Home)
vs. Recent House Price Appreciation

6

-20
-20

0

0
20
5-year Cumulative Local HPA

40

0

20
40
5-year Cumulative Local HPA (%)

Low Liquid Savings

60

High Liquid Savings

Notes: This figure uses data from the Federal Reserve Survey of Consumer Expectations and Armona et al.
(2019) to study the relation between recent house price growth and the probability of buying a non-primary
home. In this data, local house price appreciation is computed at the ZIP-level from Zillow. High versus
low liquid savings refer to those below the 25th and above the 75th percentiles, respectively, where the 25th
percentile is $1,500 and the 75th percentile is $175,000.

14

FIGURE IA2
Impulse Responses, Rational Model

.005
0
-.005
-.01
-.015

0

10

20

30

.16

.16

.16

Panel D. Volume By Occupancy
Non-Occupant

50

.12
.08

.12

.04

.08

0

.04

-.04

0

-.08

-.08

40

-.12

30

-.04

.08
.04
0
-.04

20

-.08

10

-.12

0

10

20

30

50

Panel E. Pr(Sale | Listing)

Panel F. New Listings by Holding Period
.06

40

50

Quarter

.12
.08
.04
0
-.04
-.08

Log Deviation from Initial Value

.12
.08
.04
0

0

10

20

30

40

50

-.12

30

-.12

20

-.04

Log Deviation from Initial Value

-.08

.04
.02
0
-.04

-.02

All Holding Periods

Log Deviation from Initial Value

.06
.04
.02
0
-.02

10

Short Holding-Period

.16

Quarter

-.04

0

40

Quarter

.16

0

Log Deviation from Initial Value

.12

Occupant

Log Deviation from Initial Value

.12
.08
.04
0
-.04
-.12

-.08

Log Deviation from Initial Value

50

Panel C. Volume by Holding Period
Long Holding-Period

Log Deviation from Initial Value

40

Quarter

Short Holding-Period

Log Deviation from Initial Value

.01
.005
0
-.005
-.01

Log Deviation from Initial Value

-.015

50

-.02

40

.16

30

Quarter

Log Deviation from Initial Value

20

-.12

10

-.02

0

.01

.015

.06
-.04

-.02

.05

0

.02

.1

.04

Volume

.015

Panel B. Inventory of Listings
Log Deviation from Initial Value (Volume)

Prices

0

Log Deviation from Initial Value (Prices)

.15

Panel A. Prices and Volume

Quarter

Notes: Impulse responses are average differences between log outcomes in control simulations and treatment
simulations, in which a 2-standard-deviation shock to gt (the demand growth innovation) occurs in quarters
0 through 3. A short holding period is defined as less than or equal to 12 quarters and a long holding period
is defined as greater than 12 quarters.

15

FIGURE IA3
Impulse Responses, Walrasian Model

40

.08
.06

.08

.04

.06
.04

.02
0

0

10

20

30

50

Panel C. Volume by Holding Period

Panel D. Volume By Occupancy

0

10

20

30

40

.16

.16

.12
.08

.12

.04

.08

0

.04

50

-.04

0

Log Deviation from Initial Value

Occupant

-.04

-.04

-.04

0

0

.04

.04

.08

.08

.12

.12

.16

Non-Occupant

Log Deviation from Initial Value

.16

Short Holding-Period

Log Deviation from Initial Value

40

Quarter

Long Holding-Period

Log Deviation from Initial Value

.1

50

-.02

30

Quarter

Log Deviation from Initial Value

20

-.02

10

.02

Log Deviation from Initial Value

0
-.02
-.04

0

.08
.06
.02

.04

.1
.05

Log Deviation from Initial Value (Volume)

Volume

0

.1

Panel B. Inventory of Listings

Prices

0

Log Deviation from Initial Value (Prices)

.15

Panel A. Prices and Volume

0

10

20

30

40

50

Quarter

Quarter

Panel E. Pr(Sale | Listing)

Panel F. New Listings by Holding Period

10

20

30

40

50

Quarter

.16
.12
.08
.04

.08

0

.04

0

10

20

30

40

50

-.04

0

-.04

-.04

-.04

Log Deviation from Initial Value

.12

.16

All Holding Periods

0

Log Deviation from Initial Value

.04
.02
0
-.02

Log Deviation from Initial Value

.04
.02
0
-.02

Log Deviation from Initial Value

.06

.06

Short Holding-Period

Quarter

Notes: Impulse responses are average differences between log outcomes in control simulations and treatment
simulations, in which a 2-standard-deviation shock to gt (the demand growth innovation) occurs in quarters
0 through 3. A short holding period is defined as less than or equal to 12 quarters and a long holding period
is defined as greater than 12 quarters.

16

TABLE IA1
Speculators and Housing Market Outcomes (Summary Statistics)
Panel A. Short-Volume Sample
Variable

Mean

Standard Deviation

Observations

Short-Volume Boom
Price Boom
Price Bust
∆ Volume Quiet + Bust
Foreclosures Bust

15.97
97.06
-27.9
-62.96
82.84

12.93
47.88
13.64
18.87
55.96

115
115
115
115
115

Panel B. Non-Occupant Volume Sample
Variable

Mean

Standard Deviation

Observations

Non-Occupant Volume Boom
Short-Volume Boom
Price Boom
Price Bust
∆ Volume Quiet + Bust
Foreclosures Bust

29.29
16.88
100.57
-28.99
-63.32
86.57

27.05
13.36
49.27
13.97
19.47
58.08

102
102
102
102
102
102

Panel C. Short-Volume Sample with Listings
Variable

Mean

Standard Deviation

Observations

Short-Volume Boom
∆ Listings Boom
∆ Listings Quiet

14.64
91.67
178.39

12.33
94.93
143.86

57
57
57

Panel D. Non-Occupant Volume Sample with Listings
Variable

Mean

Standard Deviation

Observations

Non-Occupant Volume Boom
Short-Volume Boom
∆ Listings Boom
∆ Listings Quiet

27.81
15.84
82.11
171.74

27.32
12.88
93.67
151.29

48
48
48
48

Notes: This table reports summary statistics for MSA-level variables in different samples of MSAs in Table
2. ∆ Volume Quiet + Bust is defined as the change in total volume from 2005 through 2011. ∆ Listings
Boom is defined as the change in total listings from 2003 through 2005. ∆ Listings Quiet is defined as the
change in total listings from 2005 through 2007. Foreclosures Bust is defined as total foreclosures from 2007
through 2011. Price Boom is defined as the change in prices from 2000 through 2006. Price Bust is defined
as the change in prices from 2006 through 2011. To aid interpretation of these relations, we scale the change
in outcomes for all quantity measures relative to total volume in 2003 and multiply by 100. Total volume
in 2003 has mean 28,061 and standard deviation 43,708 in the Short Volume Sample and mean 25,167 and
standard deviation 35,967 in the Short Volume Sample with Listings.

17

TABLE IA2
All-Cash Buyer Shares and Mean LTV by Buyer Type
MSA-Level

Transaction-Level
All Months

All Months

Boom

Quiet

Bust

All-Cash Buyer Share
Short Buyers

0.29

0.38
(0.21)

0.29
(0.16)

0.28
(0.17)

0.52
(0.20)

Non-Occupant Buyers

0.38

0.41
(0.18)

0.36
(0.15)

0.32
(0.14)

0.50
(0.18)

All Buyers

0.20

0.25
(0.16)

0.22
(0.15)

0.20
(0.14)

0.30
(0.16)

Mean LTV
Short Buyers

0.59
(0.40)

0.52
(0.18)

0.60
(0.13)

0.59
(0.13)

0.41
(0.17)

Non-Occupant Buyers

0.50
(0.41)

0.48
(0.14)

0.52
(0.12)

0.54
(0.11)

0.41
(0.15)

All Buyers

0.65
(0.36)

0.62
(0.13)

0.64
(0.12)

0.64
(0.11)

0.59
(0.14)

Mean LTV | LTV > 0
Short Buyers

0.84
(0.16)

0.85
(0.06)

0.84
(0.05)

0.82
(0.04)

0.85
(0.07)

Non-Occupant Buyers

0.81
(0.17)

0.82
(0.06)

0.82
(0.06)

0.80
(0.05)

0.82
(0.06)

All Buyers

0.82
(0.16)

0.83
(0.05)

0.82
(0.04)

0.80
(0.04)

0.85
(0.05)

Notes: This table presents statistics on LTV ratios and the share of buyers of various types who purchased
their homes without the use of a mortgage. In column 1, statistics are measured at the transaction level
and includes all transactions recorded between January 2000 and December 2011 from the CoreLogic deeds
records described in Section 2.1. The first row of each panel includes only transactions by homebuyers
who are observed to have sold the home within three years of purchase. The second row of each panel
includes only non-occupant buyers. The third row of each panel includes all buyers. In columns 2–5, means
are first calculated at the MSA-by-month level and then averaged across MSA-months within a given time
period. The standard deviation of these MSA-month means is reported in parentheses. Column 2 includes
all MSA-months between January 2000 and December 2011. Column 3 includes only MSA-months between
January 2000 and August 2005. Column 4 includes only MSA-months between August 2005 and December
2006. Column 5 includes only MSA-months between December 2006 and December 2011. All statistics are
calculated in the full sample of 115 MSAs with the exception of those for non-occupants, which are calculated
in the sample of 102 MSAs with valid non-occupancy data.

18

TABLE IA3
Speculators and Housing Market Outcomes (Additional Listing Outcomes)
Panel A. Propensity to List
∆ New Listings Boom
Short-Volume Boom

0.270
(0.182)

Non-Occupant Volume Boom
Number of Observations
R-squared

57
0.038

∆ New Listings Quiet
0.649***
(0.160)

0.115
(0.092)

0.540
(0.349)
-0.097
(0.165)

48
0.033

48
0.082

57
0.229

0.308***
(0.080)

0.452
(0.305)
0.130
(0.144)

48
0.243

48
0.278

Panel B. Sale Probability
∆ P(Sale) Boom
Short-Volume Boom

0.142***
(0.032)

Non-Occupant Volume Boom
Number of Observations
R-squared

57
0.268

∆ P(Sale) Quiet

0.100
(0.064)
0.058*** 0.019
(0.017) (0.030)
48
0.206

48
0.247

-0.163***
(0.031)

57
0.332

-0.047**
(0.018)

-0.273***
(0.059)
0.061**
(0.028)

48
0.122

48
0.404

Notes: This table reports estimates of the relation between speculative volume and housing cycle measures at
the MSA level. Short-Volume Boom has a mean of 16.0% and a standard deviation of 12.9%. Non-Occupant
Volume Boom has a mean of 29.3% and a standard deviation of 27.1%. ∆ New Listings Boom is defined as
the change in the flow of listings from 2003 through 2005. ∆ New Listings Quiet is defined as the change
in the flow of listings from 2005 through 2007. These outcomes correspond to listing propensities among
existing homeowners. ∆ P(Sale) Boom is defined as the change in the probability of sale among the observed
stock of listings from 2003 through 2005. ∆ P(Sale) Quiet is defined as the change in the probability of sale
among the observed stock of listings from 2005 through 2007. To aid interpretation of these relations, we
scale the change in outcomes for all quantity measures relative to total volume in 2003. We do not scale the
sale probability. Significance levels 10%, 5%, and 1% are denoted by *, **, and ***, respectively.

19

TABLE IA4
First-Stage Regressions of Demographics on Short Volume Boom

Old Share

1.69
0.31
(0.26) (0.11)
0.66
0.51
(0.32) (0.15)

Young Share
MSA-level
ZIP-level (MSA Effects)

X

Number of Observations
R-squared

102
0.45

X
6826
0.32

Notes: This table presents first-stage regressions corresponding to the IV specification in Table 4. Demographic data come from the 2000 Census 5% microdata. The Young Share is the share of recent buyers under
35. The Old Share is the share of recent buyers aged 65 or older. The ZIP-level regression is estimated with
MSA fixed effects and with standard errors clustered at the MSA level. The F-statistics in the MSA-level
and ZIP-level (Kleibergen-Paap Wald F-statistic reflecting MSA-level clustering) regressions are 40 and 8,
respectively.

20

TABLE IA5
List of Metropolitan Statistical Areas Included in the Analysis Sample
Metropolitan Statistical Area
Akron, OH
Ann Arbor, MI
Atlanta-Sandy Springs-Roswell, GA
Atlantic City-Hammonton, NJ
Bakersfield, CA
Baltimore-Columbia-Towson, MD
Barnstable Town, MA
Bellingham, WA
Bend-Redmond, OR
Boston-Cambridge-Newton, MA-NH
Boulder, CO
Bremerton-Silverdale, WA
Bridgeport-Stamford-Norwalk, CT
Buffalo-Cheektowaga-Niagara Falls, NY
California-Lexington Park, MD
Canton-Massillon, OH
Cape Coral-Fort Myers, FL
Champaign-Urbana, IL
Charleston-North Charleston, SC
Chicago-Naperville-Elgin, IL-IN-WI
Chico, CA
Cincinnati, OH-KY-IN
Cleveland-Elyria, OH
Colorado Springs, CO
Crestview-Fort Walton Beach-Destin, FL
Dallas-Fort Worth-Arlington, TX
Dayton, OH
Deltona-Daytona Beach-Ormond Beach, FL
Denver-Aurora-Lakewood, CO
El Centro, CA
El Paso, TX
Elmira, NY
Erie, PA
Eugene, OR
Flagstaff, AZ
Fort Collins, CO
Fresno, CA
Gainesville, FL
Gainesville, GA
Hanford-Corcoran, CA
Hartford-West Hartford-East Hartford, CT
Homosassa Springs, FL
Ithaca, NY
Jacksonville, FL
Kahului-Wailuku-Lahaina, HI
Kingston, NY
Lake Havasu City-Kingman, AZ
Lakeland-Winter Haven, FL
Lancaster, PA
Las Vegas-Henderson-Paradise, NV
Los Angeles-Long Beach-Anaheim, CA
Madera, CA
Merced, CA
Miami-Fort Lauderdale-West Palm Beach, FL
Modesto, CA
Napa, CA
Naples-Immokalee-Marco Island, FL
New Haven-Milford, CT

Share of Housing
Stock Represented
1.00
1.00
0.80
1.00
1.00
1.00
1.00
1.00
1.00
0.89
1.00
1.00
1.00
0.80
1.00
0.92
1.00
0.82
0.79
0.90
1.00
0.78
1.00
0.95
1.00
0.85
0.86
1.00
0.95
1.00
0.99
1.00
1.00
1.00
1.00
1.00
1.00
0.91
1.00
1.00
1.00
1.00
1.00
0.98
1.00
1.00
1.00
1.00
1.00
1.00
1.00
1.00
1.00
1.00
1.00
1.00
1.00
1.00

Included in
Non-Occupant
Analysis

Included in
Listings
Analysis

x
x

x
x

x
x
x

x
x

x
x
x
x
x
x
x
x
x
x
x
x
x
x
x
x
x
x
x
x
x
x
x
x
x
x
x
x

x
x
x
x
x
x
x
x
x

x
x

x
x

x

x
x

x
x
x
x
x
x
x
x
x
x
x
x
x
x
x
x
x

x
x
x
x
x
x
x
x
x
x
x
x

Metropolitan Statistical Area
New York-Newark-Jersey City, NY-NJ-PA
North Port-Sarasota-Bradenton, FL
Norwich-New London, CT
Ocala, FL
Ocean City, NJ
Olympia-Tumwater, WA
Orlando-Kissimmee-Sanford, FL
Oxnard-Thousand Oaks-Ventura, CA
Palm Bay-Melbourne-Titusville, FL
Pensacola-Ferry Pass-Brent, FL
Philadelphia-Camden-Wilmington, PA-NJ-DE-MD
Phoenix-Mesa-Scottsdale, AZ
Pittsfield, MA
Portland-Vancouver-Hillsboro, OR-WA
Port St. Lucie, FL
Prescott, AZ
Providence-Warwick, RI-MA
Punta Gorda, FL
Raleigh, NC
Reading, PA
Redding, CA
Reno, NV
Riverside-San Bernardino-Ontario, CA
Rockford, IL
Sacramento–Roseville–Arden-Arcade, CA
Salem, OR
Salinas, CA
San Diego-Carlsbad, CA
San Francisco-Oakland-Hayward, CA
San Jose-Sunnyvale-Santa Clara, CA
Santa Cruz-Watsonville, CA
San Luis Obispo-Paso Robles-Arroyo Grande, CA
Santa Maria-Santa Barbara, CA
Santa Rosa, CA
Seattle-Tacoma-Bellevue, WA
Sebastian-Vero Beach, FL
Sebring, FL
Sierra Vista-Douglas, AZ
Spokane-Spokane Valley, WA
Springfield, IL
Springfield, MA
Springfield, OH
Stockton-Lodi, CA
Tampa-St. Petersburg-Clearwater, FL
The Villages, FL
Toledo, OH
Trenton, NJ
Tucson, AZ
Urban Honolulu, HI
Vallejo-Fairfield, CA
Vineland-Bridgeton, NJ
Visalia-Porterville, CA
Washington-Arlington-Alexandria, DC-VA-MD-WV
Worcester, MA-CT
Youngstown-Warren-Boardman, OH-PA
Yuba City, CA
Yuma, AZ

Share of Housing
Stock Represented
0.97
1.00
1.00
1.00
1.00
1.00
1.00
1.00
1.00
1.00
1.00
1.00
1.00
0.97
1.00
1.00
0.78
1.00
0.78
1.00
1.00
0.99
1.00
0.84
1.00
0.79
1.00
1.00
1.00
1.00
1.00
1.00
1.00
1.00
1.00
1.00
1.00
1.00
0.87
0.93
1.00
1.00
1.00
1.00
1.00
0.92
1.00
1.00
1.00
1.00
1.00
1.00
0.95
1.00
0.80
1.00
1.00

Included in
Non-Occupant
Analysis

Included in
Listings
Analysis

x
x
x
x
x
x
x
x
x
x
x
x
x
x
x
x
x
x
x
x
x
x
x
x
x
x
x
x
x
x
x
x
x
x
x
x
x

x
x
x
x
x

x
x
x
x
x

x
x
x

x
x

x

x

x
x
x
x
x
x
x
x
x
x
x
x
x
x
x
x

x

x
x
x
x

x
x

Notes: This table lists the Metropolitan Statistical Areas that are included in the final analysis sample along
with the share of the total 2010 owner-occupied housing stock for each MSA that is represented by the subset
of counties for which CoreLogic has consistent data coverage back to 1995.

21

TABLE IA6
Number of Transactions Dropped During Sample Selection
Original Number of Transactions
Dropped:
Dropped:
Dropped:
Dropped:
Dropped:
Dropped:

Non-unique CoreLogic ID
Non-positive price
Nominal foreclosure transfer
Duplicate transaction
Subdivision sale
Vacant lot

Final Number of Transactions

57,668,026
50
3,309,100
531,786
609,756
1,304,920
831,774
51,080,640

Notes: This table shows the number of transactions dropped at each stage of our sample-selection procedure.

22

TABLE IA7
Mechanical Short-Term Volume Estimates

Year
2000
2001
2002
2003
2004
2005
2000–2005
growth

Total Volume

Actual
Short-Term
Volume

Counterfactual
Short-Term
Volume

0
0.0003
0.0008
0.0014
0.0023
0.0027

2821596
2757954
2985550
3226968
3667997
3857236

512787
499643
556987
614429
772708
909976

512787
494741
534342
557701
659111
725847

–

36.7%

77.5%

41.5%

α̂ybuy

−

buy
α̂2000

Notes: Total Volume gives annual transaction counts in our analysis sample. Actual Short-Term Volume are
sales of properties for which the previous purchased occurred less than 36 months in the past. We estimate
αybuy , a fixed effect for the propensity to sell a house having bought it in year y, using the regression equation
in Section 5.2. In the counterfactual, we assume that αybuy remains constant at its level in y = 2000 for
y ∈ {2001, 2002, 2003, 2004, 2005}.

23

