NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

THE EFFECT OF MALPRACTICE LAW ON PHYSICIAN SUPPLY:
EVIDENCE FROM NEGLIGENCE-STANDARD REFORMS
Michael D. Frakes
Matthew B. Frank
Seth A. Seabury
Working Paper 23446
http://www.nber.org/papers/w23446

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
May 2017

We are grateful to Christoph Engel, Jonah Gelbach, Eric Helland, Anupam Bapu Jena, Daniel Ho,
Kristin Madison, Susanne Prantl, Max Schanzenbach, Urs Schweizer and various seminar
participants and colleagues for helpful comments. The views expressed herein are those of the
authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
At least one co-author has disclosed a financial relationship of potential relevance for this
research. Further information is available online at http://www.nber.org/papers/w23446.ack
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.
© 2017 by Michael D. Frakes, Matthew B. Frank, and Seth A. Seabury. All rights reserved. Short
sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission
provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

The Effect of Malpractice Law on Physician Supply: Evidence from Negligence-Standard
Reforms
Michael D. Frakes, Matthew B. Frank, and Seth A. Seabury
NBER Working Paper No. 23446
May 2017
JEL No. I18,K13
ABSTRACT
We explore whether the composition of the physician work force is impacted by the clinical
standards imposed on physicians under medical liability rules. We theorize that physicians of
particular backgrounds will be attracted to regions when the malpractice laws of those regions
favor the type of medicine characteristic of those backgrounds. To test this prediction, we rely
on a quasi-experiment made possible by states shifting from local to national customs as the basis
for setting standards at court, a distinction that captures meaningful differences in the clinical
expectations of the law in light of the well documented phenomenon of regional
variations in medical practices. Using data from the Area Health Resource File from 1977 to
2005, we find that the rate of surgeons among practicing physicians increases by 2-2.4 log points
following the adoption of national-standard laws in initially low surgery-rate regions—i.e.,
following a change in the law that effectively expects physicians to increase practice intensities.
We find that this response is nearly three times greater in rural counties. We also find that this
supply effect is unidirectional, with no evidence to suggest that surgeons retreat when initially
high-surgery-rate regions change their laws so as to expect less intensive practice styles.
Michael D. Frakes
Duke University
School of Law
210 Science Drive
Box 90362
Durham, NC 27708
and NBER
Michael.frakes@law.duke.edu

Seth A. Seabury
Schaeffer Center for Health Policy and Economics
University of Southern California
635 Downey Way
VPD 414C
Los Angeles, CA 90089
and NBER
seabury@usc.edu

Matthew B. Frank
1585 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
mfrank@jd17.law.harvard.edu

An online appendix is available at http://www.nber.org/data-appendix/w23446

Along with health care spending and quality, patient access to care is frequently identified
as one of the key criteria by which we assess the effectiveness of the U.S. health care system.
Critical to the patient-access pillar is the supply of physicians willing and able to provide care in
the first instance, along with the geographic distribution and the specialty case mix of this supply.
Numerous reform proposals over the years have focused on these various dimensions to physician
supply.1 Among these proposals—especially those put forth by Republican lawmakers—is tort
reform. That is, commentators frequently cite the medical liability system as a significant threat
to patient access, with liability fears and high premiums presumably causing physicians to shut
down or relocate their practices or refrain from entering the industry in the first place. If true, then
reforms to the liability system may therefore improve patient access to care. The reform most
commonly touted for such purposes is a cap on non-economic damages awards at trial—i.e., a
limit on the amount of pain and suffering awards that successful plaintiffs may recover.
Interestingly, however, the literature has failed to produce consistent evidence of an
increase in physician supply following the hypothesized reductions in liability pressure that may
result from damage cap adoptions. This lack of conclusive evidence has led some scholars to
conclude that liability risk is unlikely to be a factor that shapes physician location decisions and
that such decisions are likely to be driven entirely by other factors such as patient demand (Paik er
al. 2016). Any such conclusion, however, is perhaps premature and places a particular burden on
the validity of using state damage caps to evaluate physician responsiveness to the liability system.
Indeed, there may be reasons to doubt the power of damage caps as a methodological
instrument for these purposes. Underlying this doubt is evidence suggesting that physicians are
financially insulated from, and thus potentially insensitive to, damages levels at trial, especially in
For recent policy discussions and empirical analyses surrounding physician supply, see, for example, Kirch and Petelle (2017), Gudbranson et al
(2017), Strange (2014), Garthwaite (2012); Chernew et al. (2009), Staiger et al. (2009), and Institute of Medicine (2008).
1

2

light of the often discussed fact that medial liability policies are generally not experience rated
(Sloan 1990, Zeiler et al. 2007). A damage-cap reform could theoretically alter a physician’s
perceived liability threat to the extent caps discourage plaintiffs and plaintiffs’ attorneys from
filing suit in the first place and to the extent that physicians face a number of uninsurable costs as
a result of malpractice liability—e.g., reputational and psychological damage (Jena et al. 2011;
Frakes and Jena 2016).2 The literature, however, has failed to systematically and consistently
document a strong relationship between damage caps and the frequency of suits.3 Moreover, even
if damages caps do indeed lead to actual reductions in the likelihood of suit, other evidence
suggests that they do not meaningfully change the perception of risk among physicians (Carrier et
al., 2010). Ultimately, damage caps may be too marginal of a shock to the liability system to
powerfully inform on the full impacts of that system.4
Beyond the possibly marginal nature of caps, remedy-focused reforms of this nature can
only hope to inform the impacts of the present structure of liability rules. Over the years, however,
policymakers and scholars have discussed implementing more structural reforms to the system—
for instance, retreating from using physician custom as the exclusive basis to determining liability
standards and instead extending safe harbors to physicians who comply with specified clinical
practice guidelines. Safe-harbor proposals of this nature may even be prominent among the
liability reforms likely to be considered by the new administration (Mello et al. 2017). How

Subject to certain exceptions, payments made on behalf of physicians to settle claims or to satisfy judgments must, under federal law, be registered
in the National Practitioner Data Bank (NPDB), an electronic repository which is made available to hospitals and certain other health care entities.
The NPDB was established by the Health Care Quality Improvement Act of 1986, as amended (42 U.S.C. 11101 et seq.). This repository may
reinforce any reputational consequences of malpractice liability.
3
See Mello and Kachalia (2016) for survey of this literature. A couple of recent studies have found that damage caps are associated with a reduction
in the frequency of malpractice suits (Paik et al. 2013, Avraham 2007). Other studies, however, have found no such association (Donohue and Ho
2007, Zuckerman et al. 1990).
4
Reinforcing the point, the literature on the link between damage caps and healthcare spending also demonstrates a generally weak relationship
(though with some variation across studies). For recent surveys on this literature, see Frakes (2015).
2

3

physicians respond to more substantive reforms of this nature may not be so clear based on our
experiences to date with the implementation of remedy-centric reforms.
Given these limitations with the damages cap approach, we elect in this paper to consider
variation along a separate dimension in the law—that is, variation in the standards of care to which
physicians are held. Physicians, after all, are only liable for harm that they cause to patients when
their behavior fails to satisfy certain clinical standards determined at trial, a structural feature of
the law not appreciated by the existing studies exploring the link between liability forces and
physician supply. Analogizing medical liability to speeding tickets, the adoption of damage caps
is akin to new traffic laws aimed at modifying the magnitude of speeding ticket fines, whereas
reforms to medical liability standards are akin to new traffic laws aimed at changing the speed
limits triggering the law in the first instance. To acquire variation along this dimension, we rely
upon a large scale, fundamental change in liability standards that the majority of states underwent
in the latter half of the 20th Century—that is, the shift from a “locality rule,” whereby the liability
standards to which physicians were held were determined according to local physician customs,
to a national-standard rule, whereby geographical limitations in the liability-standard
determinations were removed entirely (Frakes 2013).
In the healthcare context, the difference between local and national customs is potentially
significant in light of the rampant regional variations that exist in medical practices, a phenomenon
which has long garnered the attention of medical scholars and health economists (Wennberg and
Gittelsohn 1973; Chandra and Staiger, 2007; Skinner 2011; Finkelstein et al 2016). Put simply,
physicians in different regions practice very different styles of medicine. With substantial regional
variations in practices in mind, the abandonment of a locality rule—for instance, a change which

4

expects Mississippi physicians to begin practicing like physicians in others regions—represents a
potentially meaningful change in the legal expectations placed upon physicians.
In this paper, we explore whether such an alteration of the clinical standards demanded of
physicians, in turn, impacts the inclinations of physicians of certain clinical types to locate their
practices in the relevant jurisdictions. Broadly speaking, if the laws of a particular region favor a
certain style of medicine, do we see physicians trained in that style of medicine being attracted to
that region? In approaching this question, we follow Chandra and Staiger (2007) and characterize
physician behavior as following one of two styles: (1) a low-intensity approach (e.g., medical
management of disease) or (2) a high-intensity approach (e.g., surgical intervention). With this
binary clinical distinction in mind, consider the traditional locality rule as a starting point. If legal
standards reinforce local customs and if those customs, for instance, favor medical management
over intensive clinical approaches, then perhaps relatively few surgical specialists will be inclined
to set up their practices in the relevant locality. Similarly, hospitals would perhaps be disinclined
to recruit surgeons in areas whose local liability-standard rules call for low-intensity practice
styles. Should those jurisdictions embrace national medical liability standards, however, these
isolating forces may relax and we may observe more surgical specialists attracted to those regions,
whether through self-recruitment or hospital-recruitment mechanisms.
Dynamics of this nature have been ignored by the existing literature. Those studies that
have considered differential impacts of medical malpractice across physician type have done so
by simply noting that malpractice pressure more strongly discourages the supply of physicians in
specialties that face a higher incidence of malpractice suits (Klick and Stratmann, 2007). More
generally, the literature has treated liability “pressure” in a vague and abstract sense without
appreciating the clinical standards underlying that pressure.
5

Using data on physician population counts from the Area Health Resource File from the
mid-1970s to the mid-2000s and drawing on locality rule abdications from 16 states over this time
period, we find evidence consistent with the prediction that the physician mix between surgeons
and non-surgeons in a region may be a function of the prevailing malpractice-standard rules in that
region—i.e., a function of whether prevailing rules expect that physicians practice at intensive or
non-intensive practice styles. More specifically, we find that when counties with initially lowintensity medical practices—as captured by initially below-average rates of surgery—experience
a shift from a locality rule to a national-standard rule, those counties observe a corresponding shift
towards relatively greater numbers of surgical specialists practicing within their borders and
relatively fewer non-surgeons (at a magnitude of a roughly 2-2.4 log-point increase in the
proportion of surgeons). However, we find that this supply effect may be unidirectional, with no
evidence to suggest that surgeons retreat when initially high surgery-rate regions change their laws
so as to expect less intensive practice styles.
Concerns over the influence of liability forces on physician location decisions have been
particularly paramount when discussing physicians practicing in rural regions (Matsa 2007). With
this backdrop in mind, we separately estimate our difference-in-difference specifications across
counties in different quartiles of population density. Though we generally find a shift towards
more surgical specialists in all initially low-intensity counties, we find that this shift is especially
strong in the most rural population-density group. In this sub-group, we estimate a roughly 6 logpoint increase in the proportion of surgeons among the county’s total physicians following a
national standard rule adoption.
These findings complement our prior research (Frakes, Frank and Seabury 2015), where
we found that treatment utilization patterns are sensitive to the adoption of national-standard rules.
6

In this prior work, we likewise tested the impacts of national-standard-rule adoptions in counties
with initially below-average rates of surgery, using data on total inpatient and outpatient surgery
counts from the Area Health Resource File.5 In such counties, we estimated a roughly 9 log-point
increase in the surgery rate following the relevant change in the law (with an even stronger
response in the most rural population-density quartile). As such, not only do we observe an
increase in surgeries, we also observe an increase in the proportion of surgeons among practicing
physicians in those counties experiencing a change in the law that alters clinical expectations in
the direction of greater practice intensity.
Collectively, the findings from the present paper and from Frakes, Frank and Seabury
(2015) and Frakes (2013) raise a question regarding the mechanisms underlying the treatment
intensity responses documented in these prior works.

Was the convergence in practices

documented in these studies likely attributable to given physicians modifying their practices in
connection with altered clinical expectations—e.g., do given physicians practice more intensively
when an initially low-intensity regions adopts a national standard rule that expects physicians to
follow more intensive styles? Or was the convergence more attributable to a relative attraction of
surgical specialists to the affected regions upon the adoption of a national-standard rule? 6 While
we do find evidence supporting the former interpretation, our analysis suggests that some of the
changing clinical landscape may stem from corresponding impacts on the composition of
physician supply.

Frakes, Frank and Seabury (2015) builds upon Frakes (2013) which had focused on state-year level data instead of county-year level data and
which had shown that the abandonment of locality rules and the adoption of national-standard rules led to substantial regional convergence in
various obstetric, cardiac, and diagnostic procedures using data from the National Hospital Discharge Surveys. Extending the analysis to a substate unit was helpful given that locality rules themselves operated on sub-state bases.
6
Frakes (2013) controlled for changes in prevailing physician concentration rates—e.g., OB/GYN concentration rates in the case of the obstetrics
utilization convergence analysis—in order to rule out that the observed convergence in clinical behaviors resulting from national-standard-rule
adoptions could be explained by spurious fluctuations in physician supply patterns. However, Frakes (2013) did not consider whether the regional
convergence in clinical practice styles that were driven by the geographical standardization of malpractice-standard rules was accompanied by an
associated convergence in the relative physician mix servicing those regions.
5

7

The paper proceeds as follows. In Part I, we survey the literature on the relationship
between physician supply and medical malpractice law, while also providing background on the
evolution of liability standards in U.S. courts over time. In Part II, we describe the data sources
that we use and in Part III we outline our empirical framework. Part IV describes the results.
Finally, in Part V, we conclude.
I.

Literature Review and Background

A. Physician Supply and Medical Malpractice Law Literature
As alluded to in the introduction, a large literature has investigated whether medical
liability forces are associated with physicians’ supply and location choices, where most such
studies approach this inquiry through the estimation of difference-in-difference specifications
drawing on the adoption of non-economic damages caps and related remedy-focused reforms. 7
Helland and Seabury (2015), Paik et al. (2016) and Mello and Kachalia (2016) provide recent
surveys of this literature. Overall, the findings are mixed, though some studies have found that
caps increase physician supply in certain circumstances. Klick and Stratmann (2007), for instance,
fail to find increases of this nature on overall supply levels when estimating difference-indifference specifications using physician population data from 1981-2000; however, the authors
do find positive effects when estimating triple-differences specifications that differentiate between
high- and low-risk specialties. Drawing upon more recent reforms, Helland and Seabury (2015)
find similar triple-differences results, while Pesko et al. (2017) similarly find stronger supply
responses to caps among high-risk physicians (especially younger high-risk physicians). Matsa
(2007) finds no association between caps and overall supply levels when estimating difference-indifference specifications; however, Matsa does find an increase in supply following damage cap
Medical malpractice studies have also employed this methodological approach to answer other questions, such as whether physicians practice
defensive medicine. See, for example, Kessler and McClellan (1996).
7

8

adoptions in the quartile of counties with the lowest population density. Encinosa and Hellinger
(2005) likewise find an effect that is strongest among rural counties.
In a comprehensive investigation into the supply effects of the most recent wave of noneconomic damages caps, Paik et al. (2016) apply a range of methodological approaches and fail to
find the same pattern of results depicted in the above studies. They find no evidence that caps are
associated with an increase in physician supply, whether in the aggregate, among high-risk
physicians or among rural physicians. Other studies (see, for example, Yang et al. 2008 and
Hyman et al. 2015) similarly find no evidence supportive of the conventional wisdom that liability
pressure impacts physicians’ decision regarding where and whether to practice. 8
B.

Evolution of Malpractice Standard Rules

Rather than engaging in an abstract exercise of what a “reasonable” physician would do
under the circumstances—i.e., the classical approach to setting liability standards in tort law more
broadly—courts in the United States have generally deferred to customary market practices as the
basis of determining the standards generally expected of physicians in malpractice cases. Where
courts have differed, however, is with respect to which physicians one should look to in
determining operable customs. Historically, courts followed a locality rule, whereby appropriate
standards of care were based on local customs—i.e., the care that other physicians in the same area
would customarily provide.
In the latter part of the 20th Century, a number of states abandoned locality rules in favor
of requirements that physicians comply with national standards of care. Frakes (2013) reviewed
both case and statutory law and documented the evolution of each state’s malpractice standard-of-

Though not drawing on the effects of tort reforms, Baicker and Chandra (2005) find a similarly weak relationship between malpractice forces and
physician supply by instead drawing on variations in medical liability premiums. Other studies, however, continue to document some evidence
consistent with the conventional wisdom. See, for instance, Kessler et al. (2005).
8

9

care laws from the mid-1970’s to the present. Table 1 documents this legal evolution (replicating
a corresponding table from Frakes, Frank and Seabury 2015). Specifically, the table identifies 17
states that amended their standard-of-care laws—along the national vs. non-national dimension—
during the study period (16 of which indicate national-standard law adoptions). 9
As discussed in the introduction, the intensity by which physicians practice medicine is
known to be a function, in part, of geography, with some regions characterized by more intensive,
surgical approaches to medicine and others characterized by approaches focused to a greater
degree on medical management. When the geographical scope of liability standards changes—
e.g., as a result of national-standard adoptions—one might therefore expect that the law begins to
place different weight on the intensity of medical practices that it expects of physicians in the
affected regions. These altered expectations, in turn, may bear on the attractiveness, or suitability,
of surgical specialists practicing in those regions. We draw upon this evolution of liability
standards in the U.S. to test this prediction in the analysis below.
For these purposes, we do not simply estimate the association between national-standard
adoptions and prevailing rates of surgeons (unlike the reform specifications estimated in the
damages cap papers discussed above). The impact of national-standard adoptions, after all, is
likely to depend on the baseline—i.e., national standard reforms do not immediately map onto the
intensive-versus-non-intensive spectrum.

Some regions that switch from local to national-

standard rules begin the sample with non-intensive approaches to medicine. It is in these regions
where national standard adoptions may represent a change in clinical standards that may result in
attracting more surgical specialists. Other regions experiencing the relevant reforms begin the
Note that a few states take varying approaches to their standard-of-care requirements according to whether a physician is a general practitioner or
a specialist. Following Frakes (2013), in our analysis we only use laws that either (1) apply to specialists only, or (2) take symmetrical approaches
between general practitioners and specialists We also exclude Texas and Hawaii, as for these states there was conflicting case law that generated
considerable uncertainty in the nature of their standard-of-care requirements. The results of this study are entirely robust to the assumption that
Texas follows a national-standard law throughout the entire sample period, arguably the most accurate reading of its case law.
9

10

sample with levels of practice intensity at the top of the across-county practice-intensity
distribution. If anything, national-standard reforms in these areas might be expected to result in
a shift in the prevailing physician mix away from surgical specialists to the extent that nationalstandard adoptions in these regions arguably amount to the law condoning less-intensive clinical
approaches. Accordingly, to map national-standard reforms onto a spectrum of the intensity of
medical practices expected under the law, our empirical specifications effectively estimate
differential impacts of national-standard reforms across counties depending on the relative
county’s placement in the initial practice-intensity distribution.
A causal interpretation of any estimated association between national standard rule
adoptions and physician supply patterns may be compromised to the extent that national-standard
adoptions are enacted in response to trends in physician supply. A recent analysis by Frakes and
Jena (2016) largely appeases these concerns through a qualitative review of the circumstances
surrounding these reforms. Frakes and Jena first point out that, given the critical nature of the
local-versus-national standard distinction, each reforming state reserved this decision for the
state’s high court, as opposed to the legislature and as opposed to allowing the reform to grow
organically via lower state court decisions. When deciding to abdicate the locality rule, each state
high court made this decision while ruling upon the equities of a specific case, which itself had
dealt with only a particular clinical context—e.g., the use of a local versus a national customary
standard in dosing a particular anesthetic during childbirth. Accordingly, though the abdication
held precedential value for all future clinical contexts—whether or not related to anesthetic
dosing—the judges were likely primarily subjected to evidence pertaining to those single clinical
contexts at issue in the respective abdication cases. Frakes and Jena conclude that these facts are

11

encouraging in that they suggest that national-standard adoption decisions were likely orthogonal
to the broad-based trends under investigation in analyses such as the present.
Despite the fact that courts made these generally precedential decisions in the face of
specific clinical contexts, Frakes and Jena (2016) acknowledge that judges could nonetheless have
been provided with evidence on prevailing health care trends at large through information provided
via briefs submitted by the litigants or by third parties. Frakes and Jena addressed this final concern
by searching historical litigation records, finding no evidence to suggest that third parties
submitted amicus briefs of this nature in the relevant abdication cases. As such, the circumstances
surrounding liability standard reforms raises fewer concerns over external interest group pressures
relative to reforms that are more legislatively based, such as non-economic damage caps. Frakes
and Jena also reviewed the available briefs filed by the parties themselves, which suggest that the
judges were driven by broader principles of equity, as opposed to recent marketplace trends.
Accordingly, one may plausibly view national-standard adoptions as exogenous events to
test predictions that changes in liability standards that expect physicians to follow more intensive
practice styles will, in turn, lead to relatively more physicians practicing in that jurisdiction that
specialize in intensive approaches. Despite any alleviation of concerns over endogeneity that
ensue from this qualitative analysis, in our empirical analysis below, we likewise estimate
dynamic, event-study specifications that test more explicitly for markers that might be indicative
of any violation of the parallel-trends assumption underlying difference-in-difference designs. As
a final exercise in demonstrating the likely exogeneity of national-standard rule adoptions, we
divide counties in quintiles based on their practice intensities (surgery rates) in the first year of our
sample. As demonstrated by Table A1 of the Online Appendix, we find that treatment counties—

12

counties experiencing a locality rule abdication at some point over the same period—are evenly
distributed across these initial-practice-intensity quintiles.
II.

Data and Empirical Specification

For our analysis, we use data on the number of physicians, the intensity of clinical practice
and local area characteristics from the Area Health Resource File (AHRF, formerly the ARF). The
AHRF physician counts are collected from the American Medical Association (AMA) Physician
Masterfile. The AMA Masterfile includes data on the education, training and licensing of more
than 1.4 million physicians dating back to 1906, and the AHRF has compiled these into aggregate
counts of physicians to the county level. The physician counts are broken down by specialty,
although the information is missing for some intermittent years. We use linear projections to
impute data for missing years. The AHRF also includes data on several sources of demographic
and other information relevant for our study, including county-by-year level data on per-capita
income, percent white/black, percent Hispanic origin, percent over 65 years of age, population
density (population per square mile) and the percent falling into various education categories. In
addition to the AHRF, we use as covariates data on other tort reforms from Ronen Avraham’s
Database of State Tort Law Reforms (DSTLR), 4th Edition (Avraham, 2012).10
We merge in information on malpractice standards rules and tort reforms at the state-year
level to our county-by-year level data on physician population and demographics. We focus on
the time frame explored in Frakes (2013)—i.e., 1977-2005—given that this is time period over
which we have information on the evolution of liability standard rules. Table 2 provides summary
statistics for the key variables discussed below. The mean number of physicians per 1,000
residents in the sample is roughly 1.6. The mean ratio of non-surgical specialists to total physicians
The specific reforms we use include noneconomic damage caps, punitive damage caps, collateral source rule reform, joint and several liability
reform and caps on attorney contingency fees.
10

13

is approximately 0.73. We elect to construct the clinical mix ratio with non-surgeons in the
numerator as opposed to surgeons to decrease the incidence of zero-value observations at the
county-year level and thereby allow for better behaved estimation in the difference-in-difference
specifications.
With these data, we estimate the impact of switching from local to national standards in
medical malpractice cases on the percentage of physicians practicing in a county that are not
surgical specialists, along with the impact on the total number of physicians in the affected area. 11
As above, to translate national-standard reforms into reforms that expect physicians to practice
more (less) intensively, we differentially estimate the impact of reforms depending on the
respective county’s initial placement along the distribution of surgery rates across counties, using
information on county-year surgery counts (inpatient and outpatient) also provided by the AHRF. 12
We implement our approach using the following empirical specification:
(1)

,

=

+

+

,

+

×

,

+

+

+

,

+[

]+

,

where c indexes county, t indexes year, and s indexes state.; NSs,t represents an indicator for a
national-standard law (note the use of the subscript s, as the standard law evolves on a state-year
basis); Xc,t contains additional county-year factors (see above); 13 λt represent year effects which
control for fixed differences across years and δc represent county effects which control for fixed
differences across counties. In some robustness checks, we include state-specific linear time

trends, φst, which account for slowly-moving correlations between physician mix in a state and
For these purposes, we focus on active, non-federal physicians.
The AHRF collects these data from information provided in the American Hospital Association (AHA) annual survey. To form surgery rates,
we follow Frakes, Frank and Seabury (2015) and normalize the number of observed surgeries by the number of physicians in the county. This
allows us to capture the average practice style of a given physician operating in that region, which is what we are hoping to achieve in characterizing
a region’s baseline clinical style. Nonetheless, the findings do not differ substantially when instead normalizing by the county resident population.
13
These characteristics include the percent of the population over age 65, percent non-white, percent Hispanic origin, average per-capital household
income, the number of hospital beds per population, the percent of county residents falling into various education categories and the population
density, as well as dummy indicators for the tort reform variables described above.
11
12

14

the adoption of a national-standard law. In our main approach to differentiating counties by initial
practice intensity levels, we follow Frakes (2013) and Frakes, Frank and Seabury (2015) and focus
separately on counties with initially above- and below-average treatment intensity rates—to this
effect, HIc indicates that an initially high treatment-intensity county. 14 The term

,

×

represents the interaction between initially high-intensity areas and the national standard laws. In
alternative specifications discussed below, we retreat from this binary treatment of the distribution
of initial practice intensities and instead interact the national-standard reform indicator with
dummy variables capturing quintiles of the initial practice-intensity distribution across counties.
There are two primary coefficients of interest. The term

1

identifies the extent to which

the adoption of a national-standard law is associated with a change in the relevant outcome variable
for those areas that began the sample with initially low-intensity practice styles—i.e., those with
HI = 0. The term

3

intensity. The sum

identifies how the effect of the standard differs in areas that are initially high
+

represents the combined effect of national standards in the initially

high intensity areas. In other words, this interaction specification allows us to explore the effects
of national standard adoptions separately on: (1) those areas with initially low practice intensities
and with respect to which a national standard adoption arguably entails a heightening of the
practice intensity expected of medical practices and (2) those areas with initially high practice
intensities and with respect to which a national standard adoption arguably entails a reduction in
the practice intensity expected of medical practices.

The variable HIc drops out of the models with county fixed effects. Following Frakes and Jena (2016), we allocate each treatment county to the
relevant group—initially-above or initially-below the national average—based on its relation to the national average in the several-year period
leading up to the reform, as opposed to the actual beginning of the sample period. For treatment states that experience reforms in the middle of the
sample period, this approach ensures that we accurately characterize the nature of the reform bearing on that state at the time of the law change.
We note, however, that the results do not differ when instead determining initially high and low intensity treatment status based on treatment
intensity data in 1977—i.e., the first sample year. We note that the results of this exercise are robust to an alternative framing of county-level
practice intensities based on the initial allocation of surgeons and non-surgeons within each county as opposed to the initial rates of surgery applied
in the respective county (results available upon request).
14

15

We test several versions of this model to check the sensitivity and highlight different
results. We vary the inclusion of covariates, fixed effects and time trends to determine whether
other confounders are possibly driving the results. We also stratify the results according to the
population density of the county to determine whether the effects vary in urban or rural areas. We
also estimate dynamic versions of this model to test for the presence of leads (i.e., pre-existing
trends) or lags in the effect. In all cases we log the dependent variable, so the effect of the standard
rules (which are dummy variables) can be interpreted in percentage terms. Also, for all regressions
we produce variance estimates that are adjusted to allow for clustering at the state level.
In Table 3, we demonstrate the covariate balance within this design. The key component
of this balance analysis is depicted in Column 1 of Panel A, whereby we (1) start by forming
county-year predictions of the proportion of total physicians in the region that are non-surgeons,
based on the results of a regression of actual county-year non-surgeon proportions on the set of
county-year covariates and (2) then estimate the above specified difference-in-difference
specification using the natural log of this predicted non-surgeon proportion as the dependent
variable (leaving out the set of covariates from the regression). Since the predicted physician
composition mix effectively characterizes the collective influence of the covariates, this approach
offers an omnibus means of assessing covariate balance. The results suggest a substantial degree
of balance, with national standard adoptions (whether in initially high or low practice intensity
areas) having a near 0 log-point relationship with predicted values of the physician clinical mix.
The remainder of Table 3 shows corresponding results when focusing on each individual covariate
separately; though with greater noise in each individual case, these separate regressions support
the conclusion that national-standard law adoptions do not appear to be related to various countyyear demographic characteristics.
16

One methodological challenge for our analysis stems from the fact that there are many
counties within the data that do not have a hospital at all (not surprisingly, these are concentrated
largely in rural areas). Some have no hospital presence early in the sample but add a hospital in
the later sample years. Including all counties in our specifications may compromise our ability to
isolate physician recruitment and physician location decision mechanisms insofar as the lack of a
hospital in the first place may leave little room for such mechanisms to operate. With this
consideration in mind, we follow the same approach taken in Frakes, Frank and Seabury (2015)
and estimate specifications that focus on those counties that on average over the sample period
have at least some meaningful hospital presence, which we capture by having at least a mean of
50 hospital beds over the sample. By conditioning our analysis on some baseline level of inpatient
facility supply, we may be able to identify a more continuous relationship between liability
standards and the physician composition mix.15
III.

Results

A. Primary Results: Impacts of National-Standard Reforms on Physician Composition Mix
In Table 4, we estimate the interaction specification indicated in equation (1) and explore
whether changes in liability standards that expect physicians to practice more (less) intensively are
associated with a shift towards relatively more (less) surgical specialists practicing in the affected
regions. The coefficient of the national-standard-law indicator in this specification can be
interpreted as the association between national standard law adoptions in initially low practice
intensity counties and the proportion of physicians that are non-surgical specialists (among all nonfederal patient-care physicians).

In the naïve difference-in-difference specification with no

controls (only county and year fixed effects), we estimate a 2.4 log-point reduction in the share of
In the Online Appendix, we present results without making any such restrictions altogether. These alternative tables demonstrate that this sample
selection choice has little to no consequence on the results.
15

17

non-surgeons, indicating a relative shift towards more surgical specialists as the affected counties
experience a change in the law that calls upon physicians to follow more intensive practice styles.
This estimate does not change as we include other tort reform measures (e.g., damage caps) and
county-year covariates. The estimate falls slightly in absolute terms to -2.1 log points when
including state-specific linear time trends.16
The impacts of national-standard law adoptions in initially high intensity counties arguably
allows us to explore how physician supply patterns change when the negligence standard is altered
so as to condone (or expect) the delivery of less intensive practices. To observe this effect from
the interaction specification, one need only add the coefficient of the national standard indicator
to the coefficient of the interaction variable.

In the final row, we indicative the p-value

corresponding to this sum (derived from an analogous specification that interacts the nationalstandard indicator with an indicator for an initially low-intensity county). Generally, the point
estimate of the relevant sum is close to zero, and the estimate is statistically indistinguishable from
zero. Only in the case of the inclusion of state-specific linear time trends (which we intend more
as a robustness check than our primary specification), is the sum positive and significantly different
from zero. As such, the evidence appears to suggest that changes in liability standards have a onesided effect only. Increasing the intensity of practices expected of physicians may be associated
with a compositional shift towards more specialists; however, once a region has already welcomed
surgical specialists, a change in the negligence standard that leads to arguably less favorable
treatment of high intensity practices, there does not appear to be a retreat from this presence of
surgeons.

The results are not sensitive to the use of logs of the dependent variable. When using the level of the non-surgeon proportion, we estimate a
statistically significant 1.4 to 1.7 percentage point reduction in the non-surgeon proportion following national standard rule adoptions in initially
low-intensity counties.
16

18

All told, this evidence suggests that there may be a fundamental asymmetry in the effect of
the law—in low-intensity areas a national standard rule adoption attracts more surgeons, while in
high-intensity areas it leads to fewer surgeries (Frakes, Frank and Seabury 2015) but has no real
impact on the number of surgeons. There are a number of reasons why this might be the case.
Perhaps it is relatively easier for a surgeon to take a less aggressive approach and perform fewer
surgeries when the law is modified so as to expect less intensive approaches than it is for nonsurgeons to perform more surgical interventions. Or perhaps there is relatively more unused
capacity among surgeons, so it is easier for them to adjust practice styles or the volume of patients
they treat.
B.

Additional Specification Checks

In the Online Appendix, we move beyond this binary treatment of initially high and initially
low intensity regions and consider a more fine-grained response to changes in the liability standard
that map onto changes in expected practice intensity. More specifically, we interact the national
standard rule indicator with dummy variables representing each quintile of initial county-level
practice intensities. This exercise suggests that the biggest swing in the compositional mix of
physicians in the direction of surgical specialists occurs in those counties with the lowest initial
practice intensities—i.e., for those counties arguably experiencing the largest swing in liability
expectations. The estimated impacted of national standard adoptions weakens somewhat (in
absolute terms) in the second quintile, falling by roughly 1.2 log points. By the time we reach the
3rd, 4th and 5th quintiles, the estimated relationship between national-standard laws and the
physician composition mix levels out and is nearly zero in magnitude.
In Figures 1 and 2, we present results from a dynamic, event-study counterpart to the
primary specification discussed above.

For these purposes, instead of estimating a single
19

interaction specification, we separately estimate the impact of national-standard-rule adoptions on
the initially low-intensity samples and the initially-high-intensity samples. In each case, we
include a number of leads and lags of the national-standard-rule adoption indicator and plot the
coefficients of these leads and lags (doing so in a specification that includes county and year fixed
effects, county-year coefficients and other state-year tort reforms). These coefficients allow us to
trace out the differential non-surgeon-to-total-physician rate between treatment counties and
control counties in the years leading up to and subsequent to the abandonment of a locality rule
and adoption of a national-standard rule. Each coefficient is meant to reflect this differential
relative to the reference period characterized by the time preceding the fourth year prior to the
reform.
As demonstrated by Figure 1, we do not observe a discernable trend prior to the nationalstandard adoption which might otherwise call into question the parallel trends assumption
underlying our difference-in-difference approach. There is a small spike in the non-surgeon
proportion differential 4 years prior to the reform, but the differential remains flat in the preceding
three years. Collectively, an F-test on the set of lead coefficients falls to reject the hypothesis that
they are all equal to zero. At the time of the reform itself, the differential in the non-surgeon rate
between treatment and control states falls by over 2.5 log points—reflecting a compositional shift
towards surgical specialists—and remains at roughly this level over the ensuing years. The lack
of a pre-existing trend prior to the reforms also alleviates concerns that we are merely picking up
mean reversion in physician composition mixes. Further alleviating these concerns, we note that
the shift in physician composition we observe in the year following the reform is over 7 times the
magnitude of the average annual change in the percentage of non-surgeons among physicians over
the full sample (focusing on initially low-intensity control counties; we depict this control trend in
20

Figure A1 in the Online Appendix). In other words, while there may be a general trend towards
relatively more surgical specialists among initially low-intensity counties, this trend accelerates
notably upon the adoption of negligence-standard reforms calling for regional convergence in
liability standards.
In Figure 2, we present a corresponding event-study graph focusing on initially highintensity counties—i.e., counties with respect to which national-standard reforms amount to a
change in the law in which courts will condone or expect less intensive practice styles. The
interaction specifications estimated above suggested little impact of national-standard adoptions
on the physician composition of these counties, implying that the negligence standard may work
more as a one-way ratchet on the surgical specialist mix of the physician population. Figure 2
confirms this conclusion, demonstrating on a year-by-year basis little relationship between
physician composition and national-standard-rule adoptions among this group of counties.
C.

Total Physician Concentration Rate

In Table 5, we move beyond an investigation into the compositional mix of physicians in
a region—i.e, the balance between surgical specialists and other physicians—and now estimate
the impact of changing negligence standards on total physician concentration rates (county-year
counts of patient-care non-federal physicians per county-year population). We take the same
approach here as in Table 4 and interact national-standard adoptions with initial practice intensities
of counties to allow us to ask what happens separately when we change standards to expect more
intensive styles and when we change standards to expect less intensive approaches. In general, we
find no evidence that changing expectations of clinical practices by switching to a national
standard deters physicians—in the aggregate—from practicing in an area.

That is, despite

conventional fears to the contrary, we find no evidence of physician flight stemming from locality
21

rule abdications. None of the coefficients on national standards indicate a statistically significant
reduction in the number of physicians practicing in an area. If anything, as we increase the
demands on initially low intensity areas there may be some attraction of physicians (though the
positive coefficients are generally not statistically significant). Moreover, we also do not find
strong evidence of a change in physician concentration rates when national-standard laws are
adopted in initially high intensity practice areas. Again, if anything, the results might suggest an
attraction of physicians to such regions following the abandonment of locality rules.
Above, we found a shift towards relatively more surgeons and relatively fewer nonsurgeons in regions when the law changes so as to expect more intensive standards. Is this change
in the relative mix accomplished by a substitution effect or from a net addition of more surgeons
to a region? It is perhaps difficult to say from the results depicted in Table 5. Though the findings
do not document a statistically significant change in overall physician rates, the estimates are
somewhat noisy.
D.

Results by Population Density Quartile

In the physician supply and malpractice literature, there is a general perception that the
sensitivity to malpractice pressure differs across geographic areas. Matsa (2007) found evidence
of this and argued that it is due to rural physicians facing more uninsured malpractice costs and
more elastic demand for health care. If physicians in rural areas are indeed more susceptible to
malpractice pressure, we might expect that the effect of standards would be different in rural areas.
There are other reasons to consider the effect of changes in the negligence standard on rural and
urban areas separately. Much of the historical discussion surrounding the need for the locality rule
emphasized its rationale within rural areas—suggesting, for example, that it might be impractical
to expect rural areas to follow practice styles elsewhere. Moreover, one might presume that
22

practices in urban areas are heavily shaped by so many influences—competitive forces,
information networks, etc.—that arguably may be more attenuated in rural environments. If this
is the case, physicians may place greater weight on whatever signals are provided via the
malpractice system regarding proper clinical practices (liability fears themselves aside) in rural
regions. Altogether, these different factors suggest that we would expect the impact of a switch to
national standards to be more pronounced in rural areas.
To test this, we follow Matsa and estimate our physician composition mix specifications
for counties in each quartile of population density. We report these results in Table 6. Each
column reports the results of a separate regression for each county population-density quartile. For
the purposes of brevity, we show only the results of our primary specification, which includes
county-year covariates, other state-year tort reforms and county and year fixed effects (though the
results are not sensitive to the various specifications depicted throughout the columns of Table 3).
Generally, the findings appear to support the notion that standards are more binding in rural areas.
The results across population density quartiles are similar to the overall results, with a shift towards
fewer non-surgeons as initially low-intensity areas adopt national standard rules. However, the
relationship is indeed most pronounced in rural counties, with national standards being associated
with an over 6 percent decrease in the proportion of physicians that are non-surgeons in initially
low-intensity counties that fall in the bottom population-density quartile. 17 As before, the effect
appears to be one sided, with the impact of national standard laws on initially high intensity
counties (the sum of the 2 indicated coefficients) being near zero across each quartile.
In the Online Appendix, we replicate the event study analyses depicted in Figures 1 and 2
separately for each population density quartile. When focusing on the most rural counties that
This stronger effect in rural counties is consistent with Frakes, Frank and Seabury (2015) which found stronger impacts in rural regions on
patterns of surgery rates.
17

23

begin with initially low practice intensities, we again see that the shift in the physician mix away
from non-surgeons does not materialize until after the abandonment of the locality rule and the
adoption of a national standard rule, with a roughly 6.1 log-point fall in the differential in the nonsurgeon proportion between treatment and control counties occurring with a 1-year lag following
the change in the law. There is no evidence of this negative trend precipitating the reform itself.
The figures for the remaining quartiles also generally suggest that the decline in the proportion of
non-surgeons associated with the national standard reforms generally materialize at the time of or
with a 1-year lag following the reform (though to a smaller degree than in the case of the most
rural quartile).
E.

Mechanisms of Response Behind Impacts of Reforms on Practice Patterns

Frakes (2013) and Frakes, Frank and Seabury (2015) document a change in utilization of
intensive medical treatments (e.g., cesarean sections, intensive cardiac interventions, overall rates
of surgery) in connection with a shift from local to national standards. Can the swings in the
physician composition mix documented in the present paper explain these previous treatment
utilization findings? That is, are given physicians altering their practices in connection with
changing standards or are observed treatment patterns explained by changes in the type of
physicians practicing in an area? There is perhaps reason to believe that the findings from the
previous national-standard studies reflect a great deal of the former explanation. For instance, as
discussed at length above, national-standard adoptions in initially high-intensity regions do not
appear to be associated with a change in the surgeon/non-surgeon mix, despite the fact that these
prior studies found convergence in practice from both directions—i.e., that the rate of intensive
treatments fell following reforms arguably calling for the delivery of less intensive practice styles.
Even in the case of initially low-intensity regions, we note that the magnitude of the impacts of
24

reforms on surgery rates are higher in percentage terms relative to the percentage impacts on the
rate of surgeons among the physician population. That is, Frakes, Frank, and Seabury (2015)
report an 8-15 log-point increase in surgery rates following national standard reforms in initially
low-intensity regions; whereas above we document only around a 2 log-point increase in the
proportion of surgeons. Moreover, when we modify the specifications estimated in Frakes, Frank
and Seabury (2015) to include controls for prevailing proportions of non-surgeons, the estimated
relationship between national-standard reforms and surgery rates in initially low-intensity regions
falls by only 1 log point.
As such, while changes in the negligence standard may indeed be associated with changes
in the composition mix of physician supply, the bulk of the impact of such reforms may operate
within existing means of supply.
IV.

Conclusion

Though the link between physician supply and medical malpractice law has been the
subject of a considerable literature, scholars to date have largely overlooked a key aspect of
malpractice law that may bear on this discussion—mainly, the negligence standard itself. The law
places particular expectations on the type of practice that physicians must follow; and if physicians
follow such standards, they may avoid liability altogether, even if their actions cause harm to
patients. This fault-based approach to liability is at the core of the American system of tort law.
Moreover, not only may this standard be used to help adjudicate disputes that arise, but it also has
the potential to shape medical practices prospectively and even to shape the type of physicians
attracted to the jurisdiction in the first instance. Those embracing a deterrent rationale for tort law,
in fact, have this very goal in mind. Though the evidence put forth to date collectively suggests
that treatment patterns themselves—taking as given the state of physician supply—are perhaps the
25

most sensitive to changes in the medical liability standard, the results of our present analysis
suggest that the composition of physician supply may also respond. In particular, when standards
change so as to favor more intensive clinical practices, we observe a relative shift towards more
surgical specialists practicing in the affected region.
In discussing reforms aimed at bending the health care cost curve and improving patient
access to care, policymakers frequently invoke the possibility of medical liability reform. Those
in the past frequently turned to remedy-focused reforms, such as caps on non-economic damages
awards. The evidence to date, however, has demonstrated uncertainty as to whether caps may be
able to stem costs (Frakes 2015) and/or improve patient access. Legal scholars and policymakers,
however, have long considered alternative reforms that focus less on the remedy side of liability
and more on its substantive elements, including the manner in which liability standards are
determined. Such alternatives include: (1) the establishment of liability safe harbors for physicians
who comply with specified clinical practice guidelines (Mello 2001, Bovberg and Berenson
2012)18 and (2) the establishment of specialized administrative health courts to resolve medical
liability disputes, reform proposals that are frequently accompanied by proposals to shift from a
custom-based standard of care to a broader avoidable medical-injury standard (Kachalia et al.
2008). Though national-standard rule adoptions are functionally distinct from these alternative
proposals, our analysis can nonetheless be seen as demonstrating the general relevance of liability
standards to physician supply decisions. As such, our findings build upon the existing damagescap-focused literature by shedding light on the potential of reforms to the liability standard in
shaping the specialty landscape of local physician supply chains. To the extent states (or even the

Peter Orszag, former director of the Office of Management and Budget, argued for liability reforms of this nature in a series of opinion-editorial
pieces. See for example, Malpractice Methodology, NY Times A39 (Oct 21, 2010); To Fix US Budget, Reform Medical-Malpractice Law,
Bloomberg View (March 5, 2013); A Better Fix for Medical Malpractice, Bloomberg View (February 25, 2014).
18

26

federal government) proceed to experiment with alternative structures of this nature, future
research may further illuminate their impact on physician supply.

27

References
Avraham, Ronen. (2007). “An Empirical Study of the Impact of Tort Reforms on Medical Malpractice
Settlement Payments.” Journal of Legal Studies 36(S2) (2007): S183-S229.
Avraham, Ronen. (2012). Database of State Tort Law Reforms (DSTLR), 4th Edition.

Baicker, K. and A. Chandra (2005). "The Effect of Malpractice Liability on the Delivery of Health Care."
Forum for Health Economics & Policy 8(4).
Bovbjerg, Randall, and Robert A. Berenson. 2012. “The Value of Clinical Practice Guidelines as
Malpractice `Safe Harbors.’” Urban Institute, Timely Analysis of Immediate Health Policy
Issues.

Carrier, Emily R., James D. Reschovsky, Michelle M. Mello, Ralph C. Mayrell, and David Katz. (2010).
“Physicians’ Fears of Malpractice Lawsuits Are Not Assuaged By Tort Reforms,” Health Affairs
29(9): 1585-92.
Chandra, Amitabh and Douglas O. Staiger (2007). "Productivity Spillovers in Health Care: Evidence
from the Treatment of Heart Attacks." Journal of Political Economy 115(1): 103-140.

Chernew, Michael, Lyndsay Sabik, Amitabh Chandra and Joseph Newhouse. (2009). “Would having
more primary care doctors cut health spending growth?” Health Affairs 28(5): 1327-1335.

Donohue, John, and Daniel Ho. (2007). “The Impact of Damage Caps on Malpractice Claims:
Randomization Inference with Difference-in-Differences,” Journal of Empirical Legal Studies
4(1): 69-102.

Encinosa, William, and Fred Hellinger. (2005). “Have state caps on malpractice awards Increased the
Supply of physicians?.” Health Affairs 24: 250–259.

Frakes, Michael (2013). "The Impact of Medical Liability Standards on Regional Variations in Physician
Behavior: Evidence from the Adoption of National-Standard Rules." American Economic Review
103(1): 257-276.
Frakes, Michael. (2015). “The Surprising Relevance of Medical Malpractice Law.” University of
Chicago Law Review 82(1): 317-91.

Frakes, Michael, Matthew Frank, and Seth Seabury. (2015). "Do Physicians Respond to Liability
Standards." Journal of Institutonal and Theoretical Economics 171(1): 58-77.

Frakes, Michael, and Anupam Bapu Jena. (2016). “Does Medical Malpractice Law Improve Health Care
Quality.” Journal of Public Economics 143, 142-158.

Finkelstein, Amy, Matthew Gentzkow, and Heidi Williams. (2016). “Sources of Geographic Variation in
Health Care: Evidence from Patient Migration.” Quarterly Journal of Economics 131(4): 16811726.
Garthwaite, Craig. (2012). “The Doctor Might See You Now: The Supply Side Effects of Public Health
Insurance Expansions.” American Economic Journal: Economic Policy 4(3): 190-215.
Gudbranson, Emily, Aaron Glickman, and Ezekiel J. Emanuel. (2017). “Reassessing the Data on
Whether a Physician Shortage Exists.” JAMA 317(19): 1945-1946.

Helland, Eric, and Seth Seabury. (2015). “Tort Reform and Physician Labor Supply: A Review of the
Evidence.” International Review of Law and Economics 42: 192-202.
28

Institute of Medicine. (2008). Retooling For an Aging America: Building The Healthcare Workforce.
Available at http://www.iom.edu/∼/media/Files/Report%20Files/2008/Retooling-for-an-AgingAmerica-Building-the-HealthCareWorkforce/ReportBriefRetoolingforanAgingAmerica
BuildingtheHealthCareWorkforce.pdf
Jena, Anupam, Seth Seabury, Darius Lakdawalla, and Amitabh Chandra. (2011). “Malpractice Risk
according to Physician Specialty.” New England Journal of Medicine 365: 629-636.

Kachalia, Allen, Michelle Mello, Troyen Brennan, and David Studdert. (2008). “Beyond Negligence:
Avoidability and Medical Injury Compensation.” Social Science and Medicine 66(2): 387-402.

Kessler, Daniel, and Mark McClellan. (1996). “Do Doctors Practice Defensive Medicine?,”
Quarterly Journal of Economics 111: 353-90.
Kessler, Daniel P., William M. Sage and David J. Becker (2005). "Impact of malpractice reforms on the
supply of physician services." JAMA 293(21): 2618-2625.
Kirch, Darrell, and Kate Petelle. (2017). “Addressing the Physician Shortage: the Peril of Ignoring
Demography.” JAMA 317(19): 1947-1948.

Klick, Jonathan and Thomas Stratmann (2007). "Medical Malpractice Reform and Physicians in HighRisk Specialties." Journal of Legal Studies 36(2): S121-142.
Matsa, David A. (2007). "Does Malpractice Liability Keep the Doctor Away? Evidence from Tort
Reform Damage Caps." Journal of Legal Studies 36(2): S143-182.

Mello, Michelle. 2001. “Of Swords and Shields: The Role of Clinical Practice Guidelines in Medical
Malpractice Litigation.” University of Pennsylvania Law Review 149(2): 645-710

Mello, Michelle M., and Allen Kachalia. (2016). Medical Malpractice: Evidence on Reform Alternatives
and Claims Involving Elderly Patients. A Report Prepared for the Medical Payment Advisory
Commission, available at http://www.medpac.gov/docs/defaultsource/reports/dec16_medicalmalpractice_medpac_contractor.pdf.
Mello, Michelle, Allen Kachalia, and David Studdert. (2017). “Medical Liability—Prospects for Federal
Reform.” New England Journal of Medicine 376: 1806-1808.

Paik, Myungho, Bernard Black, and David Hyman. (2016). “Damage Caps and the Labor Supply of
Physicians: Evidence from the Third Reform Wave.” American Law and Economics Reiew 18(2):
463-505.
Paik, Myungho, Bernard Black and David Hyman. (2013). “The Receding Tide of Medical Malpractice
Litigation Part 2: Effect of Damage Caps.” Journal of Empirical Legal Studies 10(4): 639-69.

Sloan, Frank A. (1990). “Experience Rating: Does It Make Sense for Medical Malpractice Insurance?”
American Economic Review (Papers and Proceedings), 80(2): 128–133.

Skinner, Jonathan. "Causes and consequences of regional variations in health care." Handbook of Health
Economics, Vol 2Vol. 2 (eds. McGuire T, Pauly M, Barros P). Elsevier (2011): 45-93.
Staiger, Douglas, David Auerbach, and Peter Buerhaus. (2009). “Comparisons of Physician Workforce
Estimates and Supply Projections.” JAMA 2012(15): 1674-1680.

Strange, Kevin. (2014). “How does provider supply and regulation influence health care markets?
Evidence from nurse practitioners and physician assistants.” Journal of Health Economics 33: 127.
Wennberg, J. and Gittelsohn (1973). "Small area variations in health care delivery." Science 182(117):
1102-1108.
29

Yang, Y. Tony, David M. Studdert, S.V. Subramanian, and Michelle Mello. (2008). “A Longitudinal
Analysis of the Impact of Liability Pressure on the Supply of Obstetrician-Gynecologists.”
Journal of Empirical Legal Studies 5(1): 21-53.

Zeiler, Kathryn, Charles Silver, Bernard Black, David Hyman and William Sage. (2007). “Physicians’
Insurance Limits and Malpractice Payments: Evidence from Texas Closed Claims: 1990-2003.”
Journal of Legal Studies 36.

Zuckerman, Stephen, Randall Bovbjerg, and Frank Sloan. 1990. “Effects of tort reforms and other factors
on medical malpractice insurance premiums.” Inquiry 27(2): 167-82.

30

-0.06

-0.04

-0.02

0.00

0.02

Differential Rate of Non Surgeons
between Treatment and Control Counties

Figure 1. Impact of National-Standard Adoptions on Non-Surgeon Rates in Initially Low-Intensity
Counties: Event-Study Analysis

-6

-4

-2

0

2

4

Event Time (Years Leading up to and Following Adoption of National Standard Rule)
Differential Non-Surgeon Rate: Confidence Interval

31

Differential Non-Surgeon Rate: Mean

-0.04

-0.02

0.00

Differential Rate of Non Surgeons
between Treatment and Control Counties

0.02

Figure 2. Impact of National-Standard Adoptions on Non-Surgeon Rates in Initially High-Intensity
Counties: Event-Study Analysis

-6

-4

-2

0

2

4

Event Time (Years Leading up to and Following Adoption of National Standard Rule)
Differential Non-Surgeon Rate: Confidence Interval

32

Differential Non-Surgeon Rate: Mean

Table 1. Timing of Adoptions and Repeals of National Standard-of-Care Requirements (replicating Table 1 form
Frakes, Frank and Seabury 2015)
State

Alabama

Colorado

Year
1980

Zellis v. Brown, 382 So. 2d 528 (March 1980).1

Source(s)

1983

Green v. Thomas, 662 P.2d 491 (November 1982); Short v. Kinkade, 685 P.2d 210 (December 1983).2

1999

18 Del.C. § 6801 (amendment effective July 1998).

1992

Vergara v. Doan, 593 N.E. 2d 185 (June 1992).

Mississippi

1983

King v. Murphy, 424 So. 2d 547 (Nov. 1982); Hall v. Hilbun, 466 So. 2d 856 (Feb. 1985).5

Nevada

1979

Connecticut
Delaware

1984

D.C.

1980

Maryland

1994

Indiana

Montana

Logan v. Greenwich Hospital Association, 191 Conn. 282 (September 1983).3
Morrison v. Macnamara, 407 A.2d 555 (October 1979).
Md Code Ann, [Cts&Jud Proc] §3-2A-02(c) (effective July 1993).4

1985

Aasheim v. Humberger, 215 Mont. 127 (February 1985).

New Mexico

1978

Pharmaseal Lab., Inc. v. Goffe, 90 N.M. 753 (September 1977).

Rhode Island

1998

Sheeley v. Memorial Hospital, 710 A. 2d 161 (April 1998).

Oklahoma

South Carolina

1984
1981

Orcutt v. Miller, 595 P2d 1191 (June 1979).

76 O.S. Supp. 1983 § 20.1 (effective September 1983).

King v. Williams, 276 S.C. 478 (June 1981).

South Dakota

1988

Shamburger v. Behrens, 418 N.W.2d 299 (January 1988).

Wyoming

1981

Vassos v. Roussalis, 625 P.2d 768 (March 1981).7

West Virginia
Notes:
1.

2.

3.
4.
5.

6.
7.

1986

Paintiff v. City of Parkersburg, 176 W. Va. 469 (March 1986); W. Va. Code § 55-7B-3 (effective 1986). 6

The Zellis decision was decided by a plurality and its holding did not turn directly on this geographical distinction. Nonetheless, the Supreme
Court of Alabama in Zellis provided a strong, direct indication of their intention to abandon the use of a locality rule in Alabama. This stance
was subsequently strengthened by the Court’s decision in Bryant v. Otts, 412 So. 2d 254 (1982). The results are robust to the use of 1982 as the
relevant date of adoption.

It was not until Jordan v. Bogner, 844 P.2d 664 (January 1993) when the Supreme Court of Colorado spoke definitively on the geographical
scope of the standard of care owed by a specialist physician. However, several earlier cases, including those indicated, adopted requirements that
specialist physicians are to be judged by a standard commensurate with that of a reasonable physician practicing in that specialty. This approach
did not limit the standard to particular geographical bounds, a fact emphasized by subsequent case law. In describing the standard to be applied
to non-specialist physicians, Colorado case law continued to refer to the use of a community standard. As such, in indicating that specialists are
not subject to a locality rule, the Supreme Court in the 1993 Bogner decision cited these earlier decisions as the applicable law and did not
indicate that it was adopting a new approach. For these reasons, I use these earlier rulings, Green and Kinkade, as the turning point in Colorado’s
national-standard requirement for specialist physicians. The findings presented however are robust to the alternative use of 1993 as the year of
adoption and to the exclusion of Colorado entirely.
This position was subsequently codified in Conn. Gen. Stat. § 52-184c.

Maryland had, prior to this time, adopted a national-standard requirement in Shilkret v. The Annapolis Emergency Hospital Association, 276 Md.
187 (October 1975).
King expanded the geographical scope of the standard-of-care requirements to include at least the entire state of Mississippi plus a reasonable
distance beyond the boundaries of the state. For the purposes of this empirical analysis (structured around state-year cells) I consider this
breaking of state boundaries as an abandonment of the locality rule. However, the findings are robust to the use of 1985 as the relevant nationalstandard adoption year, at which time the court fully embraced a national standard in Hilbun.
With respect to specialists, the abolition of the substantive components of the locality rule in West Virginia may arguably be seen as having
begun years before with the West Virginia Supreme Court’s decision in Hundley v Martinez, 151 W. Va. 977 (1967). The presented results are
robust to the exclusion of West Virginia.

In Vassos, the Wyoming Supreme Court stated that “a physician or surgeon must exercise the skill, diligence and knowledge, and must apply the
means and methods, which would reasonably be exercised and applied under similar circumstances by members of his profession in good
standing and in the same line of practice… The skill, diligence, knowledge, means and methods are not those 'ordinarily' or 'generally' or
'customarily' exercised or applied, but are those that are 'reasonably' exercised or applied.” Subsequent case law viewed this 1981 decision as the
turning point in the abandonment of the locality rule. Wyoming subsequently codified the use of a national standard in 1986.

33

Table 2. Summary Statistics for Key Variables
Mean (Standard Deviation)
Physicians Per 1,000 Population

1.56
(0.83)

Proportion of Non-Surgical Specialists (among
Total Physicians)

0.73
(0.06)

National Standard Rule

0.64
(0.48)

Note: Statistics are from a sample of county-year records from the Area Health Resource File and covers the years 19772005.

34

Table 3. Covariate Balance: Relationship between National Standard Adoptions and Covariates, Separately for
Initially High- and Low-Intensity Counties
(1)

Panel A. 1 set of
Covariates

st

National-Standard (NS)
Law Dummy
NS Law * AboveAverage County

Panel B. 2nd Set of
Covariates
National-Standard (NS)
Law Dummy
NS Law * AboveAverage County

OMNIBUS
COVARIATE:
PREDICTED
PROPORTION
OF NONSURGEONS
(LOGGED)
-0.000
(0.003)
-0.001
(0.003)

POPULATION
DENSITY
(LOGGED)
-0.024
(0.049)
-0.021
(0.045)

(2)

(3)

(4)

PERCENT

PERCENT

PERCENT

(LOGGED)

(LOGGED)

(LOGGED)

0.021
(0.062)

0.039
(0.070)

0.023
(0.025)

EDUCATION
GROUP 1
(LESS THAN
9TH GRADE,
LOGGED)
-0.046
(0.077)

EDUCATION
GROUP 2
(SOME HIGH
SCHOOL,
LOGGED)
-0.000
(0.022)

EDUCATION
GROUP 3
(SOME
COLLEGE,
LOGGED)
-0.005
(0.025)

BLACK

-0.062
(0.047)

-0.042
(0.037)

HISPANIC

-0.080
(0.103)

0.023
(0.015)

OVER-65

0.021
(0.020)

-0.025
(0.022)

(5)
REAL

INCOME PER
CAPITA

(LOGGED)
0.051
(0.030)

-0.089***
(0.030)

Note: Each column in each panel represents results from a regression of the indicated dependent variable on a
dummy variable indicating the incidence of a national-standard law along with the interaction of that indicator
with another dummy variable indicating whether the relevant county is an initially above-average-intensity
county. Regressions include county and year fixed effects. Data are at the county-year level. An above-average
county is defined as a county that initially had higher than average utilization of inpatient and outpatient surgical
procedures (coefficient dropped with inclusion of county fixed effects). Regressions are weighted by the size of
the relevant county-year cell (by population). Robust standard errors are reported in parentheses, adjusted to
allow for correlation (clustering) at the state level. A *, ** or ***, indicates statistical significance at the 10%,
5% or 1% level, respectively.

35

Table 4. Relationship between National-Standard Laws and Proportion of Physicians that are Not Surgical
Specialists (Logged), Separately for Initially High- and Low-Intensity Counties
(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

National-Standard (NS)
Law Dummy

-0.024**
(0.010)

-0.023**
(0.009)

-0.024**
(0.010)

-0.021**
(0.008)

P-value of sum of above
2 coefficients

0.351

0.649

0.597

NS Law * AboveAverage County

0.016
(0.012)

0.019*
(0.011)

0.020*
(0.011)

0.035***
(0.011)
0.037

County-Year Covariates

NO

YES

YES

YES

Covariate Tort Reforms

NO

NO

YES

YES

NO

NO

NO

YES

State-Specific Linear
Time Trends

Note: Table reports the difference-in-differences estimates of the impact of national standards laws
on the proportion of physicians that are not surgical specialists (logged) among the physicians in the
respective county-year cell. Data are at the county-year level. Regressions include county and year
fixed effects. An above-average county is defined as a county that initially had higher than average
utilization of inpatient and outpatient surgical procedures (coefficient dropped with inclusion of
county fixed effects). County-year covariates include the percent of the population over age 65,
percent non-white, percent Hispanic origin, average per-capital household income, the number of
hospital beds per population, the percent of county residents falling into various education groups,
and the population density. Robust standard errors are reported in parentheses, adjusted to allow for
correlation (clustering) at the state level. A *, ** or ***, indicates statistical significance at the 10%,
5% or 1% level, respectively.

36

Table 5. Relationship between National-Standard Laws and Physician Concentration Rate (Logged), Separately for
Initially High- and Low-Intensity Counties
(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

National-Standard (NS)
Law Dummy

0.067*
(0.039)

0.030
(0.043)

0.020
(0.045)

0.028
(0.031)

P-value of sum of above
2 coefficients

0.254

0.077

0.118

0.404

NS Law * AboveAverage County

-0.029
(0.032)

0.015
(0.041)

0.033
(0.048)

-0.019
(0.030)

County-Year Covariates

NO

YES

YES

YES

Covariate Tort Reforms

NO

NO

YES

YES

NO

NO

NO

YES

State-Specific Linear
Time Trends

Note: Table reports the difference-in-differences estimates of the impact of national standards laws
on the aggregate number of physicians per capita (logged). Data are at the county-year level.
Regressions include county and year fixed effects. An above-average county is defined as a
county that initially had higher than average utilization of inpatient and outpatient surgical
procedures (coefficient dropped with inclusion of county fixed effects). County-year covariates
include the percent of the population over age 65, percent non-white, percent Hispanic origin,
average per-capital household income, the number of hospital beds per population, the percent of
county residents falling into various education groups, and the population density. Robust
standard errors are reported in parentheses, adjusted to allow for correlation (clustering) at the state
level. A *, ** or ***, indicates statistical significance at the 10%, 5% or 1% level, respectively.

37

Table 6. Relationship between National-Standard Laws and the Proportion of Physicians that are Not Surgical
Specialists (Logged), By Population Density Quartile
(1)
1ST

POPULATION

3RD

POPULATION
DENSITY

(4)
4TH

POPULATION
DENSITY

QUARTILE

QUARTILE

QUARTILE

-0.062*
(0.033)

-0.019
(0.013)

-0.032
(0.024)

-0.021**
(0.009)

0.241

0.884

0.234

0.682

(RURAL)

P-value of sum of above 2
coefficients

2ND

DENSITY

QUARTILE

NS Law * AboveAverage County

(3)

POPULATION

DENSITY

National-Standard (NS)
Law Dummy

(2)

0.075***
(0.025)

0.015
(0.038)

0.020
(0.026)

(URBAN)

0.017
(0.011)

Note: Table reports the difference-in-differences estimates of the impact of national standards laws on
the proportion of physicians that are not surgical specialists (logged) among the physicians in the
respective county-year cell. Data are at the county-year level. Regressions include county and year
fixed effects and county-year controls for the percent of the population over age 65, percent non-white,
percent Hispanic origin, average per-capital household income, the number of hospital beds per
population, the percent of county residents falling into various education groups, and the population
density. An above-average county is defined as a county that initially had higher than average
utilization of inpatient and outpatient surgical procedures (coefficient dropped with inclusion of county
fixed effects). Robust standard errors are reported in parentheses, adjusted to allow for correlation
(clustering) at the state level. A *, ** or ***, indicates statistical significance at the 10%, 5% or 1%
level, respectively.

38

