NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

CHINA'S LOST GENERATION:
CHANGES IN BELIEFS AND THEIR INTERGENERATIONAL TRANSMISSION
Gerard Roland
David Y. Yang
Working Paper 23441
http://www.nber.org/papers/w23441

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
May 2017

We thank Ran Abramitzky, Arun Chandrasekhar, and Mark Rosenzweig, as well as seminar
participants at Columbia, Stanford, Berkeley, Tsinghua University and at the 2016 China
Economic Summer Institute at the Institute for Emerging Market Studies at Hong Kong Uiversity
of Science and Technology for helpful conversations and comments. The views expressed herein
are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of
Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.
© 2017 by Gerard Roland and David Y. Yang. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to
exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.

China's Lost Generation: Changes in Beliefs and their Intergenerational Transmission
Gerard Roland and David Y. Yang
NBER Working Paper No. 23441
May 2017
JEL No. I23,O53,P26,P48,Z1
ABSTRACT
Beliefs about whether effort pays off govern some of the most fundamental choices individuals
make. This paper uses China’s Cultural Revolution to understand how these beliefs can be
affected, how they impact behavior, and how they are transmitted across generations. During the
Cultural Revolution, China’s college admission system based on entrance exams was suspended
for a decade until 1976, effectively depriving an entire generation of young people of the
opportunity to access higher education (the “lost generation”). Using data from a nationally
representative survey, we compare cohorts who graduated from high school just before and after
the college entrance exam was resumed. We find that members of the “lost generation” who
missed out on college because they were born just a year or two too early believe that effort pays
off to a much lesser degree, even 40 years into their adulthood. However, they invested more in
their children’s education, and transmitted less of their changed beliefs to the next generation,
suggesting attempts to safeguard their children from sharing their misfortunes.

Gerard Roland
Department of Economics
University of California, Berkeley
627 Evans Hall, #3880
Berkeley, CA 94720
and NBER
groland@econ.berkeley.edu
David Y. Yang
Department of Economics
579 Serra Mall
Stanford University
Stanford, CA 94305
dyang1@stanford.edu

1

Introduction

Beliefs about whether effort pays off in life outcomes play an important role in the fundamental choices individuals make. They determine work-leisure choices and in general the intensity
of effort individuals put in their professional activities (see e.g. Alesina, Glaeser and Sacerdote
(2005)). They affect parents’ investment choices in their children’s education (see e.g. Alesina and
Angeletos (2005)), and they also determine the extent of support for redistributive policies (see
e.g. Bowles and Gintis (2002), Corneo and Gruner (2002), Alesina and Glaeser (2005), Alesina and
La Ferrara (2005), Alesina and Giuliano (2011)).
Where do these beliefs come from? Economists who have studied the endogenous formation
of beliefs emphasize three main channels: (i) vertical transmission via parents (see e.g. Bisin and
Verdier (2001)), (ii) horizontal transmission via peers, and (iii) learning and updating from personal experiences (Piketty (1995)).
A challenge in research on this topic, especially in relation to the third channel, is that it is
empirically difficult to credibly identify causal factors that lead to changes in beliefs. Experiences
that may shape people’s beliefs are often chosen according to their prior beliefs, leading them to
confirm these beliefs. Such concern is particularly relevant when trying to establisha causal relationship between beliefs on whether effort pays off and individuals’ corresponding experiences.
For example, one cannot infer that experiencing failure in school (e.g. receiving bad grades at exams) induces students to believe that effort does not pay off. Indeed, students who already believe
that effort does not pay off are less likely to study hard than students who believe in the virtue
of effort, and are therefore less likely to receive good grades in the first place. As in this example,
we are typically faced with many self-fulfilling prophecies where particular actions and events are
endogenously chosen on the basis of prior beliefs, which then become self-enforcing.
In this paper, we study a particularly interesting historical episode – the Cultural Revolution in
China (1966-1976) – that has induced abrupt changes in the experiences of certain groups of individuals, which may have subsequently profoundly affected their beliefs on whether effort pays
off. The Cultural Revolution suspended regular higher education for the entire decade, creating the
so-called “lost generation” (or “delayed generation”, e.g. Chen (2007)) that grew up during that
period and was thus deprived of higher education opportunities at an age when youths would
typically consider attending college. The universities reopened and a merit-based admission system resumed in 1977, immediately after the end of the Cultural Revolution. However, the decadelong disruption generated significant opportunity costs of going to college, especially for those
who graduated from high school earlier. For example, many of the college-aspiring high school
graduates would have to give up the jobs that they had already started in order to attend college.
In other words, the Cultural Revolution induced an abrupt shock on high school graduating cohorts’ opportunity costs of going to college for reasons largely outside of their control. Therefore,
many who graduated before the end of the Cultural Revolution simply chose not to compete for
1

entering college. This shock allows us to examine whether differences in the opportunity cost of
attending university (at a time when college degrees were considered a rare privilege) persistently
shaped citizens’ beliefs on whether effort pays off in determining success. Moreover, we investigate to what extent the changed beliefs may affect citizens’ behavior, particularly their decisions
to invest in their children’s education and to transmit such beliefs to the next generation.
Using data from the China Family Panel Study (CFPS), we compare the beliefs and corresponding behavior of high school graduates who did not go on to obtain university degrees versus those
who did, across the cohorts who graduated just before and just after the Cultural Revolution ended
and college admission resumed. Specifically, the ”lost generation” consists of those who would
have gone to college (and hence becoming educated elites) but in reality could not since college
admission was still abolished when they graduated from high school. Had they been born just a
year or two afterwards, they would have graduated from high school just in time to compete in
the college admission exam. In reality, many of them never even tried to compete for admission
because they had already started jobs and it simply became too costly to go back to school.1 When
we zoom in to the narrow window of cohorts graduating from high school just before and just after the end of the Cultural Revolution, the exogenous loss of opportunities due to the suspension of
higher education remains arguably the only difference between those who missed out on higher
education and those who did not across the pre- and post-Cultural Revolution high school graduating cohorts, prior to their high school graduation.2 This allows us to attribute differences in beliefs
and behaviors that we observe among these individuals much later in their lives to the differences
in higher education opportunities that they experienced at youth due to the suspension of higher
education.
We find that high school graduates among the “lost generation” who have missed out on college education are significantly less likely to believe that effort pays off relative to luck, even well
into their 60s. They hold persistent grudges against the government for these lost opportunities,
as they report significantly higher mistrust of government compared to later cohorts. Interestingly, this is especially true among those who are unsatisfied with their current income. It is not
surprising to observe such persistent changes in beliefs. Adolescence and early adulthood are often considered to be formative years (or, impressionable years) in an individual’s life: experiences
1 Although we do not know precisely who among the “lost generation” would have gone to college if the Cultural
Revolution had not taken place, based on college attainment rates from the younger cohorts whose education schedule
was uninterrupted by the Cultural Revolution, they might have constituted in the range of up to ten percent of the high
school graduates.
2 We decide to focus on the end of the Cultural Revolution rather than the beginning for several reasons. First, those
who were admitted just before the beginning of the Cultural Revolution still had their regular college studies disrupted.
Second, even those who finished college just before the beginning of the Cultural Revolution faced significant career
disruption due to the decade-long chaos. Third, college admission system was disrupted at the beginning of the Cultural
Revolution in a manner that was much more gradual comparing to how it was resumed after the Cultural Revolution.
Hence, the discontinuity was not nearly as sharp. Fourth, focusing on early cohorts would significantly constrain the
sample size in the surveys that elicit respondents’ relevant beliefs.

2

during this period can induce effects that last for a lifetime.3 The experience of lost access to university for millions of young Chinese adults due to the Cultural Revolution would thus likely have
quite a transformative impact on their beliefs.
Interestingly, however, this does not readily imply that the impact of the Cultural Revolution
persists to the next generation. In fact, we find suggestive evidence of systematic reversal across
generations. High school graduates from the “lost generation” who missed out on college education spend more on their children’s education expenditures compared to immediately younger
cohorts. In addition, while their acquired larger mistrust towards the government has been passed
down to their children, the “lost generation”’s changed beliefs on the role of effort versus luck are
transmitted to the next generation to a much lesser degree. This pattern of intrageneratinal persistence and intergenerational reversal suggests that when we study the endogenous formation of
people’s beliefs and preferences, it is important to distinguish between those that persist over time
and are transmitted across generations, and those that only have a transitory character (namely,
that are determined only by direct personal experiences but are not transmitted across generations). Whether given events and experiences lead to a persistent or a transitory change across
generations has critical implications for the dynamic evolution of the corresponding beliefs and
preferences. We still know very little about which events and experiences lead to permanent or
transitory changes in beliefs and values. In the conclusion, we will offer some speculative thoughts
about this issue.
These findings contribute to a growing literature that investigates the endogenous formation
of preferences, beliefs, and attitudes. A first strand of the literature focuses on how experiences
affect beliefs and preferences of individuals. Many factors have been explored so far: for example,
being raised during the Great Depression made people more risk-averse, less optimistic (Malmendier and Nagel (2011)) and more pro-redistribution (Giuliano and Spilimbergo (2014)); social
mobility or property ownership makes people less favorable towards redistribution (Alesina and
La Ferrara (2005), Di Tella, Galiant and Schargrodsky (2007)); experiences of living in democratic
regimes may foster democratic support (Fuchs-Schündeln and Schündeln (2015)); experiences of
civil war make people more violent (Miguel, Saiegh and Satyanath (2010)); experience of violence
affects people’s risk preferences (Callen et al. (2014)); trust increases with age (Guiso, Sapienza and
Zingales (2008)); slave trade persistently affected trust in Africa (Nunn and Wantchekon (2011));
living under the welfare state decreases incentives of parents to instill in their children the value
of hard work (Lindbeck and Nyberg (2006)); and traumatic experiences of policy-induced famine
persistently affected citizens’ political trust and attitudes (Chen and Yang (2015)). We add to this
literature by studying the formation of beliefs on whether effort pays off, one critical dimension of
beliefs that has received relatively less attention so far. In addition, by simultaneously observing
3 For

example, Krosnick and Alwin (1989) demonstrate that individuals are highly susceptible to attitude change
during late adolescence and early adulthood. More recently, Giuliano and Spilimbergo (2014) find that individuals
are much more likely to be affected by experiences of economic recessions if these downturns occurred during their
formative years, as compared to those that happened later in life.

3

father-son pairs, our paper explicitly examines the transmission of such beliefs across generations.
Gong, Lu and Xie (2015), in a paper closely related to ours, analyze how being sent to the countryside during the Cultural Revolution affected the non cognitive skills of the adolescents involved.
Compared to the slightly older cohort that did not get sent to the countryside, those who did go
developed less external locus of control, i.e. less belief in the importance of circumstances external to the individual in shaping success. They argue that the reason is that adolescents sent to
the countryside had to work very hard in order to survive in the harsh environment they were
placed.4
Our study also contributes to a second strand of the literature on the endogenous formation
of preferences, beliefs, and attitudes that focuses on documenting their intergenerational transmission. For example, Dohmen et al. (2012) find strong evidence supporting the transmission of
willingness to take risks and willingness to trust others from parents to children. Fernandez, Fogli
and Olivetti (2004) show that men who grew up in households where their mothers worked favor strong female labor force participation . More recently, Houser et al. (2015) find that parents
tend to suppress their children’s propensity to act dishonestly, but they do so significantly more
with respect to daughters than to sons. While a majority of the literature documents persistence
via intergenerational transmission of individuals preferences, beliefs, and attitudes, our findings
provide one of the rare pieces of evidence showing that certain beliefs can persist within individuals’ own life time, and reverse (potentially strategically so) across generations. These findings on
intergenerational reversal in beliefs echo the theoretical work on strategic transmission of preferences and beliefs when parents are altruistic yet “imperfectly empathetic” towards their children
(Bisin and Verdier (2001)).
Lastly, we contribute to a growing empirical literature examining the consequences of government policies in China on its citizens. For example, Li, Rosenzweig and Zhang (2010) show
that the “Mass Sent-Down Movement” during the Cultural Revolution triggered the revelation of
favoritism and guilt within households, and affected intra-household transfers. Cantoni et al.
(forthcoming) show that the “moral and politics” curriculum effectively shapes contemporary
high school students’ political and economic ideology, making them more aligned with the state’s
agenda. Perhaps more closely related in theme, Bai and Jia (2016) show that abolishing the civil
service exam in late Qing Dynasty led the would-be educational elites to revolt against the imperial regime. Our study examines a historical episode that similarly terminated (temporarily in the
case of Cultural Revolution) the mobility channel via higher education, and the grudges that we
identify among the “lost generation” echo the anger and even desperation caused by the abolition
of the imperial exam system in the early 20th century.
The rest of the paper proceeds as follows: in Section 2, we describe the disruption of higher
education during the Cultural Revolution; in Section 3, we present a simple model to help frame
thoughts on various forces at play in the empirical context we study; in Section 4, we describe
4 Interestingly,

they use the same data on beliefs that we are using but interpret them as non cognitive skills instead.

4

our empirical strategy and discuss the threats to identification; in Section 5, we present results;
in Section 6, we test the robustness and discuss various aspects of our results; and finally we
conclude in Section 7, discussing what we can learn from these results.

The Cultural Revolution (1966-1976) and the disruption of higher ed-

2

ucation
2.1

Massive socio-political movement

The Cultural Revolution in China was a nationwide mass movement launched by Mao Zedong in
1966.5 Having been partly sidelined inside the party after the disastrous policy of the Great Leap
Forward, Mao called on the “masses” to revolt against the “bourgeois” headquarters and the bureaucrats inside the Chinese Communist Party (CCP) as well as against the government officials
who had abandoned the “pure” revolutionary ideology and adapted bourgeois thinking and behavior. Mao encouraged the Red Guards, militias formed among students and young people, to
go all over the country to spread the Cultural Revolution. The whole country was supposed to
“remodel their world view” and abandon non-revolutionary ideas and practices.
All this led to a decade-long chaos in the country. Parts of the government and the CCP were
paralyzed, millions of cadres were demoted and denounced in mass trials. Competing groups
of Red Guards fought each other. Although scholars disagree on the exact estimates, few would
oppose the fact that hundreds of thousands of individuals died during the Cultural Revolution
because of the violence and mayhem it has caused (see, among others, Harding (1987)). Economic
development was brought to a halt due to the chaos and disruption. Ancient Chinese culture was
denounced as counterrevolutionary and Red Guards destroyed large parts of the rich Chinese
cultural patrimony: monuments, paintings, books, etc.

2.2

Disruption of higher education

Higher education was disrupted because it was suspected of transmitting bourgeois values. Universities closed down since the beginning of the Cultural Revolution. While some gradually reopened starting from 1970, many remained closed until the end of the Cultural Revolution. Among
those universities that were open during the Cultural Revolution, no regular college degrees were
granted during that period. The Gaokao, the meritocratic entrance exam to universities was abolished in 1966. Entrance to universities was reserved to working class children upon grassroots
recommendation, i.e. was reserved to those who had shown activism in the Cultural Revolution
and were of the right “class origin.” Education was disrupted as the professors had been demoted
and sent to the countryside to be “reeducated.” Most traditional classes were replaced by “revolutionary” classes. For example, traditional medicine was considered bourgeois and was abandoned
5 Formally,

the movement is named the “Great Proletarian Cultural Revolution.”

5

in universities. Doctors were replaced by “barefoot doctors” with minimum education performing traditional Chinese medicine based on acupuncture. Figure 1 shows that there was a sharp
drop of university students between 1966 and 1970. The number started picking up again during the last years of the Cultural Revolution, as the universities gradually started to operate again
(although merit-based admission system remained absent).

2.3

Resumption of college admission in 1977

The Cultural Revolution ended abruptly with the death of Mao Zedong in October 1976. The Gang
of Four (it included Jiang Qing, Mao’s wife) who had led the CCP during that period were immediately arrested after Mao’s death. Among the first policies that were enacted immediately
following the end of the Cultural Revolution, was the college entrance exam (Gaokao) that was reintroduced in 1977 after a ten year interruption.
Considering the timing of high school graduation and college admission, which cohorts were
affected by the disruption of regular higher education due to the Cultural Revolution? The first
cohort affected was the 1948 birth cohort supposed to enter university in 1966. The last cohort
affected was the 1958 birth cohort of age to enter university in 1976. The resumption of the Gaokao
in 1977 set the path to undo the disruptions brought to higher education by the Cultural Revolution, and the cohorts born in 1959 and after were hence able to experience the regular educational
schedule without any delay. Those born between 1948 and 1958 who would have gone to university immediately after they graduated from high school (if they wished to) were thus negatively
affected by the Cultural Revolution, due to the increased opportunity cost. In fact, it has been argued that many of the misfortunes this generation experienced during the later parts of their lives
can be attributed to their lost opportunities for higher education (Chen (2007)).
It is important to note that older high school graduating cohorts were allowed to take the
exam after 1977. Hence, while the opportunity cost to attend college dramatically increased, it
was not infinite. Figure 2 shows the admission rate of each year’s Gaokao since its resumption
in 1977. One can see that the 1977 Gaokao was particularly competitive, largely due to the fact
that test-takers during that year not only came from the 1977 high school graduating cohorts, but
also partly from previous cohorts who were determined enough to try to go back to school. In
fact, many of the older cohorts did not attend the Gaokao at all, as it had been too many years
since they had finished high school. They may have become discouraged or had lost too much
of the knowledge acquired in high school to become competitive in the Gaokao.6 In addition, and
arguably more critically, many had a job, or even had already started a family, so that going back
to college became unfeasible as they could not afford to lose their income for a number of years.
6 There, however, are no exact figures on the number of members of older cohorts who successfully passed the
Gaokao.

6

3

Conceptual framework

In this section, we build a very simple model of college admission in China that incorporates the
main features we are interested in for our empirical analysis. In particular, the model captures the
effect of suspending and then restarting the college admission exam on various cohorts. Having
such a model clarifies the discussion for our empirical strategy to analyze how the experience
of the “lost generation” affected their posterior beliefs on whether effort pays off. We start by
analyzing the optimization choice of individual students in preparing for college admission, as a
function of their ability, prior beliefs on whether effort pays off, the years lost after high school
and the competition for admission.

3.1

Setup

The model is comprised of the following key elements:
• Call R the expected return from going to college. It can be seen as the expected net present
value of all future income. Since our paper is not about returns to education, we keep that
part of the model as simple as possible.
• Call p the perceived probability of successfully passing the Gaokao. Assume that this probability, and accordingly the expected gross return from preparing for the exam, depends on
three key factors, denoted e, b and γ. First, the probability of success depends positively on
effort provided e, which is the choice variable of the individual. We assume that p(e, b, γ) is
a concave function of effort. Effort here should be understood broadly. It is not just the time
and investment spent on preparing the Gaokao, but includes all choices made by the individual that affect the probability of being admitted. Second, we assume that the probability of
success depends positively on the prior belief in effort versus luck, b. We assume in partic∂2 p
∂e∂b

> 0. In other words, when an individual holds higher prior belief that effort
pays off (higher b), the higher is her effort’s (e) perceived marginal impact on the probability
of successful admission. This aspect of our model is important to understand the effect of
selection on prior beliefs in the admission process, a key feature in the empirical analysis.
Third, we assume that p depends on the level of competition for admission, called γ. This
is important because the first years after the college admission exam was resumed, the competition became more severe (as is evident in Figure 2). In particular, students eligible that
year had to compete with people from previous cohorts who were willing to take the exam
∂2 p
but had been prevented from doing so. We assume that ∂e∂γ < 0. i.e. holding everything
else equal, higher competition reduces the marginal impact of effort.
ular that

• Call c the cost of effort. Assume that c(e, a, θ ) is convex, where a is ability and θ is the delay
in being eligible to take the Gaokao. We assume that
7

∂2 c
∂e∂a

< 0, namely, the cost of effort for a

given level of effort decreases with ability. This is a reasonable assumption since higher ability people have more facility with studying, and thus face a lower cost of effort. We assume
∂2 c
∂e∂θ

> 0,. In other words, those born before 1959 face a
much higher marginal cost of effort in preparing for the Gaokao. This is also very reasonable.
Stopping to study for a number of years makes it harder to start again. Moreover, many people from those cohorts already had jobs, some had started families and had children to take
care of. Accordingly, the cost of effort in preparing for the Gaokao was much higher for those
cohorts. In addition, we assume that a and b are distributed independently, which seems to
be the most natural assumption to make.
that c increases with θ and also that

3.2

Equilibrium choice of effort and comparative statics

High school student i eligible for the Gaokao thus faces the following maximization problem:
max p(e, b, γ) R − c(e, a, θ )
e

The optimal choice of effort e∗ for student i thus solves the following first order condition:
∂p(e, b, γ)
∂c(e, a, θ )
R=
∂e
∂e
Given that p is concave in e, and c is convex in e, we know a maximum will exist and satisfy the
above first order condition.
Before doing some comparative statics, note first that it might be optimal not to put any effort
in the Gaokao, and thus not to participate. This will be the case if at the optimum level of effort
e∗ ≥ 0, p(e, b, γ) R − c(e, a, θ ) ≤ 0. In particular, suppose for each student i, s(e, a, b, γ, θ, R) is the
indicator regarding whether he decides to skip the Gaokao and not participate at all. We hence
∂ ∑ si
∂θ

> 0. This means that the proportion of students who would decide not to participate in
the Gaokao at all increases if these students experienced longer delay in being eligible to take the
Gaokao.
have

Proposition 1: Call b̃, γ̃, ã and θ̃, the values of b, γ, a, θ at which p(e, b, γ) R = c(e, a, θ ) at e∗

≥ 0. Everything else equal, those with b ≤ b̃, a ≤ ã, γ ≥ γ̃, θ ≥ θ̃, will not participate in the gaokao.
These conditions are quite intuitive. Note that these are sufficient conditions. Indeed, at
p(e, b, γ) R = c(e, a, θ ) at e∗ ≥ 0, there are tradeoffs between beliefs, ability, competition and delay.
For those who decide to participate in the gaokao and for which e∗ > 0, several simple comparative statics results follow.
∂2 c
∂e∂a

< 0, e∗ increases monotonically with ability. The marginal cost of effort
will be higher for people of lower ability, thus leading to a lower equilibrium effort for the

• First, given that

8

less able. If ability is normally distributed, there will be a higher proportion of students
admitted among the more able, thus leading to a higher mean level of ability among those
de∗
da

> 0. At the optimum, for
2
∂2 c
the marginal cost to be unchanged, a change in e∗ and a must satisfy ∂e∂a
da + ∂∂2 ce de∗ = 0. We

admitted compared to those who were not admitted. Formally,
thus have

de∗
da

2

=

∂ c
− ∂e∂a
∂2 c
∂2 e

• Second, given that
by an increase in

, which is positive because of our assumptions on the cost function.

∂2 p
∂e∂b >
∂c(e,a,θ )
.
∂e

0, a higher b will lead to a higher

∂p(e,b,γ)
.
∂e

This must be matched

This means that a higher equilibrium level of effort is chosen.

Indeed, people with a higher b will think there is a higher probability of return on effort
for a similar effort level, and will thus choose a higher e∗ . Formally, varying e and b at the
first order condition, we have

∂2 p
∂e∂b Rdb

+

∂2 p
Rde∗
∂2 e

=

∂2 c ∗
de .
∂2 e

∗

We thus have de
db =

∂2 p
∂e∂b R
2
∂2 c
− ∂ 2p R
∂2 e
∂ e

This

expression is positive since the numerator is assumed positive and the denominator is also
positive by convexity of c(e, a, θ ) and concavity of p(e, b, γ) with respect to e. An immediate
but important implication follows from this. Since those with a higher b will choose a higher
level of effort, this will increase their chance of being admitted. The mean level of prior belief
b will thus be higher among those admitted than among those non admitted. Remember
that we assume that a and b are distributed independently. Calling E(b A ) the expected level
of b for those admitted, and E(b N A ) the expected level of b for those non admitted, we have
E ( b A ) > E ( b N A ).
• Third, an individual with a higher θ will choose a lower level of equilibrium effort compared
to somebody of similar ability with a lower θ or with θ = 0 (those who suffer no delay in
admission). Formally,

de∗
dθ

=

∂2 c
∂e∂θ

2
∂2 p
R − ∂2 c
∂2 e
∂ e

, which is negative given our assumptions. Those with

a higher θ who are admitted must thus have a higher mean level of ability and prior beliefs
than those with a lower θ. Therefore the pool of admitted among those with a higher θ must
be of higher mean ability (or higher prior beliefs). E( a A ) and E(b A ) thus increase with θ.
Since ability and θ are independent, a higher mean ability for those admitted means that less
of those with a high θ are admitted compared with those of lower θ. There are thus high
ability individuals with a higher θ who are left out compared to those with a similar ability
and with a lower θ. The mean level of ability for those left out is thus also higher for those
with a high θ than for those with a lower θ. The same reasoning holds for prior beliefs. Those
admitted with a higher θ will have a higher mean level of b. Importantly, this implies thus
also that the mean level of b among those left out will be higher for those with a higher θ.
• Fourth, an increase in γ will lead to a lower level of e∗ for all levels of a and b, which will
reinforce the selection on ability and prior beliefs for those with a higher θ.
• Finally, given our discussion, call Fθ A ( a) and Gθ A (b) the c.d.f. of those admitted as a function
9

of a and b, respectively, for a given level of θ. Remember that these two are assumed to be
independently distributed. Then it follows that for all θ ” < θ 0 , Fθ ” A ( a) and Gθ ” A (b) stochastically dominate Fθ 0 A ( a) and Gθ 0 A (b). Calling Pθ A the proportion of admitted in cohort θ, it
also follows that Pθ ” A > Pθ 0 A .

This discussion can be summarized by the following proposition:
Proposition 2: (i) Equilibrium effort e∗ in preparation for admission increases with a and b and
decreases with θ and γ; (ii) E(b A ) > E(b N A ) and E( a A ) > E( a N A ), and given that the distribution
of ability and beliefs are assumed to be the independent of θ, E( a N A ) and E(b N A ) increase with θ;
(iii) for all θ ” < θ 0 , Fθ ” A ( a) ≤ Fθ 0 A ( a) , Gθ ” A (b) ≤ Gθ 0 A (b), and Pθ ” A > Pθ 0 A .
Selection into college based on prior beliefs

Importantly, the result that E(b N A ) increases with

θ will be particularly useful for our empirical analysis. Since the members of the “lost generation” experience delay of entering college (θ), comparing to later cohorts by definition, the model
implies that those among the “lost generation” who chose not to go to college or did not get admitted to college have a higher E(b N A ). The basic intuition is that a higher θ increases the cost
of effort. This can only be compensated by a combination of higher ability and a higher level of
prior beliefs. Given that ability and prior beliefs are assumed to be the same across cohorts, i.e. to
be independent of θ, it means that those admitted, who are less numerous are selected on a and
b. Mutatis mutandis, the mean level of a and b among those not admitted is also higher. In other
words, both E( a N A ) and E(b N A ) increase with θ. This suggests that if we find that members of
the lost generation who were not admitted to college have lower average beliefs in the payoff of
effort, it cannot be due to a selection effect of prior beliefs (b) and the corresponding equilibrium
probability of admission into college (p), since the selection effect goes in the other direction. It is
hence likely due to changes in posterior beliefs, and this is what we examine next.

3.3

Posterior belief on whether effort pays off

Next, we examine how people may adapt their (posterior) beliefs based on their college admission
experience.7 Assume that people adapt their beliefs on whether effort pays off or not as a function
of the actual outcomes of their college education attainment, and the expected outcome that they
would consider as “fair.” Specifically, in the context of the Cultural Revolution and the “lost generation,” we consider a fair expected outcome given a certain level of effort to be the counterfactual
probability of getting into college if the cohorts had faced no disruption in the higher education
schedule.
7 Note

that we are not modeling explicitly the process of Bayesian belief updating on the payoff function of effort.

10

Assume that changes in beliefs depend on the following function F that compares actual outcome with the expected fair outcome:8
∆b = F (y − ye)
where y is an observed experienced outcome and ye is an expected outcome.
In particular, we assume the expected “fair” outcome ye is the equilibrium expected probability
e are under “fair” conditions – when there is no delay
of getting into college when perceived θe and γ
(θ = 0) and when admission competition is at the level of normal years.
If y is close or equal to ye, then the outcome will be perceived to be fair to the effort, and hence
posterior beliefs on whether effort pays off or not will not change from the prior beliefs: ∆b = 0. If y
is larger than ye, then ∆b > 0, as people adjust their beliefs upward, relatively more likely to think

that effort pays off (than what is previously expected). On the contrary, if y is smaller than ye, then
∆b < 0, since people observe an outcome level lower than what they have previously expected (in

equilibrium).
If we adapt this framework to our model, then we can consider the perception of an individual
eligible for the admission exam with ability a. Under “fair” (or normal) circumstances, there is no
e. Assuming
perceived delay, i.e. θe = 0 and competition is at the corresponding expected level γ
that that individual knows his ability a and prior beliefs b, he can estimate his level of effort input
e. This would lead to an estimate of the “fair” return of effort,
as e
e∗ as a function of θe = 0 and γ
e) .
namely, the probability of college admission pe = pe(e
e∗ , b, γ
e∗

e. He would hence choose
In reality, a member in the “lost generation” faced θ > 0 and γ > γ
∗
= e( a, b, γ, θ ) < e
e , and experience the actual college admission with lower likelihood (p < pe).

Given our assumptions on belief adaptation, this leads to ∆b = F ( p − pe) < 0. We thus have the
following proposition:
e lead to ∆b < 0.
Proposition 3: An increase in θ above θ = 0 and an increase in γ above γ
This result is quite straightforward but goes in the opposite direction of the selection on beliefs
among non-admitted students discussed above. We will thus see in the empirical analysis to what
extent it is relevant.

4

Empirical strategy

In this section, we first describe our data sources. We then introduce our empirical strategy, and
discuss the identification assumption and threats to identification.
8 This

follows the same structure on the perception of fairness as in, for example, Fehr and Schmidt (2003), and
Alesina and Angeletos (2005).

11

4.1

China Family Panel Study (CFPS)

For the main analyses of this paper, we use data from the China Family Panel Study (CFPS).
Key demographic characteristics are measured in the baseline wave conducted in 2010, and the
2nd wave in 2012 elicits various beliefs of interest, such as whether effort pays off as well as
trustworthiness of the local government.
Overview of CFPS CFPS is a large-scale, almost nationally representative panel survey project
conducted by the Institute of Social Science Survey at Peking University.9 The 25 provinces of
China covered by CFPS represent about 95% of the Chinese population in mainland China, with
only Inner Mongolia, Xinjiang, Tibet, Hainan, Ningxia, and Qinghai excluded from the overall
sample. Through a multistage probability sampling procedure, CFPS completed interviews with
a total of 14,798 sampled households and all individuals living in these households, amounting
to 36,000 completed adult observations. Crucially, parents and co-resident children are independently surveyed, making it possible to observe the beliefs and attitudes of both parents and children elicited in the same physical environment around the same time.
Baseline sample restrictions

For our baseline estimations, we restrict the sample to individuals

who have completed at least high school, and were born between 1957 and 1960. These restrictions
allow us to focus on individuals who were eligible to apply for college (or, take the Gaokao), and
graduated from high school up to two years before the resumption of the college admission exam
in 1977, or two years after. This is our preferred sample frame because the two year window width
ensures that the abrupt changes in college admission policy in 1977 occurred during students’
course of study at high school. In other words, the two year window width rules out the possibility
that students could foresee the changes in college admission opportunities, and adjust their high
school attendance decisions accordingly.10 Overall, we have 509 observations: 21 pre-1959 cohorts
with college degree or above, 238 without; and 30 post-1959 cohorts with college degree or above,
and 220 without. This is not a large number of observations, but if we find significant effects with
that relatively small sample, this should be indicative of significant belief changes for the “lost
generation”.
Key outcome of interest

The CFPS elicits citizens’ belief on the payoff of effort in the following

way: “On a scale of 1-5, to what extent do you agree that ‘effort and hard work pays off’,” where
1 indicates strong agreement and 5 strong disagreement.
9 Detailed
10 We

information about the CFPS project can be found at www.isss.edu.cn/cfps.
test the sensitivity of this empirical design with a variety of sample window width in Section 4.4.

12

4.2

Pseudo regression discontinuity design

In order to identify the impact of the Cultural Revolution and its suspension of higher education on
the beliefs and behaviors among the “lost generation,” we compare individuals born just before
1959 who missed out on college (but were eligible) with those born in 1959 and just after, whose
college education schedule was uninterrupted since they graduated from high school in or after
1977.
Specifically, we estimate the following pseudo-regression discontinuity model:
yic =α NoCollegei + β BirthYearc + δ Pre1959Cohortc

+ γ Pre1959Cohortc × NoCollegei + eic
where yic is the dependent variable (individual beliefs and corresponding behaviors) (i stands for
individual and c for cohort); NoCollegei : is a dummy variable taking a value of 1 for those who
did not attend college.We control for linear cohort trend (BirthYearc ), and introduce a fixed effect
for the two cohorts born before 1959 (Pre1959Cohortc ).
The parameter of interest for our estimation is γ, which captures the differential effect from
the lack of college education, among pre-1959 cohorts that were eligible for college (compared to
post-1959 cohorts). It is important to note that the Pre1959Cohortc × NoCollegei indicator includes
high school graduates who would have chosen to go to college if they were able to take college
admission exam right after high school graduation, but in reality could not due to the Cultural
Revolution. Since the Pre1959Cohortc × NoCollegei indicator also includes individuals who would
not have gone to college even if they graduated after the Cultural Revolution,11 if we find that γ is
significantly different from zero, this suggests that the effect among those who were actually hurt
by the Cultural Revolution is quite strong.
Note that the education attainment indicator itself does not distinguish between those individuals who started college during the Cultural Revolution when admission was not meritocratic
but politicized and those who started afterwards. Nevertheless, this would only downwardly bias
our estimate, since our model suggests that the college admission exam positively selects students
who have higher prior beliefs on the payoff of effort. In other words, we have a type-II error
where we “mistakenly” identify some people with low prior beliefs (and who attended college
not through the merit-based exam) as individuals who exert effort and pass the exam. As a result
of that type-II error, the sample of those that did not attend college may have on average higher
prior beliefs in the payoff of effort relative to those that did attend.
Features of the pseudo-RD design

By focusing on the cohorts graduating from high school close

to the 1977 cutoff (namely, birth cohorts close to the 1959 cutoff), we eliminate many potential
11 This

is because only a minority (roughly 10 percent) of high school graduates choose to take the college admission
exam in any given year.

13

confounding factors that are affecting the “lost generation” other than the suspension of higher
education (see the following section for detailed discussions).
In addition, the narrow window of comparison brings three advantages to our identification.
First, it allows us to focus on cohorts for whom having been born in the “right” or “wrong” years
with respect to college admission opportunities was highly salient (arguably a lifetime experience). The “lost generation” faced an exogenously imposed sharp shock in the prospect of higher
education, which they would have avoided if they were born just a year or two later. Second,
while the pre-1959 birth cohorts could choose to go back to college by taking the 1977 college
admission exam, the narrow window comparison enables us to hold fixed the college entrance
exam competitiveness (conditional on taking the exam), since all the relevant cohorts took either
the 1977 or 1978 exam to enter college after the Cultural Revolution. This means that differences
in competitiveness of the admission exam after 1977-78 will not affect our estimates. Third, as
we briefly discussed previously, all 4 cohorts of students entered high school without the expectation that by the time they graduated, they could enter college via a merit-based exam. In other
words, there is no differential selection due to expected prospect post graduation among those
who decided to attend high school.12

4.3

Identification assumption and threats to identification

Our identification via the pseudo-RD design relies on the standard RD assumption that all relevant factors besides “treatment” must vary smoothly at the cutoff boundary. More specifically,
the empirical identity strategy assumes that among 1957 to 1960 birth cohorts, the ability to take
college admission exam right after high school graduation is the only relevant abrupt change that
occurred to the post-1959 cohorts of high school graduates, due to the resumption of the exam in
1977.
Our pseudo-RD design readily rules out several confounding factors that might drive the results. First, differences in beliefs between the “lost generation” that missed out on college education and the younger cohorts may be due to gradual changes in broad socioeconomic conditions
over time, such as for example economic development and political changes. Our comparison of
cohorts born very closely around the 1959 cutoff year rules out such concerns. Second, factors that
may affect beliefs but are not cohort-specific cannot drive the results, because our empirical design
identifies the abrupt break in cohort trend around the 1959 cutoff. Third, factors that are cohortspecific but orthogonal to higher education attainment cannot drive our results, as we make it
explicit in the empirical design that the abrupt change in 1959 birth year cutoff is also particularly
related to higher education opportunities.
Our identification would be threatened by additional abrupt changes at the level of Pre1959
Cohortc × NoCollegei that are not the resumption of the college admission exam in 1977. To the
12 However,

this also indicates that these might not be the “regular” high school students that one may expect after
the college admission exam was resumed.

14

best of our knowledge, there is no other known major historical episodes that affected particularly
the pre-1959 cohorts who missed out on college education. In particular, note that by restricting
our sample to high school graduates, we effectively focus on the urban population during the
period of the Cultural Revolution, that remained largely unaffected by the fatal Great Chinese Famine
(1959-1961) that was prevalent among the rural population, which indeed represented a major
disruption for the rural population. We next go on to demonstrate that a wide range of observable
characteristics are “balanced” at the level of Pre1959Cohortc × NoCollegei .

4.4

Balance checks

In order to make sure there were no trend-breaking shocks around the 1959 birth year cutoff that
did not attend college, we check the balance of characteristics across that cutoff year.
We first examine whether high school graduates born before 1959 and after 1959 significantly
differ in terms of a range of background characteristics. In Table 1, columns 1 and 2, we present
the mean level of personal characteristics (such as gender, ethnicity, biological traits) and family
characteristics (such as geographic location, parental educational attainment, and parental political status) for cohorts born before 1959 and those born after 1959, respectively. Column 3 shows
the p-values for a t-test of differences in these means, one characteristic at a time. We do not
see evidence of high school graduates before and after 1959 exhibiting significantly differences in
terms of most of the characteristics examined here.
Next, we investigate to what extent this pattern of no-difference across the 1959-cutoff year is
sensitive to our choice of preferred window width (2 years before 1959, and 2 years after 1959). We
extend the sample frame on both ends of the window one cohort at a time, and we test whether
the previously examined background characteristics significantly differ before and after the 1959
cutoff among high school graduates born between the new cohort frames. In column 4, we show
the p-values, testing for differences in means for cohorts born between 1956 and 1960 (hence extending the sample by one cohort to the left). In columns 5, 6, 7, and 8, we show the corresponding
p-values for cohorts born between 1957 and 1961, between 1956 and 1961, between 1955 and 1962,
and between 1954 and 1963, respectively. One can see that overall, the pattern of no abrupt change
around 1959 cutoff year is not sensitive to differences in sample window widths. However, as we
widen the window of cohorts to include in the sample, certain variables (e.g. total number of
siblings) do become marginally significantly different across the cutoff.
Finally, we check whether these observable characteristics differ at the level of Pre1959Cohortc ×
NoCollegei , which is the main source of threat to our identification. Table 2, columns 1 and 2,
presents the overall mean and standard deviation of the background characteristics of interest
among high school graduates born between 1957 and 1960, the preferred sample window width.
Columns 3 and 4 present the mean of these characteristics for individuals born before 1959, without and with college degree, respectively. Similarly, columns 5 and 6 present the mean levels for
individuals born after 1959, without and with college degree, respectively. Column 7 presents the
15

difference in the mean of characteristics between those without and with college degrees, across
cohorts born before and after 1959, and column 8 shows the p-values for a test of whether this
difference in differences is significantly different from zero.
As one can see, among the basic demographic characteristics examined here, there is no significant difference in gender or being of Han ethnicity. In addition, we examine (self-reported) weight
and height as measures of general health, since one may be concerned that the various cohorts we
are looking at were at a young age at the time of the Great Leap Forward and the ensuing Great
Chinese Famine(1958-1961), and this might have left some effects on particular cohorts.13 We see
that those who did not go to college have a significant lower weight, but there are no cohort effects.
There is no significant difference in height. For a variety of household and parental characteristics,
again we do not see evidence of the difference at the level of Pre1959Cohortc × NoCollegei . For
example, individuals with college degrees are much more likely to be residing in urban areas (at
the time of the survey, 2010), compared to their counterparts without college degrees. However,
this gap is not significantly different between cohorts born before and after the 1959 cutoff year.14
Overall, we see that there is a fairly strong balance between the group of interest and other
groups. If we do see significant differences in beliefs for that group, it is highly plausible that this
is related to their experience of missing out on college.

5

Results

We now present results that identify the impact of higher education disruption due to the Cultural
Revolution on citizens’ beliefs and corresponding behavior.

5.1

Beliefs on whether effort pays off

Our main results can be summarized in Figure 3, where we plot the mean levels of the main
outcome of interest – the belief that hard working does not payoff (thick solid line) – for each of
the 4 cohorts in the sample. We standardize the belief variable so that it has a mean of 0 and
a standard deviation of 1. One can see that relative to the 1959 and 1960 cohorts that did not
experience interruptions in their college opportunities, the “lost generation” cohorts (1957 and
1958) exhibit a significantly higher belief that effort does not pay off in achieving success. In
particular, there is an abrupt jump in this belief across the 1958 and 1959 cohorts, reflecting the
sudden resumption of college admission exam in 1977. Importantly, we plot the average z-score
index (weighted by inverse standard deviation as proposed by Anderson (2011)) for each of the
corresponding cohorts, shown in the thin dotted line, and we do not see abrupt changes on either
13 As we restrict our sample to high school graduates only, we have effectively excluded many individuals (e.g. lowly
educated rural residents) who were most vulnerable to the adverse effects of the famine.
14 We do find that individuals with college degrees are less likely to be from coastal provinces among pre-1959 cohorts
but more likely to be from coastal provinces among post-1959 cohorts ( different at the 10% level).

16

side of the 1959 cutoff.
More formally, we estimate the pseudo-RD regression described previously. The estimation
results are shown in Table 3. The belief that hard work does not pay off takes values between 1
and 5. We see clearly that this belief is stronger among the pre-1959 cohorts who did not go to
college. To be clear, the relevant people we are interested in are those among cohorts who would
have been admitted to college in normal times, but were not because of the suspension of higher
education during the Cultural Revolution. We do not know who these people are, but it is clear
that they are included in those from the pre-1959 cohorts that did not go to college. They do not
form more than 10 percent of that group, probably less. As we can see in all three specifications
of Table 3 (without and with personal or parental characteristics), the coefficient is significantly
positive.
The effect is not only statistically significant, but also substantial in magnitude. The estimated
effect of Pre1959Cohortc × NoCollegei on citizens’ beliefs is in the size of 80% of a standard deviation. It is difficult to think that this effect is present only among those who realistically would
have gone to college. Quite plausibly, many respondents in the sample think that they are part of
the ”lost generation” and attribute their failures in life to the fact that they were adversely affected
by the Cultural Revolution (particularly in the dimension of missing out on college). As we will
see below, the difference in belief is concentrated among those who perceive their income as low.
Nonetheless, it is worth noting that given the rate of college admission, the vast majority of the
members of the “lost generation” would never have been able to go to college anyway, even if
they were born a few years later. We are here in presence of a typical attribution error: people
attribute their failures to the external environment and not to themselves, whereas people tend to
attribute their success to themselves and not to circumstances they face (see, among others, Ross,
Bierbrauer and Hoffman (1976)).15

5.2

Grudges against the government

We also see in Table 4 that the pre-1959 cohorts that did not go to college have a significantly
higher distrust in local government. Distrust in local government is measured by CFPS on a scale
of 1 to 10 where 10 indicates strong distrust, and 1 indicates strong trust.
Note that both people who did not go to college and people from the pre-1959 cohorts have
in general less distrust towards local government. One thus clearly sees here evidence of grudges
from the relevant members of the lost generation towards local government. As we can see in
column (4) of Table 4, this distrust is purely political. If asked about distrust towards strangers,
which is orthogonal to the issue at hand and can be seen as a placebo in this case, we see that there
are no significant differences for the group of the lost generation.
15 Note

interestingly that those who did not go to college, among all cohorts, are more likely to think that hard work
pays off. It is thus not the case that those with lower education generally believe less that effort pays off – in fact, the
opposite is the case for people grown up during 1950-1970s in China.

17

The results of Tables 3 and 4 thus suggest patterns of persistent grudges from members of the
“lost generation.” Those who expected under normal circumstances to be able to go to college, but
were born in the “wrong years” understood clearly that they were deprived of higher education
opportunities due to political reasons, completely outside their control. It is thus no surprise
that they blamed the government for their fate. This result echoes with that of Chen and Yang
(2015), which shows that those who suffered from the Great Chinese Famine during the Great Leap
Forward have a significantly higher distrust of government, and are less likely to have married
someone who worked for government.
To make our point clearer, in Table 5, we see that lower beliefs in the payoffs of hard work and
higher distrust in local government is only significant among those who perceive that they have
a relatively lower level of income. The coefficients are also larger in magnitudes, suggesting that
one reason that members of the “lost generation” hold persistent grudges and different beliefs
about effort versus luck is their dissatisfaction with various life outcomes.16

5.3

Intergenerational transmission

The evidence so far shows clearly the grudges held by the lost generation. A natural question is
whether they transmitted their beliefs to their children. To answer that question, we estimate the
following model of intergenerational elasticity of beliefs:

F
yic = β yic
+ γ yicF · Pre1959Cohortc × NoCollegeicF

+ δ Pre1959Cohortc × NoCollegeicF + eic
where yic are the beliefs of children (asked independently to the children, with the exact same
F are the beliefs of the father, and NoCollege F is a
wording as the question asked to the parents), yic
ic

dummy variable for whether the father did not go to college. The results can be seen in Table 6.
As we see, the father’s beliefs, be it on the role of effort or on distrust towards local government are transmitted to their children. The coefficients of the effect of the father’s beliefs on the
children’s beliefs are in general all significant and positive, thus showing that there is in general
a significant component of intergenerational transmission. But what about the lost generation?
How much of their changes in beliefs were transmitted to their children? To see this, we look
at the coefficient on the father’s beliefs interacted with the pre-1959 cohort not attending college.
Here, we see a significant negative effect on beliefs in hard work and no significant effect on distrust towards local government. These results are interesting because they suggest that, while
intergenerational transmission of beliefs are clearly present, not all changes in beliefs experienced
16 We

are unable to distinguish whether the changes in beliefs and increase in distrust towards the government took
place at the time of college admission (the time when the “lost generation” experienced failure in achieving higher
education), or took place much later during their adult life.

18

during somebody’s lifetime are necessarily transmitted to one’s offspring. The negative coefficient
on beliefs on effort clearly suggest some kind of reversion to the mean.
This reversion in the children’s beliefs might be related to the fact that their parents, who were
deprived from access to higher education, made special efforts to give their children what they
had not received. In Table 7, we look at annual education spending by parents on their children’s
education (PPP-adjusted) in the year prior to the CFPS survey. We see that, while parents with no
college education, spend less on the education of their children, those from the pre-1959 cohorts
with no college education spend significantly more. This clearly suggests an intergenerational altruistic act motivated by one’s personal misfortunes. Again, since only a minority in this category
includes those who would have gone to college, had they had the opportunity, this spending effect
on children’s education is presumably quite large. It is also consistent with the reversion in belief
transmission observed among the children. Indeed, if parents invest a lot in the education of their
children, they want to inculcate beliefs that will lead them to work hard on their education. As
a placebo, we looked at annual medical spending. Not surprisingly, we find no significant effect
among the pre-1959 cohorts that did not attend college.

6

Discussion

We now present results for several placebo tests in order to demonstrate the validity of our empirical design, and we discuss evidence that our results are not confounded by changes in intellectual
traits accumulated through education and labor market outcomes.

6.1

Placebo tests

We perform two placebo tests, one assessing the particularity of the cutoff year we exploit in our
identitification (1959 cohort, the first cohort to benefit the resumption of college admission after the
Cultural Revolution), and one assessing the particularity of the lost higher education opportunities
(as opposed to education opportunities at other schooling levels) for the pre-1959 cohorts.
Fake cutoff years

To test the robustness of our results, we repeat the estimation of our baseline

specification while replacing the cutoff years. While we know that 1959 is the true cutoff of interest
due to the resumption of college admission exam in 1977, we assume other years around the 1959
as the cutoffs for the placebo tests. We redraw a window of 4 cohorts around these fake cutoff
birth years, and re-estimate our key coefficient of interest: PreCuto f f Cohortc × NoCollegei .
The results from these placebo exercises can be seen in Figures 4 and 5. We see clearly that
the coefficient is only significant for the 1959 cutoff. If we take the 1960 cutoff, this means that we
compare cohorts of 1958 and 1959 to cohorts of 1960 and 1961. In effect, only the cohort of 1958
was delayed in its ability to access the Gaokao, not the cohort of 1959. We see that the coefficient is
lower, but not significant.
19

Overall, only the 1959 cutoff yields significant coefficients for beliefs and distrust, suggesting
that the competition effect present in our model did not lead to significant effects.
Lack of high school opportunities While the Cultural Revolution abruptly halted college education, the secondary education system was not affected nearly as dramatically. In particular, there
are no sharp changes in the opportunity to access secondary education across neighboring cohorts,
as we see in the case of higher education with the centralized admission exam system. This allows
us to perform a second placebo test, where we replicate our main specification on the sample who
have completed elementary school. Some of them went on to complete secondary school, and
some did not. We test, for each of the outcome variables of interest, whether we see significant
differences between those who have completed high school degrees and those who did not, across
the pre-1959 and post-1959 cohorts.
The results are shown in Table 8. It is evident that the NoHighSchool × Pre1959Cohort are not
significantly different from zero, when we examine the outcomes of belief in whether hardworking
doesn’t pay off, the level of distrust towards the local government or annual educational spending.
In other words, our main empirical specification captures a pattern unique to college education
among the “lost generation,” and such a pattern is no longer visible in secondary education, as
one might expect.

6.2

Changes in intellectual traits and labor market outcomes

One naturally wonders to what extent the changes in beliefs that we identified previously are
confounded by the changes in individuals’ intellectual traits and labor market outcomes as a result
of the changing opportunities in higher education. We now examine these factors explicitly.
We first check for proxies of intelligence and abilities acquired through education, in Table 9.
The CFPS conducted a word test (via recognition of Chinese vocabulary) and math test (via accuracy in performing calculations), with test versions adjusted according to respondents’ actual
educational attainment. The test questions are formulated based on junior to senior high school
level of difficulty, and the final scores are standardized. In addition, the CFPS implemented a
memory ability test (via recall of a word list verbally presented) that aims to capture both “short”
term (immediate recall) and “long” term (recall after two minutes) memory capacity. These scores
are also standardized. Here also, we see no difference for the pre1959 cohorts who did not attend
college. The only difference is that those who did not go to college do in general less well on the
word test. They do slightly better on the math test, but that is significant only at the 10 percent
level.
Similarly, we use the same baseline specification to investigate whether the “lost generation”,
that graduated from high school right before the college admission resumed and subsequently
missed out on higher education, exhibit systematic disadvantageous labor market outcomes. In
Table 10, columns 1-4, we present the results on employment status. One sees that while lack of
20

college is strongly associated with unemployment at the time of the survey, there is no significant
difference in this pattern across the pre- and post-1959 cohorts. Columns 5 and 6 present the
coefficient estimates on the outcome of the rank of total income (including salary, capital gain,
pension, etc.) among subjects in the sample. Again, lack of college education predicts lower rank
in total income. However, NoCollege × Pre1959Cohort is not significantly different from zero,
indicating that such difference is not particularly larger (or smaller) among the “lost generation.”
The “lost generation” thus does not seem to have suffered particularly relative to other cohorts on
the job market. This reinforces our conclusion that the changes in beliefs we identified are related
to the lost opportunity to access college directly after high school.

7

Conclusion

People form an important part of their beliefs, preferences, and attitudes through the experiences
they have gone through, particularly during late adolescence and early adulthood. Such beliefs,
preferences, and attitudes then can shape their lifetime beliefs, which may even be transmitted to
their offspring and across generations.
In this paper, we look at the effect of the adverse experiences of China’s “lost generation” on
belief formation. For the decade between 1966 and 1976, most higher education institutions were
shut down, and admission exams to college were suspended due to the Cultural Revolution. While
we do not know who would have gone to college if given the opportunity during those years, we
do find that among those cohorts that suffered from the lost opportunities caused by the Cultural
Revolution, ex post beliefs in the payoff of effort were much lower, compared to the beliefs of those
who were born afterwards and were not deprived of a normal educational path. They also have a
significantly higher distrust of government. Interestingly, we found that the changes in beliefs on
whether effort pays off were, to a certain extent at least, not transmitted to their children.
Pondering these results, we realize we still know very little about which changes in beliefs
experienced during a generation are transmitted to next generations, which are not, and why. The
seminal work of Bisin and Verdier (2000) argues that the intergenerational transmission of preferences, beliefs and attitudes is strategic, and parents decide to transmit certain aspects of their
preferences, beliefs and values to their children out of two primary motives: (i) they transmit preferences, beliefs and attitudes that would be instrumentally valuable to their children (evaluated
based on “imperfect empathy”); and (ii) they transmit preferences, beliefs and attitudes that are
intrinsically valuable (in particularly when the intrinsic value outweighs the direct cost of possessing such preferences, beliefs and attitudes), a prominent example of which is identity (Akerlof
and Kranton (2010)).17 In the context of our study, the “lost generation”’s beliefs that effort does
not pay off seem to be largely driven by grudges and dissatisfaction. Such beliefs seem not to
17 These

two motives can obviously co-exist, complementing each other. In certain cases, however, they might crowd
each other out.

21

be instrumentally valuable – in fact, they are likely to be harmful to the offspring who live and
compete in a completely different era in contemporary China, nor do they seem to be intrinsically
fundamental to the parents’ identity. The low instrumental value and low intrinsic value suggest that parents would be less motivated to transmit such beliefs to the next generation, as our
empirical analysis shows.

22

References
Akerlof, George A, and Rachel E. Kranton. 2010. Identity Economics. How Our Identities Shape Our
Work, Wages, and Well-Being, Princeton University Press.
Alesina, Alberto, and Edward L Glaeser. 2005. Fighting Poverty in the US and Europe. A World of
Difference, OUP Oxford.
Alesina, Alberto, and Eliana La Ferrara. 2005. “Preferences for Redistribution in the Land of Opportunities.” Journal of Public Economics, 89.
Alesina, Alberto, and George-Marios Angeletos. 2005. “Fairness and Redistribution.” American
Economic Review, 95(4): 960–980.
Alesina, Alberto, and Paola Giuliano. 2011. “Ch.4 - Preferences for Redistribution.” In Handbook
of Social Economics. , ed. Jess Benhabib, 93–131. Elsevier B.V.
Alesina, Alberto, Edward L Glaeser, and Bruce I Sacerdote. 2005. “Work and Leisure in the
United States and Europe: Why So Different?” NBER Macroeconomics Annual, 20: 1–64.
Bai, Ying, and Ruixue Jia. 2016. “Elite Recruitment and Political Stability: The Impact of the
Abolition of China’s Civil Service Exam.” Econometrica.
Bisin, Alberto, and Thierry Verdier. 2000. “”Beyond the Melting Pot”: Cultural Transmission,
Marriage, and the Evolution of Ethnic and Religious Traits*.” The Quarterly Journal of Economics,
115(3): 955–988.
Bisin, Alberto, and Thierry Verdier. 2001. “The Economics of Cultural Transmission and the Dynamics of Preferences.” Journal of Economic Theory, 97(2): 298–319.
Bowles, Samuel, and Herbert Gintis. 2002. “The Inheritance of Inequality.” Journal of Economic
Perspectives, 16(3): 3–30.
Callen, Michael, Mohammad Isaqzadeh, James D Long, and Charles Sprenger. 2014. “Violence
and Risk Preference: Experimental Evidence from Afghanistan.” American Economic Review,
104(1): 123–148.
Cantoni, Davide, Yuyu Chen, David Y. Yang, Noam Yuchtman, and Jane Zhang. forthcoming.
“Curriculum and Ideology.” Journal of Political Economy, 1–71.
Chen, Yixin. 2007. “Lost in revolution and reform: The socioeconomic pains of China’s red guards
generation, 1966–1996.” Journal of Contemporary China, 8(21): 219–239.
Chen, Yuyu, and David Y. Yang. 2015. “Historical Traumas and the Roots of Political Distrust:
Political Inference from the Great Chinese Famine.” Working Paper.
Corneo, Giacomo, and Hans Peter Gruner. 2002. “Individual preferences for political redistribution.” Journal of Public Economics.
Di Tella, Rafael, Sebastian Galiant, and Ernesto Schargrodsky. 2007. “The Formation of Beliefs:
Evidence From the Allocation of Land Titles to Squatters.” The Quarterly Journal of Economics,
122(1): 209–241.
23

Dohmen, Thomas, Armin Falk, David Huffman, and Uwe Sunde. 2012. “The Intergenerational
Transmission of Risk and Trust Attitudes.” The Review of Economic Studies, 79(2): 645–677.
Fehr, Ernst, and Klaus M Schmidt. 2003. “Theories of Fairness and Reciprocity - Evidence and
Economic Applications.” In Advances in Economics and Econometrics, Econometric Society Monographs, Eighth World Congress, Volume. , ed. Mathias Dewatripont, Lars Peter Hansen and
Stephen J Turnovsky, 1–59. Cambridge.
Fernandez, Raquel, Alessandra Fogli, and Claudia Olivetti. 2004. “Mothers and sons: Preference
formation and female labor force dynamics.” The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 119(4).
Fuchs-Schündeln, Nicola, and Matthias Schündeln. 2015. “On the Endogeneity of Political Preferences: Evidence From Individual Experience with Democracy.” Science, 347(6226).
Giuliano, Paola, and Antonio Spilimbergo. 2014. “Growing Up in a Recession.” The Review of
Economic Studies, 81(2): 787–817.
Gong, Jie, Yi Lu, and Huihua Xie. 2015. “Adolescent Environment and Noncognitive Skills.”
Working Paper, 1–59.
Guiso, Luigi, Paola Sapienza, and Luigi Zingales. 2008. “Social Capital as Good Culture.” Journal
of the European Economic Association, 7(2/3): 1–27.
Harding, Harry. 1987. “Ch.2 - The Chinese State in Crisis.” In The Cambridge History of China Volume 15: The People’s Republic, Part 2: Revolutions within the Chinese Revolution, 1966–1982. , ed.
Roderick MacFarquhar and John K. Fairbank, 1–110. Cambridge:Cambridge University Press.
Houser, Daniel, John A List, Marco Piovesan, Anya Samek, and Joachim Winter. 2015. “On the
Origins of Dishonesty: From Parents to Children.” Working Paper.
Krosnick, Jon A, and Duane F Alwin. 1989. “Aging and susceptibility to attitude change.” Journal
of Personality and Social Psychology, 57(3): 416–425.
Li, Hongbin, Mark R Rosenzweig, and Junsen Zhang. 2010. “Altruism, Favoritism, and Guilt in
the Allocation of Family Resources: Sophie’s Choice in Mao’s Mass Send-Down Movement.”
Journal of Political Economy, 118(1): 1–38.
Lindbeck, Assar, and Sten Nyberg. 2006. “Raising Children to Work Hard: Altruism, Work
Norms, and Social Insurance.” The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 121(4): 1473–1503.
Malmendier, Ulrike, and Stefan Nagel. 2011. “Depression Babies: Do Macroeconomic Experiences Affect Risk Taking?” The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 126(1): 373–416.
Miguel, Edward, Sebastian M Saiegh, and Shanker Satyanath. 2010. “Civil War Exposure and
Violence.” Economics & Politics, 23(1): 59–73.
Nunn, Nathan, and Leonard Wantchekon. 2011. “The Slave Trade and the Origins of Mistrust in
Africa.” American Economic Review, 101(7): 3221–3252.
Piketty, Thomas. 1995. “Social Mobility and Redistributive Politics.” The Quarterly Journal of Economics.
24

Ross, Lee, Gunter Bierbrauer, and Susan Hoffman. 1976. “The Role of Attribution Processes in
Conformity and Dissent: Revisiting the Asch Situation.” American Psychologist.

25

Number of students enrolled at college (thousands)
0
1000
2000
3000

Figures and Tables

1950

1960

1970
Year

1980

1990

Figure 1: Number of students enrolled in universities by cohort. Data source: Compilation of China
Statistics Yearbooks (1949 to 2008).

26

60
College Admission Rate (%)
20
40
0

1970

1975

1980

1985
Year

1990

1995

2000

Figure 2: College entrance exam admission rate by exam year. Admission rate equals total students admitted into college divided by total students who took the exam. Admission rate for 1977
exam is adjusted for the pre-screening process implemented in many provinces before the college
entrance exam.

27

Diff. btw no-college and college educated
-.5
0
.5

1957

1958

1959

1960

Birth year
Effort doesn't pay off
Background characteristics

Distrust in govt.

Figure 3: Differences in means across birth cohorts. ”Beliefs in effort vs. luck” and ”distrust in
government” are standardized. ”Background characteristics” is an Anderson z-score index of the
characteristics listed in Table 2.

28

1
No college X pre-cutoff
0
.5
-.5
-1
1955

1956

1957

1958

1959
1960
Birth cohort cutoffs

1961

1962

1963

1964

Figure 4: Placebo test of pseudo-RD design on the outcome of beliefs that effort does not pay off.
For each birth cohort cutoff year, we draw 2 cohorts before and 2 cohorts after the cutoff, and
re-estimate our baseline specification. Only the NoCollege×PreCutoff coefficient estimates are
shown.

29

3
2
No college X pre-cutoff
-1
0
1
-2
1955

1956

1957

1958

1959
1960
Birth cohort cutoffs

1961

1962

1963

1964

Figure 5: Placebo test of pseudo-RD design on the outcome of distrust in local government.
For each birth cohort cutoff year, we draw 2 cohorts before and 2 cohorts after the cutoff, and
re-estimate our baseline specification. Only the NoCollege×PreCutoff coefficient estimates are
shown.

30

31

0.612
0.958
128.6
165.6
23.44

0.590
0.960
127.4
165.0
23.33
0.672
0.466
0.028
3.682
0.513
0.748
0.247
0.079
0.016
0.880

Male
Han
Weight
Height
BMI

Urban
Coastal provinces
Migrated at age 3
Number of siblings
Father illiterate
Mother illiterate
Father CCP member
Mother CCP member
Landlord class

No college degree

0.144

0.259
0.287
0.730
0.151
0.878
0.227
0.469
0.101
0.078
0.119

0.400
0.681
0.679
0.058
0.740
0.133
0.398
0.117
0.355

0.688
0.881
0.907
0.815
0.863

(4)

p-value

1956 - 1960

0.306

0.168
0.186
0.521
0.180
0.706
0.227
0.452
0.335
0.125

0.553
0.997
0.415
0.204
0.772

(5)

p-value

1957 - 1961

0.266

0.272
0.521
0.458
0.067
0.900
0.124
0.374
0.395
0.530

0.622
0.994
0.760
0.525
0.941

(6)

p-value

1956 - 1961

0.113

0.546
0.138
0.661
0.084
0.907
0.997
0.336
0.129
0.281

0.607
0.500
0.706
0.813
0.462

(7)

p-value

1955 - 1962

0.043

0.947
0.022
0.640
0.080
0.111
0.411
0.137
0.060
0.098

0.078
0.706
0.953
0.411
0.498

(8)

p-value

1954 - 1963

# of obs.
251
260
511
611
603
703
955
1207
Column 3 reports the p-value for a t-test of differences in means between pre-1959 cohorts and post-1959 cohorts. Column 4-8 report
p-values for t-tests of differences in means, using alternative sample of cohorts.

0.919

0.624
0.419
0.023
3.449
0.506
0.794
0.276
0.043
0.042

(3)

(2)

(1)
0.614
0.889
0.540
0.380
0.711

p-value

Mean
(after 1959)

1957 - 1960
Mean
(before 1959)

Born between:

Table 1: High school graduates born before and after 1959

Table 2: Summary statistics and balance check
All

Male
Han
Weight
Height
BMI

Born before 1959

Born after 1959

No college

College

No college

College

Mean

Std.Dev.

Mean

Mean

Mean

Mean

Diff-in-diffs

p-value

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

(6)

(7)

(8)

0.601
0.959
128.0
165.3
23.39

0.490
0.199
21.04
7.418
3.233

0.577
0.959
125.9
164.7
23.14

0.700
0.967
138.0
167.3
24.61

0.597
0.958
127.6
165.3
23.34

0.760
0.952
138.8
168.1
24.55

0.043
-0.013
-0.902
0.123
-0.248

0.772
0.826
0.885
0.956
0.797

Urban 0.648
0.478
0.653
0.800
0.610
0.810
0.052
0.714
Coastal provinces 0.442
0.497
0.482
0.333
0.412
0.524
0.261
0.080
Migrated at age 3 0.025
0.158
0.027
0.033
0.021
0.048
0.021
0.665
Number of siblings 3.563
1.808
3.693
3.621
3.496
2.905
-0.519
0.343
Father illiterate 0.510
0.500
0.515
0.480
0.513
0.421
-0.057
0.721
Mother illiterate 0.771
0.420
0.751
0.714
0.787
0.857
0.107
0.404
Father CCP member 0.262
0.440
0.237
0.333
0.272
0.333
-0.035
0.798
Mother CCP member 0.060
0.238
0.070
0.138
0.047
0.000
-0.115
0.110
Landlord class 0.029
0.169
0.018
0.000
0.038
0.095
0.076
0.136
Total number of observations: 509 (born before 1959 without college degree: 220; born before 1959 with college degree:
30; born after 1959 without college degree: 238; born after 1959 with college degree: 21).

32

Table 3: “Lost generation” and beliefs on effort vs. luck
Hardworking doesn’t pay off

Dependent variables:
(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

NoCollege

-0.412***
[0.202]

-0.410***
[0.204]

-0.432**
[0.214]

-0.435**
[0.216]

BirthYear

-0.031
[0.080]

-0.020
[0.080]

0.019
[0.085]

0.028
[0.086]

Pre1959Cohort

-0.520*
[0.305]

-0.496
[0.307]

-0.452
[0.329]

-0.431
[0.331]

NoCollege ×
Pre1959Cohort

0.605**
[0.266]

0.608**
[0.267]

0.616**
[0.287]

0.615**
[0.288]

Personal chara.
Parental chara.

No
No

Yes
No

No
Yes

Yes
Yes

Observations
504
501
449
446
Mean
2.287
2.287
2.287
2.287
Std.Dev.
0.887
0.887
0.887
0.887
*: Significant at 10%; **: 5%; ***: 1%. Robust standard errors in
brackets. Personal characteristics include: gender, han ethnicity indicator, weight, and height. Parental and household characteristics include father literacy, father CCP membership, mother literacy,
mother CCP membership, landlord class during the Land Reform,
total number of siblings, and indicator whether one was sent down
to countryside during the Cultural Revolution.

33

Table 4: “Lost generation” and distrust in government
Dependent variables:

Distrust in
local government

Distrust in
strangers (placebo)

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

NoCollege

-1.226**
[0.520]

-1.095**
[0.519]

-1.307**
[0.536]

-1.131**
[0.534]

0.085
[0.476]

BirthYear

0.089
[0.205]

0.116
[0.205]

0.251
[0.213]

0.266
[0.212]

0.024
[0.188]

Pre1959Cohort

-1.966**
[0.790]

-1.880**
[0.785]

-1.851**
[0.824]

-1.694**
[0.815]

-0.275
[0.724]

NoCollege ×
Pre1959Cohort

2.023***
[0.689]

2.055**
[0.683]

1.945***
[0.719]

1.875***
[0.712]

0.295
[0.631]

Personal chara.
Parental chara.

No
No

Yes
No

No
Yes

Yes
Yes

No
No

Observations
498
495
448
445
496
Mean
5.280
5.280
5.280
5.280
7.845
Std.Dev.
2.296
2.296
2.296
2.296
2.083
*: Significant at 10%; **: 5%; ***: 1%. Robust standard errors in brackets. Personal
characteristics include: gender, han ethnicity indicator, weight, and height. Parental and
household characteristics include father literacy, father CCP membership, mother literacy,
mother CCP membership, landlord class during the Land Reform, total number of siblings,
and indicator whether one was sent down to countryside during the Cultural Revolution.

34

Table 5: Heterogeneity by income satisfaction
Dependent variables:
Subjective income evaluation

Hardworking
doesn’t pay off

Distrust in
local govt.

High

Low

High

Low

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

NoCollege

0.506*
[0.260]

-0.306
[0.318]

-0.695
[0.705]

-2.011**
[0.781]

BirthYear

-0.065
[0.110]

-0.000
[0.115]

0.097
[0.302]

0.035
[0.282]

Pre1959Cohort

-0.535
[0.373]

-0.699
[0.544]

-1.272
[1.018]

-3.072**
[1.338]

NoCollege ×
Pre1959Cohort

0.519
[0.325]

0.883*
[0.480]

1.181
[0.890]

3.176***
[1.180]

Observations
241
263
236
262
*: Significant at 10%; **: 5%; ***: 1%. Robust standard errors in brackets.

35

Table 6: Intergenerational elasticity of beliefs
Child’s beliefs:

Father’s corresponding beliefs

Hardworking
doesn’t pay off

Distrust in
local govt.

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

0.283***
[0.071]

0.363***
[0.079]

0.241***
[0.049]

0.303***
[0.067]

Father’s corresponding beliefs
× Pre1959NoCollege

-0.123**
[0.055]

-0.001
[0.052]

Observations
243
242
248
242
*: Significant at 10%; **: 5%; ***: 1%. Robust standard errors in brackets.

36

Table 7: Spending on children’s education
Dependent variables:

Annual educational
spendings (PPP-adjusted)

Annual medical
spendings (placebo)

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

NoCollege

-6,430***
[2,131]

-6,330***
[2,146]

-6,327***
[2,120]

-3,871
[3,113]

BirthYear

700
[839]

843
[848]

381
[840]

-2,542**
[1,201]

Pre1959Cohort

-5,120
[3,234]

-4,856
[3,247]

-6,592
[3,214]

-8,486*
[4,673]

NoCollege ×
Pre1959Cohort

6,736**
[2,823]

6,816**
[2,826]

6,855**
[2,804]

1,932
[4,060]

Personal chara.
Child chara.

No
No

Yes
No

No
Yes

No
No

Observations
500
496
500
499
Mean
4,604
4,604
4,604
4,646
Std.Dev.
9,394
9,394
9,394
13,379
*: Significant at 10%; **: 5%; ***: 1%. Robust standard errors in brackets. Personal characteristics include: gender, han ethnicity indicator, weight, and height.
Parental and household characteristics include father literacy, father CCP membership, mother literacy, mother CCP membership, landlord class during the Land Reform, total number of siblings, and indicator whether one was sent down to countryside during the Cultural Revolution.

37

Table 8: Placebo tests – no high school education
Dependent variables:

Hardworking
doesn’t pay off

Distrust in
local government

Annual educational
spendings

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

(6)

NoHighSchool

-0.081
[0.067]

-0.042
[0.071]

-0.276
[0.208]

-0.057
[0.216]

-940.4
[1113]

-614.5
[1265]

BirthYear

-0.029
[0.045]

0.002
[0.048]

0.053
[0.139]

0.028
[0.145]

381.7
[745.6]

278.6
[851.3]

Pre1959Cohort

0.025
[0.118]

0.057
[0.126]

-0.219
[0.366]

-0.468
[0.381]

395.8
[1960]

575.2
[2241]

NoHighSchool ×
Pre1959Cohort

-0.172
[0.093]

-0.186*
[0.099]

0.052
[0.288]

0.197
[0.299]

-1031
[1547]

-1348
[1758]

No
No

Yes
Yes

No
No

Yes
Yes

No
No

Yes
Yes

Personal chara.
Parental chara.

Observations
1300
1122
1296
1137
1322
1143
Mean
2.208
2.208
5.237
5.237
4637
4637
Std.Dev.
0.840
0.840
2.438
2.438
9709
9709
*: Significant at 10%; **: 5%; ***: 1%. Robust standard errors in brackets. Personal characteristics include: gender, han ethnicity indicator, weight, and height. Parental and
household characteristics include father literacy, father CCP membership, mother literacy, mother CCP membership, landlord class during the Land Reform, total number of
siblings, and indicator whether one was sent down to countryside during the Cultural
Revolution.

38

Table 9: Intellectural traits – intelligence and ability
Dependent variables:
Word test

Math test

Long-term
memory

Short-term
memory

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

NoCollege

-3.417***
[0.868]

0.063*
[0.221]

-2.927
[6.343]

-4.503
[6.165]

BirthYear

-0.064
[0.339]

0.045
[0.086]

1.234
[2.539]

1.518
[2.457]

Pre1959Cohort

-0.006
[1.311]

0.535
[0.333]

0.914
[9.665]

1.414
[9.383]

NoCollege ×
Pre1959Cohort

0.545
[1.142]

-0.317
[0.290]

2.502
[8.402]

2.780
[8.165]

Observations
509
509
483
488
Mean
24.560
18.230
60.514
59.784
Std.Dev.
3.93
0.970
27.783
26.903
*: Significant at 10%; **: 5%; ***: 1%. Robust standard errors in brackets.

39

Table 10: “Lost generation” and labor market outcomes
Dependent variables:

Currently employed

Total income (rank)

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

(6)

(7)

(8)

NoCollege

-0.301***
[0.112]

-0.286***
[0.106]

-0.270**
[0.118]

-0.240**
[0.112]

-160.1***
[31.71]

-148.1***
[31.20]

-137.6***
[33.79]

-124.2***
[33.25]

BirthYear

0.058
[0.044]

0.049
[0.042]

0.069
[0.047]

0.049
[0.045]

17.46
[12.43]

10.62
[12.30]

11.57
[13.38]

3.89
[13.20]

Pre1959Cohort

0.117
[0.169]

0.118
[0.160]

0.224
[0.181]

0.227
[0.172]

22.18
[48.07]

10.81
[47.17]

17.35
[51.88]

12.62
[50.81]

NoCollege ×
Pre1959Cohort

0.016
[0.147]

0.001
[0.139]

-0.021
[0.158]

-0.072
[0.150]

25.05
[41.99]

22.13
[41.08]

19.24
[45.32]

6.79
[44.34]

Personal chara.
Parental chara.

No
No

Yes
No

No
Yes

Yes
Yes

No
No

Yes
No

No
Yes

Yes
Yes

Observations
509
505
454
450
505
501
453
449
Mean
0.540
0.540
0.540
0.540
254.0
254.0
254.0
254.0
Std.Dev.
0.499
0.499
0.499
0.499
145.9
145.9
145.9
145.9
*: Significant at 10%; **: 5%; ***: 1%. Robust standard errors in brackets. Personal characteristics include: gender, han ethnicity indicator, weight, and height. Parental and household characteristics include father literacy,
father CCP membership, mother literacy, mother CCP membership, landlord class during the Land Reform, total
number of siblings, and indicator whether one was sent down to countryside during the Cultural Revolution.

40

