                               NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                        INTERNATIONAL MONETARY RELATIONS:
                             TAKING FINANCE SERIOUSLY

                                        Maurice Obstfeld
                                        Alan M. Taylor

                                       Working Paper 23440
                               http://www.nber.org/papers/w23440


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     May 2017




Maurice Obstfeld is Economic Counsellor and Director of Research at the International Monetary
Fund, Washington, D.C. He is on leave as Class of 1958 Professor of Economics, University of
California, Berkeley. Alan M. Taylor is Professor of Economics and Finance, University of
California, Davis. For their helpful comments and criticism, we thank Ben Bernanke, Olivier
Blanchard, Claudio Borio, Jihad Dagher, Stanley Fischer, Pierre-Olivier Gourinchas, Patrick
Honohan, Michael Klein, José Antonio Ocampo, Carmen Reinhart, and Dirk Schoenmaker. For
discussion and assistance, we thank Helge Berger, Eugenio Cerutti, Chanpheng Fizzarotti,
Jonathan Ostry, Hui Tong, and Haonan Zhou. Mark Gertler, Gordon Hanson, and Timothy Taylor
offered expert editorial guidance. All errors are ours. The views expressed here are those of the
authors alone and do not represent those of the International Monetary Fund, its executive board,
or its management, nor those of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

At least one co-author has disclosed a financial relationship of potential relevance for this
research. Further information is available online at http://www.nber.org/papers/w23440.ack

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2017 by Maurice Obstfeld and Alan M. Taylor. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not
to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.
International Monetary Relations: Taking Finance Seriously
Maurice Obstfeld and Alan M. Taylor
NBER Working Paper No. 23440
May 2017
JEL No. B1,B27,E44,E50,E60,F30,F40,F62,F65,G01,N10,N20

                                            ABSTRACT

In our book, Global Capital Markets: Integration, Crisis, and Growth, we traced out the evolution
of the international monetary system using the framework of the “international monetary
trilemma”: countries can enjoy at most two from the set {exchange-rate stability, open capital
markets, and domestic monetary autonomy}. The events of the past decade or more highlight the
further complications for this framework posed by financial stability issues. Here we update and
qualify our prior analysis, drawing on recent experience and research. Under the classical gold
standard, scant attention was paid to macro management, either to stabilize output and
employment or to ensure financial stability. The interwar years highlighted the changing demands
for modern central bank interventions in the economy. Financial instability, followed by WWII,
left a world with sharply constricted financial markets and little private cross-border capital
mobility. Due to this historical accident, the Bretton Woods system agreed in 1944 focused not at
all on financial stability, and focused on issues like adjustment, exchange rate misalignment, and
international liquidity (defined in terms of official, not private, capital-account transactions). Post
1970s floating rates permitted, but did not require, liberalization of the capital account. But the
political equilibrium had shifted in favor of financial interests, signaled by the push toward
European integration and the later reform process in emerging markets starting in the 1990s. This
development, however, opened the door once again to domestic financial crises and their
international transmission. Countries now become more susceptible to a new species of “capital
account crises,” fueled by bank and bond lending, and its sudden withdrawal. These
developments, in fact, made evident a different, “financial trilemma”: countries can pick at most
two from {financial stability, open capital markets, and autonomy over domestic financial
policy}. We distill the main lessons as to the interactions between the monetary and financial
trilemmas, and policies that could best address the resulting weaknesses.


Maurice Obstfeld
International Monetary Fund
Research Department
700 19th Street NW
Washington, DC 20431
and NBER
MObstfeld@imf.org

Alan M. Taylor
Department of Economics and
Graduate School of Management
University of California
One Shields Ave
Davis, CA 95616-8578
and CEPR
and also NBER
amtaylor@ucdavis.edu
The architecture of the international monetary and financial system is a major determinant of

how close the world economy can come to realizing its potential, and how serious are the

risks of crisis and disruption. In this essay, we particularly want to highlight the interactions

of the international monetary system with financial conditions, not just with the output,

inflation, and balance of payments goals that have been central to most accounts.

           A basic constraint on the design of all international monetary systems is the monetary

policy trilemma: a country can enjoy two of the following three features simultaneously, but

not all three: exchange-rate stability, freedom of cross-border payments, and a primary

orientation of monetary policy toward domestic goals (for example, Keynes 1930 ch. 36;

Padoa-Schioppa 1988; Obstfeld and Taylor 1998, 2004).1 For more than a century, efforts to

cope with the monetary trilemma have varied across time and space, with mixed success. For

example, the gold standard of the late 19th and early 20th centuries implied fixed exchange

rates because all gold-standard central banks fixed their currencies’ values in terms of gold.

Coupled with international capital mobility, however, the gold standard meant that

autonomous monetary policy was infeasible. Conversely, the Bretton Woods system that

operated from the end of World War II into the early 1970s mandated fixed exchange rates

but, for as long as international capital mobility was blocked, countries could, to some

degree, use monetary policy for domestic goals. In recent decades, many advanced

economies have moved to a system of floating exchange rates: in the context of the monetary

trilemma, their trade off was to sacrifice fixed exchange rates in order to allow both

international capital mobility and a monetary policy geared toward domestic objectives.




1
    For a brief intellectual history, see Irwin (2011).


                                                          1
       While the monetary trilemma is a useful organizing principle for categorizing

different choices about international monetary systems, we need to be clear that it does not

imply that one choice is the best, much less that any choice can solve all economic problems

or insulate an economy fully from foreign financial disturbances. In this essay, we review

how financial conditions and outright financial crises have posed difficulties for each of the

main international monetary systems in the last 150 years or so: the gold standard, the

interwar period, the Bretton Woods system, and the current system of floating exchange

rates. We will argue that the Bretton Woods agreement of 1944 addressed only a limited set

of issues, those most relevant after the traumatic transformations of the Great Depression and

World War II, which included a marked retrenchment in national and international financial

market activities. However, a broader set of financial-stability challenges was not addressed

at Bretton Woods. Always latent, these dangers had periodically exploded into central

importance in the world economy from the 1870s to the 1930s—and, despite a long period in

abeyance after the war, they would gradually take on increasing importance as the postwar

decades passed. Indeed, considering the distinct policy challenges in this dimension, a

financial trilemma has been proposed to complement the better-known monetary trilemma:

specifically, countries must choose among national sovereignty over financial stability

policy, integration into global financial markets, or financial stability—but they cannot have

all three (Schoenmaker 2013).

       Our essay will rest on the argument that—even as the world economy has evolved

and sentiments have shifted among widely different policy regimes—three fundamental

challenges for any international monetary and financial system have remained. How should

exchange rates between national currencies be determined? How can countries with balance



                                               2
of payments deficits reduce these without sharply contracting their economies, and with

minimal risk of possible negative spillovers abroad? How can the international system ensure

that countries have access to an adequate supply of international liquidity—financial

resources generally acceptable to foreigners in all circumstances? In concluding, we evaluate

how the current international monetary system answers these questions.



The Bretton Woods Regime and Its Contradictions



The slide into World War II led to effective financial autarky for many countries. The

immediate postwar years then saw widespread tightening of government’s grips over banks

and financial markets (Cassis 2011, pp. 108–9). More generally, laissez faire ideology was in

retreat (Polanyi 1944), and unregulated financial markets drew special opprobrium, as they

were widely perceived to have failed. The underlying premise of the 1944 Bretton Woods

conference was that neither the classical gold standard nor the successor arrangements during

the interwar period had worked well.



Historical Context: The Gold Standard



Under the pre-1914 gold standard, the monetary trilemma was resolved in favor of exchange

stability and freedom of foreign transactions. While these features did tend to promote an

expansion of trade and international lending, the system severely limited the role monetary

policy could potentially play in macroeconomic stabilization. Short-term interest rates in

different countries tracked each other relatively closely (Obstfeld, Shambaugh, and Taylor



                                              3
2005). At the same time, longer-term inflation trends were shared across countries and tied to

supply and demand forces in the global gold market. Thus, price levels under the gold

standard sometimes underwent long periods of decline or increase as shown in Figure 1,

broadly falling from about 1880 to 1895 in the face of limited gold supplies, then rising

through 1914 in response to gold discoveries in the Yukon and South Africa. These long

swings in prices could cause tensions, both economic and political, and countries had to cope

with unanticipated redistributions between paper debtors and creditors. Notably, the stability

of banks and the financial system was not assured by gold convertibility of currency, as

evidenced by the 19th century history of banking crises both in the United States (Jalil 2015)

and elsewhere.2 Figure 2 shows the pattern of financial crises affecting advanced economies

since 1870.

           Around the same time as the panic of 1873, to focus on one prominent episode of

financial crisis, Bagehot’s Lombard Street (1873) famously laid out the Bank of England’s

role as the financial markets’ lender of last resort (although this role had been described

much earlier by Thornton in his 1802 masterpiece, An Enquiry into the Nature and Effects of

the Paper Credit of Great Britain). Bagehot’s advice was that a central bank during a

financial panic should lend freely against good collateral. But how could the Bank increase

the money supply in this way while simultaneously maintaining its currency’s parity with

gold? When confronted with both a banking and a currency crisis, Bagehot viewed

maintaining the gold standard as the priority: “We must look first to the foreign drain, and




2
    For overviews of the macroeconomics of the pre-World War I gold standard, useful starting points are Cooper

(1982), Bordo and Schwartz (1984), and Eichengreen (2008, chapter 2).


                                                        4
raise the rate of interest as high as may be necessary. Unless you stop the foreign export you

cannot allay the domestic alarm” (Bagehot 1873, 27–28). Bagehot’s argument amounted to

the assertion that monetary policy could be deployed to stem a banking panic independent of

the exchange-rate constraint, which might be true in certain special circumstances, but more

broadly serves to illustrate how some resolutions of the monetary trilemma could

simultaneously exacerbate financial instability.3 In another episode, in 1907 the Bank of

England, alarmed by gold outflows that financed overheating financial markets in the United

States, abruptly hiked its target interest rate, helping to set off the devastating panic of 1907.

           Though the 1873 and 1907 episodes are among the better known ones, they are

merely two of the many severe systemic banking crises and accompanying recessions,

sometimes occurring at once in several countries, that punctuated the gold standard era.

Indeed, the panic of 1873, which afflicted Europe as well as North America, helped inspire

the founding of the German Reichsbank in 1876, while the U.S. panic of 1907, against the

backdrop of periodic liquidity tensions in the U.S. banking system, led to the founding of the

Federal Reserve.



Historical Context: The Interwar Period



World War I surpassed previous wars not only in its scope and destructiveness, but also in

the extent to which economic relationships between nations broke down. That breakdown




3
    See Laidler (2003) on the contrasting views of Bagehot and Thornton regarding the relative importance of

internal versus external stability.


                                                        5
was in part a result of direct government actions, including widespread suspension of the

gold standard and, significantly, pervasive official control over external payments, a huge

contrast to the previous era’s laissez faire; looking back, Keynes, who had served in the U.K.

Treasury during the war, said: “Complete control was so much against the spirit of the age,

that I doubt it ever occurred to any of us that it was possible” (as cited in Obstfeld and Taylor

2004, p. 146). Governments had opened Pandora’s box.

       Figure 3 illustrates the pattern that followed. The 1920s then saw various attempts by

governments to remove exchange control and return to gold: only about 10 percent of

currencies were still pegged to gold in the early 1920s, but by the end of the 1920s 80 percent

were again pegged to gold, and capital mobility was once more widespread. But in the

subsequent Great Depression most countries abandoned the gold standard and imposed harsh

capital controls (Obstfeld and Taylor 2004, 136–40).

       The story of the severity of the Great Depression from a U.S. perspective is well

known. The U.S. economy succumbed to macroeconomic and financial shocks as U.S.

government policy failed to react effectively. Waves of banking crises followed, a pattern

seen in many countries around the world in the 1930s, as reflected in Figure 2 presented

earlier. The Federal Reserve failed to do much as a lender of last resort, despite having been

founded to fill that role (Hetzel and Richardson 2016). Thus, various historians have

attributed the depth of the Great Depression in the U.S. to Federal Reserve incompetence

(Friedman and Schwartz 1963; Hsieh and Romer 2006), or a collapse of credit (Mishkin

1978; Bernanke 1983; Bernanke and James 1991), or both. Taken together, these arguments

indicate the importance of both traditional macroeconomic and financial factors.




                                                6
       The economic and financial crisis of Great Depression occurred within an

international context, driven in part by problems that arose from the global attempt to return

to the gold standard (Temin 1989; Eichengreen 1992). The United Kingdom returned to gold

in 1925, but at the prewar sterling gold parity, despite a significantly higher postwar price

level compared with 1913. France returned in 1926, but could tolerate doing so only at a

much-depreciated exchange rate between the franc and gold. These fateful decisions ensured

that for many years the deflated British economy would struggle with a strong currency, high

unemployment, and gold losses (Keynes 1925); in contrast, reflated France enjoyed a weak

currency and a gold surplus (Hamilton 1988; Irwin 2012–2013). Contradicting textbook

stories about price-specie-flow adjustment, these outcomes highlighted the real-world

asymmetry between deficit countries, pressured by balance of payments outflows, and

surplus countries facing no corresponding pressure to reduce their external imbalances.

       The United States, which had remained on gold throughout World War I and after,

was by the late 1920s experiencing a massive stock-market boom that attracted substantial

gold inflows from abroad (Kindleberger 2013). U.S. credit tightening compounded the

inflow, and countries throughout the world raised interest rates as they competed to retain

gold. This purposeful competition for gold ultimately proved deflationary, and escape came

slowly. Britain abandoned the gold standard in 1931. Other countries followed. Instability in

global banking played an important role in driving speculative capital flows (Borio, James,

and Shin 2014). In the U.S. economy, the first signs of economic stabilization occurred only

in spring 1933, when President Roosevelt also suspended the U.S. dollar’s gold link. The end

of tight money stopped the collapse of price levels and nurtured hesitant recoveries in




                                               7
countries that depreciated (Eichengreen and Sachs 1985; Campa 1990; Bernanke and Carey

1996; Obstfeld and Taylor 1998).

           From the perspective of this essay, two lasting legacies of this period are worth

emphasizing. One was a fear of “beggar-thy-neighbor” policies, a phrase originally due to

Adam Smith,4 but now widely linked with the Depression era. Countries tried in several ways

to bottle in domestic demand at the expense of their trading partners, including high tariff

walls and strict exchange controls. Competitive currency depreciation was also often held up

as a poster child in this policy class, its typical goal being to switch demand between

countries (for example, League of Nations 1944). As Eichengreen and Sachs (1985) pointed

out, however, simultaneous competitive monetary expansion in a group of countries where

each one is trying to depreciate, even if it leaves their currencies’ mutual exchange rates

unchanged, could be a better equilibrium if all are battling deflation and unemployment.

           The other major legacy was that the financial instability of the interwar period left

governments much less willing to tolerate free-wheeling financial markets. In the United

States in 1933 alone, for example, this new mindset begat the Glass-Steagall act, which

prohibited commercial banks from engaging in investment-banking activities; the creation of

the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation, to oversee a new system of deposit insurance;




4
    Smith (1776) wrote in The Wealth of Nations (Book IV, Chapter III): “[N]ations have been taught that their

interest consisted in beggaring all their neighbours. Each nation has been made to look with an invidious eye

upon the prosperity of all the nations with which it trades, and to consider their gain as its own loss. Commerce,

which ought naturally to be, among nations, as among individuals, a bond of union and friendship, has become

the most fertile source of discord and animosity.” Any similarity with current political discourse is not in the

least coincidental.


                                                         8
new and broad regulatory powers for the Federal Reserve; and Regulation Q, which imposed

interest-rate ceilings to discourage banks from competing for deposits. The Securities

Exchange Act of 1934 and the Banking Act of 1935 soon followed.

       On economic policy, doctrinal change was swift and dramatic. Macroeconomic policy

was seen to have been badly wrong. By the 1940s, new thinking, as represented by Keynes

and his followers, was the order of the day. There would be no rush to restore either a rigid

gold standard or unregulated financial markets, as there had been after World War I. As

Cassis (2011, p. 109) describes it, the turbulent years from 1914 to 1945 “led to an

ideological shift which, combined with a generational change, favored state intervention and

a more organized form of capitalism.” This was the ascendant worldview as international

negotiators gathered at Bretton Woods, New Hampshire, in July 1944 to design the postwar

international monetary and financial order.



The Bretton Woods Approach and the Creation of the IMF



Post-World War II reconstruction offered an opportunity to construct a new international

monetary system. Ruggie (1982) painted the contrast between earlier attitudes and the new

postwar vision of this system: “[U]nlike the economic nationalism of the thirties, it would be

multilateral in character; unlike the liberalism of the gold standard and free trade, its

multilateralism would be predicated upon domestic interventionism.”

       Under the system designed at Bretton Woods in 1944, exchange rates were fixed,

with every country pegging to the U.S. dollar (and thereby stabilizing the N – 1 exchange

rates among the N currencies) while the United States was supposed to peg the dollar price of



                                                9
gold (an arrangement that formally applied mainly to its transactions with official foreign

dollar holders, and thus gave the U.S. in practice an asymmetrically central position with

disproportionate power over global monetary conditions). Unlike the euro area monetary

union of recent times, the Bretton Woods system mandated no external constraints on

government budgets, allowing fiscal policy to be used more freely as a tool of macro

stabilization.

        With the recognition that countries with fixed exchange rates might run short of

international reserves, the International Monetary Fund was created as an emergency lender.

Countries also had the capacity, subject to IMF approval, to devalue or revalue their

currencies in circumstances of “fundamental disequilibrium”—a term nowhere defined in the

IMF’s Articles of Agreement. The basic idea was that countries running persistent balance of

payments deficits should not be forced to maintain what appeared to be an unsustainably

strong exchange rate through employment-reducing monetary contraction, fiscal austerity, or

both. Rather, as Keynes put it in defending the plan before the British Parliament, the value

of the currency would adjust to the economy’s needs, not the reverse.

        Of course, in oxymoronic fashion, “fixed but adjustable” exchange parities do face

the frequent drawback that markets can often see the changes coming—or imagine that they

will come—and in those cases, speculative capital flows (self-fulfilling or anticipatory) can

disrupt any pretense of deliberate and consultative exchange-rate adjustment. The problem

was well understood from the interwar experience, but the risks were mitigated when the

IMF opened its doors in 1946: pervasive capital and exchange controls remained and

domestic financial systems were broadly constrained and repressed, greatly reducing crisis




                                              10
risk and limiting speculative responses to possible exchange parity changes.5 Nor did the

IMF’s Articles have as a goal any process of capital-control liberalization. Indeed, Article VI,

Section 1(a), discouraged members from using IMF resources to finance sustained capital

flight, and also allowed the IMF to request a member to impose outflow controls in such

cases. Article VI, Section 3, explicitly stated that “Members may exercise such controls as

are necessary to regulate international capital movements,” subject to some restrictions.

Deviations from frictionless capital mobility, to greater or lesser extent, then gave national

authorities scope to manage domestic interest rates notwithstanding fixed exchange rates.

           In sum, by eliminating capital mobility, the Bretton Woods system set up a resolution

of the monetary trilemma based on exchange-rate stability and a degree of autonomy of

monetary policy. Long-run inflation trends would be determined de facto by U.S. monetary

policy (mediated by the nature of the dollar’s link to gold); but in extremis, countries could

also adjust currency values. IMF funding was meant to ensure that such adjustments would

occur only in response to highly persistent shocks.

           The IMF’s Articles did not explicitly address financial-market stability. But in the

absence of extensive private international capital flows, each country had a free hand to

regulate its financial sector. With memories of the 1930s still fresh, an inclination for tight

regulation, coupled with relatively uncomplicated financial systems, made the Bretton

Woods period up to about 1970 almost crisis-free compared with the decades that preceded

and followed it. Figure 2 illustrates how singular that interlude was.




5
    The exception that proved the rule was Britain in 1947, where a premature return to free sterling convertibility

quickly ended in a balance of payments crisis and a return to capital controls.


                                                          11
       These postwar choices mirrored deeper economic objectives. According to the first of

its Articles of Agreement, two of the IMF’s original main purposes are to “facilitate the

expansion and balanced growth of international trade” and “to assist in the establishment of a

multilateral system of payments in respect of current transactions between members and in

the elimination of foreign exchange restrictions which hamper the growth of world trade.”

Through the start of the 1960s, these goals seemed to have been well realized—supported

also by the Marshall Plan after World War II, five tariff reduction rounds under the GATT,

falling international transport costs, as well as the European Payments Union and a range of

other European integration initiatives. International trade did recover, but weaknesses in the

Bretton Woods architecture were lurking.



Weaknesses Emerge in the Bretton Woods Architecture



First, stability of the Bretton Woods fixed exchange rates was predicated on continuing

limited cross-border capital mobility. But policymakers struggled with financial plumbing,

trying to open the pipes for payments on current transactions to support the rebirth of global

trade, but close the valves for speculative capital transactions that could destabilize the

system. However, one result of the Bretton Woods system’s successes was that the

opportunity for capital flows inevitably grew and unwanted leakages increasingly seeped

through. Fixed exchange rates therefore became harder to maintain. As early as 1961, the

German and Dutch currencies were revalued in the face of large capital inflows. This episode

was a harbinger of much bigger eruptions later in the 1960s, notably the devaluations by

Britain and several others in November 1967.



                                               12
           Second, and parallel with the increased exchange-rate instability implied by greater

capital mobility, was a phenomenon that remains central to financial-stability policy to this

day: the migration of financial activity to less regulated venues, both through the location of

banking activity offshore and domestic financial innovation. In the 1960s, U.S. banks were

constrained by the Depression-era Regulation Q from competing for deposits onshore, but

moving offshore—notably to London, where they could operate essentially free of

regulation—allowed them to circumvent the rule. In addition, the 1963 Interest Equalization

Tax, intended to strengthen the U.S. balance of payments by taxing capital outflows, gave

multinational firms an incentive to borrow dollars from foreign banks and issue dollar bonds

abroad. Eurodollar and eurodollar-bond markets arose in London, ultimately helping London

to become the world’s pre-eminent financial center. Because of the Regulation Q interest-rate

ceilings, mounting U.S. inflation also implied that the real interest rates banks could offer

savers were become increasingly negative. As financial activity moved to commercial paper

markets and new money-market mutual funds, pressures for bank deregulation grew in the

United States as well as in other industrial countries.6

           A third weakness in the Bretton Woods system centered on international liquidity.

Governments around the world were accumulating U.S. dollars to hold as international

reserves, while the United States had promised to redeem foreign official dollars at a price of

$35 per ounce. All would be well as long as the Americans held enough gold, but as Triffin

(1960) pointed out, redemption would become increasingly problematic as global dollar

reserves in foreign hands continued to grow. In 1960, foreign U.S. dollar reserves overtook




6
    Dagher (2016) discusses the political economy of deregulation following crises.


                                                        13
the value of U.S. gold holdings and speculators began to push up gold’s price in the London

market, which raised the possibility that the United States (like the Bank of England in the

1930s), might have trouble meeting official demands to convert its currency into gold.

       U.S. inflation began to rise in the latter 1960s. The dollar’s supposed link to gold had

weakened significantly over time, causing a problem for countries pegged to the dollar as

they faced pressure to import inflation from the United States. At the same time, analysts and

markets began to believe that the U.S. dollar was overvalued and in need of depreciation. The

resulting capital flows into currencies like Germany’s mark, Japan’s yen, and Switzerland’s

franc exacerbated the inflationary pressures those countries faced, as their central banks had

to buy dollars to keep their exchange rates pegged, in the process increasing their

international reserve holdings and money supplies, as well as their exposure to any action by

the United States to increase the dollar price of gold. Triffin’s feared imbalance became ever-

more acute. Although Germany would revalue in October 1969 and Japan in July 1967, the

pressures continued.

       More academic economists began to echo Friedman’s (1953) and Meade’s (1955)

early calls for floating exchange rates, arguing that market-determined rates would tend to

eliminate external payments imbalances while insulating countries from foreign inflationary

shocks. Their basic argument was that routine exchange-rate flexibility allows all countries to

move to a preferred resolution of the trilemma—as compared with the situation of much

more constrained policymaking that they then faced. As Johnson (1969, p. 18) put it:

“Flexible rates would allow each country to pursue the mixture of unemployment and price

trend objectives it prefers, consistent with international equilibrium, equilibrium being




                                              14
secured by appreciation of the currencies of ‘price stability’ countries relative to the

currencies of ‘full employment’ countries.”

       By March 1973, after several attempts by the industrial countries to shore up fixed

exchange rates, further co-operation proved impossible. Generalized floating exchange rates

emerged as a stopgap measure in the face of continuing speculative attacks. What was at the

time intended as a temporary retreat has now lasted more than four decades.



Floating Exchange Rates: Monetary Independence and Financial Instability



       The monetary trilemma implies that, with the imperative of exchange-rate stability

gone, countries in the 1970s could orient monetary policy toward domestic goals while still

allowing additional freedom of capital movements across borders. In the decades since 1973,

both exchange-rate flexibility and capital mobility have increased, but the process has not

been smooth or consistent around the world. The United States financial account was already

reasonably unrestricted at the start of the 1970s. European countries like Germany and

Switzerland had imposed some inflow controls earlier, but could now dismantle them,

whereas other European countries and Japan retained heavier controls through the late 1970s

(Britain) or even up to the late 1980s (Bakker 1996; Abdelal 2007). As shown in Figure 4,

the share of countries with pegged exchange rates fell dramatically from about 90 percent in

the early 1970s to about 40 percent by the early 1980. But since then, the share of countries

with pegged currencies has crept up over time to more than half. Conversely, the level of

capital mobility was still relatively low in the mid-1980s, but then rose dramatically into the

early 2000s, before leveling off and even declining during the last decade or so.



                                               15
        Although it was clearly feasible for countries to liberalize capital accounts once they

had abandoned exchange rate pegs, it was not obvious that such a choice would be desirable,

and outcomes have not been entirely uniform. Many countries kept some form of pegged

exchange rates, most of them emerging economies and developing countries, but also notably

many European countries that established their own fixed exchange rate system in the 1970s,

a precursor of the euro. And in recent years, more countries have chosen to limit capital

flows, notably after the 2008 global crisis. Volatility in exchange rates, in international

capital flows, or in both can bring risks of financial and economic instability, as economic

history has always shown.



The Promise and Reality of Free International Capital Flows



In the 1970s, economists who made the case for capital-account liberalization tended to stress

the upside, emphasizing, for example, the negative effects of capital-control regimes that

enabled governments to use financial repression to protect the domestic markets for their

debts (McKinnon 1973; Shaw 1973). Moreover, capital controls became still harder to

enforce in the 1970s as domestic financial institutions developed and trade expanded further.

The growing political clout of financial-sector interests also pushed in the direction of

deregulation. More recently, Rajan and Zingales (2003) have suggested a narrative in which

financial openness drives domestic liberalization by allowing greater competition in the

financial sector and eroding the politically powerful interests that inhibit domestic reform to

protect their rents.




                                               16
       However, the literature making the case for opening the capital account also often

emphasized a more desirable sequence of events, which began with liberalizing competition

and establishing prudential regulation in domestic financial markets, and only then moving to

openness to international capital flows. In their survey of the liberalization experience of 34

developing and advanced economies between 1973 and 1996, Williamson and Mahar (1998)

found that, while most “liberalized the capital account gradually—after financial

liberalization had occurred—in accord with the prevailing policy recommendation” (p. 31),

“[f]ew countries seem to have heeded the advice to precede financial liberalization with the

introduction of a system of prudential supervision, staffed by supervisors who have a high

degree of independence of the political authorities” (p. 29). The piecemeal natures of some

liberalizations contributed to later financial instability in some cases. Moreover, in the 1970s

and 1980s the accepted wisdom often did not emphasize interactions between opening the

capital account and the need for considerable exchange rate flexibility.

       The doctrinal shift regarding capital mobility seen in advanced economies in the

1970s and 1980s began to spread globally in the 1990s. By September 1997, the IMF’s

management was proposing that the Fund’s executive board amend the Articles of

Agreement to give the Fund an explicit role in guiding countries toward more open capital

accounts. To be clear, the proposal was not advocating an indiscriminate rush toward

opening; indeed, it recognized the role of capital inflows in financial crises, such as those that

had afflicted Latin America from the mid-1970s through the mid-1990s, and it therefore

explicitly sanctioned gradualism, based on country circumstances (Fischer 1997). But it took

it as a given that an open capital account was the desirable ending point for all countries.




                                               17
       However, the 1997–98 financial crisis that rocked countries across East Asia marked

an inflection point in economists’ thinking about the merits of international capital mobility.

With the Latin American debt crisis of the 1980s, one could make an argument that

macroeconomic policy-making in those countries had been unsound, that their growth

prospects had been overstated, and that they were prone to structural rigidities—a seemingly

sufficient explanation for why their overborrowing came to grief. But without such apparent

macroeconomic flaws, the economies of east Asia had seemed to provide shining examples

of mostly well-run economies with rapid economic growth. These economies featured at

least partially open capital accounts, which allowed for substantial inflows of foreign capital.

They also had heavily managed exchange rates. These economies experienced what became

known as a “sudden stop,” when foreign (and, often, domestic) capital fled these countries.

The result was a drop in exchange rates, which made it impossible to repay dollar-

denominated debt, triggering a meltdown of their financial markets and banking systems—

financial dynamics for which there actually was ample precedent in the earlier Latin

American crises (Díaz Alejandro 1985; Kaminsky and Reinhart 1999).

       After the east Asian crisis, it became commonplace for economists (and the IMF) to

recommend floating for such emerging and liberalizing economies (Fischer 2003). But in

addition, the certitude that freeing the capital account should be a long-term goal for all

countries fell by the wayside. Since then, there has been considerable re-thinking of the

doctrine as well as an accumulation of empirical evidence on capital account liberalization

(for example, Ostry et al. 2010; Ocampo 2015). In 2012 the IMF published a new

“institutional view” on capital controls (International Monetary Fund 2012), which

sanctioned their use in some circumstances.



                                               18
The Promise and Reality of Floating Exchange Rates



Advocates of floating exchange rates like Friedman and Johnson clearly oversold the extent

to which they could facilitate trade while still insulating a domestic economy from

international shocks. They erred in part because, in their times, they had no immediate

experience with the types of global financial shocks that have become more prevalent.

Indeed, as shown earlier in Figure 4, a substantial number of countries have been unwilling

to allow their currencies to float freely, and the prevalence of pegged currencies has

exceeded half in the last decade or so. Presumably, those who peg their currencies believe

that this choice will facilitate trade and protect their economy from macro-financial shocks

caused by large exchange rate fluctuations, the essence of “fear of floating” (Calvo and

Reinhart 2002).

       Even early in the floating rate era, the new risks to financial stability were apparent.

In June 1974, German regulators closed a small bank, the Bankhaus I.D. Herstatt, which had

taken large foreign exchange positions far in excess of its capital. Later that year, the

Franklin National Bank of New York also closed after foreign exchange losses. Interestingly,

the Federal Reserve had to borrow from European central banks to help Franklin National

meet its obligations, a direction of funding that would be reversed when the Fed lent dollars

to foreign central banks during the global financial crisis of the late 2000s.

       But flexible exchange rates have their advantages, too. As noted a moment ago, the

consequences of the “sudden stop” of capital inflows in the east Asian financial crises of

1997–98 was made worse because exchange rates had been heavily managed, and domestic



                                               19
banks and other financial institutions were unhedged and unprepared for a dramatic swing in

exchange rates. In addition, as the monetary trilemma suggests, floating exchange rates

empower domestically oriented monetary policy, while providing a shock absorber against

external macroeconomic shocks.

           For most countries around the world, one of the most potent external macroeconomic

shocks involves changes in policy by the U.S. Federal Reserve. Early work by Jay

Shambaugh, and the three of us together, examined the empirical correlation between short-

term and policy interest rates in home countries versus in “base” countries like the United

States (Obstfeld, Shambaugh, and Taylor 2004, 2005; Shambaugh 2004). We looked at

whether the bilateral exchange rate regime between the home and the base country in a given

time period was a float or a peg, and whether the capital account was largely open or closed.

In our panel data, for the home-base pairs and periods studied—covering advanced and

emerging economies, and spanning epochs from the pre-World War I gold standard era to the

post–Bretton Woods era of today—the clear result was that pegs with open capital accounts

had much higher (and more statistically significant) interest rate correlations between them

than did either floating exchange rates or pegs with closed capital accounts—consistent with

what the monetary trilemma would predict. Other work on international transmission of

interest rates has confirmed these findings, with a range of studies finding bigger responses

of short-term interest rates for pegs versus floats.7




7
    For example, see Borensztein, Zettelmeyer and Philippon (2001); Frankel, Schmukler, and Servén (2004);

Miniane and Rogers (2007); di Giovanni and Shambaugh (2008); Klein and Shambaugh (2015); Obstfeld

(2015); Caceres, Carrière-Swallow, and Gruss (2016); and Ricci and Shi (2016).


                                                       20
       To what extent does the decoupling of short-term interest rates that floating allows

carry over to macroeconomic outcomes? Probably the most important macroeconomic

outcome variable is aggregate output, and di Giovanni and Shambaugh (2008) found

evidence that when the home economy has an open capital account and a peg, it tends to

experience a real GDP growth slowdown when its base country tightens monetary policy,

whereas when the home country has a floating exchange rate or a peg with a closed capital

account, such an effect is weak or nonexistent. This finding indicates a macroeconomic

buffering role for floating exchange rates.

       One recent branch of the research literature argues that the choice of exchange regime

may not matter. Indeed, Rey (2013, 2016) suggests that the monetary trilemma may now

have been transformed into a dilemma, writing that “cross-border flows and leverage of

global institutions transmit monetary conditions globally, even under floating exchange-rate

regimes” (Rey 2013, p. 310, emphasis in original). In this view, the key choice is between

domestic control over monetary policy and openness to international capital flows, and the

choice of exchange rate regime plays at most a secondary role. We agree that floating

exchange rates do not offer a complete buffer against transmission of all international

financial and monetary shocks. For example, Miranda-Agrippino and Rey (2015), Passari

and Rey (2015), and Rey (2013, 2016) show that even in major, advanced, floating-rate

economies there appears to be significant spillover from U.S. interest rates, to the global

financial cycle, to domestic macroeconomic and financial conditions. However, when faced

with external shocks, countries with floating exchange rates still have a shock absorber that

countries which peg exchange rates lack, and thus can achieve preferred policy outcomes

even if they cannot achieve full insulation of their economies (Obstfeld 2015). In this sense,



                                               21
more flexible exchange rates do provide a degree of differential insulation from external

monetary shocks, as the monetary policy trilemma predicts. Adding further weight to this

argument, Obstfeld, Ostry, and Qureshi (2017) document that in emerging markets, which

are most vulnerable to external forces, global changes in risk sentiment have less effect on

most domestic financial variables when the exchange rate regime is a free or managed float.



International Financial Stability and the Financial Trilemma



The classic monetary policy trilemma emphasizes that the combination of floating exchange

rates and capital mobility will empower monetary policy to focus on domestic objectives.

However, the monetary trilemma does not speak directly to financial stability concerns.

Indeed, monetary policy alone may be a relatively ineffective tool for addressing potential

financial stability problems. In this case, exposure to global financial shocks and cycles,

perhaps the result of monetary or other developments in the industrial-country financial

markets, may overwhelm countries even when their exchange rates are flexible. If this

outcome is a risk, countries may desire some combination of financial regulations or

restrictions on international capital mobility to shield their economies more fully.8

           Concerns about the need for international coordination of bank regulation emerged

almost immediately after the collapse of the Bretton Woods arrangements. The first meeting

of the Basel Committee on Banking Supervision (BCBS) was held in February 1975. Since




8
    This is the core argument that Rey (2013, 2016) makes; and on global financial cycles, see also Borio and

Disyatat (2015), Avdjiev, McCauley, and Shin (2016), and Reinhart, Reinhart, and Trebesch (2016).


                                                        22
then, this group has worked to apportion regulatory authority among national supervisors to

avoid gaps in oversight; to promote informational exchanges; and to regularize international

best practice in regulation, including standards for capital. There have been three successive

initiatives on bank capital and other regulations starting in 1988. The BCBS has expanded

over time and has drawn emerging markets into its orbit. Supplementing the work of the

BCBS, and housed along with it at the Bank for International Settlements, is the Financial

Stability Board (FSB), which originated in 1999 as the Financial Stability Forum (FSF) and

monitors the broader international financial system. The work of the FSB has become ever

more important as “shadow banking” has grown up alongside more traditional banking, as

the range of financially systemic and globally active institutions has expanded, and as the

complexity of financial markets and the instruments traded in them has grown.

       The growing efforts of international regulators to coordinate on financial oversight

have been mirrored in the rise to prominence of the financial trilemma (Schoenmaker 2013),

which is distinct from the monetary policy trilemma discussed above. In the financial

trilemma, countries must choose between national financial policies, integration into global

financial markets, or financial stability. For example, if there is widespread integration into

global financial markets and each nation retains national sovereignty over financial policies,

then regulatory arbitrage among jurisdictions may undermine financial stability (for some

evidence on arbitrage channels, see Aiyar et al. 2014; Bayoumi 2017; Cerutti et al. 2017).

Alternatively, a country with national financial rules may enhance financial stability by

cutting off integration into global markets. However, most countries have been willing

effectively to surrender a certain amount of sovereignty over financial regulation in the hope

of keeping access to international capital markets while maintaining financial stability. While



                                               23
the financial trilemma obviously applies to currency zones with integrated payments systems

like the euro area, it also applies to countries that maintain their own floating currencies.

       Because of the financial trilemma, moreover, domestic monetary policy under an

open capital account and a floating exchange rate, even if more autonomous than under a

pegged exchange rate, will likely face a harsher tradeoff between conventional

macroeconomic goals (inflation, output) and financial stability (Obstfeld 2015). Thus, the

burden on domestic financial stability policy will accordingly be even greater.

Macroprudential policies must bear some of the load, and in the face of certain kinds of

shocks, some forms of capital controls could appear desirable as well, as argued, for

example, by Blanchard (2016).



The European Example: Pegged or Stable Exchange Rates and Financial Fragility



The nations of western Europe have charted a hybrid path for monetary institutions in the

post-Bretton Woods era. After the early 1970s breakdown of fixed rates, the members of

what was at the time called the European Economic Community (EEC) moved to limit

currency fluctuations within their group. Indeed, as early as 1969 these countries were

already contemplating the Werner Plan for ultimately moving to a common currency. By

1979, an important subset of EEC members pegged their mutual exchange rates in what was

known as the European Monetary System. The resulting exchange rate mechanism ended up

functioning much like a miniature Bretton Woods system—with periodic crises and

exchange rate parity adjustments, only now with Germany as the center country. In line with

the trilemma, some members, including France and Italy, maintained capital controls.



                                               24
       By the end of the 1980s, as was later codified in the Maastricht Treaty of 1991,

momentum built for the move toward economic and monetary union. Concretely, the former

meant a single market concept under which capital controls had to disappear; the latter meant

that fixed exchange rates became the overriding objective of national monetary policies, as a

stepping stone to the common currency. The future members of the euro area thus embraced

the vertex of the monetary policy trilemma based on capital mobility and exchange-rate

stability vis-à-vis each other, but with jointly floating exchange rates against outside

currencies. Abdelal (2007) offers an insightful treatment of the European attitude toward

capital controls, and its impact on global practice more generally.

       However, just as the earlier Bretton Woods treaty had neglected financial stability

concerns, the Maastricht Treaty of 1991 setting up the European economic and monetary

union likewise turned a blind eye to financial stability (as opposed to macroeconomic) issues,

in a different setting and for different reasons, but with considerable destabilizing effects

later. There was no mechanism built into the euro to address a situation in which some

countries ran continuous and large trade surpluses, while others ran large and continuous

deficits. There was no common framework of prudential banking and financial regulation,

much less any pooling of bank failure risks (e.g., deposit insurance). And, as became evident

in subsequent euro area crises, banks and governments could even run out of liquidity despite

the single currency, amplifying financial stability risks. Unlike the 1950s and 1960s, when a

quite repressive global financial environment ensured that the neglect of these issues under

Bretton Woods would not prove too costly, the disregard for financial stability in the euro

architecture in a time of rampant financialization would prove to be a painful oversight.




                                               25
Old Problems in New Guises



The causes of the global financial crisis of 2007–2008 have been much debated. The

financial boom that preceded the crash was a global phenomenon. Bernanke (2005) argued

that the world economy was experiencing a global saving glut, driven primarily by China and

the former crisis countries of East Asia, distributing ample liquidity worldwide and pushing

up real estate prices in many countries, not just the United States. But this emphasis on net

capital flows from countries with surpluses of saving over investment obscured another

prominent feature of the period, the sharp rise in gross capital (largely bank-related) flows

between countries that helped to prepare the ground for the subsequent crash (Bernanke,

Bertaut, DeMarco, and Kamin 2011; Lane 2012; Borio, James, and Shin 2014). Figure 5

illustrates the behavior of these flows in the period leading up to the financial crisis, and

after.

         Despite having exchange-rate flexibility as a potential brake, some countries were

unable to head off the resulting amplification of financial instability coming through open

capital markets. Within the euro area, with no exchange rates at all to adjust, cross-border

capital flows from core to periphery played a major destabilizing role, notably in the credit

booms of Ireland and Spain (Lane 2013; Hale and Obstfeld 2016). Moreover, as advanced

economies turned to ultra-loose monetary policies in the wake of the financial crisis, some

emerging markets, while having loosened the rigidity of their exchange rates after the Asian

crisis, still found that lower global interest rates and capital inflows were making it harder for

them to maintain financial and price stability. The central macroeconomic challenges of

exchange rate regime choice, external payments adjustment, and international liquidity have



                                                26
clearly remained over time, although they have manifested themselves in different forms

given the evolution of financial markets.



How Should Exchange Rates Be Determined?



A number of countries have continued to use some form of pegged exchange rates, as shown

earlier in Figure 4. However, the monetary trilemma, coupled with widespread financial

integration, has made it much harder—or even impossible, for most countries—to maintain

completely firm currency pegs, given the imperatives of domestically-oriented monetary

policy. At the national level, as we have seen, floating exchange rates clearly cannot provide

insulation against all global financial or real shocks. But floating still does facilitate some

measure of domestic insulation, and policymakers can provide additional shock absorbers by

deploying effective financial and macroprudential policies, by adopting sound fiscal and

structural policies, and even by using measures to limit capital flow in some circumstances.

       But while floating or soft peg exchange rates have helped mitigate policymakers’

domestic challenges, debate has continued over whether floating is a suitable solution for the

international system as a whole. While, to a degree, floating exchange rates can allow

individual countries to stabilize, they also raise the age-old problem of competitive currency

depreciations, in which demand is just being shifted between countries. Central bankers faced

with this “currency war” critique typically respond that while monetary expansion and lower

interest rates within a country indeed do depreciate the domestic currency and make foreign

goods relatively more expensive, the lower domestic interest rates also bring about a win-win

rise in domestic demand (via the interest rate channel) that spills over positively abroad. This



                                                27
argument may appear to lose traction in today’s economy where major central bank policy

interest rates have settled near their effective lower bounds.9 But the arrival at that unpleasant

floor is a result of other factors, notably the conjunction of low real rates and current inflation

targets, and not a mark against conventional policy in normal times per se.

           Low global real interest rates, however, reflect the balance between global saving and

global investment, and for each individual country, its current account surplus equals the

excess of its saving over its investment. These facts raise the concern that some economies

may be boosting their economies through higher trade surpluses, pushing global real interest

rates down and making monetary stabilization more difficult for all.



How Should Balance of Payments Adjustments Occur?



Countries with large trade deficits, experiencing an inflow of foreign investment capital, face

the threat of “sudden stop,” and therefore have some incentives to limit their external

imbalance. On the other hand, there is no such market-based incentive to limit trade

surpluses. In a world where high balance-of-payments surpluses persist for certain countries,

net external wealth positions become increasingly divergent. Creditors’ external wealth

becomes ever more positive, and debtors’ becomes ever more negative—and debtor efforts to

fend off deflation only prolonging the process. When economies that have been experiencing



9
    Mishra and Rajan (2016) suggest that the unconventional monetary policies employed at the effective lower

bound for monetary policy interest rates may in some cases work primarily by shifting aggregate demand from

other countries, rather than stimulating interest-sensitive expenditure components at home, and that policies

which are globally zero sum should be avoided.


                                                       28
large and sustained current account deficits eventually are forced to adjust spending abruptly

when their perceived intertemporal budget constraints shift, as is often the case, the result can

be national or even international recession and crisis.

        In some cases, one country’s higher trade surplus may come directly at the expense of

employment and price stability abroad (Caballero, Farhi, and Gourinchas 2015; Eggertsson et

al. 2016). The problem is less serious when countries can deploy monetary or other policies

to offset deflationary impulses from abroad (Blanchard and Milesi-Ferretti 2012). For an

economy at the effective lower bound of the policy interest rate, however, monetary policy

alone cannot easily offset a foreign deflationary impulse; moreover, a fiscal policy response

may be constrained as well by fears (justified or not) over pre-existing high levels of public

debt.

        The problems that arise when some countries run sustained and large trade

imbalances have been well-understood by economists since at least the interwar years, but

this issue has repeatedly proven intractable to global macroeconomic policy solutions.

International cooperation is at a much more evolved stage with respect to trade policy (the

World Trade Organization with its rules and oversight) and in financial-regulatory policy (the

Basel process and the FSB), and is even advancing in international tax policy. One reason

may be that the gains from those other modes of cooperation potentially accrue

simultaneously to all parties. However, the identities of countries with large trade surpluses

tend to be fairly persistent over time, giving them less incentive to submit to rules or suasion

today in the expectation that someday they may be running deficits. Another reason may be

that economists and policymakers have, rightly or wrongly, more precise expectations about




                                               29
the nature and effects of trade, regulatory, and tax instruments, compared with

macroeconomic policy tools.



How Can Countries Have Access to Adequate International Liquidity?



Under the Bretton Woods system, countries held foreign exchange reserves (mostly in U.S.

dollar assets) to peg their exchange rates. Accordingly, the advent of floating exchange rates

led many economists to predict that central banks would reduce their demands for reserves.

As in the last few decades, aside from the role that reserves play in foreign exchange

intervention, they can also play a potential role in buffering balance of payments shocks

when other means of external financing become expensive or unavailable, for example, in a

sudden stop. Here as well, the development of international capital markets after the early

1970s led some to predict that expanded opportunities for foreign borrowing would reduce

the role of reserves.

       Such predictions have been wildly wrong, as we can see from Figure 6. Advanced-

country reserves remain significant relative to GDP, rising from about 3 percent of GDP in

1993 for these countries as a group, to more than 5 percent of GDP by 2015. However, the

reserves held by emerging and developing countries have risen sharply, rising from about 7

percent of the GDP of this group of countries in 1993 to about 25 percent of their GDP by

2007—and remaining roughly at that level since then (based on IMF data).

       Emerging and developing economies have raised their reserve holdings for two main

reasons. First, even though their exchange rates have generally become more flexible in the

last few decades, they continue to intervene in foreign exchange markets. In some cases, the



                                              30
goal has been to temper currency volatility (Calvo and Reinhart 2002); in others, to maintain

or enhance export competitiveness—motivations that in practice can overlap. Second, more

open international capital markets have raised the precautionary demand for reserves, not

reduced it. For emerging market economies, larger balance-sheet liabilities, some

denominated in foreign currencies and at short term, imply a greater risk of capital-flow

reversal: not only might financing for a current account deficit disappear in a sudden stop,

but foreign creditors could also call for the repayment of gross liabilities. In addition,

domestic investors might seek to rebalance portfolios towards foreign assets, via capital

flight towards perceived safe havens. The magnitudes of these gross flows can greatly exceed

those of net flows, and these risks increase the utility of foreign exchange reserves to help

domestic financial institutions as well as importers make payments abroad, while minimizing

the risks of possible spillovers to domestic banks (Obstfeld, Shambaugh, and Taylor 2010).

            Such risks are not limited to emerging and developing economies. Banks worldwide

fund themselves with borrowing in key advanced-economy currencies, notably the U.S.

dollar, which continues to play a pivotal international role long after the Bretton Woods

system’s demise.10 During the global financial crisis, for example, European banks found it

difficult to roll over short-term dollar credits, and faced the prospect of having to liquidate

dollar-denominated assets in fire sale conditions. Ad hoc swap lines, through which the

Federal Reserve lent dollars, and with which foreign central banks could meet these needs

(and assume the attached credit risk), helped stabilize markets. Indeed, these arrangements

became permanent late in 2013 among the six key advanced-economy central banks. Helpful




10
     A prescient meditation on the centrality of the U.S. dollar, still relevant 50 years later, is Kindleberger (1967).


                                                           31
and necessary as this arrangement is, it still leaves emerging-market central banks out in the

cold (Weder di Mauro and Zettelmeyer 2017).

       The existing system of gross reserve holding by emerging-market central banks has

several drawbacks, discussed in detail in Obstfeld (2013), among which is the risk that large-

scale reserve accumulation is deflationary globally. These problems could be ameliorated if

instead emerging and developing countries had better access to credit lines. Traditional IMF

lending cannot fulfill this role, as IMF programs are subject to conditionality and time-

consuming negotiation. Over the years, the IMF has tried to offer various more flexible credit

facilities for pre-qualified borrowers, but few countries have signed up, fearing either the

stigma of asking for a credit line or of receiving one and later being disqualified. In any case,

a globally systemic crisis would strain the Fund’s capacity. The desire of non-advanced

economies to hold higher reserves raises a modern-day analog of the Triffin paradox from the

1960s (Farhi, Gourinchas, and Rey 2011; Obstfeld 2013). Reserves these days mostly take

the form of high-quality “safe” liabilities of advanced countries, generally government-issued

or guaranteed. But the supply of these liabilities is not unlimited; indeed, it has arguably

shrunk as several advanced-country governments, notably in the euro area, became fiscally

challenged after the crises of 2008–12. Just as the Triffin dilemma was that the United States

could not continue to satisfy the world’s growing demand for dollar reserves without

undermining its commitment to convert them into gold, so the advanced-economy reserve

issuers cannot issue unlimited amounts of reserve claims without undermining the “safe

asset” character of those liabilities that makes them useful as reserve assets in the first place.

There is little doubt that excess global demand for safe assets, including safe reserve assets,

is contributing to the current low interest rate environment in the world economy.



                                                32
Summing Up



One of the most important realizations to come out of the global financial crisis of 2007–08

and its aftermath was that standard models of macroeconomic stabilization had not paid

sufficient attention to finance and financial markets. A similar realization holds for models of

international monetary relations. In both cases, policy practice and intellectual debate have

been struggling for centuries to address financial stability concerns. In the last few decades,

the task has become even more urgent in the face of rapidly evolving financial markets,

seemingly intent on pushing risky activities outside the perimeters of regulation. Economic

analysis still needs to bring the risks of financial instability into its core frameworks, from the

analysis of business cycles to that of international economic interactions.




                                                33
References


Abdelal, Rawi. 2007. Capital Rules: The Construction of Global Finance. Cambridge, Mass.:
       Harvard University Press.

Aiyar, Shekhar, Charles W. Calomiris, and Tomasz Wieladek. 2014. Does Macro-Prudential
        Regulation Leak? Evidence from a UK Policy Experiment. Journal of Money, Credit and
        Banking 46(S1): 181–214.

Avdjiev, Stefan, Robert N. McCauley, and Hyun Song Shin. 2016. Breaking Free of the Triple
       Coincidence in International Finance. Economic Policy 31(87): 409–51.

Bagehot, Walter. 1873. Lombard Street: A Description of the Money Market. London: Henry S. King
       and Co.

Bakker, Age F. P. 1996. The Liberalisation of Capital Movements in Europe: The Monetary
        Committee and Financial Integration, 1958–1994. Dordrecht, The Netherlands:
        Kluwer Academic Publishers.

Bayoumi, Tamim. 2017. Unfinished Business: Origins and Implications of the North Atlantic
      Financial Crisis. New Haven, Conn.: Yale University Press.

Bernanke, Ben S. 1983. Nonmonetary Effects of the Financial Crisis in the Propagation of the Great
       Depression. American Economic Review 73(3): 257–76.

Bernanke, Ben S. 2005. The Global Saving Glut and the U.S. Current Account Deficit. Remarks at
       the Sandridge Lecture, Virginia Association of Economists, Richmond, Va., March 10.

Bernanke, Ben S., with Carol Bertaut, Laurie Pounder DeMarco, and Steven Kamin. 2011.
       International Capital Flows and the Returns to Safe Assets in the United States 2003–2007.
       Financial Stability Review (Banque de France) 15(1): 13–26.

Bernanke, Ben S., and Kevin Carey. 1996. Nominal Wage Stickiness and Aggregate Supply in the
       Great Depression. Quarterly Journal of Economics 111(3): 853–83.

Bernanke, Ben, and Harold James. 1991. The Gold Standard, Deflation, and Financial Crisis in the
       Great Depression: An International Comparison. In Financial Markets and Financial Crises,
       edited by R. Glenn Hubbard. Chicago: University of Chicago Press, pp. 33–68.

Blanchard, Olivier J. 2016. Currency Wars, Coordination, and Capital Controls. NBER Working
       Paper 22388.

Blanchard, Olivier J., and Gian Maria Milesi-Ferretti. 2012. (Why) Should Current Account Balances
       Be Reduced? IMF Economic Review 60(1): 139–150.

Bordo, Michael D. and Anna J. Schwartz, eds. 1984. A Retrospective on the Classical Gold Standard,
       1821–1931. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.




                                                34
Borensztein, Eduardo, Jeromin Zettelmeyer, and Thomas Philippon. 2001. Monetary Independence in
       Emerging Markets: Does the Exchange Rate Regime Make a Difference? IMF Working
       Paper WP/01/1. January.

Borio, Claudio, and Piti Disyatat. 2015. Capital Flows and the Current Account: Taking Financing
        (More) Seriously. BIS Working Paper 525, October.

Borio, Claudio, Harold James, and Hyun Song Shin. 2014. The International Monetary and Financial
        System: A Capital Account Historical Perspective. BIS Working Paper 457, August.

Caballero, Ricardo J., Emmanuel Farhi, and Pierre-Olivier Gourinchas. 2015. Global Imbalances and
        Currency Wars at the ZLB. National Bureau of Economic Research Working Paper 21670.
        October.

Caceres, Carlos, Yan Carrière-Swallow, and Bertrand Gruss. 2016. Global Financial Conditions and
       Monetary Policy Autonomy. IMF Working Paper WP/16/108. June.

Calvo, Guillermo A. and Carmen M. Reinhart. 2002. Fear of Floating. Quarterly Journal of
        Economics 107(2): 379–408.

Campa, José Manuel. 1990. Exchange Rates and Economic Recovery in the 1930s: An Extension to
       Latin America. Journal of Economic History 50(3): 677–82.

Cassis, Youssef. 2011. Crises and Opportunities, 1890–2010: The Shaping of Modern Finance.
        Oxford: Oxford University Press.

Cerutti, Eugenio, Stijn Claessens, and Luc Laeven, 2017. The Use and Effectiveness of
         Macroprudential Policies: New Evidence. Journal of Financial Stability 28(1): 203–24.

Chinn, Menzie D., and Hiro Ito. 2006. What Matters for Financial Development? Capital Controls,
       Institutions, and Interactions. Journal of Development Economics 81(1): 163-92.

Cooper, Richard N. 1982. The Gold Standard: Historical Facts and Future Prospects. Brookings
       Papers on Economic Activity 1: 1–45.

Dagher, Jihad C. 2016. Regulatory Cycles: Revisiting the Political Economy of Financial Crises.
       Mimeo, IMF Research Department.

Díaz Alejandro, Carlos F. 1985. Good-bye Financial Repression, Hello Financial Crash. Journal of
       Development Economics 19(1–2): 1–24.

di Giovanni, Julian, and Jay C. Shambaugh. 2008. “The Impact of Foreign Interest Rates on the
        Economy: The Role of the Exchange Rate Regime.” Journal of International Economics
        74(2): 341–61.

Eggertsson, Gauti B., Neil R. Mehrotra, Sanjay R. Singh, and Lawrence H. Summers. 2016. A
        Contagious Malady? Open Economy Dimensions of Secular Stagnation. IMF Economic
        Review 64(4): 581–634.

Eichengreen, Barry. 1992. Golden Fetters: The Gold Standard and the Great Depression, 1919–
       1939. New York: Oxford University Press.

                                                35
Eichengreen, Barry. 2008. Globalizing Capital: A History of the International Monetary System. 2nd
       edition. Princeton, N.J.: Princeton University Press.

Eichengreen, Barry and Jeffrey Sachs. 1985. Exchange Rates and Economic Recovery in the 1930s.
       Journal of Economic History 45(4): 925–46.

Farhi, Emmanuel, Pierre-Olivier Gourinchas, and Hélène Rey. 2011. Reforming the International
        Monetary System. London: Centre for Economic Policy Research.

Fischer, Stanley. 1997. Capital Account Liberalization and the Role of the IMF. Paper presented at
        the seminar “Asia and the IMF,” Hong Kong, China. September.

Fischer, Stanley. 2003. Financial Crises and Reform of the International Financial System. Review of
        World Economics 139(1): 1–37.

Frankel, Jeffrey A., Sergio L. Schmukler, and Luis Servén. 2004. Global Transmission of Interest
        Rates: Monetary Independence and Currency Regimes. Journal of International Money and
        Finance 23(5): 701–34.

Friedman, Milton. 1953. The Case for Flexible Exchange Rates. In Essays in Positive Economics.
       Chicago: University of Chicago Press, pp. 157–203.

Friedman, Milton, and Anna Jacobson Schwartz. 1963. A Monetary History of the United States,
       1867–1960. Princeton, N.J.: Princeton University Press.

Hale, Galina, and Maurice Obstfeld. 2016. The Euro and the Geography of International Debt Flows.
       Journal of the European Economic Association 14(1): 115–44.

Hamilton, James D. 1988. Role of the International Gold Standard in Propagating the Great
       Depression. Contemporary Economic Policy 6(2): 67–89.

Hetzel, Robert L., and Gary Richardson. 2016. Money, Banking, and Monetary Policy from the
        Formation of the Federal Reserve until Today. Working Paper Series WP 16-01, Federal
        Reserve Bank of Richmond. January.

Hsieh, Chang-Tai, and Christina D. Romer. 2006. Was the Federal Reserve Constrained by the Gold
        Standard during the Great Depression? Evidence from the 1932 Open Market Purchase
        Program. Journal of Economic History 66(1): 140–76.

International Monetary Fund. 2012. The Liberalization and Management of Capital Flows: An
         Institutional View. URL: www.imf.org/external/np/pp/eng/2012/111412.pdf

Irwin, Douglas A. 2011. Trade Policy Disaster: Lessons from the 1930s. Cambridge, Mass.: MIT
        Press.

Irwin, Douglas A. 2012–2013. The French Gold Sink and the Great Deflation of 1929–32. Cato
        Papers on Public Policy 2: 1–41.




                                                 36
Jalil, Andrew J. 2015. A New History of Banking Panics in the United States, 1825–1929:
         Construction and Implications. American Economic Journal: Macroeconomics 7(3): 295–
         330.

Johnson, Harry G. 1969. The Case for Flexible Exchange Rates, 1969. Federal Reserve Bank of St.
       Louis Review 69(6): 12–24.

Jordà, Òscar, Moritz Schularick, and Alan M. Taylor. 2017. Macrofinancial History and the New
        Business Cycle Facts. NBER Macroeconomics Annual. Forthcoming.

Kindleberger, Charles P. 1967. The Politics of International Money and World Language. Princeton
       Essays in International Finance 61. August.

Kindleberger, Charles P. 2013. The World in Depression: 1929–1939. 40th Anniversary edition.
       Berkeley, CA: University of California Press.

Kaminsky, Graciela L., and Carmen M. Reinhart. 1999. The Twin Crises: The Causes of Banking and
      Balance of Payments Problems. American Economic Review 89(3): 473–500.

Keynes, John Maynard. 1925. The Economic Consequences of Mr Churchill. London: Hogarth Press.

Keynes, John Maynard. 1930. A Treatise on Money. The Collected Writings of John Maynard
       Keynes, vol. VI. London: Macmillan.

Klein, Michael W., and Jay C. Shambaugh. 2015. Rounding the Corners of the Policy Trilemma.
        American Economic Journal: Macroeconomics 7 (4): 33–66.

Laidler, David. 2003. Two Views of the Lender of Last Resort: Thornton and Bagehot. Cahiers
         d’Économie Politique 45(2): 61-78.

Lane, Philip R. 2012. Financial Globalisation and the Crisis. BIS Working Papers 397.

Lane, Philip R. 2013. Capital Flows in the Euro Area. European Commission, Directorate-General for
       Economic and Financial Affairs, Economic Papers 497.

League of Nations. 1944. International Currency Experience: Lessons of the Interwar Period
       Geneva: League of Nations.

McKinnon, Ronald I. 1973. Money and Capital in Economic Development. Washington, D.C.:
      Brookings Institution.

Meade, James. E. 1955. The Case for Variable Exchange Rates. The Three Banks Review 27: 3–27.

Miniane, Jacques, and John H. Rogers. 2007. Capital Controls and the International Transmission of
       U.S. Money Shocks. Journal of Money, Credit and Banking 39(5): 1003–35.

Miranda-Agrippino, Silvia, and Hélène Rey. 2015. World Asset Markets and the Global Financial
       Cycle. NBER Working Papers 21722.

Mishkin, Frederic S. 1978. The Household Balance Sheet and the Great Depression. Journal of
       Economic History 38(4): 918–37.

                                                37
Mishra, Prachi, and Raghuram Rajan. 2016. Rules of the Monetary Game. RBI Working Paper Series
        04/2016. Department of Economic and Policy Research, Reserve Bank of India.

Obstfeld, Maurice. 2013. The International Monetary System: Living with Asymmetry. In
        Globalization in an Age of Crisis: Multilateral Economic Cooperation in the Twenty-First
        Century, edited by Robert C. Feenstra and Alan M. Taylor. Chicago: University of Chicago
        Press, pp. 301–336.

Obstfeld, Maurice. 2015. Trilemmas and Tradeoffs: Living with Financial Globalization. In Global
        Liquidity, Spillovers to Emerging Markets and Policy Responses, edited by Claudio Raddatz,
        Diego Saravia, and Jaume Ventura. Santiago, Chile: Central Bank of Chile, pp. 13–78.

Obstfeld, Maurice, Jonathan D. Ostry, and Mahvash S. Qureshi. 2017. A Tie that Binds: Revisiting
        the Trilemma in Emerging Market Economies. IMF Working Paper, May.

Obstfeld, Maurice, Jay C. Shambaugh, and Alan M. Taylor. 2004. Monetary Sovereignty, Exchange
        Rates, and Capital Controls: The Trilemma in the Interwar Period. IMF Staff Papers
        51(Special Issue): 75–108.

Obstfeld, Maurice, Jay C. Shambaugh, and Alan M. Taylor. 2005. The Trilemma in History:
        Tradeoffs among Exchange Rates, Monetary Policies, and Capital Mobility. Review of
        Economics and Statistics 87(3): 423–38.

Obstfeld, Maurice, Jay C. Shambaugh, and Alan M. Taylor. 2010. Financial Stability, the Trilemma,
        and International Reserves. American Economic Journal: Macroeconomics 2(2): 57–94.

Obstfeld, Maurice, and Alan M. Taylor. 1998. The Great Depression as a Watershed: International
        Capital Mobility in the Long Run. In The Defining Moment: The Great Depression and the
        American Economy in the Twentieth Century, edited by M. D. Bordo, C. D. Goldin, and E. N.
        White. Chicago: University of Chicago Press, pp. 353–402.

Obstfeld, Maurice, and Alan M. Taylor. 2004. Global Capital Markets: Integration, Crisis, and
        Growth. Japan-U.S. Center Sanwa Monographs on International Financial Markets.
        Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.

Ocampo, José Antonio. 2015. Capital Account Liberalization and Management. WIDER Working
      Paper 2015/048, United Nations University, May.

Ostry, Jonathan D., Atish Ghosh, Karl Habermeier, Marcos Chamon, Mahvash S. Qureshi, and
        Dennis B. S. Reinhardt. 2010. Capital Inflows: The Role of Controls. IMF Staff Position
        Note 10/04.

Padoa-Schioppa, Tommaso. 1988. The European Monetary System: A Long-Term View. In The
       European Monetary System, edited by Francesco Giavazzi, Stefano Micossi, and Marcus
       Miller. New York: Cambridge University Press, pp. 369–384.

Passari, Evgenia, and Hélène Rey. 2015. Financial Flows and the International Monetary System.
         Economic Journal 125(584): 675–98.

Polanyi, Karl. 1944. The Great Transformation. New York: Farrar & Rinehart.

                                                38
Qian, Rong, Carmen M. Reinhart, Kenneth S. Rogoff. 2011. On Graduation from Default, Inflation
       and Banking Crises: Elusive or Illusion? NBER Macroeconomics Annual 25(1): 1–36.

Quinn, Dennis P., Martin Schindler, and A. Maria Toyoda. 2011. Assessing Measures of Financial
       Openness and Integration. IMF Economic Review 59(3): 488–522.

Rajan, Raghuram G. and Luigi Zingales. 2003. The Great Reversals: The Politics of Financial
        Development in the 20th Century. Journal of Financial Economics 69 (1): 5–50.

Reinhart, Carmen M., Vincent Reinhart, and Christoph Trebesch. 2016. Global Cycles: Capital
       Flows, Commodities, and Sovereign Defaults, 1815–2015. American Economic Review
       (Papers and Proceedings) 106(5): 574–80.

Rey, Hélène. 2013. Dilemma not Trilemma: The Global Financial Cycle and Monetary Policy
       Independence. Proceedings of a symposium sponsored by the Federal Reserve Bank of
       Kansas City, Jackson Hole, Wyo., August 23–24, 2013, pp. 285–333.

Rey, Hélène, 2016. International Channels of Transmission of Monetary Policy and the Mundellian
       Trilemma. IMF Economic Review 64(1): 6–35.

Ricci, Luca Antonio, and Wei Shi. 2016. Trilemma or Dilemma: Inspecting the Heterogeneous
        Response of Local Currency Interest Rates to Foreign Rates. IMF Working Paper WP/16/75.
        March.

Ruggie, John Gerard. 1982. International Regimes, Transactions, and Change: Embedded Liberalism
        in the Postwar Economic Order. International Organization 36(2): 379–415.

Schoenmaker, Dirk. 2013. Governance of International Banking: The Financial Trilemma. Oxford:
      Oxford University Press.

Shambaugh, Jay C. 2004. The Effects of Fixed Exchange Rates on Monetary Policy. Quarterly
      Journal of Economics 119(1): 301–52.

Shaw, Edward S. 1973. Financial Deepening in Economic Development. New York: Oxford
       University Press.

Temin, Peter. 1989. Lessons from the Great Depression. Cambridge, Mass.: MIT Press.

Thornton, Henry. 1802. An Enquiry into the Nature and Effects of the Paper Credit of Great Britain.
       London: J. Hatchard.

Triffin, Robert. 1960. Gold and the Dollar Crisis: The Future of Convertibility. New Haven, Conn.:
         Yale University Press.

Weder di Mauro, Beatrice and Jeromin Zettelmeyer. 2017. The New Global Financial Safety Net:
       Struggling for Coherent Governance in a Multipolar System. CIGI Essays on International
       Finance—Volume 4. Waterloo, Ont.: Center for International Governance Innovation.

Williamson, John, and Molly Mahar. 1998. A Survey of Financial Liberalization. Princeton Essays in
       International Finance 211. November.

                                                39
Figure 1: Price levels under the Gold Standard, U.K. 1870–1913 and U.S.A. 1870–1913




                         105
                                                                                                             United Kingdom
                                                                                                             United States




                         100
    CPI price level
           95            90
                         85




                                                   1870             1880               1890          1900           1910

    Source: Data from Jordà, Schularick, and Taylor (2017) Macrofinancial Database.


                                                                Figure 2: Financial Crises, 1870–present
                         80




                                                             High-income economies (N=23)
                                                             Middle- & low-income economies (N=44)
                         70
    Share of countries in a financial crisis (%)
      20       30       40
                         10
                         0      50        60




                                                   1870 1880 1890 1900 1910 1920 1930 1940 1950 1960 1970 1980 1990 2000 2010

                                                           Source: Data from Qian, Reinhart, and Rogoff (2011).




                                                                                       40
                                         Figure 3: Pegging to Gold and Capital Mobility, 1870–1938




               100




                                                                                                                 100
               90
  30 40 50 60 70 80




                                                                                                                 Quinn index of capital mobility
Percentage of pegged countries




                                                                                                                      60                 80
               20
               10




                                               Percentage of pegged countries




                                                                                                                 40
                                               Index of capital mobility (right scale)
               0




                                  1870        1880          1890        1900         1910     1920   1930     1940


Source: Data from Jordà, Schularick, and Taylor (2017) Macrofinancial Database;
                   and Quinn, Schindler, and Toyoda (2011).


                              Figure 4: Fixed Exchange Rates and Capital Mobility, 1970–Present
               100




                                                                                                                 80
                                               Index of pegged exchange rates
                                               Index of capital mobility (right scale)




                                                                                                                   Chinn-Ito index of capital mobility (normalized)
                                                                                                                                                          70
                             80
 Percentage of pegged countries




                                                                                                                                            60
               60




                                                                                                                              50
40




                                                                                                                 40
               20




                                  1970               1980                 1990              2000       2010


Notes: Data from Shambaugh (2004) coding; and Chinn and Ito (2006) database.




                                                                               41
      Figure 5: Evolution of Real Gross Capital Flows Compared with Output and Trade, 1985-2015

                                                         GDP




                             2000
                                                         Trade
                                                         Gross financial flows




                                    1500
                 Index (1985 = 100)
                     1000    500
                             0




                                             1985         1990            1995        2000    2005     2010   2015

 Notes: Indices are calculated from data in real U.S. dollars (deflated using U.S. GDP deflator). Global trade is defined as the average of global e
 and imports of goods and services. Gross global financial flows are defined as the sum of direct investment, portfolio investment, and other
 investments. Values are obtained by averaging inflows and outflows to account for measurement error.
 Source: IMF World Economic Outlook and International Financial Statistics databases.


                                                      Figure 6: Stocks of International Reserves, 1993–2015
                                 30




                                                          Emerging and developing economies
                                                          Advanced economies
                                 25
                    Percent of county group GDP
                       10        15
                                 5
                                 0         20




                                                  1993 1995 1997 1999 2001 2003 2005 2007 2009 2011 2013 2015
                                                     1994 1996 1998 2000 2002 2004 2006 2008 2010 2012 2014

Note: The “advanced” group excludes Hong Kong, South Korea, Singapore, and Taiwan but includes the Czech Republic,
Estonia, Slovenia, and the Slovak Republic.
Sources: IMF, International Financial Statistics database for reserve data (which include gold valued using national
methods); IMF, World Economic Outlook database for GDP data.



                                                                                   42
