                             NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                     AND THE CHILDREN SHALL LEAD:
          GENDER DIVERSITY AND PERFORMANCE IN VENTURE CAPITAL

                                      Paul A. Gompers
                                      Sophie Q. Wang

                                     Working Paper 23454
                             http://www.nber.org/papers/w23454


                    NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                             1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                               Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    May 2017




Support for this research was provided by the Division of Research at the Harvard Business
School. Lauren Cohen provided helpful comments and suggestions. Kevin Huang provided
excellent research assistance. Paul Gompers has invested in and consulted for venture capital
firms. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the
views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2017 by Paul A. Gompers and Sophie Q. Wang. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not
to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.
And the Children Shall Lead: Gender Diversity and Performance in Venture Capital
Paul A. Gompers and Sophie Q. Wang
NBER Working Paper No. 23454
May 2017
JEL No. G24

                                         ABSTRACT

With an overall lack of gender and ethnic diversity in the innovation sector documented in
Gompers and Wang (2017), we ask the natural next question: Does increased diversity lead to
better firm performances? In this paper, we attempt to answer this question using a unique dataset
of the gender of venture capital partners’ children. First, we find strong evidence that parenting
more daughters leads to an increased propensity to hire female partners by venture capital firms.
Second, using an instrumental variable set-up, we also show that improved gender diversity,
induced by parenting more daughters, improves deal and fund performances. These effects
concentrate overwhelmingly on the daughters of senior partners than junior partners. Taken
together, our findings have profound implications on how the capital markets could function
better with improved diversity.


Paul A. Gompers
Harvard Business School
Baker Library 263
Soldiers Field
Boston, MA 02163
and NBER
pgompers@hbs.edu

Sophie Q. Wang
Department of Economics
Harvard University
Littauer Center
1805 Cambridge Street
Cambridge, MA 02138
USA
sophieqzwang@gmail.com
Contents
  1.          Introduction ....................................................................................................................................... 3

  2.          Data Collection .................................................................................................................................. 8

  3.          Methodology .................................................................................................................................... 13

  4.          Empirical Results............................................................................................................................. 17

       4.1.      Effects on Venture Capital Hiring ........................................................................................... 17

       4.2.      Effects on Venture Capital Performance ................................................................................ 21

       4.3.      Instrumental Variable Regression............................................................................................. 24

       4.4.      Robustness and Alternative Specifications ............................................................................. 26

       4.5.      Discussions on the Economic Magnitude .............................................................................. 27

  5.          Conclusion........................................................................................................................................ 28

  References .................................................................................................................................................... 31

  Appendix A: Tables and Figures .............................................................................................................. 34

  Appendix B: Variable Definitions ............................................................................................................ 54

  Online Appendix: Additional Table I...................................................................................................... 55




                                                                                                                                                                  2
1. Introduction

   Homophily-driven biases can be a powerful force that inhibits diversity in organizations. To

overcome these barriers, policymakers have often attempted to actively promote diversity in the

workplace. Whether politicians or senior executives, many of the measures that are adopted assume

that greater diversity naturally leads to better performance. Others are skeptical that there is a

measurable improvement in performance when diversity is mandated. Most of the research on

whether or not greater diversity leads to improvements in the performance of organizations has

been hampered by the inability to identify exogenous variation in diversity that is needed for causal

inferences about the implications of diversity on performance. Still, other work has been done in

artificial settings outside of a real business context in which true long-run profit motives would be

present. Our paper makes two important contributions to the literature on diversity by using a

novel experimental design. First, we show that subtle treatment effects (e.g., parenting daughters)

can reduce hiring biases against women. Second, we show that exogenous shocks to gender diversity

lead to economic and statistically significant increases in performance.


   We look at venture capital firms and leverage the exogenously induced increases in gender

diversity.   Through unique data, we are able to identify hiring events for senior investment

professionals at venture capital firms. Gompers and Wang (2017) show that only about 10% of new

hires in the venture capital industry are women.          Prior work by Gompers, Muhkarlyamov,

Weisburst, and Xuan (2017) has shown that approximately 75% of venture capital firms have never

had a senior investment professional who is a woman. Our experimental design is to gather data on

the gender of venture capitalists’ children.     We show that when existing partners have more

daughters, the probability of hiring a senior female investor is significantly increased. Because the

gender of one’s children is usually thought to be exogenous, the gender diversity induced by hiring a


                                                                                                   3
senior female investor can be used to estimate the causal effect of gender diversity on performance.

We examine both deal level outcomes as well as fund level excess returns and find that greater

gender diversity increases performance by a meaningful amount. The results are robust to various

measures of the relative ratio of daughters to total children. Importantly, the results for hiring

women and its effect on performance only exist for information on senior partners’ children. This

makes sense if the senior partners are those who make the hiring decisions in the firm.


   Our results highlight two important effects.      The first is that subtle treatment effects can

overcome the influence of homophily. The demographic patterns and trends surveyed in Gompers

and Wang (2017) highlight the overall lack of gender diversity in venture capital. Women have

entered into venture capital at rates much lower than their entry rates into other highly compensated

professional fields such as medicine or law. The representation of women in science and technology

advanced degrees and MBAs (as a precursor to entry into venture capital) are much higher than the

representation of women in the innovation sector.         Also, the relative percentage of venture

capitalists who are female has not increased measurably over the past twenty-five years. Gompers

and Wang point out that the most likely explanation for this persistently low representation of

female investors is related to the notion of homophily, which is the tendency of individuals to

associate with similar others.


   As surveyed in McPherson, Smith-Lovin, and Cook (2001), the notion that “similarity breeds

connection” has robust and profound effects in network structures of every type, including

“marriage, friendship, work, advice, support, information transfer, exchange, co-membership, and

other types of relationship.” Positive assortative mating along observable inheritable traits (e.g.,

intelligence, race, and height) discussed by Becker (1973) in the context of a marriage market can be

viewed as the micro foundation of homophily in which choosing a partner with similar


                                                                                                   4
characteristics increases the certainty about the quality of one’s offspring. Currarini et al. (2009)

provide theoretical foundations for the pattern of homophily in social networks using a search-based

model of friendship formation and conclude that biases towards same types in both individual

preferences and the matching processes affect pairing outcomes.


    A direct implication of this “birds of a feather” phenomenon is that venture capitalists prefer to

hire, invest in, or coinvest with those that are similar to themselves in characteristics such as gender

and ethnicity. Indeed, Gompers, Mukharlyamov, and Xuan (2016) show that coinvestment patterns

in venture capital are driven by social similarities, where venture capitalists who are more similar in

terms of gender, ethnicity, school background, and work history are more likely to collaborate.

Further, they also show that this homophily driven collaboration reduces performance.1


    Moreover, the typical venture capital firm is small in size, with a median of three partners in our

dataset. Hiring decisions are made infrequently. Most venture capital firms only make infrequent

senior hires, e.g., perhaps once every three to five years. Thus, aggregate new hiring in this industry

is driven by the (aggregated) decisions of small teams. From social psychology, small groups are

both more likely to be homophilous, and more likely to have biases aggregated into expressed

decision-making (Klocke (2007)).        Thus, a slight – even subconscious - preference over certain

demographic characteristics, like gender, could aggregate into a sustained overall lack of gender

diversity at an industry level. A very slight gender preference due to homophily may result in the

hiring of a man over a woman. Even though the gender preference can be thought of as a

continuous variable and any slight bias could be small, the hiring outcome is binary. In this setting,

even a very small bias towards hiring someone of the same gender could lead to persistent low




1Cohen, Frazzini, and Malloy (2008) show that homophily also works at the school ties level in the investment
management arena between buy side analysts and CEOs.

                                                                                                           5
representation from those groups not already in the venture capital industry. The aggregation of

such binary outcomes across firms can result in the overall lack of diversity across an entire industry.


   One question is whether subtle treatment effects can dislodge the inherent homophilic

preferences that venture capitalists have when hiring a new senior partner. Recent work has found

that parenting can influence social preferences. For example, Warner (1991) showed in surveys that

parents of daughter tended to show greater support for feminist causes. Similarly, Warner and Steel

(1999) show that fathers of daughters show greater support for gender equity than do fathers of

sons. Recent works have also shown that decision making of fathers can be influenced by the

gender of their children. Washington (2008) has shown that US Congressmen vote more liberally,

especially on issues affecting women, if they have more daughters. Crongquist (2015) shows that

CEOs who have more daughters are more likely to adopt socially responsible corporate policies.

Glynn and Sen (2015) show that Federal Court judges with more daughters tend to decide cases on

women’s issues more liberally and that the effect is largely driven by Republican judges.


   Our results show that these types of subtle treatment effects have real consequences for business

decisions. We find that the proportion of female hires increases by 1.93% if you replace a son with

a daughter for the existing partners in a firm. Given that about 8.03% of the new hires are female,

this suggests a 24% increase in the probability of hiring a senior female investor when a son is

replaced with a daughter for the existing partners.


   Our second important result concerns the effect of diversity on firm performance. Despite

growing evidence that people do indeed tend to partner with similar individuals, the success

implications of this bias remain unclear. To put it another way, conclusive causal evidence that

increases in gender diversity lead to better performance in a business setting is lacking. Sociology-

based research has tended to look at ex post data and measure correlations with performance.

                                                                                                       6
Results on gender diversity have, by and large, been equivocal. Furthermore, the setting does not

allow for causal interpretations of results. Still, other papers have looked at experimental settings

and assigned members based on gender to various “team-based” projects. This work, however, tells

us little about whether or not the kinds of complex problems in business are affected by diversity.


   Theory also does not help when trying to understand whether firm diversity increases or

decreases performance. One conjecture is that the more characteristics a pair of individuals has in

common, the better the performance of the team is likely to demonstrate. This better performance

may result from easier communication, the ability to better convey tacit information, or the ability to

make joint decisions in a timely and productive manner (e.g., Ingram and Roberts, 2000; McPherson

et al., 2001; Cohen et al., 2008; Gompers and Xuan, 2010).


   On the other hand, however, homophily may induce social conformity and groupthink that may

lead to inefficient decision making (e.g., Asch, 1951; Janis, 1982; Ishii and Xuan, 2010). Individuals

in homophilic relationships often have an enhanced desire for unanimity and ignore, or insufficiently

consider, the disadvantages of the favored decision as well as the advice from experts outside the

group. Consequently, under an alternative hypothesis, more diverse firms might perform better

because decision-making under uncertainty is improved.


   Our empirical setting allows us to estimate the causal implications of diversity on investment

performance in venture capital. Because the gender of a venture capitalists’ children is exogenous,

we can utilize the relative fraction of daughters (to all children) as an instrument for changes in the

gender diversity of the firm (caused by hiring a senior female investor.) This setting allows us to look

at the exogenous component of gender diversity in venture capital and its effect on investment

performance. Our results are robust to a number of ways to characterize the gender make-up of

children as well as to measuring individual deal level performance (success) or fund level excess

                                                                                                      7
returns (relative to similar strategy venture capital funds raised in the same year.) The results are

both statistically significant and economically meaningful.


   The rest of the paper is organized as follows: Section 2 discusses our data. Our methodological

approach is outlined in section 3. Section 4 presents a discussion of our results, both the hiring level

regressions as well as the performance results. Section 5 concludes.


2. Data Collection

   The core data used in this paper is comprised of several parts. The first element of our data

involves collecting a comprehensive dataset all venture capital partners as well as their demographic

and family information. The second element involves a panel dataset of venture capital firm hiring

events. The final elemnt part is on collecting the deal and fund performances.


   We start with VentureSource, a database that contains detailed information on venture capital

investments. Our data cover the period from 1990 through mid-2016. We start our analysis in 1990

because the data become reasonably comprehensive at that point in time. The unit of observation in

the data is venture capital-backed companies. For each portfolio company, we have the identities of

the individuals involved with the firm including founders, venture capital investors, angel investors,

board members, and early hires. We focus on the venture capitalists on the board of directors.

Venture capitalists who never serve on a board will not be identified in our data. We believe this is

reasonable because most venture capitalists serve on the board of directors for companies for which

they are the lead investor. Similarly, most venture capitalists highlight their active involvement in

their portfolio companies via board representation. In addition to information about the people

involved in the company, we also have information on the portfolio company’s location and




                                                                                                        8
industry. A venture capitalist enters the data in the year they make their first investment for which

they sit on the board of directors.


   For each individual venture capitalist in the dataset, we collect a broad range of biographical

information such as gender, ethnicity, education, and prior job experience. We collect this

information from a variety of sources, including a leading online resume website, web searches, SEC

filings and news articles. In particular, venture capitalist genders are primarily determined based on

first names. In the cases of unisex names, we determine gender by reading news articles and web

pages mentioning or containing pictures of the individual. Our overall match rates for gender

exceeds 99%. A full detailed summary of the data are presented in Gompers and Wang (2017).


   Our empirical approach is to focus on the effects of children’s gender on the hiring choices of

venture capital firms and how exogenous changes in gender diversity associated with children’s

gender affects venture capital investment outcomes. We therefore set out to collect a novel dataset

on the family information of venture capital partners, including the number of children as well as the

gender and age of each child. Summarized in Table I Panel B, we obtain information from a total of

1,403 individuals from various sources including college and business school directories and reunion

books (61.7%), direct email solicitation (33.9%), and Marquis Who’s Who database (3.5%). For

email solicitation, we sent out over 3000 emails and obtained 476 responses. If we do not obtain a

child’s gender explicitly but have the child’s name, we assign a best-guess gender based on the first

name. Overall, we are able to identify gender for over 98% of venture capital partners’ children in

our data.


   Panel A of Table 1 provides descriptive statistics for our data on children. Venture capital

partners in our data set have on average 2.39 children and 1.15 daughters as of 2015. For 71.6% of

the children we obtain their exact ages as well, which is used to approximate the children measures

                                                                                                    9
for prior years. In the firm panel data, Table VI shows that the average number of daughters for

existing partners is 1.033, while the average number of sons is 1.084 in the sample. Senior partners,

defined as those who have a tenure of 5 years or more at the venture capital firm, have on average

1.086 daughters and 1.143 sons. In comparison, junior partners, defined as those whose tenure is

less than 5 years, have fewer children than the senior partners as expected, averaging 0.809 daughters

and 0.850 sons.2


    Also shown in Table I, 10.19% of our sample are women (slightly higher than the population

average in Gompers and Wang (2017)) and have made 5.29 investments on whose boards they have

served.3 To ensure that our analysis is based on people who are professional venture capitalists, our

main analysis focuses on those who have made at least three investments on whose boards they have

served.


    In constructing our sample, as long as we have children information on at least one partner from

a given firm, we include that firm in our sample. We do not believe that this creates issues for our

resuls because the partners that we obtained information are typically those who are more senior and

have an important role in making hiring decisions. Simiarly, there should be no bias from using all

firms for which we have children’s gender for at least one partner. Table II compares the

characteristics of the firms in our sample with those for whom we have no data on children. In

particular, our sample includes firms that have more partners (5.03 vs. 1.95), larger in the total

amount raised ($3.66 billion vs. $0.88 billion), and more likely to be US-based (85% vs. 65%).

Although this sample is not representative by any means, they do hire similar proportions of women

(0.08 vs. 0.09). Economically, we believe that this is a relevant sample because these firms make

2 It should be noted that the ratio of male births to total births of 51.2% is close to the average for North American and
Europe, 51.5%, found in Grech, Savona-Ventura, Vassallo-Agius (2002).
3 Our venture capitalists have almost certainly done more deals than we observe in the sample. Venture capitalists do

not always obtain a board seat. As such, this is a lower bound on the investment experience of our venture capital
partners.

                                                                                                                        10
disproportionately more deals (76.5 vs. 8.9) and hire more people (12.8 vs. 3.3). The empirical results

from this group of firms are of great economic importance given they represent a large fraction of

all deals done. Additionally, this selection is unlikely affected by the gender break-down of the

children, which is also what we need for a meaningful interpretation of the empirical results.


   Next, we construct a panel of gender breakdowns for each firm’s new hires, which allows us to

test whether the gender of an existing partner’s children can have an effect on the hiring of women.

While we do not directly observe exactly when a particular VC partner is hired by a firm, we estimate

the “hiring” event by recording the year in which the person first sat on the board of a venture

capital-backed company and represented the particular venture capital firm. Overall, we can see

from Table VI that VC firms in our sample make 4.58 new hires on average in any 5-year window

and only 8.03% of the new hires are women.


   Table III shows that 72.1% of firms have never had a female investor. 19.2% have hired exactly

one female investor. We also see that there is a general relationship between firm size and the

number of female investors hired. In Table IV we examine the ratio of female hiring based upon

firm size. We find that small firms with fewer than 5 partners have an average female hiring ratio of

5.29%, whereas large firms with greater than 11 partners have a much higher female hiring ratio of

10.18%. The general pattern of very low female hiring ratios is consistent with the results of

Gompers and Wang (2017) who show that homophily may be particularly strong in influencing

hiring decisions at small organizations.


   Table V tabulates the ratio of new hires who are women by industry and over various time

periods. Hiring by industry is defined by the industry of the first company on whose board the

venture investor sits.    We see that there is little relative variation across different industries.

Healthcare has the highest percentage of female hires at 11.6%. Most of the other industries are

                                                                                                    11
between 7.7% and 9.0%. In the bottom of Table V we look at the ratio of female hires across five-

year cohorts. The lowest percentage of female hires is for 1991-1995. A period of time during

which only 3.54% of new hires were female investors. From 1996 through 2016, the fraction of new

hires who are women has not shown any secular trend. It has varied between 7.6% and 9.4%.


   Lastly, we also compile a comprehensive dataset of venture firm performances, which allows us

to estimate the impact of both parenting daughters and improved gender diversity on economic

outcomes. At the deal level, in Table VI, we see that out of 11,832 deals, 14.17% of them resulted in

an IPO. Alternatively, if we complement the definition of “success” with deals whose acquisition

values are greater than the total amount of capital invested, the overall success rate is 28.7%. We

obtain acquisition values from Capital IQ when available. If we are unable to identify an acquisition

value, we do not consider the investment a success.


   Because both “IPO” and “success” are binary outcome measures that may fail to capture the

economic magnitude of the outcome, we also compile fund-level internal rates of return (IRR) by

matching each of the venture capital funds in our data to the Preqin database. Over the relevant time

period of our analysis, our venture capital firms raised 1,270 venture capital funds with an average

amount of capital raised of $515.1 million. We are able to identify fund level IRR information for

395 funds with Preqin data. The average net IRR of funds in our sample is 14.1%. We also

compare our fund returns to benchmarks that are matched by investment stage and year. Excess

returns above these benchmarks average 3.9% for funds in our sample. Similar to the summary

results for firm size and age, our sample skews towards more successful firms.




                                                                                                  12
3. Methodology

   The work of Gompers, Mukharlyamov, and Xuan (2016) and Gompers and Wang (2017) show

that homophily is a strong force that affects collaboration and hiring decisions in the venture capital

industry. Our empirical approach is to examine whether subtle treatment effects may “de-bias”

venture capital hiring decisions. From the work of Warner and Steel (1999) and Washington (2008),

we know that the gender of one’s children affects parental behavior in the political arena. Politicians

with more daughters are more likely to support feminist policies and women’s issues relative to

other issues. In this paper, we examine whether the same type of debiasing affects hiring decisions in

venture capital. Also, because the gender of one’s children is exogenous, we can use children’s

gender as an instrument for exogenous changes to venture capital firm gender diversity and, hence,

can identify the causal effects of exogenous shocks to diversity on firm performance.


   The thought experiment is as follows: A venture capital partner decides to have a child; nature

randomly assigns the gender of the child. Importantly, our empirical set-up conditions on the total

number of children, while estimating the relative effect of having a daughter vs. a son, which we will

refer to as the “daughter effect” in this paper.


   !",$ = &' #*+,-ℎ/012",$ + &4 #5ℎ678109",$ + 5:9/1:72",$ + ;",$      (1)


   Here, the ! variable is the “female hired ratio”, which is defined as the proportion of female

partner hires by firm 6 within the five-year window ending in year /. Whether a particular firm-year

observation is included in our sample is determined by whether the venture capital firm raised a

fund that year. This sample construction method attempts to capture the more active years while

also reducing over-lapping time windows, since an average firm launches 3.3 funds in our sample.




                                                                                                    13
Overall, we have 988 fund observations where we include 301 VC firms with funds raised through

2010.4


    On the right-hand side of equation (1), “number of daughters” and “number of children” refer to

the average number of daughters or children among the existing partners of the firm. For a given

observation at the fund level, we define “existing partners” as those who are present in the firm

when the fund was raised. This measure of existing partner is constructed to capture the likely

decision makers in the hiring process.


    In alternative specifications, we also consider other measures of children’s gender breakdown,

including the average ratio of daughters, the proportion of partners who have more daughters than

sons, as well as the proportion of partners who have at least one daughter. All results are robust to

these alternative specifications for the gender make-up of the existing partners’ children.

Additionally, we include control variables for firm size (approximated by partner count), the VC

firm age, the average existing partners’ age, a dummy for whether the firm has hired a female

investor before, and year fixed effect.


    There are a number of issues in interpreting the identification here. First, &' identifies the relative

effect of having an additional daughter as compared to an additional son. It is important that we

condition on the total number of children because we know that people who choose to have more

children are more likely to have conservative beliefs (Washington, 2008). However, once we

condition on the total number of children, the gender distribution can be more reliably thought of as

a random variable uncorrelated with the error. Additionally, since the total number of children, the

number of daughters, and the number of sons are linearly dependent, we cannot differentiate


4 We also run robustness tests by specifying the gender diversity of new hires in a number of ways to make sure our
results are not an artifact of how we specify the exogenous shock to diversity. All our results are robust to these
alternative specifications.

                                                                                                                      14
whether the VC behavior is related to parenting a daughter, not parenting a son, or a combination of

both.


   The important identifying assumption is that conditioning on the total number of children, the

number of daughters is exogenously assigned by nature. This requires that parents are not giving

birth to children using a gender-based stopping rule, or practicing any type of direct sex-selection. It

is this natural experiment setting that allows us to identify a causal relationship between the relative

number of daughters and the female hired ratio as well as the effects of this exogenously induced

gender diversity on venture capital performance.


   We first rule out sex-selection that may skew the sex ratio. Given that direct sex selection through

abortions is uncommon in the US, it is not surprising that we find that male-to-female ratio in our

sample of children is not statistically different from the natural male-to-female birth ratio in the

overall population. This is true if we condition on the total number of children, or if we examine

various subgroups, namely the senior partners, the junior partners, the male partners, and the female

partners. In fact, being able to recover the natural sex birth ratio in all subsamples gives us

confidence in the integrity of our data. As such, we do not find evidence of sex selection in our data.


   Next, we want to rule out gender-based stopping rules. If parents employ a gender-based

stopping rule which stipulates that they keep having children until they have at least one son, then

conditioning on the total number of children, those who have more daughters would be more likely

to be using such a stopping rule.


   To provide support for this identifying assumption, we run a number of tests. In particular, we

find that having a first-born daughter does not predict the total number of children, consistent with

the findings in Washington (2008). We tabulate these results in Online Appendix Table I. Further,

we also do not find statistical evidence of gender-stopping rules by testing whether the gender
                                                                                                     15
distribution is different from that of a binomial distribution with the natural sex birth rates

conditioning on the total number of children. As such, the gender of the partners’ children in our

sample is considered truly random, and hence uncorrelated with the error. Our estimation of the

form in Equation (1) can then identify the impact of the children’s gender on female hiring.


   In addition to examining the effects of children’s gender on hiring decisions, we use the

exogenous effect of children’s gender on the hiring decision to examine the causal effect of diversity

on venture capital investment performance. We examine the performance effects in two ways.

First, we simply look at the reduced form regression results, i.e., we examine a simple performance

regression where deal or fund level performance is on the left-hand side and a variety of controls are

on the right-hand side including data on the gender of existing partners’ children. Since we measure

firm outcomes both at the deal level and the fund level, we simply need to adjust Equation (1) so

that the deal-level or fund-level characteristics are correctly matched to firm-level characteristics or

controls.


   Our second set of performance results exploits the exogenous nature of a venture capitalist

partners’ children’s genders and use the “number of daughters” as an instrument for the “female

hired ratio.” In this instrumental variables framework, we look at the performance effect of the

exogenous component of gender diversity for a venture capital firm that is associated with the

gender of existing partners’ children. Our measure of a shock to the firm’s gender diversity is the

female hired ratio.


?0@+70 A6108 B+/6:",$ = &' #*+,-ℎ/012",$ + &4 #5ℎ678109",$ + 5:9/1:72",$ + ;",$


?61@ C01D:1@+9E0",$ = F' C1086E/08 ?0@+70 A6108 B+/6:",$ + F4 #5ℎ678109",$ + 5:9/1:72",$ + G",$




                                                                                                     16
      In this set-up, we can causally infer the effect of gender diversity on performance in venture

capital. As discussed above, we run a variety of robustness checks throughout the results to ensure

that our findings are not sensitive to the measure of the prevalence of daughters or measuring the

gender diversity of the venture capital firms. Many of these robustness tests are included in an

online appendix.


4. Empirical Results

      In this section, we present our empirical findings. We first analyze the causal relationship

between the gender of existing partners’ children and the hiring of female investment partners.

Then, we analyze the reduced-form relationship between the gender of existing partners’ children

and investment performances. Finally, we analyze an instrumental variable framework to estimate

the impact of the female hires on venture capital firm performance.


       4.1. Effects on Venture Capital Hiring

      In Table VII, we show the effects of daughters on the proportion of female partners hired. As

discussed earlier, our dependent variable is the ratio of females hired to the total number of hires in

a new fund (the five-year period commencing from raising a new fund). We express data on

children by averaging across all the partners of the firm for whom we have children’s gender. We

include the average number of daughters that partners have as well as the average number of

children.5 We also include a variety of firm-level controls including firm size (number of existing

partners), firm age, whether the firm has a female investment professional prior to this fund, and the

average partner age. In column (1), we observe a positive coefficient on the average number of

daughters, implying a positive relationship between parenting more daughters (holding the number


5   As previously discussed, our results are robust to expressing gender ratios in a variety of ways.

                                                                                                        17
of children constant) and the ratio of female hires in a new fund. It is also important to note that

holding the number of daughters constant, increasing the average number of children reduces the

probability of hiring a female investor. Adding additional firm-level controls does not change the

magnitude of the effect that daughters have on the hiring decisions with coefficients remaining

statistically significant at 5%. As such, we use column (3) as our main specification and always

include these controls when applicable throughout the paper. In this specification, conditioning on

the total number of children, the relative effect of existing partners having one more daughter

increases the ratio of female hires by an amount of 1.93%. Given that, on average, firms have a

female hired ratio of 8.03%, this is a substantial increase of 25%.


   To further put this in context, we also notice that the binary variable “having female before

hiring” has a large and statistically significant coefficient of 5.24%, consistent with the presence of

gender-based homophily in hiring. Notice that the inclusion of this variable also renders the

coefficient on firm size statistically insignificant. It also means the relative effect of having one more

daughter on average is about 40% of the magnitude of having an existing female partner in the firm.

Here, we are cautious about the fact that “having female before hiring” is not exogenous, but this

coefficient is more likely to be upward biased given the plausible correlation between the existence

of female partners and unobservable gender attitudes. Our exogenous daughter effect, therefore,

remains sizable (and its magnitude plausible) relative to the organizational feature of a pre-existing

female partner.


   We also observe that the results for the daughter effect hold strongly for senior partners, but not

as much for junior partners. The size of the coefficient on the average number of daughters for

senior partners is roughly three times as large as the coefficient on the average number of partners

for junior partners. Here, senior partners are those that have been with the firm for more than 5


                                                                                                       18
years and likely wield stronger influences in the hiring decisions. This suggests that the main effects

are driven by the senior partners’ daughters in the venture capital firms. This is intuitively consistent

with the view that the hiring decisions are mainly driven by the members of the firm who have a

longer tenure and thus more “senior”.


   We can see our main result from these regressions in Figure 1. In the first panel, we divide firms

into those in which the existing partners have more daughters, have an equal number of daughters

and sons, and firms with more sons. Firms with more daughters and an equal number of daughters

and sons have significantly higher ratios of females that are hired (10.59% and 10.57%) than firms

with more sons (8.93%). The pattern is even stronger when we look only at the gender of senior

partners. For firms in which the existing senior partners have more daughters, the ratio of female

hires is 11.87%. Firms in which existing senior partners have an equal number of sons and

daughters have a female hired ratio of 9.78%. Finally, in firms in which existing senior partners have

more sons, the female hired ratio is 8.68%.


   We also run the first stage regression with several alternative measures of gender composition of

existing partners’ children shown in Table VIII. This is motivated by the concern that the potential

effect may not be linear in the number of daughters relative to the total number of children. As

such, we look at variables such as the average of the proportion of daughters, the excess number of

daughters over sons, the proportion of partners with more daughters, the proportion of partners

whose first child is a daughter, and the proportion of partners with at least one daughter. With the

same controls including holding constant the number of children, we observe that the first four

variables are all positive but with varying degrees of statistical significance. Therefore, we are

confident that when existing partners have relatively more daughters, there is a positive relationship

with hiring more female investors. What is also worth pointing out is that the variable on “having


                                                                                                      19
female before hiring” also remains positive and statistically significant across all these alternative

specifications.


   Furthermore, we provide a simple placebo test in Table IX that sheds some light on the findings.

In particular, with the same controls, we find that the “number of daughters” has a positive

relationship with the count of female hires, but a negative relationship with the number of male

hires. The average number of daughters has no effect on the total number of hires. This suggests

the potential mechanism that having relatively more daughters raises the female hired ratio by hiring

more partners overall is not true. Have more daughters leads to a substitution in the hiring of males

for the hiring of females without an effect on the total number of new hires. This suggests that the

daughter effect is more likely a removal of bias towards hiring females.


   Before turning to the investment performance results, we also test whether or not the gender of

existing partners’ children affects the gender of founders in the portfolio companies of the venture

capital firm. One might hypothesize that the daughter effect not only affects the hiring of female

partners, but also investment in portfolio companies founded by a female entrepreneur. However,

Table X shows that there is no statistically significant relationship between the average number of

daughters (holding the number of children constant) and the fraction of portfolio company founders

who are women. What does turn out to be significant is that the presence of female VC investor.

Having a female partner is strongly correlated with the investment into companies with a female

entrepreneur, as shown in column (4). Therefore, even though there is a strong gender-based

homophily between the venture capital partner and the portfolio founder, in this reduced form, we

do not find statistical evidence that the children’s gender of the existing partners directly affects the

investment in female entrepreneurs, unlike the employment of female partners.




                                                                                                      20
       4.2. Effects on Venture Capital Performance

      In the prior section, we established a strong causal link between having a greater fraction of

children who are daughters and hiring more female investors. In this section, we explore the

performance implications of this effect. We regress the deal or fund level performance on children’s

gender. Since multiple deals or funds can be associated with a given venture capital firm, we make

sure the firm identity, the fund identity, and the deal are all appropriately matched for the purpose of

our reduced form regression:


                    !H = &' #*+,-ℎ/012"        H ,$(H)   + &4 #5ℎ678109"    H ,$(H)   + 5:9/1:72H + ;H


      At the deal level, !H is an indicator for deal success, while #*+,-ℎ/012"(H),$(H) refers to the

average number of daughters by partners of firm 6 which made the deal I in year /.6 Besides the

firm-level controls, we also add deal level controls including the industry, the country, the funding

round, and whether the firm had a female VC partner on the deal. Analogously, for the fund level

regressions, !H is the net IRR achieved by the fund, while #*+,-ℎ/012"(H),$(H) refers to the number

of daughters by partners of firm 6 who finished raising for fund I in year /. In this case, we add fund

level controls including the log fund size and the fund region. Therefore, these are reduced-form

attempts to directly estimate the economic gains (losses) that are due to having relatively more

daughters by the venture capital partners.


      In Table XI, the dependent variable is a binary “success” indicator based on whether the deal has

resulted in an IPO or a successful acquisition where the acquisition value is greater than the amount

of capital invested. In column (1)-(3), we see a positive and significant coefficient on the number of

daughters across all specifications. In the main specification column (3), the point estimate suggests


6   In the case where a deal is funded by a number of venture capital firms, it will be counted as separate observations.

                                                                                                                            21
that a relative increase of one daughter on average leads to an increased probability of success by

2.88%. Compared with the overall success rate of 28.7%, this is a meaningful magnitude. Therefore,

in a reduced form, we find strong evidence of a relationship between the gender of a venture

capitalists’ children and performance.


   We also find a positive significant coefficient for the firm size. Similarly, venture capital age is

positively related to success rates. This is consistent with the survival of better performing firms.

Surprisingly, we find that venture capital partner age is negatively related to success.


   In Table XI Panel A column (4) and (5), we also evaluate the reduced form regression for senior

partners and junior partners separately. Similar to the regression on female hires, we find that the

deal-level successes are entirely driven by the relationship with senior partners’ daughters, with a

larger point estimate as well as a larger t-statistics than column (3). The coefficient for junior

partners’ daughters is not statistically significant, shown in column (5). As before, this is consistent

with an interpretation where the senior partners are the main decision-makers, as opposed to the

junior partners.


   We also present the reduced form result if we focus just on IPO. Although IPO alone may not

be a good measure of success because IPO rates have generally declined over the past decade and

the importance of high value acquisitions has increased, it is more accurately measured because not

all acquisition values are publicly available. In Table XI Panel B, we find moderately statistically

significant results for the number of daughters of existing partners. Similar to Panel A, we find that

the t-statistics increases if we focus only on the senior partners’ children characteristics, and the

relationship completely vanishes for junior partners. Other results are also similar to Panel A.


   So far, our main analysis is based on a binary measure of success for each venture capital deals.

However, there may be a meaningful difference between two “successful” exits in terms of the
                                                                                                     22
actual rate of return that is achieved. However, in order to take this into account, it is challenging to

obtain comprehensive deal-level returns. Fortunately, we are able to match a meaningful portion of

the venture capital funds in our sample to the Preqin database in which we can access the fund level

internal rates of returns (IRR). We match 395 of 1270 funds in our sample and perform the same

reduced form regression as before, controlling for log fund size.


   Despite the limited sample size, consistent with the findings in the deal-level sample, Table XII

column (1) to (3) shows strong positive and statistically significant coefficients for the number of

daughters, i.e., our reduced form regression indicates a positive relationship between the fund return

and the number of daughters, controlling for the total number of children. We use “excess return”

of the fund as the independent variable, which is defined as a fund’s net IRR minus the median fund

return raised in the same region and year provided by the Preqin database. In column (3), we find

that the relative effect of having a daughter over a son is a 3.2% increase in excess return for the

fund. In comparison, the average net IRR is 14.1% and the average excess return is 3.9% for the

funds in our sample. As expected, we also find that the estimate holds for measures of children’s

gender for senior partners only, not for junior partners.


   Our two main results establish that the parenting of a daughter relative to a son by venture capital

partners, especially by senior partners, leads to a significant increase in the proportion of female

partner hired. We also saw in the reduced form regression, that there is significant improvement in

the firm’s performance, where performance is measured in a variety of ways at both the deal and the

fund level. Not only does the statistical significance remain robust across different specifications, the

economic magnitude of the estimated coefficients is also substantial: The relative effect of having on

average a daughter rather than a son by existing partners increases the female hired ratio by 1.93%,

compared with a base rate of 8.03%. It lifts deal success by about 2.88%, given the overall success


                                                                                                      23
rate at 28.7%. It also translates to an increase of 3.20% in net IRR compared to average fund returns

of 14.1%. Moreover, these are causally identified.




    4.3. Instrumental Variable Regression

   Having established a strong, positive relationship between having more daughters and hiring

female investors and fund performance, we next explore an instrumental variables specification in

which we identify exogenous increases in fund gender diversity and its effect on investment

performance. In particular, we use the average number of daughters of the existing partners as an

instrument for the variations in the female hire ratio.


   For the causal interpretation of the female hired ratio to apply here, the relevant exclusion

restriction is that the effect of parenting daughters affects venture capital investment performance

only through the proportion of female partners hired. We find this exclusion restriction plausible.

One concern might be that parenting more daughters leads the partner to invest in more companies

with female founders and that perhaps the average quality of those entrepreneurs are higher than the

male entrepreneurs because they are often overlooked by other firms. However, as shown in Table

X, this is not the case because the proportion of female founders does not increase with the number

of daughters that an existing partner has. Nonetheless, we acknowledge that the coefficient would be

biased if the number of daughters was still correlated with other unobservables that affects deal

outcomes. In other words, one could contend that the effects may not only come from the extensive

margin on hiring, but could also come from the intensive margin such as assigning existing female

employees more responsibilities as well as other unobservables. Therefore, we believe the causal




                                                                                                  24
relationship demonstrated in the reduced form between the number of daughters and the

performance is our strongest evidence of an effect.


    We employ a linear IV regression framework for estimation.7 In Table XIII Panel A, we see that

that the IV regression coefficient for “female hired ratio” is large, positive, and statistically

significant. We present OLS as well as the IV estimates. We find that the IV estimator loads

significantly only on senior partners, not the junior ones, consistent with previous findings. The

coefficient of 0.965 in column 4 implies that if the female hired ratio increases by 10% due to the

daughter effect, the deal success rate would increase by 9.65%. Recall that the overall success rate is

28.8% in our deal-level sample. By comparison the OLS estimate is 0.079. Together, this suggests

when more female partners are hired because of changes brought about by more daughters, its effect

on the deal performance is much larger than what OLS implies.


    In terms of robustness, when we narrow the definition of deal success to IPO only, Table XIII

Panel B shows that we obtain similar results, but as before with slightly weak statistical significance.

The female hired a ratio has a coefficient of 0.361 in column (4), suggesting a 10% increase in the

proportion of female hired leads to a 3.61% increase in IPO rate. This compares with an overall

IPO rate of 14.2% in our overall sample. Similarly, we find the effects are attributable mainly to the

senior partners.


    Furthermore, when we change the outcome variable from the deal level to the fund level in Table

XIV, we find noisier, but directionally similar results.               While not all the results are statistically

significant, they all go in the same direction as the deal level results. The lower significance level is

driven primarily by the smaller sample size. Deals are collapsed into fund returns, reducing the


7 Note that since the outcome variable is at the deal-level, but the endogenous variable and the instrument are at the firm
level, the IV estimation will not be identical to two-stage least square. The IV estimation framework provides the
consistent estimate as well as the correct standard errors when clustered appropriately.

                                                                                                                        25
number of observations by a factor of 10.            Similarly, we only have fund return data on

approximately one fourth of our funds. This means we have roughly 2.5% of the number of

observations for fund returns as we do for deals.




   4.4. Robustness and Alternative Specifications

   In this section, we describe a few robustness checks, as well as several additional specifications

that could shed more light on the results.


   One of the concerns regarding the sample is that about 34% of the children information is

obtained from email solicitations. If the respondents are self-selected in terms of their parental

involvement, this will likely bias the results. In Table XVI, we run the same analysis excluding the

email respondents while including only those whom we obtain information from public sources. We

find that the daughter effects on female hiring and deal performance remain robust, and so is the

instrumental variable regression. However, the statistical significance is weaker likely due to the

reduced sample size. Another robustness check we run is to cover every venture capitalist in the

dataset, including those who have made fewer than 3 deals. This accounts for about 41% of the

venture capitalists. Table XVII shows that all of our results continue to hold with similar magnitude

and statistical significance. Additionally, we also break the results down by the number of daughters

for male and female partners of the firm. The results remain robust for the male partners, as shown

in Online Appendix Table IV, while the results for female partners become less significant likely due

to the severe drop in sample size.


   Moreover, we also investigate whether the age of the children matters for hiring and

performance. In Online Appendix Table III, we include both the number of daughters over the age


                                                                                                        26
of 12 and the number of daughters under 12. Interestingly and perhaps unsurprisingly, these

regressions tend to load significant coefficients on the number of teenage daughters, rather than the

number of pre-teen daughters. This might suggest that older daughters may have more of an effect

on the attitudes of their fathers. This is consistent with fathers observing potential gender biases

that their daughters face as they get older.




    4.5. Discussions on the Economic Magnitude

   In our paper, we established a causal relationship that having more daughters relative to sons for

venture capital partners leads to a higher proportion of female partners being hired. This increase in

the hiring of female investors is exogenous to the firm and, through the IV specifications, we find

that the exogenous increase in gender diversity leads to an improvement in the performance of the

venture capital firm. Although we have seen in the literature how children can affect parental

behavior and attitudes, one important contribution of the paper is to provide an estimate of the

potential economic magnitude on the benefits of gender diversity in a business setting. In Table

XV, we documented the historical IPO amount by all the VC-backed companies. From 1990 to

2010, the total amount of capital raised through IPOs is $91.6 billion by over 800 companies.


   We can now combine the first stage and the IV coefficient to provide an estimate of the

economic impact. Recall that the first stage regression coefficient from Table VII implies that the

relative effect of having a daughter instead of a son raises the female hired ratio by 1.93% from a

base rate of 8.03%. Combining this with the IV coefficient from Table XIII, this translates into an

increase of 0.70% in the probability of an IPO (compared with a base rate of 14.2%). Together, this

implies the relative effect of having a daughter versus a son is that an additional $4.5bn could have


                                                                                                   27
been raised.8 Moreover, if we think that the base rate of female hired ratio 8.03% could be increased

by 10%, namely from the current level of 8.03% to 18.03%, this would translate into an additional

$23.2bn being raised.9


    This back-of-the-envelope calculation is an extrapolation from the partial equilibrium, without

the constraint that there may only be a fixed number of listable companies. However, it is also not

obvious that this is necessarily an upper-bound because an improvement in the venture capital firm’s

ability to differentiate and finance better deals could generate dynamic responses from the

entrepreneurial side as well. Nonetheless, to our knowledge, this paper is a first attempt in the

literature to link the value of diversity with the better performance in an investment setting.




5. Conclusion

    While diversity has been lauded as an important cornerstone of modern civil society and

contemporary workplace, there have been few rigorous studies, to our knowledge, that estimate the

causal economic impact of a diverse workforce in a real business setting. In this paper, we address

the effect of gender diversity by collecting a unique dataset of venture capitalists’ children’s gender

and taking advantage of a research design where this gender is exogenous to the individual partner.

Combined with the time series of the hiring of senior investment professionals and deal

performance, we establish that a relative increase in the number of daughters relative to the number

of sons leads to a significant and economically meaningful increase in the proportion of females

hired. In reduced form regressions, this higher relative fraction of daughters is related to improved

deal and fund level performance. In instrumental variables regressions, we demonstrate that the
8 Calculated as 1.93% * 0.360 / 14.2% * $91.6bn. Note that is different from using the deal-level reduced form
coefficients because here 2SLS and IV estimation are not identical, although both consistent.
9 Calculated as 10% * 0.360 / 14.2% * $91.6bn.


                                                                                                                 28
exogenously induced increases in firm gender diversity lead to improvements in performance. These

results provide convincing evidence in a real business setting that performance is improved with

greater gender diversity. One important caveat is that this result does not necessarily imply that

implementing a blunt gender quota would bring about the same positive outcomes, whereas

improved diversity through a genuine removal of biases is likely more beneficial.


   We would like to emphasize the importance of understanding the role that this subtle removal of

gender bias has for increasing diversity. The subtle treatment effects that prior research has shown

to influence US Congressmen’s votes (Washington, 2008) and Federal judge rulings (Glynn and Sen,

2015) also plays a role here in causing fathers to increase the likelihood that they hire a female

investor. Our results suggest that diversity achieved through genuine removal of a bias or change in

belief can lead to better economic outcomes. We believe that further research efforts into

uncovering how exactly the parenting of a daughter and improved gender diversity improves

outcomes could be fruitful.


   There are several potential explanations we feel are important to explore. First, parenting

daughters reduces the bias that one has towards women, which leads to more female hires. Given

that the pool of potential female investors is relatively untapped, these female investors are of

higher quality than the counterfactual male hires. The higher quality hires then generate higher

returns. A second potential explanations is that having a diverse set of backgrounds around the

table to make decisions about investments may reduce correlated errors in judgment.           Since

homophily in hiring in venture capital is strong, most venture capital firms are populated by men of

the same ethnicity with similar schooling and work histories. Different perspectives may reduce

groupthink and allow venture capital firms to avoid costly investment mistakes. Third, because so

much of venture capital investment success is driven by having access to the best deals (Gompers,


                                                                                                 29
Gornall, Kaplan, and Strebulaev, 2017), having more diverse backgrounds may attract a much wider

deal flow and, hence, average deal quality may increase. We believe that future research on these

potential mechanisms will be very fruitful for understanding the source of performance

improvement that greater gender diversity engenders.




                                                                                              30
References

Asch, S. E. (1951). Effects of group pressure upon the modification and distortion of judgment. In

H. Guetzkow (ed.) Groups, leadership and men. Pittsburgh, PA: Carnegie Press.


Becker, G. S. (1974). A theory of marriage. In Economics of the family: Marriage, children, and

human capital (pp. 299-351). University of Chicago Press.


Cohen, L., Frazzini, A., & Malloy, C. (2008). The small world of investing: Board connections and

mutual fund returns. Journal of Political Economy, 116(5), 951-979.


Cohen, L., Frazzini, A., & Malloy, C. (2010). Sell side school ties. The Journal of Finance, 65(4),

1409-1437.


Cronqvist, H., & Yu, F. (2015). Shaped by their daughters: Executives, female socialization, and

corporate social responsibility.


Currarini, S., Jackson, M. O., & Pin, P. (2009). An economic model of friendship: Homophily,

minorities, and segregation. Econometrica, 77(4), 1003-1045.


Gompers, P., Gornall, W., Kaplan, S. N., & Strebulaev, I. A. (2016). How Do Venture Capitalists

Make Decisions? (No. w22587). National Bureau of Economic Research.


Gompers, P. A., Mukharlyamov, V., Weisburst, E., & Xuan, Y. (2014). Gender effects in venture

capital. Working Paper.


Gompers, P. A., Mukharlyamov, V., & Xuan, Y. (2016). The cost of friendship. Journal of Financial

Economics, 119(3), 626-644.




                                                                                                      31
Gompers, P. A., and Wang, S.Q. (2017). Diversity in Innovation. Harvard Business School Working

Paper, No. 17-067, January 2017.


Gompers, P. A., Xuan, Y., (2010). Bridge building in venture capital-backed acquisitions.

Unpublished working paper, Harvard Business School.


Glynn, A. N., & Sen, M. (2015). Identifying Judicial Empathy: Does Having Daughters Cause Judges

to Rule for Women's Issues?. American Journal of Political Science, 59(1), 37-54.


Grech, V., Savona-Ventura, C., Vassallo-Agius, P. (2002). Unexplained differences in sex ratios at

birth in Europe and North America. BMJ, NCBI/National Institutes of Health. 324 (7344): 1010–

1.


Ingram, P., & Zou, X. (2008). Business friendships. Research in organizational behavior, 28, 167-

184.


Ishii, J., & Xuan, Y. (2014). Acquirer-target social ties and merger outcomes. Journal of Financial

Economics, 112(3), 344-363.


Janis, I. L. (1982). Groupthink: Psychological studies of policy decisions and fiascoes.


Klocke, U., “How to Improve Decision Making in Small Groups: Effects of Dissent and Training

Interventions,” Small Group Research, June 2007 38: 437-468


McPherson, M., Smith-Lovin, L., & Cook, J. M. (2001). Birds of a feather: Homophily in social

networks. Annual review of sociology, 27(1), 415-444.


Warner, R. L. (1991). Does the sex of your children matter? Support for feminism among women

and men in the United States and Canada. Journal of Marriage and the Family, 1051-1056.



                                                                                                      32
Warner, R. L., & Steel, B. S. (1999). Child Rearing as a Mechanism for Social Change: The

Relationship of Child Gender to Parents' Commitment to Gender Equity. Gender & Society, 13(4),

503-517.


Washington, E. L. (2008). Female socialization: how daughters affect their legislator fathers' voting

on women's issues. The American economic review, 98(1), 311-332.




                                                                                                    33
Tables and Figures

                              Figure 1. Probability of Hiring a Female

This figure plots the probability of hiring a female by existing partner’s children. VC firms are
categorized into firms with more daughters/ equal number of daughters and sons/ more sons. Y Axis is
the probability of hiring a female.




                                              Female
             12.00%           10.59%               10.57%
             10.00%                                                       8.93%

              8.00%
              6.00%
              4.00%
              2.00%
              0.00%
                          Firms with More      Firms with Equal    Firms with More Sons
                        Daughters (Obs=699)   Daughters and Sons        (Obs=851)
                                                  (Obs=577)



                       Female (Senior Partner's Children)
             14.00%           11.87%
             12.00%
                                                    9.78%
             10.00%                                                       8.68%
              8.00%
              6.00%
              4.00%
              2.00%
              0.00%
                          Firms with More      Firms with Equal    Firms with More Sons
                        Daughters (Obs=514)   Daughters and Sons        (Obs=703)
                                                  (Obs=910)




                                                                                                       34
                              Table I. Data Collection and VC Characteristics

This table reports the characteristics of the partners with children information and the source of the data.

       Panel A. Variables                                Obs       Mean             SD         Min        Max
       # of Children                                    1403         2.39          1.07          0          7
       # of Daughters                                  137910        1.15          0.90          0          5
       # of Sons                                        1380         1.23          0.97          0          5
       Age                                              1327        55.52         11.86         27         96
       Deal Count                                       1403         5.29          6.35          1         45
       Male                                             1403      89.74%           0.30          0          1
       Female                                           1403      10.19%           0.30          0          1
       White                                            1403      69.28%           0.46          0          1
       Jewish                                           1403      17.32%           0.38          0          1
       Indian                                           1403       4.70%           0.21          0          1
       East Asian                                       1403       5.35%           0.23          0          1
       Hispanic                                         1403       2.92%           0.17          0          1
       African American                                 1403       0.36%           0.06          0          1
       % of Partners who we have data on
       children’s age                                             71.56%



                          Panel B. Source of Children's data               Obs       Percent
                          Email                                            476       33.93%
                          Harvard Reunion Book                             322       22.95%
                          HBS Alum Directory                               319       22.74%
                          Stanford Reunion Book                            100        7.13%
                          Princeton Reunion Book                            77        5.49%
                          Yale Reunion Book                                 48        3.42%
                          Marquis                                           49        3.49%
                          Others11                                          12        0.86%
                          Total                                          140312        100%


                          Panel C. Deal Count                               Obs      Percent
                          1                                                 376      26.80%
                          2                                                 203      14.47%
                          3                                                 177      12.62%
                          4                                                 140       9.98%
                          5 or More Deals                                   507      36.14%




10
   Partners list the names of their children in alumni directory, and we then infer the gender of their children from
names. A few partners reported the total number of children in the reunion book but did not report the names (or
age) their children. In these cases, the number of sons or daughters is missing.
11 Other sources include Wikipedia, New York Times, UPenn Alumni Directory, and Qualtrics.
12 In the main analysis, we excluded the partners who made less than 3 deals. In the robustness test Table XXII, we

reported the results including partners who made less than 3 deals.

                                                                                                                    35
                                       Table II. Sample Selection

This table reports VC firms’ characteristics in our sample compared to the VC firms that are not in our
sample. Each observation is a VC Firm.

VC Firms in Sample                    Obs        Mean          SD        SE           25%       50%         75%
Average Partner Count                  301        5.03        2.91       0.2            2.9       4.3         6.1
Firm Deal Count                        301       76.52       88.17       5.1           23.0      45.0        91.0
Firm IPO Count                         301       10.21       16.90       1.0            1.0       4.0        13.0
Total Amount Raised                    301     3655.22    12390.16     714.2         268.0     813.0      2247.7
VC Founding Year                       301     1995.26        7.35       0.4        1989.0    1997.0      2000.0
Total Hires                            301       12.77       10.86       0.6            6.0       9.0        16.0
Female Hired                           301        1.12        1.68       0.1            0.0       1.0         2.0
Female Hired Ratio                     301        0.08        0.11       0.0            0.0       0.0         0.1
% US Based VC Firms                    301     85.05%                    0.0
VC Firms Not in Sample                Obs        Mean          SD        SE           25%       50%         75%
Average Partner Count                3,329        1.95        1.28       0.0            1.0       1.5         2.4
Firm Deal Count                      3,329        8.90       15.04       0.3            2.0       4.0        10.0
Firm IPO Count                       3,329        0.81        2.35       0.0            0.0       0.0         1.0
Total Amount Raised                  3,329      875.08     5122.61      88.8           22.5    100.0       329.0
VC Founding Year                     3,329     2003.05        6.87       0.1        1999.0    2001.0      2009.0
Total Hires                          3,329        3.25        3.57       0.1            1.0       2.0         4.0
Female Hired                         3,329        0.29        0.69       0.0            0.0       0.0         0.0
Female Hired Ratio                   3,329        0.09        0.22       0.0            0.0       0.0         0.0
% US Based VC Firms                  3,329     65.21%
Sample Representativeness
% VC Firms in Sample                 8.29%
% Deal in Sample                    43.74%
% IPO in Sample                     53.11%
% Raised Amount in Sample           27.41%




                                                                                                           36
                                  Table III. Number of Female New Hires

          This table breaks down the sample by the number of female hired in the past 5 years.

         Total Female Hires                  Freq.      Percent      Firm Size (partner Count)
         Never Hire Female                    712       72.06%                  6.85
         Hired One Female                     190       19.23%                 10.32
         Hired Two Females                     61        6.17%                 13.13
         Hired Three Females                   16        1.62%                 18.13
         Greater than 3                         9        0.90%                 26.00
         Total                                988        100%                   8.26


                                 Table IV. Female Hired Ratio by Firm Size

                                                Female Hired
# of Partners                         Obs          Ratio           SD              SE     Min       Max
Less than 5 Partners                  272          5.29%           0.18           0.011    0         1
5 Partners to 7 Partners              283          8.48%           0.20           0.012    0         1
8 Partners to 11 Partners             235          8.84%           0.15           0.010    0         1
Greater than 11 Partners              198         10.18%           0.12           0.009    0        0.5


                                  Table V. Female Ratio by Industry, Year

                    This table summarizes Female Hired Ratio by industry and by year.

                                                      Female Hired
Industry                                      Obs        Ratio               SD              SE
Business and Financial Service               1,951       7.73%              0.140           0.003
Consumer Goods                                 80        8.42%              0.128           0.014
Consumer Services                            1,250       8.24%              0.142           0.004
Energy and Utilities                          208        9.02%              0.143           0.010
Healthcare                                   2,769      11.63%              0.197           0.004
Industrial Goods and Materials                159        8.57%              0.135           0.011
Information Technology                       5,364       7.66%              0.140           0.002
Not Identified                                 51        8.20%              0.126           0.018
Total                                       11,832       8.70%              0.156           0.001


                                                       Female
   Year                                  Obs         Hired Ratio           SD              SE
   Before 1990                            33           1.70%              0.056           0.010
   1991 to 1995                           48           3.54%              0.125           0.018
   1996 to 2000                          180           9.40%              0.184           0.014
   2001 to 2005                          206           7.68%              0.153           0.011
   2006 to 2010                          270           7.62%              0.165           0.010
   After 2010                            251           9.44%              0.187           0.012
   Total                                 988           8.03%              0.169           0.005




                                                                                                          37
                                         Table VI. Summary Statistics

                                          Obs       Mean         SD        SE    25%      50%      75%
VC Firm Characteristics (Firm - Year Level Observation)
Female Hired Ratio                         988      8.03%      0.169     0.005    0.00     0.00     0.11
Total Female Hires                         988       0.415     0.843     0.027    0.00     0.00     1.00
Total New Hires                            988       4.582     3.933     0.125    2.00     4.00     6.00
Partner Count                              988       8.263     6.200     0.197    4.00     7.00    10.00
Firm Age                                   988       5.887     6.740     0.214    0.00     4.00     9.00
Having Female Before Hiring                988       0.264     0.441     0.014    0.00     0.00     1.00
Average Partner Age                        942       43.36      7.65     0.249   38.00    42.50    48.00
Children Measure (Firm - Year Level Observation)
Average Girl                               988       1.033     0.768     0.024    0.50     1.00     1.50
Average Boy                                988       1.084     0.814     0.026    0.50     1.00     1.77
Average Girl (Senior Partner)              808       1.086     0.802     0.028    0.50     1.00     1.50
Average Boy (Senior Partner)               808       1.143     0.835     0.029    0.50     1.00     2.00
Average Girl (Junior Partner)              386       0.809     0.761     0.039    0.00     1.00     1.00
Average Boy (Junior Partner)               386       0.850     0.835     0.042    0.00     1.00     1.50
Average Girl (Female Partner)              103       0.995     0.892     0.088    0.00     1.00     2.00
Average Boy (Female Partner)               103       1.053     0.792     0.078    0.50     1.00     2.00
Average Girl (Male Partner)                966       1.050     0.779     0.025    0.50     1.00     1.50
Average Boy (Male Partner)                 966       1.099     0.862     0.028    0.50     1.00     2.00
Average Daughter Ratio                     988       0.499     0.286     0.009    0.33     0.50     0.67
Average Excess Daughter                    988      -0.049     1.193     0.038   -1.00     0.00     0.50
Daughter-Heavy Partner Ratio               988      -0.078     1.205     0.038   -1.00     0.00     1.00
First Daughter Partner Ratio               861       0.481     0.459     0.016    0.00     0.50     1.00
At Least One Daughter Partner Ratio        988       0.692     0.398     0.013    0.50     1.00     1.00
Deal Level Performance (Deal Level Observation)
IPO                                     11832      14.17%      0.349     0.003      0        0        0
Success                                 11832      28.71%      0.452     0.004      0        0        1
VC Fund Characteristics (Fund Level Observation)
Excess Return                             395      0.039        0.18     0.009   -0.04     0.00     0.07
NetIRR                                    395      0.141        0.22     0.011    0.02     0.09     0.18
MedianFund Benchmark                      434      0.102        0.08     0.004    0.03     0.10     0.15
Quartile                                  431      2.299        1.00     0.048    1.00     2.00     3.00
Total Closing Amount                     1270    515.082     1189.91    33.390   90.00   230.00   500.00



    Note: There are 1270 VC funds in the sample, and some VC firms opened two or more fund in a given
    year.




                                                                                                           38
                                                      Table VII. Daughter Effect First Stage

This table reports first stage regression results of hiring female. The observation level is firm-year. The dependent variable (Female Hired Ratio) is
the number of female hired by the firm in the past 5 years divided by the total number of new hires in the past 5 years. Independent variables are
measures of existing partners children aggregated at VC firm level. Children’s ages are adjusted to the year of hiring. Robust standard error is
clustered at VC firm, Year level. Asterisks denote statistical significance at the 1% (***), 5% (**), or 10% (*) level.

                                                                       (1)            (2)             (3)              (4)           (5)
 VARIABLES                                                                                     Female Hired Ratio

 Average Number of Daughters                                        0.0180**       0.0205**         0.0193**
                                                                    (0.00833)      (0.00827)        (0.00858)
 Average Number of Children                                        -0.0217***     -0.0227***       -0.0228***
                                                                    (0.00622)      (0.00617)        (0.00702)
 Average Number of Daughters (Senior Partner)                                                                        0.0221**
                                                                                                                    (0.00948)
 Average Number of Children (Senior Partner)                                                                        -0.0181**
                                                                                                                    (0.00792)
 Average Number of Daughters (Junior Partner)                                                                                      0.00758
                                                                                                                                  (0.0125)
 Average Number of Children (Junior Partner)                                                                                      -0.0139*
                                                                                                                                 (0.00837)
 Firm Size (Partner Count)                                                        0.00267***         0.000411         0.00124    -0.000542
                                                                                  (0.000763)        (0.00113)        (0.00113)   (0.00170)
 VC Firm Age                                                                                          0.00187        0.000836      0.00165
                                                                                                    (0.00123)        (0.00122)   (0.00182)
 Have Female Before Hiring                                                                         0.0524***        0.0467***    0.0595***
                                                                                                     (0.0155)         (0.0174)    (0.0190)
 Average Partner Age                                                                                -0.000332        0.000171     -0.00184
                                                                                                   (0.000865)       (0.000942)   (0.00127)
 Control                                                             Year            Year               Year            Year         Year
 Observations                                                         988             988               942             775          373
 R-squared                                                           0.034           0.043             0.061           0.056        0.134




                                                                                                                                                   39
                 Table VIII. Daughter Effect Robustness Test (Alternative Measures)

This table reports first stage regression results of hiring female using different daughter measures. The
observation level is firm-year. The dependent variable (Female Hired Ratio) is the number of female
hired by the firm in the past 5 years divided by the total number of new hires in the past 5 years.
Independent variables are measures of existing partners children aggregated at VC firm level. Children’s
ages are adjusted to the year of hiring. Robust standard error is clustered at VC firm, Year level. Asterisks
denote statistical significance at the 1% (***), 5% (**), or 10% (*) level.



                                           (1)              (2)               (3)            (4)          (5)
 VARIABLES                                                           Female Hired Ratio

 Average Daughter Ratio                   0.0270
                                         (0.0183)
 Average Excess Daughter                                0.00970**
                                                        (0.00435)
 Daughter-Heavy Partner Ratio                                               0.0147*
                                                                           (0.00761)
 First Daughter Partner Ratio                                                             0.00911
                                                                                          (0.0135)
 At Least One Daughter Ratio                                                                              0.0121
                                                                                                        (0.0161)
 Average Number of Children              -0.0134**       -0.0132**         -0.0127**      -0.0146**   -0.0165***
                                         (0.00582)       (0.00580)         (0.00587)      (0.00735)    (0.00633)
 Firm Size (Partner Count)                0.000357        0.000401          0.000433      -0.000478     0.000236
                                         (0.00114)       (0.00113)         (0.00114)      (0.00125)    (0.00113)
 VC Firm Age                            0.0529***       0.0525***         0.0522***       0.0586***    0.0546***
                                          (0.0156)        (0.0155)          (0.0155)       (0.0166)     (0.0159)
 Have Female Before Hiring                 0.00179         0.00187           0.00181       0.00245*      0.00184
                                         (0.00124)       (0.00123)         (0.00124)      (0.00141)    (0.00123)
 Average Partner Age                     -0.000366       -0.000331         -0.000391      -0.000721    -0.000371
                                        (0.000861)      (0.000865)        (0.000859)      (0.00103)   (0.000858)
 Control                                     Year            Year              Year          Year          Year
 Observations                                942             942               942            816           942
 R-squared                                  0.058           0.061             0.060          0.067         0.057




                                                                                                          40
                                   Table IX. Daughter Effect Placebo Test: Daughter Effect on Total Hires

This table reports regression results of daughter on the number of new hires (total/female/male). Dependent variables are the number of total
(female, male) new hires. Independent variables are firm-level measure of partner’s children. Robust standard error is clustered at VC firm, Year
level. Asterisks denote statistical significance at the 1% (***), 5% (**), or 10% (*) level.

                                          (1)                   (2)       (3)                  (4)       (5)                  (6)
 VARIABLES                                       Total Hires                    Female Hires                    Male Hires


 Average Number of Daughters            -0.0918            -0.0733     0.129***           0.122**     -0.221**          -0.196**
                                        (0.0944)          (0.0940)     (0.0484)          (0.0476)     (0.0972)          (0.0961)
 Average Number of Children             -0.0150            -0.0334     -0.132***         -0.125***      0.117            0.0913
                                        (0.0765)          (0.0763)     (0.0314)          (0.0309)     (0.0766)          (0.0762)
 Firm Size (Partner Count)             0.622***           0.629***     0.0649***        0.0621***     0.557***          0.567***
                                        (0.0229)          (0.0231)     (0.00895)         (0.00876)    (0.0232)          (0.0233)
 Have Female Before Hiring                               -0.520***                       0.197***                       -0.717***
                                                           (0.167)                       (0.0622)                        (0.163)
 VC Firm Age                           -0.135***         -0.133***     -0.000149         -0.000954    -0.135***         -0.132***
                                        (0.0164)          (0.0165)     (0.00477)         (0.00469)    (0.0158)          (0.0158)
 Average Partner Age                   -0.0213**         -0.0190**     -0.000700         -0.00158     -0.0206**         -0.0174*
                                       (0.00897)          (0.00906)    (0.00321)         (0.00314)    (0.00895)         (0.00903)
 Control
 Year                                      Y                    Y         Y                    Y         Y                    Y
 Observations                             942                  942       942                   942      942                  942
 R-squared                               0.787                 0.790     0.247             0.256        0.745                0.751




                                                                                                                                                41
                               Table X. Daughter Effect on Entrepreneurs

This table reports regression results of daughter on female entrepreneurs. The dependent variable female
entrepreneur ratio is the number of female founders divided by the total number of founders in the start-
up. Independent variables are Partner’s children. Robust standard error is clustered at VC firm, Year
level. Asterisks denote statistical significance at the 1% (***), 5% (**), or 10% (*) level.

                                              (1)            (2)           (3)             (4)
          VARIABLES                                        Female Founder Ratio


          Number of Daughters              -0.00272       -0.00258       -0.00454        -0.00416
                                           (0.00400)      (0.00400)     (0.00417)       (0.00413)
          Number of Children               -0.000975     -0.000930      -4.85e-05       0.000575
                                           (0.00299)      (0.00300)     (0.00308)       (0.00310)
          Founder Count                                   0.00441*      0.00488*        0.00502*
                                                          (0.00252)     (0.00260)       (0.00258)
          Firm Size (Partner Count)                                     -4.20e-05       -9.30e-05
                                                                        (0.000617)      (0.000622)
          Have Female Before Hiring                                       0.0101         0.00739
                                                                        (0.00622)       (0.00620)
          VC Firm Age                                                  -0.000934*       -0.000889*
                                                                        (0.000490)      (0.000487)
          Female Partner                                                                0.0438***
                                                                                         (0.0144)
          Partner Age                                                                   0.000384
                                                                                        (0.000365)
          Control                                      Round, Country, Year, Industry
          Observations                       4,927          4,927         4,634           4,634
          R-squared                          0.025          0.026         0.029           0.032




                                                                                                        42
                                                  Table XI. Deal Level Sample Reduced Form

This table reports reduced form results of deal level sample. The dependent variable (“Success”) equals to 1 if the portfolio company went public
or was acquired with acquisition value greater than invested amount. Independent variables are measures of existing partners’ children aggregated
at VC firm level. Robust standard error is clustered at VC firm, Year level. Asterisks denote statistical significance at the 1% (***), 5% (**), or
10% (*) level.

                                                                  (1)             (2)            (3)             (4)            (5)
           VARIABLES                                            Success         Success        Success         Success        Success

           Average Number of Daughter                          0.0286***      0.0287***       0.0288***
                                                               (0.00859)      (0.00876)       (0.00876)
           Average Number of Children                          -0.0160**      -0.0149**       -0.0149**
                                                               (0.00644)      (0.00683)       (0.00683)
           Average Number of Daughter (Senior Partner)                                                        0.0306***
                                                                                                              (0.00893)
           Average Number of Children (Senior Partner)                                                        -0.0142**
                                                                                                              (0.00694)
           Average Number of Daughter (Junior Partner)                                                                         0.00540
                                                                                                                              (0.0139)
           Average Number of Children (Junior Partner)                                                                         -0.0110
                                                                                                                             (0.00978)
           Firm Size (Partner Count)                           0.00333***     0.00249**         0.00248**       0.00270**    0.000916
                                                               (0.000828)     (0.00106)          (0.00106)      (0.00112)    (0.00133)
           VC Firm Age                                                         0.00219*           0.00221*       0.00178       0.00226
                                                                              (0.00117)          (0.00117)      (0.00129)    (0.00175)
           Have Female Before Hiring                                            -0.0137            -0.0123        -0.0107      -0.0115
                                                                               (0.0118)           (0.0119)       (0.0128)     (0.0176)
           Female VC                                                                               -0.0137        -0.0109      -0.0170
                                                                                                  (0.0174)       (0.0187)     (0.0272)
           Average Partner Age                                                 -0.00139*         -0.00140*     -0.00163**     -0.00157
                                                                              (0.000742)        (0.000742)     (0.000787)    (0.00147)
           Control                                                                   Industry, Country, Year, Round
           Observations                                          11,832          11,478             11,478         9,746       4,885
           R-squared                                              0.089           0.091              0.091         0.092       0.096




                                                                                                                                                 43
The dependent variable (“IPO”) equals to 1 if the portfolio company went public.

                                                                (1)            (2)             (3)             (4)          (5)
             VARIABLES                                         IPO            IPO             IPO             IPO          IPO

             Average Number of Daughter                      0.0126*         0.0108          0.0108
                                                            (0.00668)      (0.00677)       (0.00676)
             Average Number of Children                     -0.0104**      -0.0107**       -0.0107**
                                                            (0.00470)      (0.00498)       (0.00498)
             Average Number of Daughter (Senior Partner)                                                    0.0125*
                                                                                                           (0.00707)
             Average Number of Children (Senior Partner)                                                   -0.0110**
                                                                                                           (0.00513)
             Average Number of Daughter (Junior Partner)                                                                    0.0101
                                                                                                                         (0.00956)
             Average Number of Children (Junior Partner)                                                                   -0.0106
                                                                                                                         (0.00695)
             Firm Size (Partner Count)                      0.00261***        0.00145          0.00144         0.00149     0.00111
                                                            (0.000702)     (0.000884)       (0.000882)      (0.000942)   (0.00111)
             VC Firm Age                                                   0.00221**         0.00222**       0.00206**   0.00279**
                                                                           (0.000864)       (0.000861)      (0.000940)   (0.00136)
             Have Female Before Hiring                                       -0.00475         -0.00433         0.00115     -0.0209
                                                                            (0.00951)        (0.00957)        (0.0104)    (0.0135)
             Female VC                                                                        -0.00422        -0.00350    -0.00438
                                                                                              (0.0139)        (0.0147)    (0.0214)
             Average Partner Age                                            -0.000500        -0.000505      -0.000999*   -0.000493
                                                                           (0.000546)       (0.000545)      (0.000570)   (0.00117)
             Control                                                              Industry, Country, Year, Round
             Observations                                     11,832          11,478            11,478          9,746      4,885
             R-squared                                         0.089           0.091             0.091          0.092      0.096




                                                                                                                                     44
                                      Table XII. Fund Level Reduced Form

    This table reports reduced form results of fund level sample. The dependent variable is the excess return
    of the fund, which is defined as fund net IRR minus median fund return in the same year, region.
    Independent variables are measures of existing partners’ children aggregated at VC firm level. Robust
    standard error is clustered at VC firm, Year level. Asterisks denote statistical significance at the 1% (***),
    5% (**), or 10% (*) level.

                                             [1]             [2]             [3]              [4]             [5]
VARIABLES                                                               Excess Return

Average Number of Daughters               0.0352**         0.0366**       0.0320**
                                          (0.0154)         (0.0156)       (0.0162)
Average Number of Children               -0.0235**        -0.0221**        -0.0141
                                          (0.0103)         (0.0105)       (0.0118)
Average Number of Daughters (Senior
Partner)                                                                                   0.0346*
                                                                                           (0.0209)
Average Number of Children (Senior
Partner)                                                                                   -0.00487
                                                                                           (0.0115)
Average Number of Daughters (Junior
Partner)                                                                                                   0.00291
                                                                                                           (0.0284)
Average Number of Children (Junior
Partner)                                                                                                    0.00142
                                                                                                            (0.0217)
Firm Size (Partner Count)                                  0.00202         0.000573        0.000854        -4.80e-05
                                                          (0.00126)        (0.00160)       (0.00165)       (0.00167)
Have Female Before Hiring                                   0.0116            0.0164         0.0204           0.0194
                                                           (0.0260)         (0.0270)        (0.0264)        (0.0254)
Log Fund Size                                                                -0.0121        -0.0129*         -0.0104
                                                                           (0.00737)       (0.00753)       (0.00732)
VC Firm Age                                                               0.00393**        0.00320*       0.00406**
                                                                           (0.00171)       (0.00188)       (0.00172)
Average Partner Age                                                      -0.00381***     -0.00438***     -0.00417***
                                                                           (0.00147)       (0.00139)       (0.00128)
Control (Fund Region, Year)                  Y                Y                  Y              Y                Y
Observations                                395              395                378            378              378
R-squared                                   0.23            0.235               378           0.263            0.248




                                                                                                               45
                                                                 Table XIII. Deal Level Sample IV

        This table reports regression result of deal success in deal level sample using the number of daughters as the instrument. The dependent variable
        Success equals to 1 if the deal went public or was acquired with acquisition value greater than invested amount. Independent Variable (Female
        Hired Ratio) is the number of female partners hired in past 5 years divided by the total number of new hires in past 5 years. Instrumental Variables
        are measures of existing partners’ children. Robust standard error is clustered at VC firm, Year level. Asterisks denote statistical significance at the
        1% (***), 5% (**), or 10% (*) level.

                                                  (1)            (2)           (3)            (4)             (5)            (6)             (7)             (8)
VARIABLES                                       Success        Success       Success        Success         Success        Success         Success         Success

Estimation Method                                OLS            OLS           GMM            GMM             GMM            GMM             GMM             GMM
Instruments For Hiring Female                    N/A            N/A
Average Number of Daughters                                                     X              X
Average Number of Daughters (Senior)                                                                           X              X
Average Number of Daughters (Junior)                                                                                                          X               X
Female Hired Ratio                            0.0948***       0.0791**        0.942**       0.965**        0.994***        1.046**          2.275           2.901
                                               (0.0326)       (0.0332)        (0.380)       (0.381)         (0.383)        (0.408)         (4.636)         (5.610)
Average Number of Children                                                    0.00404       0.00430
                                                                             (0.00767)     (0.00761)
Average Number of Children (Senior)                                                                         0.00525         0.00289
                                                                                                           (0.00587)       (0.00598)
Average Number of Children (Junior)                                                                                                          0.0265          0.0414
                                                                                                                                           (0.0583)        (0.0877)
Firm Size (Partner Count)                                    0.00224**      0.00277**     0.00379***      0.00281**       0.00388***        0.00283        0.00608
                                                              (0.00103)     (0.00123)      (0.00142)      (0.00122)        (0.00145)      (0.00240)       (0.00819)
VC Firm Age                                                    0.00205*      -0.00228       -0.00208       -0.00271         -0.00251       -0.00729         -0.0105
                                                              (0.00118)     (0.00227)      (0.00249)      (0.00234)        (0.00264)       (0.0185)        (0.0253)
Have Female Before Hiring                                       -0.0135                    -0.0451**                       -0.0477**                         -0.112
                                                               (0.0121)                     (0.0202)                        (0.0215)                        (0.199)
Female VC                                                       -0.0212                     -0.115**                       -0.123***                         -0.312
                                                               (0.0175)                     (0.0446)                        (0.0473)                        (0.576)
Average Partner Age                                           -0.00136*                    -3.05e-05                        0.000159                       0.00377
                                                             (0.000725)                    (0.00117)                       (0.00127)                       (0.0105)
Control
Industry, Country, Year, Round                     Y              Y              Y              Y             Y               Y              Y               Y
Observations                                    11,832         11,478         11,832         11,478         11,832          11,478         11,832          11,478
R-squared                                        0.087          0.090          0.006          0.008


                                                                                                                                                             46
        The dependent variable (“IPO”) equals to 1 if the portfolio company went public.

                                                (1)            (2)           (3)             (4)        (5)          (6)         (7)         (8)
VARIABLES                                      IPO            IPO           IPO             IPO        IPO          IPO         IPO         IPO

Estimation Method                              OLS           OLS           GMM             GMM        GMM          GMM         GMM         GMM
Instruments For Hiring Female                  N/A           N/A
Average Number of Daughters                                                  X               X
Average Number of Daughters (Senior)                                                                    X            X
Average Number of Daughters (Junior)                                                                                              X           X
Female Hired Ratio                            0.0385         0.0248         0.387         0.361      0.444*       0.448*        2.474       2.582
                                             (0.0260)       (0.0270)       (0.245)       (0.242)     (0.251)      (0.264)      (4.954)     (5.056)
Average Number of Children                                                -0.00303      -0.00347
                                                                         (0.00497)     (0.00495)
Average Number of Children (Senior)                                                                  0.00140     -0.000369
                                                                                                    (0.00371)    (0.00377)
Average Number of Children (Junior)                                                                                              0.0266      0.0354
                                                                                                                               (0.0620)    (0.0788)
Firm Size (Partner Count)                                   0.00148*      0.00162*      0.00195*     0.00178*    0.00218**      0.00228     0.00502
                                                          (0.000862)     (0.000947)     (0.00104)   (0.000949)    (0.00107)   (0.00266)   (0.00742)
VC Firm Age                                               0.00204**       0.000442      0.000579     -1.21e-05    0.000114     -0.00794    -0.00941
                                                          (0.000867)      (0.00141)     (0.00152)    (0.00147)    (0.00163)    (0.0197)    (0.0227)
Have Female Before Hiring                                   -0.00495                      -0.0167                   -0.0199                 -0.0940
                                                           (0.00964)                     (0.0130)                  (0.0138)                 (0.180)
Female VC                                                   -0.00647                      -0.0421                  -0.0512*                  -0.271
                                                            (0.0139)                     (0.0284)                  (0.0308)                 (0.520)
Average Partner Age                                        -0.000650                     6.97e-06                  5.99e-05                 0.00399
                                                          (0.000535)                   (0.000718)                (0.000798)               (0.00943)
Control
Industry, Country, Year, Round                   Y             Y              Y               Y         Y            Y           Y           Y
Observations                                  11,832        11,478         11,832          11,478    11,832       11,478       11,832      11,478
R-squared                                      0.123         0.126          0.101           0.105     0.092        0.094




                                                                                                                                            47
                                                                       Table XIV. Fund Level IV

           This table reports regression result of deal success in fund level sample. The dependent variable is the excess return of the fund. Independent
           Variable (Female Hired Ratio) is the number of female partners hired in past 5 years divided by the total number of new hires in past 5 years.
           Instrumental Variables are measures of existing partners’ children. Robust standard error is clustered at VC firm, Year level. Asterisks denote
           statistical significance at the 1% (***), 5% (**), or 10% (*) level.

                                                          [1]           [2]            [3]           [4]              [5]           [6]            [7]          [8]
VARIABLES                                                                                                  Excess Return

Estimation Method                                        OLS           OLS           GMM            GMM             GMM           GMM            GMM          GMM
Instruments For Hiring Female                            N/A           N/A
Average # of Daughters                                                                 X              X
Average # of Daughters (Senior Partner)                                                                               X             X
Average # of Daughters (Junior Partner)                                                                                                             X            X
Female Hired Ratio                                      0.151*         0.139*        1.008*         0.863*           0.884         0.806          1.066        0.396
                                                       (0.0868)       (0.0804)       (0.523)        (0.519)         (0.543)       (0.562)        (4.601)      (6.514)
Average Number of Children                                                           0.0118         0.0192
                                                                                    (0.0129)       (0.0130)
Average Number of Children (Senior Partner)                                                                         0.0173*      0.0233**
                                                                                                                   (0.00976)     (0.0116)
Average Number of Children (Junior Partner)                                                                                                     0.00530        0.00420
                                                                                                                                                (0.0108)      (0.0132)
Firm Size (Partner Count)                               0.00172       0.000239      0.000314        0.00240        0.000111       0.00221      -0.000118     0.000655
                                                       (0.00118)      (0.00154)     (0.00201)      (0.00250)       (0.00211)     (0.00240)     (0.00914)      (0.0134)
Have Female Before Hiring                                              0.00877                       -0.0379                       -0.0341                    -0.00889
                                                                       (0.0226)                     (0.0444)                      (0.0474)                     (0.478)
Log Fund Size (M)                                                       -0.0106                      -0.0124                       -0.0136                     -0.0111
                                                                      (0.00743)                     (0.0105)                      (0.0105)                   (0.00849)
VC Firm Age                                                          0.00350**                      3.14e-05                    -0.000603                      0.00268
                                                                      (0.00153)                    (0.00342)                     (0.00375)                    (0.0265)
Average Partner Age                                                 -0.00414***                  -0.00493***                   -0.00496***                    -0.00420
                                                                      (0.00131)                    (0.00171)                     (0.00160)                   (0.00284)
Control (Fund Region, Year)                                Y               Y            Y               Y             Y               Y            Y              Y
Observations                                              395             392          395             392           395             392          395            392
R-squared                                                0.239           0.264                                                                                  0.199

                                                                                     48
                               Table XV. Economic Impact of Gender Diversity

                                  This table reports VC-backed US IPOs by year.



                                                                            Effect of Gender
                                       Average                               Diversity from
                                                     Total IPO Amount                             Benefit of 10% Increase in
IPO Year                   #IPO        IPO Size                             Replacing a Son
                                                             (M)                                  Female Hired Ratio (M)14
                                         (M)                                with a Daughter
                                                                                 (M)13
     1990                       6           65.38                 392.3                  19.20                        99.46
     1991                       5           48.42                 242.1                  11.85                        61.38
     1992                      17           67.92              1,154.69                  56.50                       292.74
     1993                      16           145.9              2,334.33                 114.22                       591.80
     1994                      14          131.84              1,845.80                  90.31                       467.95
     1995                       9            61.7                 555.3                  27.17                       140.78
     1996                      36           84.61              3,046.00                 149.04                       772.23
     1997                      61           42.34              2,582.71                 126.37                       654.77
     1998                      51           65.15              3,322.56                 162.57                       842.34
     1999                     190          161.79             30,740.66                1504.13                     7,793.41
     2000                     164           96.41             15,812.01                 773.67                     4,008.68
     2001                      17           67.01              1,139.20                  55.74                       288.81
     2002                      12          117.45              1,409.41                  68.96                       357.32
     2003                      16           71.38              1,142.08                  55.88                       289.54
     2004                      61           96.78              5,903.57                 288.86                     1,496.68
     2005                      37           67.17              2,485.11                 121.60                       630.03
     2006                      47              83              3,900.97                 190.87                       988.98
     2007                      65           110.2              7,163.13                 350.49                     1,816.00
     2008                       5          105.01                525.04                  25.69                       133.11
     2009                       6          144.29                865.75                  42.36                       219.49
     2010                      49          102.86              5,040.25                 246.62                     1,277.81
     Total                    884          103.62             91,602.97                4482.09                    23,223.29


Source: summarized from Venture Source. Only includes IPOs listed on Nasdaq and NYSE from 1990-2010.




13   Estimated based on Table VII, column 3 and Table XIII, Panel B, column 4 (eg. 91602.97*0.36/0.142*1.93%)
14   Estimated based on Table XIII, Panel B, column 4 (eg. 91602.97*0.36/0.142*10%)
                                                            49
                          Table XVI. Robustness Test – Excluding Email Responses

This table reports first stage, reduced form and IV results excluding responses from the email. Panel A
corresponds to Table VII. Panel B corresponds to Table XI. Panel C corresponds to Table XII.

 Panel A                                           (1)            (2)            (3)             (4)          (5)
 VARIABLES                                                                Female Hired Ratio

 Average Number of Daughters                      0.0137        0.0166*         0.0135
                                                (0.00902)      (0.00905)      (0.00885)
 Average Number of Children                      -0.0129*       -0.0126*       -0.0126
                                                (0.00731)      (0.00739)      (0.00776)
 Average Number of Daughters (Senior Partner)                                                0.0147
                                                                                           (0.01000)
 Average Number of Children (Senior Partner)                                                -0.00567
                                                                                           (0.00812)
 Average Number of Daughters (Junior Partner)                                                              -0.000331
                                                                                                            (0.0162)
 Average Number of Children (Junior Partner)                                                               -0.000482
                                                                                                            (0.0114)
 Control
 Firm Size (Partner Count)                          N             Y               Y               Y           Y
 VC Firm Age, Partner Age                           N             N               Y               Y           Y
 Have Female Before Hiring                          N             N               Y               Y           Y
 Year                                               Y             Y               Y               Y           Y
 Observations                                      657           657             657             547         283


 Panel B                                           [1]            [2]             [3]             [4]          [5]
VARIABLES                                        Success        Success         Success         Success      Success

Average Number of Daughters                     0.0280***      0.0281***      0.0281***
                                                (0.00871)      (0.00873)      (0.00873)
Average Number of Children                       -0.0127*       -0.0120*       -0.0119*
                                                (0.00699)      (0.00713)      (0.00713)
Average Number of Daughters (Senior Partner)                                                   0.0305***
                                                                                               (0.00905)
Average Number of Children (Senior Partner)                                                    -0.0162**
                                                                                               (0.00711)
Average Number of Daughters (Junior Partner)                                                                 -0.0101
                                                                                                             (0.0140)
Average Number of Children (Junior Partner)                                                                 -0.00116
                                                                                                            (0.00950)
Control
Firm Size (Partner Count)                           Y              Y               Y               Y            Y
VC Firm Age, Partner Age                            N              Y               Y               Y            Y
Have Female Before Hiring                           N              Y               Y               Y            Y
Female VC                                           N              N               Y               Y            Y
Country, Year, Round, Industry                      Y              Y               Y               Y            Y
Observations                                      9,226          9,226           9,226           8,008        3,991




                                                          50
Panel C                                       (1)        (2)        (3)       (4)       (5)       (6)       (7)       (8)
VARIABLES                                   Success    Success    Success   Success   Success   Success   Success   Success

Estimation Method                            OLS        OLS        GMM      GMM       GMM       GMM       GMM       GMM
Instruments For Hiring Female                N/A        N/A
Average # of Daughters, Children                                       X      X
Average # of Daughters, Children (Senior)                                               X         X
Average # of Daughters, Children (Junior)                                                                    X         X
Female Hired Ratio                           0.0597     0.0503    1.382**   1.591*    1.563**   1.887*     1.659     1.750
                                            (0.0382)   (0.0393)   (0.705)   (0.833)   (0.795)   (1.024)   (1.329)   (1.499)
Control
Firm Size (Partner Count)                      N          Y          Y         Y         Y         Y         Y         Y
VC Firm Age, Partner Age                       N          Y          Y         Y         Y         Y         Y         Y
Have Female Before Hiring                      N          Y          N         Y         N         Y         N         Y
Female VC                                      N          Y          N         Y         N         Y         N         Y
Industry, Country, Year, Round                 Y          Y          Y         Y         Y         Y         Y         Y
Observations                                 9,226      9,226      9,226     9,226     8,008     8,008     3,991     3,991




                                                                  51
                             Table XVII. Robustness Test – Including Partners with Less Than 3 Deals

            This table reports first stage, reduced form and IV results including VCs who made less than 3 deals.
            Panel A corresponds to Table VII. Panel B corresponds to Table XI. Panel C corresponds to Table XII.

Panel A                                            (1)                 (2)               (3)                     (4)              (5)
VARIABLES                                                                          Female Hired Ratio

Average Number of Daughters                      0.0169**          0.0202**               0.0200**
                                                 (0.00792)         (0.00786)              (0.00882)
Average Number of Children                      -0.0175***        -0.0189***             -0.0210***
                                                 (0.00588)         (0.00583)              (0.00718)
Average Number of Daughters (Senior Partner)                                                                  0.0220**
                                                                                                              (0.00970)
Average Number of Children (Senior Partner)                                                                    -0.0151*
                                                                                                              (0.00780)
Average Number of Daughters (Junior Partner)                                                                                    0.00977
                                                                                                                                (0.0136)
Average Number of Children (Junior Partner)                                                                                    -0.0216**
                                                                                                                               (0.00873)
Control
Firm Size (Partner Count)                           N                   Y                    Y                   Y                Y
VC Firm Age, Partner Age                            N                   N                    Y                   Y                Y
Have Female Before Hiring                           N                   N                    Y                   Y                Y
Year                                                Y                   Y                    Y                   Y                Y
Observations                                      1,065               1,065                 942                 775              354




  Panel B                                                    [1]                 [2]                 [3]             [4]             [5]
 VARIABLES                                                 Success             Success             Success         Success         Success

 Average Number of Daughters                              0.0324***           0.0287***           0.0288***
                                                           (0.00864)          (0.00903)           (0.00903)
 Average Number of Children                               -0.0181***           -0.0133*            -0.0133*
                                                           (0.00620)          (0.00686)           (0.00686)
 Average Number of Daughters (Senior Partner)                                                                     0.0269***
                                                                                                                  (0.00899)
 Average Number of Children (Senior Partner)                                                                       -0.00988
                                                                                                                  (0.00687)
 Average Number of Daughters (Junior Partner)                                                                                      0.00279
                                                                                                                                   (0.0142)
 Average Number of Children (Junior Partner)                                                                                       -0.0103
                                                                                                                                  (0.00998)
 Control
 Firm Size (Partner Count)                                     Y                 Y                   Y                   Y            Y
 VC Firm Age, Partner Age                                      N                 Y                   Y                   Y            Y
 Have Female Before Hiring                                     N                 Y                   Y                   Y            Y
 Female VC                                                     N                 N                   Y                   Y            Y
 Country, Year, Round, Industry                                Y                 Y                   Y                   Y            Y
 Observations                                                12,347            11,478              11,478              9,746        4,712




                                                                              52
 Panel C                                   (1)         (2)        (3)       (4)       (5)        (6)         (7)        (8)
VARIABLES                                Success     Success    Success   Success   Success    Success     Success    Success

Estimation Method                           OLS       OLS       GMM       GMM        GMM        GMM        GMM        GMM
Instruments For Hiring Female               N/A       N/A
Average # of Daughters, Children                                  X         X
Average # of Daughters, Children (Senior)                                              X          X
Average # of Daughters, Children (Junior)                                                                     X          X
Female Hired Ratio                      0.0940***    0.0797**   1.117**   0.934**   0.973***   0.817***     0.186      0.826
                                          (0.0321)   (0.0332)   (0.452)   (0.374)    (0.314)    (0.275)    (0.676)    (0.856)
Control
Firm Size (Partner Count)                     N         Y         Y         Y          Y          Y           Y          Y
VC Firm Age, Partner Age                      N         Y         Y         Y          Y          Y           Y          Y
Have Female Before Hiring                     N         Y         N         Y          N          Y           N          Y
Female VC                                     N         Y         N         Y          N          Y           N          Y
Industry, Country, Year, Round                Y         Y         Y         Y          Y          Y           Y          Y
Observations                               12,347     11,478    12,347    11,478     10,501     9,746     5,341      4,712




                                                                   53
          Appendix: Variable Definitions

                                             Table XVIII. Variable Description

Variable                       Description
VC Firm Characteristics
                               The number of female partners hired divided by the total number of new hires in the 5
Female Hired Ratio             years prior to the fund closing year
Total Female Hires             The number of female partners hired in the 5 years prior to the fund closing year
Total New Hires                The number of new hires made in the 5 years prior to the fund closing year
Partner Count                  The number of partners in the firm at fund closing year, proxy for the firm size
Firm Age                       Current year minus firm’s first fund year in the sample, proxy for the firm age
Having Female Before Hiring    Equals to 1 if there was a female in the VC firm within the 5-year hiring window
Average Partner Age            Average age of existing partners in the firm
Firm Level Children
Measure
Average Number of
Daughters                      Average number of daughters by all existing partners in the VC firm before hiring a female
Average Number of              Average number of daughters by senior partners in the VC firm before hiring a female.
Daughters (Senior Partner)     Senior partner is defined as partners whose tenure is greater or equals to 5 years
Average Number of              Average number of daughters by junior partners in the VC firm before hiring a female.
Daughters (Junior Partner)     Junior partner is defined as partners whose tenure is less than 5 years
Average Number of
Daughters (Female Partner)     Average number of daughters by female partners in the VC firm before hiring a female
Average Number of
Daughters (Male Partner)       Average number of daughters by male partners in the VC firm before hiring a female
                               The average of all partners’ daughter ratio. If a partner has no children, daughter ratio
Average Daughter Ratio         equals to 0.5
Average Excess Daughter        (Total number of daughters by existing partners – total son) / # of partners
                               (# of partners with more daughters - # of partners with more sons or equal daughter, son) /
Daughter-Heavy Partner         # Partners
First Daughter Partner Ratio   The percentage of partners whose first child is a daughter
At Least One Daughter
Partner Ratio                  The percentage of partners who have daughters
VC Firm Performance
Measure
IPO                            Equals to 1 if a deal went IPO
                               Equals to 1 if a deal went IPO or was acquired with an acquisition value greater than the
Success                        invested amount
VC Fund Characteristics
Excess Return                  Fund net IRR minus median fund return in the same year, same region. Provided by Preqin
Net IRR                        Fund's net IRR. Provided by Preqin
MedianFund Benchmark           Median fund return in the same year, same region. Provided by Preqin
Quartile                       Performance Quartile of fund's net IRR. Provided by Preqin
Total Closing Amount           Fund Size




                                                                  54
Online Appendix: Additional Table I.

This table tests the independence of the number of daughters by each partner.
Panel A reports son/daughter ratio by senior partners, junior partners, female partners and male partners.
Panel B reports son/daughter ratio conditional on the total number of children.
Panel C reports Chi-Square test of son/daughter mix conditional on the total number of children.

Panel A. t-Test
                                                            #           # of            # of
                                                         Partners     Children     Son/Daughter         P Value15
 Number of Son / Daughter                                 1,379        3284            1.080              0.423
 Number of Son / Daughter (Senior Partner)                 972         2388            1.057              0.874
 Number of Son / Daughter (Junior Partner)                 407          896            1.144              0.202
 Number of Son / Daughter (Female Partner)                 140          273            1.133              0.531
 Number of Son / Daughter (Male Partner)                  1,239        3008            1.076              0.504

Panel B. t-Test
                                                           #           # of            # of
               Number of Children
                                                        Partners     Children     Son/Daughter          P Value
                          1                               183          183            0.848              0.151
                          2                               584         1168            0.997              0.373
                          3                               393         1179            1.163              0.079
                          4                               130          520            1.039              0.906

Panel C. Chi Square Test
 Number of Children                                                 P Value16
 Condition on Number of Children=1                                      0.177
 Condition on Number of Children=2                                      0.310
 Condition on Number of Children=3                                      0.084
 Condition on Number of Children=4                                      0.312




15 Panel A and Panel B test the null hypothesis P(Child=girl)=0.4878. Each observation is a child. It equals to 1 if the
child is a girl and 0 if the child is a boy.
16 Panel C is a Chi Square test on the binominal distribution of # of daughters each partner has conditional on total #

children. Each observation is a partner.
                                                              55
                                         Online Appendix Table II.

This table reports results regressing the number of children on first child’s gender. The observation is
individual partner. The dependent variable is the number of children a partner has. The independent
variable First Daughter equals to 1 if the first child is a daughter. Asterisks denote statistical significance
at the 1% (***), 5% (**), or 10% (*) level.

                                                              (1)          (2)          (3)
                VARIABLES                                            Number of Children

                First Daughter                             0.0488         0.0398    0.0355
                                                          (0.0575)       (0.0579)  (0.0578)
                Partner Age                                             0.0171*** 0.0161***
                                                                        (0.00261) (0.00262)
                Female Partner                                                    -0.347***
                                                                                   (0.0972)
                Constant                                  2.370***      1.421***   1.509***
                                                          (0.0367)        (0.147)   (0.148)

                Observations                                 1,403         1,327       1,327
                R-squared                                    0.000         0.037       0.047




                                                        56
                       Online Appendix Table III. The Effect of Children’s Age

Panel A. First Stage: Children’s Age and Hiring

                                                                 (1)          (2)            (4)
VARIABLES                                                              Female Hired Ratio

Average Number of Daughters (less than 12 Yrs)                   0.0118                     -0.0208
                                                               (0.0145)                    (0.0178)
Average Number of Children (less than 12 Yrs)                   -0.0121                     0.00771
                                                              (0.00927)                    (0.0123)
Average Number of Daughters (Greater than 12 Yrs)                             0.0236         0.0245
                                                                             (0.0283)      (0.0287)
Average Number of Children (Greater than 12 Yrs)                             0.00688        0.00479
                                                                             (0.0170)      (0.0191)
Firm Size (Partner Count)                                     0.000189      -0.000926      -0.00108
                                                             (0.00118)      (0.00194)     (0.00200)
VC Firm Age                                                    0.00123       0.00314        0.00315
                                                             (0.00130)      (0.00204)     (0.00201)
Have Female Before Hiring                                    0.0577***      0.0534***     0.0532***
                                                              (0.0184)       (0.0201)      (0.0205)
Average Partner Age                                           -0.00116     -0.00383**    -0.00387**
                                                             (0.00114)      (0.00164)     (0.00164)
Control                                                          Year          Year           Year
Observations                                                     675            335            335
R-squared                                                       0.060          0.144          0.149
Panel B. Children’s Age and VC Performance

                                                            (1)               (2)               (3)
VARIABLES                                                 Success           Success           Success

Average Number of Daughters (less than 12 Yrs)            0.00273                               -0.0111
                                                          (0.0127)                             (0.0167)
Average Number of Children (less than 12 Yrs)             0.00284                                0.0182
                                                         (0.00914)                             (0.0130)
Average Number of Daughters (Greater than 12 Yrs)                            0.0636**           0.0606*
                                                                              (0.0311)         (0.0312)
Average Number of Children (Greater than 12 Yrs)                               -0.0293          -0.0161
                                                                              (0.0210)         (0.0236)
Firm Size (Partner Count)                                 0.00184*             0.00159          0.00139
                                                         (0.00111)           (0.00145)        (0.00145)
VC Firm Age                                              0.00269**             0.00205          0.00210
                                                         (0.00135)           (0.00185)        (0.00185)
Have Female Before Hiring                                  -0.0170             -0.0181          -0.0157
                                                          (0.0138)            (0.0181)         (0.0179)
Female VC                                                 -0.00131            -0.00434         -0.00341
                                                          (0.0201)            (0.0280)         (0.0280)
Average Partner Age                                       -0.00123            -0.00207         -0.00194
                                                         (0.00111)           (0.00190)        (0.00189)
Control                                                           Industry, Country, Year, Round
Observations                                                8,250               4,471             4,471
R-squared                                                   0.095               0.096             0.096

                                                    57
Panel C. Children’s Age and VC Performance (IV)

                                                     (3)               (4)
VARIABLES                                          Success           Success

Instrument
Average Number of Daughters (Less than 12 Yrs)          Y
Average Number of Daughters (More than 12 Yrs)                         Y

Female Hired Ratio                                  0.143             0.818*
                                                   (0.663)           (0.468)
Firm Size (Partner Count)                          0.00203           0.00207
                                                  (0.00153)         (0.00177)
Average Number of Children (Less than 12 Yrs)      0.00429
                                                  (0.00679)
Average Number of Children (More than 12 Yrs)                          -0.0101
                                                                      (0.0177)
VC Firm Age                                         0.00225           -0.00235
                                                   (0.00270)         (0.00355)
Have Female Before Hiring                            -0.0254           -0.0264
                                                    (0.0402)          (0.0215)
Female VC                                            -0.0153           -0.0474
                                                    (0.0682)          (0.0386)
Average Partner Age                               -0.000948          -0.000918
                                                   (0.00174)         (0.00239)
Control                                          Industry, Country, Year, Round
Observations                                          8,250             4,471
R-squared                                             0.095             0.070




                                                   58
               Online Appendix Table IV. Daughter Effect on Male/Female Partners

Panel A. First Stage                                               (1)           (2)
VARIABLES                                                          Female Hired Ratio

Average Number of Daughters (Male Partners)                      0.0141*
                                                                (0.00796)
Average Number of Children (Male Partners)                     -0.0204***
                                                                (0.00655)
Average Number of Daughters (Female Partners)                                       0.0235
                                                                                  (0.0437)
Average Number of Children (Female Partners)                                       -0.0243
                                                                                  (0.0377)
Firm Size (Partner Count)                                         0.000536        -0.00746
                                                                 (0.00113)       (0.00573)
Have Female Before Hiring                                       0.0505***          -0.0133
                                                                  (0.0155)         (0.217)
VC Firm Age                                                       0.00218*         0.00342
                                                                 (0.00123)       (0.00716)
Average Partner Age                                              -0.000594         0.00692
                                                                (0.000849)       (0.00581)
Control                                                             Year             Year
Observations                                                         924               99
R-squared                                                           0.064            0.371


Panel B. Reduced Form                               (1)              (2)
VARIABLES                                         Success          Success

Average Number of Daughter (Male Partners)       0.0255***
                                                 (0.00835)
Average Number of Children (Male Partners)       -0.0124**
                                                 (0.00627)
Average Number of Daughter (Female Partners)                          0.0406
                                                                    (0.0246)
Average Number of Children (Female Partners)                       -0.0511**
                                                                    (0.0216)
Firm Size (Partner Count)                         0.00232**          0.00322
                                                   (0.00107)       (0.00228)
VC Firm Age                                        0.00197*         -0.00197
                                                   (0.00119)       (0.00334)
Have Female Before Hiring                           -0.00459         -0.0717
                                                    (0.0124)        (0.0634)
Female VC                                            -0.0132         -0.0460
                                                    (0.0179)        (0.0333)
Average Partner Age                              -0.00149**         -0.00388
                                                  (0.000745)       (0.00261)
Control                                         Industry, Country, Year, Round
Observations                                          11,292           1,435
R-squared                                              0.090           0.105




                                                   59
Panel C. IV                                            (1)          (2)
VARIABLES                                            Success      Success

Estimation Method                                     GMM          GMM

Instruments For Hiring Female
Average Number of Daughters (Male Partners)             X
Average Number of Daughters (Female Partners)                        X

Female Hired Ratio                                    1.008**      0.795
                                                      (0.430)     (0.560)
Average Number of Children (Male Partners)            0.00185
                                                     (0.00715)
Average Number of Children (Female Partners)                      -0.00363
                                                                  (0.0257)
Firm Size (Partner Count)                        0.00379**         0.00227
                                                 (0.00150)       (0.00231)
Have Female Before Hiring                         -0.0426*          -0.109
                                                  (0.0236)         (0.105)
VC Firm Age                                       -0.00261        -0.00172
                                                 (0.00271)       (0.00381)
Female VC                                         -0.122**        -0.0720*
                                                  (0.0510)        (0.0382)
Average Partner Age                              0.000301         -0.00308
                                                 (0.00130)       (0.00285)
                                                   Industry, Country, Year,
Control                                                     Round
Observations                                        11,292           1,435
R-squared                                                            0.050




                                                60
                Online Appendix Table V. Deal Level Reduced Form Alternative Measures

This table reports reduced form results of deal level sample. The dependent variable (“Success”) equals to
1 if the portfolio company went public or was acquired with acquisition value greater than invested
amount. Independent variables are alternative measures of existing partners’ children aggregated at VC
firm level. Robust standard error is clustered at VC firm, Year level. Asterisks denote statistical
significance at the 1% (***), 5% (**), or 10% (*) level.



                                           (1)              (2)            (3)             (4)           (5)
 VARIABLES                               Success          Success        Success         Success       Success

 Average Daughter Ratio                 0.0506***
                                         (0.0189)
 Average Excess Daughter                               0.0150***
                                                       (0.00444)
 Daughter-Heavy Partner Ratio                                           0.0186**
                                                                        (0.00822)
 First Daughter Partner Ratio                                                            0.0218*
                                                                                         (0.0130)
 At Least One Daughter Ratio                                                                           0.0399***
                                                                                                        (0.0153)
 Average Number of Children              -0.00113       -0.000564         -0.000326        -0.00515     -0.0112*
                                        (0.00562)       (0.00559)         (0.00562)       (0.00650)    (0.00622)
 Firm Size (Partner Count)              0.00243**      0.00250**          0.00245**      0.00228**     0.00220**
                                        (0.00106)       (0.00105)         (0.00107)       (0.00114)    (0.00105)
 VC Firm Age                              -0.0143         -0.0136           -0.0148        -0.0221*      -0.0101
                                         (0.0119)        (0.0118)          (0.0119)        (0.0126)     (0.0120)
 Have Female Before Hiring               0.00224*        0.00219*          0.00224*      0.00272**     0.00246**
                                        (0.00118)       (0.00117)         (0.00118)       (0.00128)    (0.00117)
 Average Partner Age                   -0.00151**       -0.00138*        -0.00153**        -0.00110   -0.00147**
                                       (0.000743)      (0.000742)        (0.000742)      (0.000899)   (0.000747)
 Control                                                       Industry, Country, Year, Round
 Observations                            11,478            11,478            11,478          9,751      11,478
 R-squared                                0.090             0.091             0.090          0.092       0.090




                                                     61
