NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

SHORT RUN GRAVITY
James E. Anderson
Yoto V. Yotov
Working Paper 23458
http://www.nber.org/papers/w23458

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
May 2017

The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the
National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.
© 2017 by James E. Anderson and Yoto V. Yotov. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not
to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.

Short Run Gravity
James E. Anderson and Yoto V. Yotov
NBER Working Paper No. 23458
May 2017
JEL No. F10,F14,F15
ABSTRACT
Short run gravity is a geometric weighted average of long run gravity and bilateral capacity. The
model features (i) joint trade costs endogenous to bilateral volumes, (ii) long run gravity as a
limiting case of efficient investment in bilateral capacities, (iii) a structural ratio of short run to
long run trade elasticities equal to a micro-founded buyers' incidence elasticity, and (iv) tractable
short and long run models of the extensive margin. Application to manufacturing trade of 52
countries during the globalization period 1988-2006 strongly supports the model. Results solve
several time invariance and trade elasticity puzzles in the literature.

James E. Anderson
Department of Economics
Boston College
Chestnut Hill, MA 02467
and NBER
james.anderson.1@bc.edu
Yoto V. Yotov
School of Economics
Drexel University
Philadelphia, PA 19104
and ERI-BAS
yotov@drexel.edu

1

Introduction

Gravity’s emergence from the shade [e.g. Head and Mayer (2014)] highlights empirical and
conceptual puzzles posed by the model’s success. On one hand gravity-fitted bilateral trade
flows come very close to the data and estimated coefficients are stable over time. On the other
hand, this fit and stability violate intuition and observation about trade behavior over time.
Secular invariance of coefficients is a puzzle in light of big technological improvements in
transportation and communications over the past 60 years.1 Higher frequency invariance and
good fit is further puzzling in light of pronounced business cycle movement of ocean shipping
rates and delivery lags. Imperfectly correlated national expenditures over the business cycle
and big secular shifts in the location of economic activity suggest cyclical and trend variation
in bilateral trade costs over time and space. Time invariance also appears to conflict with
the richly patterned adjustment over time in bilateral trade links emphasized by Chaney
(2014), on French firm export market behavior, and the random entry and exit emphasized
by Besedes and Prusa (2006), on US 10-digit trade.
Addressing the empirical puzzles poses conceptual problems for gravity theory derived
from static equilibrium economics. The short run gravity model of this paper is a conceptual
solution. Trade costs vary with volume in the short run due to diminishing returns to
a variable factor that is paired with a bilaterally specific fixed factor. Short run gravity
nests the standard long run gravity model as a limit approached when bilaterally specific
capacities adjust to efficient levels. Application of the model to manufacturing trade data
for 52 countries over 1988-2006 yields a good fit with intuitively plausible parameters. The
estimated parameters give solutions to the time invariance and related empirical puzzles.
Bilateral capacity is a notion consistent with the network link dynamics modeled by
Chaney (2014) and with the link between managers’ experience in previous firms and the
export performance of their current company described by Mion and Opromolla (2014).
1
Coe et al. (2002) define the ‘Missing Globalization Puzzle’ as “the failure of declining trade-related costs
to be reflected in estimates of the standard gravity model of bilateral trade” (p.1).

Commonly used assumptions in production theory with fixed factors then yield a log-linear
structural gravity model. Short run gravity is a geometric weighted average of the familiar
(long run) gravity model and a bilateral capacity variable for shipments from origin i to
destination z:
[Long Run Gravity(i, z)]ρ λ(i, z)1−ρ .
[Long Run Gravity (·)] is the standard gravity model expression for the trade depressing
effect of bilateral relative to multilateral resistance.2 λ(i, z) is a bilateral capacity variable
that reflects origin-destination-specific investment in bilateral links. ρ is the buyers’ short run
incidence elasticity, the fraction of trade cost variation borne by buyers.3 ρ is a combination
of the elasticity of substitution in demand and the elasticity of supply, itself micro-founded in
the joint supply of output delivered to many destinations at increasing cost due to diminishing
marginal product of a variable factor on each link.4 Our estimation suggests ρ ∈ (0.20, 0.37),
narrowed to (0.20, 0.24) in our favored specifications with a preferred value 0.24. In all
robustness checks ρ is significantly far below 1, statistically and economically.
In the short run (i.e. at all observable moments), observed trade flows face rising costs
due to diminishing marginal product of variable factors with fixed bilateral capacity on each
link. Over time bilateral capacity adjusts, plausibly toward the efficient level. With perfectly
efficient origin-destination-specific capacity on all links {λ∗ (i, z)}, the model converges to
2

As demonstrated by Arkolakis et al. (2012), [Long Run Gravity(·)] derives from a wide array of
theoretical microfoundations. Anderson (1979) is the first to offer a theoretical economic foundation for the
gravity equation in an Armington-CES setting. Other early contributions to gravity theory include Krugman
(1980) and Bergstrand (1985), who obtain gravity from a monopolistic competition and a Heckscher-Ohlin
foundations, respectively. Eaton and Kortum (2002), who derive gravity in a Ricardian framework with
intermediate goods, and Anderson and van Wincoop (2003), who popularize the Armington-CES model and
emphasize the importance of the general equilibrium effects of trade costs, are arguably the most influential
gravity theories. More recently, the gravity model has been derived in a heterogeneous firm setting by
Chaney (2008) and Helpman et al. (2008). We refer the reader to Anderson (2011), Arkolakis et al. (2012),
Head and Mayer (2014), and Costinot and Rodrguez-Clare (2014), and Yotov et al. (2016) for recent surveys
of the evolution of the theoretical gravity literature.
3
The term incidence elasticity is chosen to distinguish it from the passthrough elasticity used to describe
incomplete incidence of exchange rate changes on prices, a higher frequency behavior that may reflect other
causes than are the focus of this paper.
4
Short run fixed capacity causes diminishing marginal product of labor in production-cum-delivery on
any link. Heterogeneous productivity of firms results in a composite supply elasticity with an extensive
margin including the dispersion parameter of a Pareto distribution of productivity draws.

2

the standard long run gravity equation. Over the era of globalization 1988-2006, our results
suggest that the growing efficiency of trade capacity increased trade volume by 162%.
Bilateral trade costs are interdependent in the short run, jointly determined across all
bilateral volumes. Efficient allocation of the variable factor interacts with size effects in
demand at each destination and supply at each origin along with bilateral fixed capacities to determine the system of equilibrium trade costs. Despite this generality, CES-type
tractability still obtains. The model encompasses heterogeneous productivity, of industries
(as in Eaton and Kortum (2002)) or of firms (as in Chaney (2008)). The property of rising
short run marginal cost of trade resembles the model of Arkolakis (2010), but differs in the
cause. In Arkolakis (2010) rising trade cost in the long run is due to increasing difficulty of
reaching new customers. Long run trade costs are constant in our model.
Short run gravity generates a simple prediction about the relationship between the short
run (SR) gravity coefficients and their long run (LR) counterparts:

βlSR = βlLR ρ,

(1)

where l denotes any gravity covariate, e.g. distance, tariffs, etc. Equation (1) is an explanation of the difference between short run and long run trade elasticities based on fixed
bilateral capacities.5 Short run gravity elasticities are around 1/4 the size of long run elasticities based on our parameter estimates. Ruhl (2008) reconciles the difference in a model
based on cyclical fluctuations being temporary whereas trade cost changes are permanent.
Arkolakis et al. (2011) offer an alternative explanation by introducing a dynamic adjustment
process on the part of consumers. Most recently, Crucini and Davis (2016) explain the discrepancy between the short- and long-run elasticities with frictions in distribution, which
may lead to the slow adjustment of quantities following a change in relative prices.
5

The long run elasticity estimates in the trade literature usually vary between 2 and 12. See Eaton and
Kortum (2002), Anderson and van Wincoop (2003), and Broda et al. (2006). The corresponding short run
elasticity indexes from the IRBC macro literature are usually between 1 and 2. See Backus et al. (1994),
Zimmermann (1997), Heathcote and Perri (2002) and Feenstra et al. (2012).

3

A second implication of equation (1) suggests an explanation of the broad ‘missing globalization puzzle’ (Coe et al., 2002): the effects of geographic impediments such as distance
and other geographic impediments to estimated gravity equations have been stable, or even
increasing over time. Time invariance of estimated coefficients of standard cross section gravity regressions is explained by iceberg trade cost proxies that control well for the omitted
bilateral capacity variables. Bilateral capacity adjusts over time toward an efficient level that
is shown below to depend on the same iceberg trade costs as in the standard cross section
model.6 We estimate highly significant declining border effects associated with rising investment in cross-border capacities relative to domestic capacities. The missing globalization
is in the omitted dynamic adjustment of bilateral capacities driven by the same geographic
forces that drive spatial variation of bilateral trade flows. The omission is concealed by standard static gravity estimation that is an unbiased estimate of long run gravity. Our tests
below based on (1) are consistent with this solution to the puzzle.
The short run gravity model also features a useful theoretical approach to the many zeroes
observable in bilateral trade flows, some persistent and some flickering on and off. Changes
in persistent zeroes are due to investments in bilateral capacity on the extensive margin as
capacity moves toward an efficient long run extensive margin of markets served. Flickering
zeroes are due to demand changes combined with period-by-period fixed cost components
of variable trade costs such that the origin-destination pair representative firm flips from
one side to the other of the breakeven point for serving a particular destination. In the
heterogeneous firms version of the model, the breakeven point for not serving a destination
applies the least productive active firm on an interior extensive margin.7
6

The puzzles of time-invariant gravity estimates have attracted significant attention in the literature. A
series of papers have proposed purely empirical solutions to the puzzles. See Buch et al. (2004), Carrre and
Schiff (2005), Brun et al. (2005), Boulhol and de Serres (2010), Lin and Sim (2012), Yotov (2012) Carrre et
al. (2013), Bergstrand et al. (2015) and Larch et al. (2016).
7
Helpman et al. (2008) (HMR) offer the first model of zeroes based on fixed export costs. Firms draw
productivities from a Pareto distribution with an upper bound such that zeroes are explained by a sufficiently
low upper bound such that no firm at a particular origin receives a draw high enough to cover the fixed
cost of entering a particular destination market. Our model for short run zeroes differs only in that fixed
capacity implies increasing opportunity cost of serving small markets, hence a U-shaped full average cost
curve that can lie everywhere above a small destination market’s willingness to pay, even with an unbounded

4

Section 2 presents the basic theoretical model of joint trade costs of production and delivery to many destinations. Section 3 applies the model to the multi-country setting, yielding
the short run gravity model. Section 4 develops and tests two complementary empirical
versions of the model. Theoretical Appendix A shows that the basic model encompasses
heterogeneous productivities (as in Eaton and Kortum (2002)) and heterogeneous firms (as
in Chaney (2008)). Appendix A also draws out the implications of model for a theory of
endogenous trade costs such as may be applied to model inference from price comparisons for
homogeneous goods across many locations. Appendix B reports on sensitivity experiments
with the main empirical models. The main results are robust.

2

A Model of Joint Trade Costs

An origin region produces and ships a product to potentially many destinations. Distribution on each link requires multiple resources in variable proportions, generalizing the usual
notion of iceberg-melting trade costs but preserving the essential feature that distribution
multiplicatively amplifies production costs. The scalar trade cost factors differ across destinations due to endogenous as well as exogenous geographical features of the world economy.
Cost-minimizing resource allocation implies that bilateral trade destinations are imperfect
substitutes. Specializing this story to a manageable model, assume two factors are required
to produce and distribute to each destination market. One factor is variable in the short run
(labor that can be freely allocated across destination markets that have positive capacity)
and one is fixed in the short run (capacity in each potential network link).
The variable labor requirement to each destination served includes a fixed labor component, interpretable as a manager. For simplicity the fixed labor requirement is normalized
Pareto productivity distribution. The equilibrium extensive margin thus depends only on technology and
taste parameters. Short run entry and exit flickering on the extensive margin are induced by demand or
technology shocks that can have any distribution. Other models use demand systems with choke prices to
explain zeroes, e.g. quadratic as in Melitz and Ottaviano (2008), or translog as in Novy (2013). While choke
prices are realistic, such systems appear to do worse (according to Novy’s, 2013, results) at fitting the data
than the standard CES gravity equation. We leave empirical validation of the SR gravity model of zeroes to
future research.

5

to one. Labor, including the managerial labor, is mobile in the short run across production
for destinations actively served.
The trade activity also requires destination-specific “marketing capital” that is committed
(sunk) before the allocation of labor, though it is variable ex ante. Marketing capital is thus
bilaterally specialized and fixed in the short run. The details of destination specialization,
while interesting and important (e.g., Chaney, 2014), are outside the scope of this paper.
“Marketing capital” is left vague to encompass both human capital in the form of network
connections and physical capital particularized to serve a particular destination. The idea
of a retail network in Crucini and Davis (2016) is similar.
Bilateral production and trade of a generic firm in a generic origin and sector to destination z is formally modeled as a Cobb-Douglas function of non-managerial labor L(z) − 1,
1 unit of managerial labor, and capital K(z): x(z) = (1/t(z))K(z)1−α (L(z) − 1)α . The
functional form implies that the manager is required.8 x(z) is delivered product. t(z) > 1 is
the technological iceberg-melting parameter from the given origin to destination z, a penalty
imposed by ‘nature’ relative to the frictionless benchmark t = 1. t(z) also reflects a productivity penalty in the usual sense that would apply to all destinations z uniformly. With
all inputs variable (in the long run), the production function exhibits economies of scale. In
the short run with K(z) fixed, decreasing returns dominate.9 For now, all firms are identical
in any origin, aggregating to an industry with the generic firm’s characteristics. Appendix
Section A.1.1 shows that the short run gravity model extends in all essentials to include
the heterogeneous firms model with firm productivities drawn from a Pareto distribution.
(Essentially the same short run gravity model extends to incorporate fixed infrastructure
at each location and time, adding location-time-specific productivity shifters controlled for
8

The manager story is just one justification of the formal requirement of a fixed labor cost for each
destination served. Choice of the manager is outside the model, while normalization of managerial or fixed
cost input to 1 unit of labor is a harmless convention. A useful extension empirically introduces heterogeneity
across destinations in the amount of fixed input required. At this level of generality, the production function
has the Stone-Geary form.
9
To see the long run economies of scale, consider a scalar expansion of K(z), L(z). The elasticity of x(z)
with respect to a one % rise in K(z), L(z) is equal to 1 − α + αL(z)/[L(z) − 1] > 1 in the long run. The
marginal product of labor is diminishing in the short run, ∂ 2 x(z)/∂L(z)2 = (α − 1)αx(z)/[L(z) − 1] < 0.

6

econometrically with location-time fixed effects.)
For the generic sector as a whole, labor is drawn from a national labor market in an
amount satisfying the value of marginal product condition at the national wage rate. The
P
labor market constraint on short run allocation across destinations is L = n0 L(z), where
L is labor supply to the sector and n is the extensive margin destination. n units of fixed
managerial labor are included in L. Labor is efficiently allocated across destination activities
with value of marginal product equal to the common wage. Managers are drawn from the
common labor pool and are paid the common wage.
The price for delivered output at destination z is p(z). Delivered price p(z) in competitive
equilibrium covers costs: w[L(z) − 1] + r(z)K(z) + w = p(z)x(z) where r(z) is the realized
(residual) return on the specific capital for delivery to destination z. The first term on the
left hand side of the equation is the non-managerial wage bill, the second term the payments
to sector specific capital and the third term the payment to the manager.10
The extensive margin destination n is reached when the wage required for the marginal
manager exceeds the value of sales minus the wage bill for non-managerial labor; i.e., profits
are negative. Even with positive profits, destination z may not be served if K(z) = 0,
no destination-specific capital is allocated. Destination-specific capital K(z) is allocated
prior to production and delivery to n∗ ≥ n potentially active destinations, accounting for
P ∗
K = n0 K(z) units of capital. The allocation shares of capital are λ(z) = K(z)/K. Long
run efficient allocation of capital and its extensive margin n∗ is analyzed in Sections 3.2-3.3.
The value of production at delivered prices in the generic region and sector is the sum
over destinations z of the payments to labor and to managerial capital and the payment to
10

Managers may also receive a premium as a share of the residual return to an active sector. The share
can be rationalized as incentivizing, or as the outcome of bargaining between managers with a disutility
of managing and the owners of specific capital. Total cost is then w[L(z) − 1] + (1 − π)r(z)K(z) + [w +
πr(z)K(z)] = p(z)x(z), where π is the manager’s premium share. This nod to realism plays no role in the
model, hence is suppressed for simplicity.

7

non-managerial capital given by11

Y = (L − n)α K 1−α C,

(2)

n
X
C≡[
λ(z)(p(z)/t(z))1/(1−α) ]1−α .

(3)

where
0

The real activity level
R = (L − n)α K 1−α
in (2) is multiplied by a price index C embedding efficient allocation of the joint activity to
delivered output at the many destinations. The setup thus yields a Constant Elasticity of
Transformation (CET) joint revenue function for delivered output. (The level of activity R
can be taken as exogenous for gravity model purposes, hence it is not necessary to assume
that activity R is a Cobb-Douglas function of labor and specific human capital.)
The equilibrium share of sales to each destination z that is served, by Hotelling’s Lemma
(applied to (2) using (3)), is

s(z) = λ(z)

p(z)/t(z)
C

1/(1−α)
.

(4)

It is convenient for later purposes to sort destinations by rank order, beginning with the
largest (so in equation (4) z ∈ [0, n]). The local delivery market is s(0) by convention
because empirically it is almost universally the largest.
The short run extensive margin n is determined by the value of marginal product of labor
in sector n falling below its value on the intensive margin for sectors z < n. This implies
11

The setup here extends the specific factors production model of Anderson (2011) to include a fixed cost.
In Anderson (2011) the environment is a GDP function where z denotes a sector in a continuum of fixed
size, t(z) is a productivity penalty and there is no fixed cost.
Competitive equilibrium implies that labor is paid a common wage in serving all markets, equal to the
value of marginal product of labor in each market. Aggregate labor employed is L, taken as an endowment
in solving for Y in (2) below. Price index C(·) results from solving the labor market clearance condition for
the wage, then replacing the wage with the resulting reduced form in evaluation aggregate revenue.

8

that the extensive margin is efficient in the sense of maximizing (2) with respect to n. For
simplicity, temporarily think of a continuum of destinations (with ‘shares’ being densities)
and differentiate (2) with respect to n. The first order condition yields

αY /(L − n) = (1 − α)s(n)Y.

The left hand side is the value of marginal product of non-managerial labor, equal to the
wage. The right hand side is the value of marginal product of the extensive margin manager.
Manipulating the first order condition, the implication is:
Proposition 1: Extensive Margin. The smallest market served in short run equilibrium
is unique and characterized by:

n = z : s(z) =

α
[L − z]−1 .
1−α

(5)

Ordering markets by decreasing size, the extensive margin is the smallest market that can be
served.
Equation (5) implies that a manager paid w exhausts the entire residual payment in
sector n. The wage = αY /(L − n) is rising in n, while (1 − α)s(n)Y decreasing in n; hence
the equilibrium extensive margin exists and is unique. (5) readily rationalizes the flickering
on and off of bilateral trade that is observable in highly disaggregated data: capacity is in
place but insufficient revenue to cover the overhead cost of management indicate temporary
shutdown. Section 3.2 analyzes the long run extensive margin of installed capacity.
An implication of extensive margin model (5) is that volume equations for positive trade
are not subject to selection bias. That is because firms are identical, in contrast to heterogeneous firms literature. When the model is extended to heterogeneous firms with productivities drawn from an unbounded Pareto distribution following Melitz (2003), the volume
of positive trade on any link combines smooth action on both extensive and ‘interior’ in-

9

tensive margins in a closed-form structural gravity equation. With proxies for fixed costs
that differ from the proxies for iceberg trade costs, the action can be decomposed into the
component intensive and extensive margins. (The details are developed below in Appendix
Section A.1.1.)
For any market that is served, the equilibrium delivered price p(z) is endogenously determined by the supply side forces described in (2)-(4) interacting with demand forces described
by Constant Elasticity of Substitution preferences or technology (in the case of intermediate
goods). The intuitive notion of a bilateral trade cost corresponds to p(z)/p(0), a clear idea
when t(0) = 1, so bilateral trade cost is endogenous. In practice, this is a dangerous simplification because internal delivery costs are not zero, differ across countries and are endogenous
just as the bilateral costs are endogenous, cf. Agnosteva et al. (2014) and Ramondo et al.
(2016).
Description of the demand side of the market requires an expansion of notation to designate the location of the originating sector. The CES expenditure share for goods from origin
i in destination z is given by
X(i, z)
=
E(z)



β(i)p(i, z)
P (z)

1−σ
.

(6)

Here, X(i, z) denotes the bilateral flow at end user prices, E(z) denotes the total expenditure
in destination z on goods from all origins serving it, β(i) is a distribution parameter of the
CES preferences/technology, σ is the elasticity of substitution, and P (z) is the CES price
index for destination z.
The market clearing condition for positive bilateral trade from i to z is

Y (i)s(i, z) = X(i, z).

Using (4) for s(i, z) and (6) for X(i, z) in the market clearing condition to solve for the

10

equilibrium price p(i, z) yields:
E(z)P (z)σ−1 β(i)1−σ [t(i, z)C(i)]η
p(i, z) =
Y (i)λ(i, z)


1/(η+σ−1)
,

(7)

where η = 1/(1 − α) > 1 is the supply elasticity. The short run equilibrium price in an active
origin-destination pair in (7) is an intuitive constant elasticity function of demand shifters
E(z)P (z)σ−1 , supply shifters Y (i) and C(i), and the exogenous bilateral friction components
in t(i, z) and the contemporaneously exogenous bilateral capacity λ(i, z).
Incidence of trade costs to buyers is incomplete: the buyers’ incidence elasticity is
d ln p(i, z)/d ln t(i, z) = η/(η + σ − 1) ≡ ρ. The incidence elasticity ρ (dropping “buyers” for brevity) plays a key role in the gravity representation of the model. ρ has a deep
micro-foundation as a combination of the demand elasticity parameter σ and the supply
elasticity parameter η, itself microfounded in the equilibrium of distribution based on the
Cobb-Douglas specific factors model. ρ is increasing in η and decreasing in σ.12

3

Gravity in Short Run and Long Run

The gravity representation of short run equilibrium trade yields a gravity model with a short
run trade cost elasticity equal to the product of the long run trade cost elasticity times the
incidence elasticity ρ. The short run elasticity applies everywhere. The short run trade flow
and multilateral resistance equations are additionally altered relative to long run gravity by
the volume effects of bilateral specific capacity everywhere. Multilateral resistances retain
their interpretation as sellers’ and buyers’ incidence of trade costs. Short run size-adjusted
trade flows (the ratio of observed to hypothetical frictionless trade flows) are a geometric
weighted average of long run gravity frictions and bilateral specific capacity investment,
12

Equation (7) can, in principle, account for substantial variation in prices across time and space. Rents
to the sector specific factor similarly vary (see Section 3.2). Rents are competitive in the model, so pricing to
market behavior in the usual sense is not implied. The model can be extended to monopolistic competition
by treating each origin i as a firm. With CES demand, markups are constant when firms shares are small.

11

where the geometric weight on long run gravity is equal to the buyers’ incidence elasticity.
Multilateral resistance for sellers is derived from the global market clearing condition for
Y (i). Substitute (7) into (6), then multiply by E(z) and sum over z to obtain the global
demand for Y (i). Collect the terms for Y (i) on the left hand side of the market clearance
condition and simplify the exponents 1−ρ(σ−1)/η = ρ on Y (i) and (σ−1)/(η+σ−1) = 1−ρ
on λ(i, z). The result is

Y (i)ρ = [β(i)C(i)]ρ(1−σ)

X

[E(z)P (z)σ−1 ]ρ t(i, z)ρ(1−σ) λ(i, z)1−ρ .

z

Divide both sides by Y ρ . The result is


Y (i)
Y

ρ

= [β(i)C(i)Π(i)]ρ(1−σ) ⇒

Y (i)
= [β(i)C(i)Π(i)]1−σ ,
Y

(8)

where outward multilateral resistance

Π(i)

(1−σ)ρ

=

X  E(z) ρ  t(i, z) (1−σ)ρ
z

Y

P (z)

λ(i, z)1−ρ .

(9)

The left hand side of (8) is recognized as a CES share equation for a hypothetical world buyer
on the world market, with a world market price index for all goods equal to 1. Short run
multilateral resistance in (9) is a CES function of bilateral relative trade costs t(i, z)/P (z),
where the elasticity of short run substitution is (1 − σ)ρ. Π(i) is homogeneous of degree one
in {t(i, z)} for given {P (z)}.
The gravity representation of trade also requires a relationship between the buyers’
price index and relative trade costs. Substitute (7) in the CES price definition P (z)1−σ =
P
1−σ
. Then use (8) to substitute for [β(i)C(i)]1−σ in the resulting equation.
i [β(i)p(i, z)]
After simplification this gives the short run price index as

(1−σ)ρ

P (z)


=

E(z)
Y

−(1−ρ) X
i

Y (i)
Y

12



t(i, z)
Π(i)

(1−σ)ρ

λ(i, z)1−ρ .

Buyers’ price index P (z) is the product of a size effect [E(z)/Y ]−(1−ρ) and a CES function
of the set of bilateral buyers’ incidences:

(1−σ)ρ

Pe(z)

=

X Y (i)  t(i, z) (1−σ)ρ
i

Y

Π(i)

λ(i, z)1−ρ , ∀z,

(10)

with short run elasticity of substitution (1 − σ)ρ . Pe(z) is the buyers’ short run multilateral
resistance, also interpreted as the buyers’ short run incidence of trade costs. Simplifying the
CES price index, P (z) = [E(z)/Y ](1−ρ)/(σ−1)ρ Pe(z). Higher relative demand E(z)/Y raises
P (z) given Pe(z) due to fixed capacities {λ(i, z)Y (i)}. In long run gravity, as effectively
η → ∞, ρ → 1 and the buyers’ market size effect vanishes from the price index P (z).
Use P (z)(1−σ)ρ = [E(z)/Y ]−(1−ρ) Pe(z)(1−σ)ρ in sellers’ multilateral resistance (9) to yield
the more intuitive equivalent form

Π(i)(1−σ)ρ =

X E(z)
z

Y

t(i, z)
Pe(z)

!(1−σ)ρ
λ(i, z)1−ρ , ∀i.

(11)

The final step in deriving short run gravity is to substitute the right hand side of (7) for
p(i, z) in (6) and use (8) to substitute for [β(i)C(i)]1−σ in the resulting expression. After
simplification using incidence elasticity ρ = η/(η + σ − 1), this gives:13
Proposition 2: Short Run Gravity. Short run gravity is a geometric weighted average
of long run gravity and a bilateral capacity variable λ(i, z) . Short run gravity trade flows
are given by:
"
#(1−σ)ρ
Y (i)E(z)
t(i, z)
X(i, z) =
λ(i, z)1−ρ .
Y
Π(i)Pe(z)

(12)

where the multilateral resistances Π(i), Pe(z) are given by (10)-(11)
The first term on the right hand side of (12) is the frictionless benchmark flow at given
13

X(i, z)
= E(z)(β(i)p(i, z))1−σ
= E(z)ρ [t(i, z)/P (z)](1−σ)ρ λ(i, z)1−ρ H(i) where H(i) =
(1−σ)ρ
1−ρ
[β(i)C(i)]
Y (i) . Substitute [Y (i)/Y Π(i)1−σ ]ρ for [β(i)C(i)](1−σ)ρ in H(i) and replace P (z)(1−σ)ρ
−(1−ρ) e
with [E(z)/Y ]
P (z)(1−σ)ρ . Rearranging the result yields equation (12).

13

sales {Y (i)} and expenditure {E(z)}. The middle term is the familiar effect of gravity
frictions, the ratio of bilateral to the product of buyers’ and sellers’ multilateral resistance.
The difference is that the short run trade elasticity is reduced in absolute value to (1 − σ)ρ.
The last term λ(i, z)1−ρ is the ‘friction’ due to inefficient investment in capacity on link i, z.
Dividing both sides of (12) by the frictionless benchmark, size adjusted trade is
"
#(1−σ)ρ
t(i, z)
X(i, z)
=
λ(i, z)1−ρ ,
e
Y (i)E(z)/Y
Π(i)P (z)
a geometric weighted average of long run gravity frictional displacement and inefficient link
capacity allocation.
Intuition about short run gravity system (10)-(12) is aided by considering an equiproportionate change in all bilateral trade costs t(i, z): t1 (i, z) = µt0 (i, z). Intuitively, bilateral
trade flows should be unchanged because no relative price changes. Checking the system
(10)-(11), {Pe(z), Π(i)} are homogeneous of degree 1/2 in {t(i, z)}, hence buyers and sellers
multilateral resistances change by µ1/2 so indeed bilateral trade flows are constant. As with
long run gravity, system (10)-(11) solves for multilateral resistances up to a normalization.
Over time the allocation of destination specific capital {λ(i, z)} presumably moves toward
the efficient level analyzed below in Section 3.2. The efficient allocation matches the long
run demand pattern, so that the short run gravity equation (12) approaches the long run
gravity equation, intuitively equivalent to ρ → 1.
The preceding derivation of (12) combined with (9) and (10) uses for simplicity the
Armington CES/endowments setup of Anderson and van Wincoop (2003), but the same short
run gravity structure derives from two alternative structures with endogenous production
and heterogeneous productivities. Appendix Section A.1.1 shows that the form of short run
gravity in equations (9)-(12) holds exactly for the alternative interpretation of gravity based
on heterogeneous productivity draws in a Ricardian model due to Eaton and Kortum (2002).

14

It also extends to the heterogeneous firms gravity model of Chaney (2008),14 understanding
that the composite supply elasticity combines intensive margin elasticity η above with an
extensive margin elasticity based on the dispersion parameter θ of the Pareto productivity
distribution. The composite supply elasticity is η̃ = η(1 + θ − η) > η for the intuitive case
θ > η, the necessary and sufficient condition for the extensive margin to be rising in price.
The incidence elasticity becomes ρ̃ = η̃/(η̃ + σ − 1) > ρ for θ > η. In the special case θ = η
the intensive and extensive supply responses are perfect substitutes and ρ̃ = ρ.

Thus, the

short run gravity adjustment developed here applies to the wide class of models that have
been described in Arkolakis et al. (2012).

3.1

Short vs. Long Run Gravity Elasticities

Standard cross-section gravity inference of the effect of bilateral frictions is interpreted as
long run gravity. The short run gravity model (12) nests long run gravity and thus can
simply explain three prominent empirical puzzles. To aid intuition, let the vector of bilateral
trade costs t(i, z) from the short run gravity specification (12) be an exogenous function of
standard gravity variables:
L
Y
(1 + tar(i, z))d(i, z)ψl l ,
t(i, z) =

(13)

l=1

where tar(i, z) denotes ad-valorem tariffs and the vector d(i, z) includes a set of binary
and continuous determinants of bilateral trade. Proposition 2 delivers a straightforward
relationship between the short run (SR) gravity coefficients and the corresponding long run
(LR) counterparts:
Corollary 2.1: Short Run vs. Long Run Gravity Estimates.
βlSR = (1 − σ)ψl ρ = βlLR ρ.
14

(14)

The extension is exact for competitive firms and a close approximation for monopolistically competitive
firms.

15

Equation (14) gives structure to address two elasticity puzzles in the trade literature. First,
the theoretical constraint ρ ∈ (0, 1) applied to the estimates of direct price shifters such as
tariffs at least partially resolves the empirical puzzle posed by estimates of the trade elasticity
in cross-section gravity estimations that are much larger than short run estimates used in
the macro literature. (See Footnote 5.) Using (14) with estimates of ρ, inference of short
run elasticities from the two literatures can be compared, with remaining differences isolated
from that due to the missing incidence elasticity. Some portion of remaining difference may
be due to incomplete passthrough to high frequency price changes. Equation (7) is the short
run gravity model counterpart, as developed further in Appendix A.
Second, equation (1) and its relation to equation (12) helps resolve the time invariance
‘distance puzzle’ and the more broad ‘missing globalization puzzle’. A possible rationale
for the puzzling time invariance of estimated trade cost elasticities starts from the plausible
idea that iceberg trade cost proxies control for the omitted capacity variables in the standard
cross section gravity regression. Then the effect of distance on trade, including its effect on
capacity could be falling in absolute value over time. Specifically, divide both sides of (12)
by Y (i)E(z)/Y at a point in time, take logs and totally differentiate with respect to distance
D(i, z) holding multilateral resistances constant:


d ln[X(i, z)Y /Y (i)E(z)]
d ln D(i, z)

SR


=ρ

∂ ln[X(i, z)Y /Y (i)E(z)]
∂ ln D(i, z)

LR
+ (1 − ρ)

∂ ln λ(i, z)
.
∂ ln D(i, z)

The first term on the right hand side is the special case of (14) for distance. Long run distance
elasticity estimates are nearly constant in long run gravity regressions. The intuition that
distance elasticities should be declining in the era of globalization is interpreted here as a
positive second term. Over time λ(i, z) moves toward its efficient level, which level will be a
loglinear function of distance as shown below in Section 3.2. Our results below are consistent
with a positive second term.15 The missing globalization puzzle is the broader version of the
15

In contrast, intuition that the long run partial distance elasticity in the first term should fall over time
requires that technological change reduces long distance trade cost more than short distance trade cost. In
contrast, uniform technological change reduces trade cost at all distances equiproportionately, an inference

16

distance puzzle, applying to all the long run gravity covariates.
Structural estimation can potentially identify the structural parameter ρ. With ρ estimates in hand, equation (14) offers several opportunities to test the SR gravity theory. (14)
implies that the SR gravity estimates should be smaller than the corresponding LR numbers
by the factor ρ, suggesting the test β SR − ρβ LR = 0, one for each of the gravity regressors
in vector d(i, z).

3.2

Long Run Efficient Allocation

The allocation of capital to destinations z is outside the static model developed above under
the realistic assumption that investment is predetermined and generally inefficient relative to
current realizations of random variables. It is nevertheless useful to construct a benchmark
efficient allocation as an aid to intuition and to learning something about the inefficiency of
allocation. A key, though in some sense obvious result is that the general gravity model under
inefficient investment nests the standard iceberg trade cost model as a special case of efficient
allocation. The difference between actual and hypothetical efficient allocation is presumably
due to un-modeled frictions hampering investment in the face of various risks and imperfect
information about realizations of natural bilateral resistance and other components of the
realized equilibrium. The development of the benchmark allocation provides structure to the
econometric application that generates inferred differences between actual and benchmark
allocations as residuals.
Economic intuition suggests that standard iceberg trade costs should emerge as a reduced
form of all efficient equilibrium production and distribution models because it is consistent
with the envelope theorem in the allocation of all relevant resources in distribution. Effectively, geography dictates the allocation of capital as well as the distribution of goods given
that efficient allocation of capital. Development of the benchmark special case demonstrates
how this works.
that is consistent with the data.

17

Efficient capital allocation achieves equal returns on investment in each destination
served. The average return on investment for the generic sector and economy of Section
2 is given by r̄ = YK = (1 − α)Y /K. The return on capital relative to the average for destination z is given by s(i, z)/λ(i, z) (Anderson, 2011). If investors perfectly foresee bilateral
natural trade costs and the extensive margin, then λ(i, z) = s(i, z) in the capital allocation equilibrium actually realized. Then λ∗ (i, z) = s(i, z) = λ∗ (i, z)[p(i, z)/t(i, z)C(i)]η ⇒
p(i, z) = t(i, z)C(i). Combine this restriction with equation (7) for the market clearing price
to solve for the efficient allocation
E ∗ (z)
λ (i, z) = ∗
Y (i)
∗



β(i)C ∗ (i)t(i, z)
P ∗ (z)

1−σ

E ∗ (z)
=
Y∗



t(i, z)
∗
Π (i)P ∗ (z)

1−σ
.

(15)

Note that (15) is a general equilibrium concept: the multilateral resistances imply that
all origins solve for efficient allocation simultaneously. Efficient allocation share λ∗ (i, z) is
decreasing in the cross section of trade pairs in natural trade friction t(i, z), increasing in
destination market potential E(z)P (z)σ−1 and origin utility weight β(i)1−σ . Each of these
effects is intuitive. It is also increasing in the ‘average economic distance’ of the origin from its
markets, Π∗ (i), implying that for markets actually served, relationship-specific investments
must be larger to overcome the average resistance.
Notice that η = 1/(1 − α) plays no role in the efficient allocation equilibrium. This
arises because no short run reallocation of labor is needed; the trade flows have converged
to the standard gravity model pattern. The ‘long run’ trade cost elasticity is 1 − σ, which
exceeds in absolute value the ‘short run’ elasticity (1 − σ)η/(η + σ − 1) = (1 − σ)ρ, a familiar
implication of the envelope theorem. A convenient approximation of the convergence to
efficient allocation is the parametric result

lim (1 − σ)η/(η + σ − 1) = 1 − σ.

η→∞

Thus the short run gravity model of Section 2 is effectively related to the long run model
18

as if the elasticity of transformation became infinite through the mechanism of efficient
reallocation of specific investment. (Opening the black box of convergence here requires
developing the dynamics of λ(i, z), discussed in Section 4.)

3.3

Efficient Extensive Margin

In efficient equilibrium, the extensive margin is determined by equation (5) with s(i, n) =
λ∗ (i, n). Order the destinations with ordering Z(i) such that the efficient destination investment shares defined by (15) are decreasing in z: Z(i) = P({z}) : dλ∗ (i, z)/dz < 0 where
P({z}) denotes a permutation of the ordering of {z}. Then n(i)∗ is defined by

n∗ (i) = z : L(i) − z −

α
= 0; z ∈ Z(i).
(1 − α)λ∗ (i, z)

Existence and uniqueness of the fixed point n∗ (i) is guaranteed because

L(i) − z −

α
(1 − α)λ∗ (i, z)

is decreasing in z. More intuitively,

s∗ (i, τ ) =

α
[L(i, τ ) − n∗ (i, τ )]−1 .
1−α

(16)

Evidently the efficient equilibrium extensive margin n(i)∗ is increasing in origin size L(i)
and increasing in origin average economic distance Π∗ (i), the latter effect because it reduces
the relative difficulty of entering the marginal market t(i, z)/Π∗ (i). A more steeply rising
profile of bilateral trade costs for an origin country reduces its extensive margin. Destination
size distribution (market potential) E(z)P (z)σ−1 affects all exporters equally; as markets are
more equal, more are served by every origin. The intuitive results on origin and destination
size accord with observed characteristics of the extensive margin of trade. The more subtle
implications of (16) remain to be explored in applications. Notice that this theory of the
19

extensive margin imposes no structure on the distribution of productivity that contributes
implicitly to the variation of t(i, z).

4

Empirical Analysis

Short run gravity theory generates a series of testable predictions. Taking the predictions
to data faces two challenges. First, there is no direct data on bilateral capacity. Proxies
must be found to substitute for missing data. Second, there is no fully developed theory of
the investment trajectory.16 To maintain focus on short run forces, the application abstracts
from details about the progress of formal globalization aside from treatment of FTA implementation and tariff changes. Results here should be viewed as ‘proof of concept’ rather than
an accounting exercise. Knowledge gained will guide further empirical tests and extensions
of SR gravity, discussed in the conclusion and the Appendices.
The application focuses on the intensive margin, for two reasons. First, equation (12) for
positive trade flows is central as a theory nesting long run gravity with forces departing from
long run gravity. Second, the key incidence elasticity parameter ρ is inferred from equation
(12), a parameter that helps resolve well-known elasticity puzzles in the empirical gravity
literature. The empirical investigation of SR gravity on the intensive margin is a natural
first step before taking its implications to the more difficult issue of capturing behavior on
the extensive margin.
A guiding intuition for the empirical analysis is that an evolutionary process is gradually
approaching efficient capacity allocation in the era of globalization. Uncoordinated buyers’
and sellers’ agents grope forward experimentally to form links, expanding high rent links and
16

Full rational expectations development is a chimera. The investments that plausibly form parts of λ(i, z)
are the result of uncoordinated decisions of many actors on N 2 links where N is the number of countries.
See Chaney (2014) for evidence on export dynamics of French firms. Information network theories of links
suggest search and random matching conditioned on anticipated probabilities of a match. Simple structures
are thus applied here to model an investment trajectory.

20

contracting low rent links. Extend short run gravity model (12) to add a time dimension τ :
Y (i, τ )E(z, τ )
X(i, z, τ ) =
Y (τ )



t(i, z, τ )
Π(i, τ )P (z, τ )

1−σ !ρ

λ(i, z, τ )1−ρ .

(17)

Established econometric techniques and standard proxies control for bilateral trade costs
(t(i, z, τ )), the multilateral resistances (Π(i, τ ) and P (z, τ )), and the size effects (Y (i, τ ),
E(z, τ ), and Y (τ )). λ(i, z, τ ) remains.
The challenge posed by estimation of (17) is how to account for evolution of inefficient
capacity investment λ(i, z, τ ). We use two complementary approaches. The reduced-form
approach uses (cross-)border-time fixed effects to pick up the effect of evolving bilateral
capacity. Bergstrand et al. (2015) also use time-varying border dummies, designed to capture
the impact of globalization on bilateral trade. A similar border-time fixed effects strategy
is used by Head et al. (2010) to estimate the decline in ‘marketing capital’ in the trade
of ex-colonies with their former masters relative to continuously non-colonial international
trade. In contrast to the current approach, these earlier reduced-form specifications have no
theoretical foundation pointing to structural interpretation of the estimated fixed effects. The
alternative structural approach is a dynamic extension of theory suggesting an appropriate
proxy variable for λ(i, z, τ ). The merits and disadvantages of each of the two approaches
are discussed with the findings in sections 4.2 and 4.3, respectively. Before that we briefly
describe the data.

4.1

Data: Description and Sources

In order to obtain the main empirical results we use the dataset of Baier et al. (2016), which
covers total manufacturing bilateral trade among 52 countries over the period 1988-2006.17
17

The 52 countries/regions in the sample include: Argentina, Australia, Austria, Bulgaria, BelgiumLuxembourg, Bolivia, Brazil, Canada, Switzerland, Chile, China, Colombia, Costa Rica, Cyprus, Germany,
Denmark, Ecuador, Egypt, Spain, Finland, France, United Kingdom, Greece, Hungary, Indonesia, Ireland,
Iceland, Israel, Italy, Jordan, Japan, South Korea, Kuwait, Morocco, Mexico, Malta, Myanmar, Malaysia,
Netherlands, Norway, Philippines, Poland, Portugal, Qatar, Romania, Singapore, Sweden, Thailand, Tunisia,
Turkey, Uruguay, United States

21

In addition to spanning over a relatively long time period, the dataset of Baier et al. (2016)
has two advantages. First, it includes data on intra-national trade flows.18 As will become
clear shortly, availability of intra-national trade flows data is crucial for the implementation
of the reduced form approach to test SR gravity theory. Second, the dataset includes data
on applied tariffs, which will enable us to identify the estimate of the trade elasticity of
substitution directly from the empirical gravity specification, and to compare it between the
short run vs. long run gravity specifications. The original source of the tariff data is the
United Nation’s TRAINS database. In addition to trade and tariff data and a rich set of
fixed effects, we also employ data on standard gravity variables (bilateral distance, colonial
ties, etc.), which come from the CEPII distances database (see Mayer and Zignago (2011)),
and data on free trade agreements (FTAs), which come from the NSF-Kellogg Database on
Economic Integration Agreements of Jeff Bergstrand. For further description of the main
dataset we refer the reader to Baier et al. (2016).
In the sensitivity analysis we also experiment with an alternative database. Specifically,
we employ the latest edition of the WIOD database, which covers 43 countries over the
period 2000-2014. Similar to the dataset from Baier et al. (2016), the WIOD data includes
consistently constructed international and intra-national trade flows.19 The disadvantages of
WIOD dataset, as compared to the data used to obtain the main results, are that the WIOD
data cover a shorter time period and a smaller number of countries. However, the WIOD
dataset also has two main advantages. First, it offers a complete sectoral coverage for each
of the countries in the sample. Thus, summing across all sectors will enable us to cover total
trade (including international and intra-national trade flows) for each country in the sample.
Second, on a related note, we will use the WIOD data to test our theory at the sectoral
level. We do take advantage of these features of the WIOD data in the sensitivity analysis
18

Intra-national trade flows are constructed as apparent consumption, i.e. as the difference between the
gross value of total production and total exports. The original trade data come from the UN COMTRADE
database, accessed via WITS. The data on total gross production come from the CEPII TradeProd database
and UNIDO IndStat database.
19
The intra-national trade flows in the WIOD database are constructed using input-output linkages. See
Timmer et al. (2015) and Timmer et al. (2016) for further details.

22

that we present in Appendix B, where we demonstrate that our findings are confirmed with
the WIOD dataset.

4.2

A Reduced Form Approach to Short Run Gravity

Start with the intuition that in an era of globalization (1988-2006 or 2000-2014 depending on
the dataset), cross-border trade capacities λ(i, z, τ ) are inefficiently small (network links are
inefficiently sparse) while domestic capacities λ(i, i, τ ) are inefficiently large (trade links are
relatively too dense). Over time capacity investment presumably evolves toward efficiency,
so cross-border investment in trade links rises relative to domestic investment in trade links.
The reduced from approach looks for evidence in cross-border time fixed effects without
imposing any time path of adjustment.
Cross-border-time fixed effects averaged over the cross-destination variation for an origin
are structurally interpreted as:

[λ(i, z, τ )/λ(i, i, τ )]1−ρ = [λ(i, z, 0)/λ(i, i, 0)]1−ρ µ(i, τ ), z 6= i

where µ(i, τ ) > 1 is the growth factor of [λ(i, z, τ )/λ(i, i, τ )]1−ρ . No structure is imposed over
time, so µ(i, τ )/µ(i, τ − 1) is not restricted over τ . Initially we average across all cross-border
pairs at each point in time, µ(i, τ ) = µ(τ ). Subsequently we allow for differential rates of
adjustment for origin countries specialized to a difference between developed and developing
countries. Other uniformity restrictions are plausible as well in order to supply degrees of
freedom to identify the average time variation of primary concern. Idiosyncratic variation of
growth of λ(i, z, τ )/λ(i, i, τ ) that deviates from the uniform growth assumption is associated
with effects that go into the error term of the gravity equation. Averaging the µ(τ )s to a
smooth exponential increase in efficiency as we do for some purposes below, µ̃(τ ) = ebτ τ
where bτ equals 1 − ρ times the growth rate of λ(i, z)/λ(i, i).
A useful benchmark is a long run estimated panel gravity model that does not control

23

for the efficiency improvements to be looked for based on the short run gravity theory. Thus
ρ = 1 and the econometric model run in logs with OLS is:20

LN Xij,τ

= β1 LN DISTij + β2 CN T Gij + β3 CLN Yij + β4 LAN Gij + β5 F T Aij,τ +
β6 LN T ARIF Fij,τ + β7 IN T L BRDRij + πi,τ + χj,τ + ij,τ ,

(18)

The dependent variable in (18) is the logarithm of nominal bilateral trade flows. The regressors are the standard gravity variables including the logarithm of bilateral distance between
countries i and j (LN DISTij ), and indicator variables for contiguous borders (CN T Gij ),
common language (LAN Gij ), colonial ties (CLN Yij ), and free trade agreements (F T Aij,τ ).
In addition, we include the log of applied tariffs (LN T ARIF Fij,τ ).21 IN T L BRDRij is an
indicator variable that takes a value of one for international trade and it is equal to zero
for internal trade. Specification (18) includes exporter-time and importer-time fixed effects
to control for the multilateral resistances of Anderson and van Wincoop (2003) and will absorb any other observable and unobservable country-specific characteristics on the exporter
and on the importer side, respectively. Finally, following the recommendation of Cheng and
Wall (2005), we use 3-year intervals instead of consecutive years in order to obtain our main
estimates.22
Estimates obtained from specification (18) are reported in column (1) of Table 1. With
an R2 = 0.88, gravity delivers its usual strong fit. In addition and as expected, distance
and tariffs23 are strong impediments to trade, while the presence of colonial ties, sharing
a common official language, and having FTAs in force all promote bilateral trade. The
20

Specification (18) is consistent with the traditional empirical approach to estimate gravity with the OLS
estimator. We show in the sensitivity experiments that our results are robust to using the PPML estimator
instead, which, as demonstrated by Santos Silva and Tenreyro (2006, 2011), simultaneously accounts for
heteroskedasticity and takes into account the information contained in zero bilateral trade flows.
21
Since tariffs are a direct price shifter, the estimate of the tariff elasticity equals the trade elasticity σ.
22
We demonstrate in the sensitivity experiments below that our main results and conclusions are robust
to using all years in the sample. We refer the reader to Head and Mayer (2014) and Yotov et al. (2016) for
further discussion of the challenges with the estimation of empirical gravity models and their solutions.
23
The estimated tariff elasticity suggests a value of σ that is low relative to previous estimates. We suspect
this is due to aggregation bias for such a heterogeneous sector as manufacturing.

24

negative, large, and significant estimate on IN T L BRDR is also expected, and it confirms
the strong presence of international borders, even after controlling for the impact of distance
and tariffs. Apart from the insignificant estimate on CN T G, all other estimates from column
(1) of Table 1 are readily comparable to corresponding estimates in the literature (see the
meta analysis estimates from Head and Mayer (2014)). In sum, the results from column (1)
of Table 1 are long run benchmarks that confirm the representativeness of our sample and
provide long run responses to compare to the short run responses that follow.
The estimates from column (2) of Table 1 are obtained with time-varying cross-border
trade fixed effects, motivated by our theory. A series of year-specific dummies for internaP
tional borders 2006
τ =1991 βτ IN T L BRDR τij are introduced to (18):
LN Xij,τ = β1 LN DISTij + β2 CN T Gij + β3 CLN Yij + β4 LAN Gij + β5 F T Aij,τ + β6 LN T ARIF Fij,τ +
β7 IN T L BRDRij +

2006
X

βτ IN T L BRDR τij + πi,τ + χj,τ + ij,τ ,

(19)

τ =1991

The theoretical interpretation of each of the time-varying border estimates is βτ = (1 −
ρ)∆ ln[λ(i, z, τ )/λ(i, i, τ )] = (1 − ρ)∆ ln µ(τ ) and, by construction, these estimates should be
interpreted as deviations from the estimate of β7 . Due to perfect collinearity, we omit the
border for the first year of the sample, 1988.
Two findings stand out from the estimates in column (2) of Table 1. First, we see that
the estimates of the standard gravity variables are statistically unchanged from column (1),
implying that the uniform growth assumption imposed in (19) is approximately valid (nonuniform growth would likely be correlated with cross-section variation in bilateral distance,
etc.). Second, the estimates on IN T L BRDRij are all positive, statistically significant, and
gradually increasing over time. SR gravity theory in an era of globalization is consistent
with this finding, hence interpretation with the model provides a structural explanation of
the “missing globalization puzzle”.
The estimates from column (3) of Table 1 are obtained after allowing for the effects
of distance to vary over time. Specifically, we interact the distance variable with dummy

25

variables for each year on our sample.24 In order to ease the interpretation of our results,
we keep the original distance variable and do not include the distance variable for 1988.
Thus, the estimate on LN DIST should be interpreted as the effect of distance in 1988,
and all other time-varying distance estimates should be interpreted as deviations from the
estimate on LN DIST . Column (3) implies that distance elasticities are stable over time.
The “distance puzzle” of non-declining distance elasticities in international trade (Disdier
and Head (2008)) remains.
As demonstrated in Section 3.1, short run gravity theory suggests that an intuitive interpretation of the effects of distance on trade over time is to combine the direct impact that
is captured by the distance estimates in column (1) with the indirect effect of distance on
efficiency improvements associated with movement toward efficient capacity λ∗ (i, z). Thus
the estimates of the (insignificant) time-varying distance effects for each year should be multiplied by the corresponding portion of efficiency improvement change for that year that is
attributable to distance. The implication is that the “distance puzzle” is resolved; while the
distance effects will remain strong and negative in 2006, they have steadily decreased over
time. (The structural approach to the dynamics of capacity investment that follows provides
more evidence buttressing this intuitive implication.)
The estimates from columns (4) and (5) of Table 1 employ pair fixed effects. The motivation for the use of the time-invariant bilateral dummies is twofold. First, these variables
will completely account for the impact of all observable and unobservable determinants of
bilateral trade, cf. Agnosteva et al. (2014) and Egger and Nigai (2015). Second, on a related
note and as demonstrated by Baier and Bergstrand (2007), the use of the pair fixed effects
will help mitigate endogeneity concerns related to the trade policy variables in our specification. The main findings from columns (4) and (5) are that (i) the estimates of the trade
policy variables are unchanged across the two specifications; and (ii) we observe the gradual
24
In principle, we could allow for the effects of all gravity variables to vary over time. We chose to focus on
distance only for expositional simplicity and because the distance variable has been used most prominently
to capture trade costs and their changes.

26

and economically and statistically significant increase in the estimates on the international
border dummies. Exponentiating the border-time cumulative efficiency change estimate in
column (5) of Table 1 (0.965) yields an overall efficiency of trade gain from 1988-2006 of
162%: world cross-border trade is 162% larger in 2006 than it would have been with the
more inefficient bilateral capacities of 1988.
Column (6) relaxes the uniform efficiency growth restriction to allow for efficiency growth
to vary across ‘rich’ vs. ‘poor’ exporters, as classified by the World Bank.25 The estimates
from column (6) of Table 1 reveal significant efficiency improvements for each group of countries captured by the positive, significant, and gradually increasing over time estimates on
IN T L BRDR HIGH and IN T L BRDR LOW . More importantly, low income countries
have converged faster toward more efficient trade during the period of investigation. (The
result may not be robust to further country level disaggregation, plausibly being driven by
few outliers such as China. The difference between high income and developing countries
may also an artifact of composition effects, as the sectoral composition of manufacturing
changes differently across countries. Sectoral disaggregation is indicated as part of investigating country differences.)
A series of sensitivity experiments demonstrate the robustness of our main results, summarized here with a full report in Appendix B. Motivated by the work of Santos Silva and
Tenreyro (2006, 2011) advocating the PPML estimator as an alternative to OLS with the
log of gravity, Table 2 replaces the main estimates from Table 1 with those based on the
PPML estimator. PPML estimates confirm the OLS results: all border-time estimates are
positive, significant and increasing over time. Another experiment uses size-adjusted trade
as the dependent variable. The size-adjusted dependent variable specification is consistent
25

Note that non-uniform efficiency growth does not violate the structural assumptions used to specify
short run gravity. In principle origin-specific estimates of the efficiency-improvement effects βτ (i)’s can be
identified from variation across destinations z under a uniformity condition imposed on the external (foreign)
destinations vs. internal trade. The original World Bank classification includes five income categories:
‘High Income OECD’, ‘High Income Non-OECD’, ‘Upper Middle Income’, ‘Lower Middle Income’, and ‘Low
Income’ countries. We used the top three categories to form our sample of ‘rich’ countries, and the bottom
two categories to form the group of ‘poor’ countries.

27

with theory and tends to reduce the problem of heteroskedasticity associated with the level
of trade specification (19). The OLS and PPML estimates using size-adjusted trade as dependent variable confirm the robustness of our main findings. A third experiment uses data
for all years rather than 3 year intervals. The OLS and PPML results are very similar to
the main estimates from Table 1. The next experiment employs the newly available 2016
WIOD data.26 Again, the main results from Tables 1 and 2 are closely matched with OLS
and PPML estimators respectively. Finally, exploiting the sectoral dimension of the WIOD
data we reproduce our main results for Crop and Animal Production, Forestry and Logging,
Fishing and Aquaculture, Mining and Quarrying, Manufacturing, and Services. The results
naturally vary by sector, but the main finding for the presence of efficiency improvement is
present in each sector.

4.3

A Structural Approach to Short Run Gravity

The complementary structural approach to estimating short run gravity adds a theory of
investment in bilateral capacity. The investment structure enables (i) direct inference about
the buyers’ incidence parameter ρ, (ii) additional tests of the short run model, and (iii)
consistency checks between the two complementary approaches.27
Suppose that intensive margin investment in pair-specific capital moves the current level
from its past level toward the efficient level at some rate of log-linear adjustment that is
implied by a Cobb-Douglas function of efficient and past levels.28 The adjustment process
26

See Data section for a description and details on the WIOD data.
There are advantages and disadvantages to the treatment of efficiency improvements with border-time
dummies. As to advantages, dummy variables are exogenous by construction, hence avoid the endogeneity
issues raised by our complementary structural approach to dynamic adjustment. Another advantage of the
dummy variable approach relative to the structural approach is a comprehensive accounting for all forces
that could have contributed to improved efficiency over time, including those omitted from the structural
approach. Thus while (19) imposes a uniform efficiency improvement across destinations z 6= i at each time
τ , the specification does not impose any pattern whatever on efficiency variation over time. The disadvantage
of the efficiency treatment with border-time dummies is that it does not permit identification of ρ, but only
the effect of adjustment of cross-border capacity toward the long run over time.
28
The approach developed here is a first cut at a difficult problem. It leaves out plausibly important effects.
Investment in bilateral trade may be systematically affected in a differential fashion by a number of variables
reflecting allocations subject to credit constraints. Exchange rate risk’s effects on trade flows can be hedged
27

28

specification is inspired by inter alia Lucas and Prescott (1971), Hercowitz and Sampson
(1991), and Anderson et al. (2015) and Eaton et al. (2016) in the gravity context:

λ(i, z; τ ) = λ∗ (i, z)δ λ(i, z; τ − 1)1−δ ; δ ∈ (0, 1).

(20)

The parameter δ reflects both costs of adjustment and depreciation, the higher is δ the faster
the movement to the efficient level. In the steady state, λ = λ∗ .
Operationalization of the adjustment process requires finding observables to replace the
unobservable λs. The agents know that efficient allocation implies that λ∗ (i, z) = s∗ (i, z).
This suggests that λ(i.z, τ ) → s(i, z, τ ). Groping ahead toward the eventual efficient allocation suggests a specification of the dynamic process replacing s∗ (i, z) with s(i, z, τ ). Moving
toward operationality, replace the unobservable λ∗ (i, z) = s∗ (i, z) in (20) with s(i, z, τ ). Similarly, replace the unobservable λ(i, z, τ − 1) with s(i, z, τ − 1). (Note that λ(i, z) is likely
unobservable by individual competitive firms in i exporting to multiple zs, as well as by
the econometrician.) Then the costly adjustment specification in the spirit of Lucas and
Prescott is:29
λ(i, z, τ ) = s(i, z, τ )δ s(i, z, τ − 1)1−δ .
The steady state of this process reaches the efficient allocation of long run gravity, is plausible as an approximation to more sophisticated expectations mechanisms, and its simplicity
preserves the simple loglinear features of structural gravity.
Substitute the right hand side of the preceding equation for the (implicit) contemporafor many sectors with minimal cost, but hedging over longer intervals appropriate for fixed commitments is
expensive. This suggests that bilateral exchange rate volatility may significantly affect investment in bilateral
trade but not variable trade cost. Similarly, bilateral covariance of business cycles may affect investment but
not variable trade cost. Such refinements are beyond the scope of this project.
29
The specification here is in part an expedient to deal with the problem of unobservable capacity allocations, but on a conceptual level it violates rational expectations. The alternative of super-humanly rational
expectations is implausible considering the extremely high dimensionality where each bilateral link has potentially many uncoordinated agents and there are very many links with simultaneous interaction. In a
simpler environment of perfect information, Anderson et al. (2015) combine the Lucas-Prescott adjustment
mechanism with the consumer’s inter-temporal maximization problem to derive the optimal accumulation
of country-specific physical capital. In contrast, the present case involves a bilateral capacity adjustment on
each link, N 2 adjustment paths compared to N in the simpler case.

29

neous value of λ(i, z, τ ) in gravity equation (12). The result is
#(1−σ)ρ
"
h
i1−ρ
Y (i, τ )E(z, τ )
t(i, z, τ )
.
X(i, z, τ ) =
s(i, z, τ )δ s(i, z, τ − 1)1−δ
Y (τ )
Π(i, τ )Pe(z, τ )

The presence of contemporaneous trade share s(i, z, τ ) on the right hand side of the preceding
equation requires solution for contemporaneous bilateral trade flows to yield:


X(i, z, τ ) = Y (i, τ )

E(z, τ )
Y (τ )



1
1−δ(1−ρ)

"

t(i, z, τ )
Π(i, t)Pe(z, τ )

#

(1−σ)ρ
1−δ(1−ρ)



X(i, z, τ − 1)
Y (i, τ − 1)

 (1−δ)(1−ρ)
1−δ(1−ρ)

. (21)

Use the standard gravity proxies for bilateral trade costs introduced in the previous section, log-linearize specification (21), and add an error term in order to obtain the econometric
model:30
LN Xij,τ = β̃1 LN DISTij + β̃2 CN T Gij + β̃3 CLN Yij + β̃4 LAN Gij + β̃5 F T Aij,τ + β̃6 LN T ARIF Fij,τ +
β̃7 IN T L BRDRij + β̃8 LN Xij,τ −1 + π̃i,τ + χ̃j,τ + ˜ij,τ .

(22)

Note that the exporter-time fixed effects in the preceding expression will absorb and control
for all contemporaneous as well as lagged exporter-specific characteristics, including the
structural contemporaneous and lagged size terms, that may affect bilateral trade.31
The structural interpretation of the estimated coefficient on LN Xij,τ −1 is:

β̃8 =

(1 − δ)(1 − ρ)
.
1 − δ(1 − ρ)

(23)

(23) is used below to recover the structural efficiency parameter ρ in combination with
information on δ.
30

Similar to the analysis in the previous section, in the sensitivity analysis we also experiment by estimating
the model with the PPML estimator.
31
In contrast, exporter specific δi must be treated with exporter-specific β1 − β8 . An exporter-type
δi consistent with the evidence that border-time fixed effects differ between high income and developing
economies. We impose a common δ here since our use of aggregate manufacturing trade confounds dynamic
adjustment cost effects with changing composition effects that vary across exporters. A proper investigation
of origin variation in δ should be done with disaggregated data.

30

Specification (22) for short run gravity estimation differs in two important ways from long
run gravity specification (18).32 The first difference between the two estimating equations is
the appearance of the lagged dependent variable as a regressor in the SR gravity specification
(22). From an econometric perspective short run gravity implies that the standard estimation
of gravity without lagged variables may suffer from omitted variable bias. Hypothesizing
that the standard gravity estimator controls also control for the omitted capacity variables,
the standard estimator may be an unbiased estimator of long run gravity. The no-bias
hypothesis can be tested jointly with the structural implications of short run gravity, the
second difference between specifications (18) and (22).
The theoretical relationship between long run and short run gravity coefficients in Corollary 2.1, extended to accommodate the theory of investment developed here is:

β̃SR = βLR

ρ
,
1 − δ(1 − ρ)

(24)

where, the subscripts SR and LR denote estimates from the short run (SR) and from the
long run (LR) empirical gravity specifications, respectively. For any given gravity variable
coefficient, the combination of equations (23) and (24) enable a joint test of SR gravity
structure and the no-bias hypothesis for estimates of long run gravity by checking whether:
β̃SR
= 1 − β̃8 .
βLR

(25)

Because the gravity specifications include six gravity covariates, test (25) is performed six
times, and reported below.
The natural starting point for estimation is a standard/long run gravity model:
LN Xij,τ = β1 LN DISTij + β2 CN T Gij + β3 CLN Yij + β4 LAN Gij + β5 F T Aij,τ + β6 LN T ARIF Fij,τ +
β7 IN T L BRDRij + πi,τ + χj,τ + ij,τ ,
32

(26)

In addition to the two estimation-related differences, the structural interpretation of the fixed effects
will also be different in the SR gravity specification since the size variables no longer appear with unitary
elasticities in the theoretical SR gravity model. However, this has no consequences for gravity estimations.

31

The only difference between specifications (22) and (26) is the absence of lagged trade in the
latter specification. The standard gravity estimates from column (1) of Table 3 are readily
comparable to their counterparts from the previous section. The estimates from column (2)
of Table 3 are obtained from specification (22) with a lagged dependent variable.
An important potential issue is the dynamic panel bias from the use of a lagged dependent
variable, i.e. the Nickell (1981) bias. As explained in Roodman (2009a), the use of sufficiently
long time spans may mitigate and even eliminate the Nickell bias by construction. The
analysis in this section employs every year in the dataset33 motivated by this observation.
Importantly, even if the time coverage is not long enough to eliminate the dynamic panel
bias completely, the ‘naive’ OLS results from column (2) are useful for our purposes because
they establish an upper bound for the key estimate of the coefficient β̃8 on the structural
efficiency term LN Xij,τ −1 .34 This, in combination with expression (23), will enable us to
draw inference about the bounds for the structural efficiency parameter ρ. In particular, we
will use the estimates from column (2) to establish a lower bound for ρ. Finally, note that the
OLS results from column (2) will be supported by the findings from the more sophisticated
econometric specifications that we employ below.
The estimates in column (2) of Table 3 reveal a positive and significant estimate of
β̃8 = 0.788 (std.err. 0.009). While the estimate of β̃8 seems fairly large in magnitude, it is
quite low to be explained solely by the capital adjustment cost δ from our theory. Capitalize
on the structural restriction (23) in combination with an external estimate δ = 0.06135
in order to recover the incidence elasticity parameter ρ = 0.202 (std.err. 0.008). Three
33

In the sensitivity experiments we also employ the 3-year interval data from the previous section and we
demonstrate that our main results are robust to employing this alternative sample.
34
Specification (26) will deliver an upward bound for the estimate on β̃8 due to positive correlation between
the lagged dependent variable and the pair fixed effects in the error term, which will inflate the estimate on
LN Xij,τ −1 by attributing additional predictive power to it. See Roodman (2009a) for further details and a
very informative discussion.
35
This value for δ is the average adjustment cost parameter estimate from the structural gravity setting
of Anderson et al. (2015), obtained under the same assumptions for investment. Specifically, Anderson et
al. (2015) recover δ from a second stage regression that links trade openness to capital accumulation. These
authors also obtain a distribution of country-specific capital adjustment cost parameters that vary between
1.6 and 13.6.

32

implications follow.
First, column (2) of Table 3 implies that gravity estimates that do not control for efficiency
improvements and adjustment may suffer significant biases. The estimates from column (1)
are very significantly larger than the estimates from column (2). This result reinforces the
findings of Olivero and Yotov (2012) and Eichengreen and Irwin (1996) who conclude that
they “will never run another gravity equation that excludes lagged trade flows” (p.38). But
the possible bias may be one of interpretation under a valid ‘no-bias’ hypothesis that standard
gravity covariates also control for variation of the omitted variable.
Second, SR gravity theory as captured by equation (24) implies at least partial solution
to the trade elasticity puzzle – the gap between estimates of the trade elasticity σ from the
trade and the macro literatures, cf. Ruhl (2008), Arkolakis et al. (2011) and Crucini and
Davis (2016).
Third, column (2) of Table 3 implies support for the quantitative structural predictions
of SR gravity theory and the ‘no-bias’ hypothesis. Expression (25) implies the hypothesis
test:
1 − β̃8 − β̃SR /βLR = 0

(27)

The test statistic in column (3) of Table 3 uses the estimated coefficients of columns (1)-(2)
of Table 3 in (27) for each of the gravity variables. The null hypothesis cannot be rejected
at high levels of significance for all six tests.36
The results from the lagged dependent variable empirical model are complements to the
border-time dummy variable model under the strong assumption that the Lucas-Prescott
adjustment model (20) applies to both. In that case, the border-time dummy variable
coefficient β7 +βτ should in theory be declining at rate bτ = (1−ρ)δ.37 The lagged dependent
36

The largest estimate that we obtain in column (3) is for CLN Y . However, as can be seen from columns
(1) and (3) of Table 3, the estimate of the effect of sharing a common border is insignificant to start with.
Thus, even though the corresponding estimate in column (3) is insignificant and supports our theory, we
discount this finding.
37
Divide both sides of (20) by λ(i, z, τ − 1) to yield λ(i, z, τ )/λ(i, z, τ − 1) = [λ∗ (i, z)/λ(i, z, τ − 1)]δ with
growth rate δ.

33

variable model implies β8 = (1 − ρ)(1 − δ)/[1 − δ(1 − ρ)]. This structure can be used in two
ways. First, for a given δ, compare the implied value of ρ from the lagged dependent variable
model to the implied value of ρ from the border-time dummy variable model. Second, solve
the two equations simultaneously for the unique values of ρ and δ that satisfy the equations:
ρ̂ = (1 − β̂8 )(1 − b̂τ ) and δ̂ = b̂τ /[β̂8 + b̂τ (1 − β̂8 )].
We first recover b̂τ = (1 − ρ)δ as the slope of the fitted line of the estimates of the changes
in the effects of international borders, from our preferred specification with paired fixed effects
from column column (5) of Table 1. The best-fit line in the βτ –τ coordinate space is plotted
in Figure 1. The regression implies that the slope is b̂τ = 0.046. In combination with the
adopted value of δ = 0.061, the estimate of b̂τ = 0.046 enables us to recover ρ̂ = 1 − b̂τ /δ =
0.246. This value is somewhat larger but comparable in magnitude to the preceding estimate
of ρ = 0.202 from the structural approach above. Finally, use the estimates of β̂8 and b̂τ in
the simultaneous equations ρ̂ = (1 − β̂8 )(1 − b̂τ ) and δ̂ = b̂τ /[β̂8 + b̂τ (1 − β̂8 )] in order to
simultaneously recover unique values of ρ̂ = 0.202 (std.err. 0.008) and δ̂ = 0.058 (std.err.
0.001). ρ is statistically and quantitatively indistinguishable from the estimate of using the
external value of δ = 0.061 while the internally generated estimate of δ differs statistically
significantly but quantitatively insignificantly from the external value. The close magnitudes
of the various inferences of the value of ρ are compelling. Pushing inference to the limit, we
note that the lower value of δ̂ = 0.058 obtained from the simultaneous solution corresponds
more closely to the interest rate values that are used for calibrations in the macroeconomic
literature.
Estimates of ρ̂ imply restrictions on the deep structural parameters of supply η and
demand σ because
1/ρ − 1 = (σ − 1)/η.
Using the estimate ρ̂ = 0.20 ⇒ η̂ = (σ − 1)/4. Estimate of σ in the literature38 range from 4
to 10, implying η̂ ∈ [0.75, 2.25]. The finite short run supply elasticities implied pass a smell
38

The estimate of 1 − σ inferred in our regressions is lower but we assume it is biased downward.

34

test (with heterogeneous firms, η̃ < 1 is readily possible) and provide an intuitive foundation
for thinking about short run gravity.
Columns (4)-(8) of Table 3 report results from alternative estimators. Columns (4)
and (5) use pair fixed effects for two reasons. First, the pair fixed effects will absorb and
control for any omitted time-invariant determinants of bilateral trade. Second, the use
of pair fixed effects has proven to be a useful method to address possible endogeneity of
FTAs and trade policy in general. In the context of dynamic panel bias caused by the
lagged dependent variable (Roodman (2009a)), an additional advantage of pair fixed effects is
mitigation of the dynamic panel bias. The so-called Least Square Dummy Variable (LSDV)
treatment of the Nickell bias is especially effective for samples with long time coverage.
Finally, as demonstrated in Roodman (2009a), in case the LSDV estimator does not eliminate
completely the bias in the estimate of the lagged dependent variable, then the remaining bias
would be a downward bias owing to a negative correlation between the lagged dependent
variable and the remaining error. This, in combination with expression (23), enables us to
establish an upper bound for ρ. Using external value δ = 0.061, the result in column (5)
give an upper bound ρ̄ = 0.371 (std.err. 0.011) to pair with the lower bound from column
(2) ρ = 0.202.
Two further results stand out from columns (4)-(6). First, the SR gravity theory test (27)
reported in column (6) offer strong support for the theory. Second, in combination with the
estimates from the border-time dummy variable model, the results from column (5) imply
ρ̂ = 0.368 (std.err. 0.011) and δ̂ = 0.072 (std.err. 0.001). The incidence elasticity estimate
of ρ is almost unchanged by the switch from externally to structurally generated δ.
The relatively long time coverage of our sample attenuates endogeneity bias in the LSDV
estimator of SR gravity of column (5), but may not eliminate it. Column (7) of Table 3 thus
implements an IV estimation along the lines of Frankel and Romer (1999). We construct an
instrument for lagged trade by using a reduced-form gravity specification that only includes
the standard gravity variables, which are exogenous by definition, and also exporter and

35

importer population, which also are arguably exogenous. We use the second to fifth lags
of the newly constructed trade variable as instruments for the lagged dependent variable in
specification (22). The estimation results from column (7) support our theory. First, the
instruments are good since, based on the specification tests that we perform in the bottom
of Table 3, they pass all IV tests. Second, once again, we obtain a positive and significant
estimate on the lagged trade term. In combination with (23) and the external value of
δ = 0.061, ρ = 0.242 (std.err. 0.120). We calculate ρ̂ = 0.242 (std.err. 0.118) and δ̂ = 0.061
(std.err. 0.009) when we combine the estimates from column (7) with those from the main
results from the border-time dummy variable model. The close approximation of the two
estimated parameter vectors is remarkable. Pushing the results of the various specifications
hard, our preferred range for the key incidence elasticity is ρ ∈ (0.20, 0.24) and our preferred
value is 0.24, while we report a conservative range ρ ∈ (0.20, 0.37).
Note finally that the SR test for the LSDV IV estimation reported in column (8) weakly
supports the theory. We cannot reject the null hypothesis for the FTA variable. In contrast,
the test statistic on LN T ARIF F rejects the null. We are suspicious of all estimates of the
tariff parameter due to aggregation bias and low variation.
We conclude with a brief description of robustness checks. Detailed results and descriptions for each experiment can be found in Appendix B. The first experiment uses interval
data instead of yearly data. The second experiment uses size-adjusted trade as the dependent variable. Use of the trade share instead of the level of trade tends to reduce the problem
of heteroskedasticity. The third sensitivity experiment uses international trade data only.
All three experiments confirm robustness of the main findings. We also experiment with the
PPML estimator, yielding estimates that correspond to the upper and lower bound results
from Table 3. The next experiment employs the system-GMM estimator of Arellano and
Bond (1991) and Arellano and Bover (1995)/Blundell and Bond (1998). Here the results for
ρ are higher, though remaining well inside the unit interval. (We suspect the poorer small
sample properties of the system-GMM estimator are to blame.) Finally, the main results

36

are reproduced with the aggregate WIOD data as well as for each of the main sectors that
are covered in the WIOD dataset. In each case, the new estimates are consistent with and
comparable to the main results from Table 3.

5

Conclusion and Extensions

Short run gravity features (i) joint trade costs endogenous to bilateral volumes, (ii) long run
gravity as a limiting case of efficient investment in bilateral capacities, (iii) tractable short
and long run models of the extensive margin, and (iv) a structural ratio of short run to long
run trade elasticities. Despite the complexity, bilateral trade is a geometric weighted average
of long run gravity and a bilateral capacity variable, where the weight on long run gravity
is the short run buyers’ incidence elasticity. The incidence elasticity is itself micro-founded.
The theoretical short run gravity model finds strong support in the data and the empirical
analysis resolves several empirical puzzles.
The short run gravity model here suggests several extensions. (i) The model can be applied at the firm level, where indeed its assumption of a common Cobb-Douglas distribution
‘production’ function is most natural. (ii) Another potential extension is to the explanation
of income inequality. The rents to destination-specific managerial labor may be linked to
inefficient investment and costs of adjustment, inducing income inequality within firms and
across firms in a sector. (iii) The model also extends upward to embedding in a multi-sector
general equilibrium setting. The stock of labor and human capital is simply the sectoral
allocation, possibly with differentials due to search costs. (iv) Empirical implementation
and tests of the short run and long run extensive margin implications of SR gravity is an
important challenge.
More challenging, perhaps leading outside the scope of the present model, is opening
the black box of bilateral capacity. This paper treats capacity investment as effectively on
the exporter side only. Since some investment is on the importer side, this may affect the

37

dynamics and even the short run statics of the model. Firm level data and modeling suggests
more carefully modeling the ‘manager’ input, sources of heterogeneity across markets and
also across modes of organization: arms length contracting, joint ventures or horizontal
integration in a multinational structure. The Arkolakis (2010) model extended to a dynamic
setting may be a useful starting point.

38

References
Agnosteva, Delina E., James E. Anderson, and Yoto V. Yotov, “Intra-national Trade
Costs: Measurement and Aggregation,” NBER Working Paper No. 19872, 2014.
Anderson, James E., “A Theoretical Foundation for the Gravity Equation,” American Economic
Review, 1979, 69 (1), 106–116.
and Eric van Wincoop, “Gravity with Gravitas: A Solution to the Border Puzzle,” American
Economic Review, 2003, 93 (1), 170–192.
Anderson, J.E., “The Gravity Model,” Annual Review of Economics, 2011, 3, 133–160.
, Mario Larch, and Yoto V. Yotov, “Growth and Trade with Frictions: A Structural Estimation Framework,” NBER Working Paper No. 21377, 2015.
Anderson, T. W. and C. Hsiao, “Formulation and Estimation of Dynamic Models Using Panel
Data,” Journal of Econometrics, 1982, 82 (1), 47–82.
Arellano, Manuel and Olympia Bover, “Another look at the instrumental variable estimation
of error-components models,” Journal of Econometrics, 1995, 68 (1), 29–51.
and Stephen Bond, “Some tests of specification for panel data: Monte Carlo evidence and
an application to employment equations,” Review of Economic Studies, 1991, 58 (2), 277–297.
Arkolakis, Costas, “Market Penetration Costs and the New Consumers Margin in International
Trade,” Journal of Political Economy, 2010, 118 (6), 1151–1199.
, Arnaud Costinot, and Andrs Rodrguez-Clare, “New Trade Models, Same Old Gains?,”
American Economic Review, 2012, 102 (1), 94–130.
, Jonathan Eaton, and Samuel S. Kortum, “Staggered Adjustment and Trade Dynamics,”
2011 Meeting Papers 1322, Society for Economic Dynamics 2011.
Backus, David K., Patrick J. Kehoe, and Finn E. Kydland, “Dynamics of the Trade Balance
and the Terms of Trade: the J-curve,” American Economic Review, 1994, 84 (1), 84–103.
Baier, Scott L. and Jeffrey H. Bergstrand, “Do Free Trade Agreements Actually Increase
Members’ International Trade?,” Journal of International Economics, 2007, 71 (1), 72–95.
, Yoto V. Yotov, and Thomas Zylkin, “On the widely differing effects of free trade agreements: Lessons from twenty years of trade integration,” School of Economics Working Paper
Series, 2016-15, 2016.
Bergstrand, Jeffrey H., Mario Larch, and Yoto V. Yotov, “Economic Integration Agreements, Border Effects, and Distance Elasticities in the Gravity Equation,” European Economic
Review, 2015, 78, 307–327.
Bergstrand, J.H., “The Gravity Equation in International Trade: Some Microeconomic Foundations and Empirical Evidence,” Review of Economics and Statistics, 1985, 67 (3), 474–481.
Besedes, Tibor and Thomas J. Prusa, “Product differentiation and duration of US import
trade,” Journal of International Economics, December 2006, 70 (2), 339–358.

39

Blundell, Richard and Stephen Bond, “Initial conditions and moment restrictions in dynamic
panel data models,” Journal of Econometrics, 1998, 87 (1), 115–143.
Boulhol, Herv and Alain de Serres, “Have Developed Countries Escaped the Curse of Distance?,” Journal of Economic Geography, January 2010, 10 (1), 113–139.
Broda, C., J. Greenfield, and D. Weinstein, “From Groundnuts to Globalization: A Structural Estimate of Trade and Growth,” NBER Working Paper No. 12512, 2006.
Brun, Jean-Franois, Cline Carrre, Patrick Guillaumont, and Jaime de Melo, “Has
Distance Died? Evidence from a Panel Gravity Model,” World Bank Economic Review, 2005,
19 (1), 99–120.
Buch, Claudia M., Jorn Kleinert, and Farid Toubal, “The Distance Puzzle: On the Interpretation of the Distance Coefficient in Gravity Equations,” Economics Letters, June 2004, 83
(3), 293–298.
Carrre, Cline and Maurice Schiff, “On the Geography of Trade. Distance is Alive and Well,”
Revue conomique, 2005, 56 (6), 1249–1274.
, Jaime de Melo, and John Wilson, “The Distance Puzzle and Low-Income Countries: An
Update,” Journal of Economic Surveys, 2013, 27 (4), 717–742.
Chaney, Thomas, “Distorted Gravity: The Intensive and Extensive Margins of International
Trade,” American Economic Review, 2008, 98 (4), 1707–1721.
, “The Network Structure of International Trade,” American Economic Review, 2014, 104 (11),
3600–34.
Cheng, I-Hui and Howard J. Wall, “Controlling for Heterogeneity in Gravity Models of Trade
and Integration,” Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis Review, 2005, 87 (1), 49–63.
Coe, D., A. Subramanian, N. Tamirisa, and R. Bhavnani, “The Missing Globalization
Puzzle,” IMF Working Paper No. 171, 2002.
Costinot, Arnaud and Andrs Rodrguez-Clare, “Trade Theory with Numbers: Quantifying
the Consequences of Globalization,” Chapter 4 in the Handbook of International Economics Vol.
4, eds. Gita Gopinath, Elhanan Helpman, and Kenneth S. Rogoff, Elsevier Ltd., Oxford, 2014.
Crucini, Mario J. and J. Scott Davis, “Distribution capital and the short- and long-run import
demand elasticity,” Journal of International Economics, 2016, 100 (C), 203–219.
Disdier, A.-C. and K. Head, “The Puzzling Persistence of the Distance Effect on Bilateral
Trade,” Review of Economics and Statistics, 2008, 90 (1), 37–48.
Eaton, Jonathan and Samuel Kortum, “Technology, Geography and Trade,” Econometrica,
2002, 70 (5), 1741–1779.
,
, B. Neiman, and J. Romalis, “Trade and the Global Recession,” American Economic
Review, 2016, 106 (11), 3401–38.

40

Egger, Peter H. and Sergey Nigai, “Structural gravity with dummies only: Constrained
ANOVA-type estimation of gravity models,” Journal of International Economics, 2015, 97 (1),
86–99.
Eichengreen, Barry and Douglas A. Irwin, “The Role of History in Bilateral Trade Flows,”
NBER Working Papers 5565, National Bureau of Economic Research, Inc May 1996.
Feenstra, R.C., Maurice Obstfeld, and Katheryn N. Russ, “In Search of the Armington Elasticity,” available for download at http://www.econ.ucdavis.edu/faculty /knruss
/FOR 6-1-2012.pdf, 2012.
Frankel, J.A. and D. Romer, “Does Trade Cause Growth?,” American Economic Review, 1999,
89 (3), 379–399.
Head, K., T. Mayer, and J. Ries, “The Erosion of Colonial Trade Linkages after Independence,”
Journal of International Economics, 2010, 81 (1), 1–14.
Head, Keith and Thierry Mayer, “Gravity Equations: Workhorse, Toolkit, and Cookbook,”
Chapter 3 in the Handbook of International Economics Vol. 4, eds. Gita Gopinath, Elhanan
Helpman, and Kenneth S. Rogoff, Elsevier Ltd., Oxford, 2014.
Heathcote, J.H. and F. Perri, “Financial Autarky and International Business Cycles,” Journal
of Monetary Economics, 2002, 49 (3), 601–627.
Helpman, Elhanan, Marc Melitz, and Yona Rubinstein, “Trading Partners and Trading
Volumes,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 2008, 123 (2), 441–487.
Hercowitz, Zvi and Michael Sampson, “Output Growth, the Real Wage, and Employment
Fluctuations,” American Economic Review, 1991, 81 (5), 1215–1237.
Krugman, P.R., “Scale Economies, Product Differentiation, and the Pattern of Trade,” American
Economic Review, 1980, 70 (5), 950–959.
Larch, Mario, Pehr-Johan Norbck, Steffen Sirries, and Dieter Urban, “Heterogeneous
Firms, Globalization and the Distance Puzzle,” 2016, The World Economy, forthcoming, 2016.
Lin, Faqin and Nicholas C.S. Sim, “Death of Distance and the Distance Puzzle,” Economics
Letters, 2012, 116 (2), 225–228.
Lucas, Robert E. and Edward C. Prescott, “Investment Under Uncertainty,” Econometrica,
1971, 39 (5), 659–681.
Mayer, T. and S. Zignago, “Notes on CEPII’s Distances Measures: the GeoDist Database,”
CEPII Working Paper No. 2011-25, 2011.
Melitz, Marc J., “The Impact of Trade on Intra-Industry Reallocations and Aggregate Industry
Productivity,” Econometrica, 2003, 71 (6), 1695–1725.
and Gianmarco I. P. Ottaviano, “Market Size, Trade, and Productivity,” Review of Economic Studies, 2008, 75 (1), 295–316.
Mion, Giordano and Luca David Opromolla, “Managers’ mobility, trade performance, and
wages,” Journal of International Economics, 2014, 94 (1), 85–101.

41

Nickell, Stephen J, “Biases in Dynamic Models with Fixed Effects,” Econometrica, November
1981, 49 (6), 1417–26.
Novy, Dennis, “International Trade without CES: Estimating Translog Gravity,” Journal of
International Economics, 2013, 89 (2), 271–282.
Olivero, Mara Pa and Yoto V. Yotov, “Dynamic Gravity: Endogenous Country Size and
Asset Accumulation,” Canadian Journal of Economics, 2012, 45 (1), 64–92.
Ramondo, Natalia, Andrs Rodrguez-Clare, and Milagro Saboro-Rodrguez, “Trade, Domestic Frictions, and Scale Effects,” American Economic Review, 2016, 106 (10), 3159–3184.
Roodman, David, “How to do xtabond2: An introduction to difference and system GMM in
Stata,” Stata Journal, 2009, 9 (1), 86–136.
, “A note on the theme of too many instruments,” Oxford Bulletin of Economics and Statistics,
2009, 71 (1), 135–158.
Ruhl, Kim J., “The International Elasticity Puzzle,” unpublished manuscript, available for download at http://www.kimjruhl.com/, 2008.
Santos Silva, J.M.C. and Silvana Tenreyro, “The Log of Gravity,” Review of Economics and
Statistics, 2006, 88 (4), 641–658.
and
, “Further Simulation Evidence on the Performance of the Poisson Pseudo-Maximum
Likelihood Estimator,” Economics Letters, 2011, 112 (2), 220–222.
Timmer, M. P., B. Los, and G. J. de Vries, “An Anatomy of the Global Trade Slowdown
based on the WIOD 2016 Release,” GGDC research memorandum number 162, 2016.
, E. Dietzenbacher, B. Los, R. R. Stehrer, and G. J. de Vries, “An Illustrated User Guide
to the World Input?Output Database: the Case of Global Automotive Production,” Review of
International Economics, 2015, 23, 575?605.
Yotov, Yoto V., “A Simple Solution to the Distance Puzzle in International Trade,” Economics
Letters, 2012, 117 (3), 794–798.
, Roberta Piermartini, Jos-Antonio Monteiro, and Mario Larch, An Advanced Guide
to Trade Policy Analysis: The Structural Gravity Model, Geneva: UNCTAD and WTO, 2016.
Zimmermann, C., “International Real Business Cycles among Heterogeneous Countries,” European Economic Review, 1997, 41 (2), 319–356.

42

Table 1: SR Gravity with Efficiency Improvements, OLS Estimates
LN DIST
CNTG
CLNY
LANG
FTA
LN TARIFF
INTL BRDR
INTL BRDR 1991
INTL BRDR 1994
INTL BRDR 1997
INTL BRDR 2000
INTL BRDR 2003
INTL BRDR 2006
LN DIST 1991
LN DIST 1994
LN DIST 1997
LN DIST 2000
LN DIST 2003
LN DIST 2006

(1)
Standard
-1.184
(0.049)∗∗
-0.047
(0.189)
0.460
(0.159)∗∗
0.782
(0.107)∗∗
0.413
(0.062)∗∗
-1.723
(0.443)∗∗
-3.235
(0.299)∗∗

(2)
Efficiency
-1.185
(0.049)∗∗
-0.048
(0.189)
0.459
(0.159)∗∗
0.782
(0.107)∗∗
0.406
(0.062)∗∗
-1.704
(0.442)∗∗
-3.733
(0.324)∗∗
0.215
(0.091)∗
0.462
(0.098)∗∗
0.622
(0.122)∗∗
0.685
(0.132)∗∗
0.722
(0.149)∗∗
0.799
(0.160)∗∗

(3)
DistPuzzle
-1.183
(0.057)∗∗
-0.047
(0.189)
0.460
(0.159)∗∗
0.781
(0.107)∗∗
0.419
(0.065)∗∗
-1.719
(0.445)∗∗
-3.737
(0.336)∗∗
0.381
(0.116)∗∗
0.551
(0.158)∗∗
0.508
(0.166)∗∗
0.664
(0.174)∗∗
0.713
(0.197)∗∗
0.680
(0.209)∗∗
-0.051
(0.030)+
-0.027
(0.040)
0.034
(0.037)
0.006
(0.038)
0.002
(0.041)
0.035
(0.042)

INTL BRDR HIGH 1991

(4)
PairFEs

(5)
Efficiency2

(6)
Development

0.165
(0.041)∗∗
-1.311
(0.308)∗∗

0.147
(0.041)∗∗
-1.283
(0.306)∗∗

0.139
(0.041)∗∗
-0.990
(0.260)∗∗

0.231
(0.092)∗
0.511
(0.098)∗∗
0.713
(0.121)∗∗
0.812
(0.131)∗∗
0.864
(0.144)∗∗
0.965
(0.158)∗∗

0.314
(0.237)
INTL BRDR HIGH 1994
0.589
(0.187)∗∗
INTL BRDR HIGH 1997
0.800
(0.258)∗∗
INTL BRDR HIGH 2000
1.009
(0.262)∗∗
INTL BRDR HIGH 2003
1.065
(0.267)∗∗
INTL BRDR HIGH 2006
1.287
(0.306)∗∗
INTL BRDR LOW 1991
0.438
(0.177)∗
0.939
INTL BRDR LOW 1994
(0.214)∗∗
INTL BRDR LOW 1997
1.235
(0.226)∗∗
INTL BRDR LOW 2000
1.237
(0.275)∗∗
1.351
INTL BRDR LOW 2003
(0.322)∗∗
INTL BRDR LOW 2006
1.520
(0.351)∗∗
N
18345
18345
18345
18344
18344
18336
r2
0.880
0.881
0.881
0.935
0.936
0.955
Notes: This table reports results from the international-borders dummy variable approach to test SR gravity theory. All estimates are obtained with the OLS estimator and with exporter-time and importer-time
fixed effects, whose estimates are omitted for brevity. The dependent variable in each specification is the
log of nominal bilateral trade. Column (1) reports standard (long run) gravity estimates. The estimates
from column (2) are obtained with time-varying international border dummies, designed to capture relative
efficiency improvements. Column (3) allows for time-varying distance effects, in addition to the time-varying
border dummies. Columns (4) and (5) reproduce the results from columns (1) and (2) but with pair fixed
effects. Finally, column (6) uses the specification from column (5) but allows for heterogeneous efficiency
improvements across developed vs. developing countries. Standard errors are clustered by country pair and
are reported in parentheses + p < 0.10, ∗ p < .05, ∗∗ p < .01. See text for further details.

43

Table 2: SR Gravity with Efficiency Improvements, PPML Estimates
LN DIST
CNTG
CLNY
LANG
FTA
LN TARIFF
INTL BRDR
INTL BRDR 1991
INTL BRDR 1994
INTL BRDR 1997
INTL BRDR 2000
INTL BRDR 2003
INTL BRDR 2006
LN DIST 1991
LN DIST 1994
LN DIST 1997
LN DIST 2000
LN DIST 2003
LN DIST 2006

(1)
Standard
-0.648
(0.065)∗∗
0.488
(0.148)∗∗
-0.049
(0.109)
0.325
(0.139)∗
0.142
(0.123)
-7.438
(1.167)∗∗
-2.635
(0.154)∗∗

(2)
Efficiency
-0.662
(0.065)∗∗
0.500
(0.146)∗∗
-0.064
(0.108)
0.343
(0.138)∗
0.073
(0.118)
-6.803
(1.227)∗∗
-3.032
(0.152)∗∗
0.202
(0.023)∗∗
0.324
(0.028)∗∗
0.449
(0.044)∗∗
0.543
(0.055)∗∗
0.491
(0.062)∗∗
0.510
(0.065)∗∗

(3)
DistPuzzle
-0.640
(0.074)∗∗
0.500
(0.145)∗∗
-0.066
(0.108)
0.345
(0.138)∗
0.073
(0.117)
-6.859
(1.238)∗∗
-3.069
(0.164)∗∗
0.182
(0.057)∗∗
0.297
(0.055)∗∗
0.394
(0.086)∗∗
0.595
(0.106)∗∗
0.561
(0.106)∗∗
0.621
(0.090)∗∗
0.011
(0.023)
0.013
(0.023)
0.028
(0.031)
-0.029
(0.036)
-0.039
(0.038)
-0.061
(0.036)+

INTL BRDR HIGH 1991

(4)
PairFEs

(5)
Efficiency2

(6)
Development

0.318
(0.077)∗∗
-4.842
(0.588)∗∗

0.112
(0.067)+
-2.699
(0.547)∗∗

0.214
(0.062)∗∗
-2.122
(0.448)∗∗

0.147
(0.016)∗∗
0.249
(0.024)∗∗
0.401
(0.035)∗∗
0.481
(0.041)∗∗
0.498
(0.043)∗∗
0.570
(0.040)∗∗

0.436
(0.054)∗∗
INTL BRDR HIGH 1994
0.750
(0.078)∗∗
INTL BRDR HIGH 1997
0.967
(0.150)∗∗
INTL BRDR HIGH 2000
0.988
(0.227)∗∗
INTL BRDR HIGH 2003
0.972
(0.208)∗∗
1.118
INTL BRDR HIGH 2006
(0.205)∗∗
INTL BRDR LOW 1991
0.512
(0.084)∗∗
INTL BRDR LOW 1994
1.162
(0.123)∗∗
INTL BRDR LOW 1997
1.368
(0.132)∗∗
INTL BRDR LOW 2000
1.520
(0.172)∗∗
INTL BRDR LOW 2003
1.900
(0.187)∗∗
INTL BRDR LOW 2006
2.062
(0.193)∗∗
N
18928
18928
18928
18928
18928
18928
Notes: This table reports results from the international-borders dummy variable approach to test SR gravity theory. All estimates are obtained with the PPML estimator and with exporter-time and importer-time
fixed effects, whose estimates are omitted for brevity. The dependent variable in each specification is nominal bilateral trade. Column (1) reports standard (long run) gravity estimates. The estimates from column
(2) are obtained with time-varying international border dummies, designed to capture relative efficiency
improvements. Column (3) allows for time-varying distance effects, in addition to the time-varying border
dummies. Columns (4) and (5) reproduce the results from columns (1) and (2) but with pair fixed effects.
Finally, column (6) uses the specification from column (5) but allows for heterogeneous efficiency improvements across developed vs. developing countries. Standard errors are clustered by country pair and are
reported in parentheses + p < 0.10, ∗ p < .05, ∗∗ p < .01. See text for further details.

44

Table 3: SR Gravity & Efficiency
LN DIST
CNTG
CLNY
LANG
FTA
LN TARIFF
INTL BRDR
L.LN TRADE

(1)
Standard
-1.186
(0.049)∗∗
-0.036
(0.189)
0.457
(0.158)∗∗
0.773
(0.105)∗∗
0.418
(0.062)∗∗
-1.513
(0.378)∗∗
-3.229
(0.297)∗∗

(2)
SR Gravity
-0.248
(0.016)∗∗
0.005
(0.039)
0.092
(0.034)∗∗
0.147
(0.022)∗∗
0.108
(0.013)∗∗
-0.348
(0.100)∗∗
-0.635
(0.064)∗∗
0.788
(0.009)∗∗
46868
0.959
0.202
(0.008)∗∗

(3)
SR Test1
0.003
(0.008
0.358
(1.097)
0.112
(0.074)
0.022
(0.028)
- 0.046
(0.032)
- 0.018
(0.066)
0.015
(0.019)

(4)
LSDV

(5)
SR LSDV

(6)
SR Test2

(7)
LSDV IV

(8)
SR Test3

0.170
(0.037)∗∗
-1.114
(0.259)∗∗

0.070
(0.016)∗∗
-0.446
(0.118)∗∗

- 0.024
(0.097)
0.014
(0.105)

0.029
(0.017)+
-0.579
(0.149)∗∗

0.081
(0.130)
-0.265
(0.097)∗∗

0.614
(0.011)∗∗
46868
0.964
0.371
(0.011)∗∗

0.746
(0.124)∗∗
N
49916
49916
35411
R2
0.882
0.936
0.964
ρ
0.242
(0.120)∗∗
2
Under Id χ
13.595
p-val
(0.009)
Weak Id χ2
3.394
p-val
(0.009)
Over Id χ2
1.350
p-val
(0.717)
Notes: This table reports results from the structural investment approach to test SR gravity theory. All estimates are
obtained with exporter-time and importer-time fixed effects, whose estimates are omitted for brevity. The dependent
variable in each specification is the log of nominal bilateral trade. Column (1) reports standard (long run) gravity
estimates. The estimates from column (2) are obtained with lagged trade added as a covariate. Column (3) reports
the results from a test of the SR gravity theory according to equation (27). Columns (4)-(6) reproduce the results
from columns (1)-(3) but with pair fixed effects, thus implementing the LSDV estimator. Column (7) implements an
IV LSDV estimation, and column (8) reports the results from test (27). The “weak identification” (Weak Id) statistics
are based on Kleibergen-Paap Wald F values, which are appropriate when the standard error i.i.d. assumption is not
met and the usual Cragg-Donald Wald statistic is no longer valid. (The corresponding Cragg-Donald Wald F statistic
is 3.781.) Robust standard errors are reported in parentheses + p < 0.10, ∗ p < .05, ∗∗ p < .01. See text for further
details.

45

Figure 1: Evolution of International Borders, 1988-2006.

Note: This figure plots the evolution of the international border estimates
from column (5) of Table 1, which are obtained with the OLS estimator and
pair fixed effects, over time. The figure also reports the slope of the fitted line,
which corresponds to the parameter bτ from the main text.

46

Appendix A
A.1

Theoretical Extensions

Heterogeneous Productivities and Short Run Gravity

Short run gravity can equivalently represent a foundation based on heterogeneous productivities generated by a probability distribution (Eaton and Kortum, 2002). With productivity
draws from a Frechet (Type II extreme value) distribution, it is well known that the same
long run gravity equation system results with the trade cost elasticity 1 − σ reinterpreted
as the dispersion parameter θ of the Frechet distribution and the taste parameter βi reinterpreted as the location parameter of the productivity distribution for origin i. The CES
demand system is used in the Eaton-Kortum model but σ ends up in a background constant
term due to the infinite elasticity of transformation of the Ricardian model.
The simplicity of the Cobb-Douglas production model here allows short run long run
gravity to be interpreted in terms of either foundation. For the Eaton-Kortum interpretation,
each origin supplies potentially an infinite number of varieties to each destination. Each
variety has the same basic Cobb-Douglas production function up to a productivity draw
parameter divided by an iceberg trade factor. The proportion of draws favorable enough to
permit shipments to destination j relative to shipments from all origins to destination j is
a CES-type share function of unit cost of delivered output from origin i relative to an index
of unit costs of delivered output to j from all origins. The key link between the two models
is that the unit cost of delivered output in equilibrium in the short run model plays the
same role in either model. Note also that the long run Cobb-Douglas model with efficient
capacities becomes Ricardian, as in the Eaton-Kortum model.
Feenstra (2016) following Chaney (2008) shows that with constant iceberg bilateral trade
costs and Melitz (2003) Pareto distributed productivities, a version of the structural gravity
model emerges, with the trade cost elasticity having a different interpretation and fixed
costs playing a role. The key step in reaching this conclusion is that the combination of
Pareto distribution and iceberg bilateral costs leads to a log-linear closed form solution for

47

the productivity of the least productive firm in any origin able to serve each destination from
that origin. The Pareto distribution then yields a log-linear expression for the proportion of
firms from each origin that serve each destination.
For purely competitive firms with Pareto distributed productivities, fixed costs of exporting to a destination, and the increasing variable bilateral trade costs modeled in this paper,
Section A.1.1 below shows that the optimized (restricted) profit function has a constant
elasticity with respect to productivity. This implies a closed form solution for the minimum
productivity firm and thus the proportion of firms that can serve any market. In this case,
the heterogeneous purely competitive firms model again yields a standard structural gravity
equation. The trade cost elasticity is now a function of the elasticity of substitution σ, the
Pareto distribution dispersion parameter θ and the elasticity of transformation 1/(1 − α).
The monopolistic competition case is examined in Section A.1.3. Unfortunately, the
combination of heterogeneous productivities and selection of monopolistically competitive
firms due to fixed costs does not lead to a tractable short run gravity model. There is
generally no closed form solution for the productivity of the least productive firm able to
serve a destination. This is because in monopolistic competition the elasticity of optimized
(restricted) revenue with respect to productivity is smaller than the elasticity of optimized
variable cost with respect to productivity. The implicit relationship between the proportion
of firms serving a market on the one hand and market size and origin wage on the other
hand retains the qualitative properties of the Melitz-Chaney model, but the implicit function
substantially departs from log-linearity. Nevertheless, Section A.1.3 shows that the purely
competitive firms model closely approximates the monopolistic competition model as σ is
large. Numerical evaluation reveals the two models are close.

A.1.1

Short Run Gravity with Competitive Heterogeneous Firms

Each firm draws a Hicks-neutral productivity scalar % ≥ 1 from a Pareto distribution G(%) =
1 − %−θ . Index the firms in an (implicit) origin by their productivity draws ρ. Firms

48

have (by assumption) previously committed capital K(z) to each destination z in the same
pattern based on expected demand because prior to receiving their productivities, all firms
are identical. The profit of firm % is

%

p(z)
L(z, %)α K(z)1−α − wL(z, %).
t(z)

Profit maximization by a price taking firm implies the restricted profit function %1/(1−α) R̄(z)
where

R̄(z) =

p(z)
t(z)

1/(1−α)

K(z)[αα/(1−α) − w−α/(1−α) α1/(1−α) ]

is the variable profit of the least productive firm (whether it ships to destination z or not).
The zero profit cutoff value of % occurs at

%(z) = [f (z)/R̄(z)]1−α

where f (z) is the fixed cost of exporting to z. The proportion of firms with % ≥ % is given
R∞
by 1 − G(%) = % θ%−θ−1 d%. Then the aggregate value shipped to destination z is given by


p(z)
t(z)

1/(1−α)

K(z)αα/(1−α) S(z)

(28)

where the mass of firms serving destination z
Z
S(z) =

∞

θ%
%

1/(1−α)−θ−1

θ
d% =
θ+1−η



f (z)
R̄(z)

η−θ
(29)

using η = 1/(1 − α). Relative to the text version of short run gravity, S(z) enters everywhere
that K(z) = λ(z)K appears. R̄(z) is proportional to [p(z)/t(z)]η . Using this expression in
(29), p(z)/t(z) affects the extensive margin of trade through S(z) with elasticity η(θ − η).
The intensive margin response to a fall in trade cost t(z) acts to crowd out the extensive
margin response in (29), completely so at θ = η. The mass of active firms falls and average
49

productivity rises when η > θ, which is the famous Melitz (2003) case where effectively
η → ∞.
(29) combines in (28) with the effect of p(z)/t(z) on the intensive margin of trade with
elasticity η. The combined effect of p(z)/t(z) on shipments has composite supply elasticity
η̃ = η(1 + θ − η). This composite supply side elasticity combines with the demand side
elasticity in the short run equilibrium model of the text to yield a buyers’ incidence elasticity
equal to
ρ̃ =

η(1 + θ − η)
>ρ
η(1 + θ − η) + σ − 1

(30)

for θ > η, the intuitive case where the extensive margin S(z) is increasing in price p(z). In
the special case θ = η, the responses of firms on the intensive and extensive margins are
perfect substitutes.
In empirical applications, the extensive margin component can be identified if proxies
for fixed export costs can be found that are not also proxies for variable trade costs. In the
absence of such proxies, estimated trade elasticities have to be considered combinations of
intensive and extensive margin responses.

A.1.2

Empirical Implications

The development of the firm level model here points to a rationale for the simple econometric
procedure adopted for the empirical work. First, the λ(z) allocations are assumed to be the
same for any firm, under the assumption that all heterogeneity is in % draws. We can
extend the logic to assume that all z > 0 external markets are ex post under-supplied to a
uniform extent, λ(z) is too small by a common fraction and correspondingly λ(0) is too large.
This permits drawing inferences from multiple observations on the movement of external vs.
internal trade over time.
A second aspect of the model with empirical content is that the zeroes in bilateral trade
flows can simply be rationalized as the absence, for whatever reason, of a finite positive λ.

50

A.1.3

Monopolsitic Competition Case

The production function for delivered output by monopolistic competitive firm % to destination z from a representative origin is the same as in the competitive case, y(z, %) =
%L(z, %)α K(z)1−α /t(z), where K(z) is assumed to be committed before % is drawn from the
Pareto distribution with dispersion parameter θ. The firm faces willingness to pay for its
shipments to destination z equal to

p(z, %) = y(z, %)−1/σ E(z)1/σ P (z)1−1/σ .

Once % is drawn, the firm hires labor (including the manager) to maximize profits (including
the premium paid to the manager). The efficient level of labor is such that the wage w is
equal to the marginal revenue product of labor:

L(z, %) = %(1−1/σ)/(1−α(1−1/σ)) α(1 − 1/σ)E(z)1/σ (P (z)/t(z)1−1/σ K(z)(1−α)(1−1/σ) /w

1/(1−α(1−1/σ))
(31)

The wage bill of firm % on shipments to z is w times the right hand side of (31). The
value of sales at destination prices follows from substituting the right hand side of (31) into
the production function for delivered output and the willingness to pay function for delivered
output. The restricted profit function is equal to sales minus the wage bill. It is convenient
for present purposes to define the sales y(z) and labor L(z) of the minimally productive firm
with % = 1, suppressing the unnecessary details. The restricted profit function of firm % on
sales to z is

R(z, %) = y(z)%(1−1/σ)(1+α)/(1−α(1−1/σ)) − L(z)%(1−1/σ)/(1−α(1−1/σ)) .

(32)

The least productive firm able to serve market z must be productive enough to pay fixed

51

cost f (z). The cutoff firm has productivity

%(z) = min % : R(z, %) − f (z) = 0.

The definition imposes a plausible restriction that the monopolistic competitive firm will
find the smallest root % when there are multiple roots solving the equation.
Expression (32) does not yield a closed form solution for % for a given profit level, so it
will not yield a convenient structural gravity equation for the mass of firms serving market
z from the origin in focus here. In contrast, perfectly competitive firms yield a closed form
solution. The monopolisitic competition case comes close to the competitive case as σ grows
large, hence 1 − 1/σ → 1 in the exponents of (32).
Quantitatively, the difference between the monopolistic competition case and the pure
competition case can be numerically evaluated by comparing solutions for %(z) given reasonable range values of σ with the competitive equivalent solution with σ → ∞. Plugging
the pair of solutions for into equation (29), the ratio of the mass of sales of monopolistic
to competitive firms can be computed, given a value of θ. A representative evaluation case
used f /Y = 0.5, wL/y = 0.6, α = 0.67, θ = 4. At σ = 2, monopolistic firms total sales
are 91% of competitive firms sales. At σ = 10, they are 99% of competitive firms sales. The
ratio is monotonic (and equilibrium % is unique), convex and ‘nearly’ linear in σ ∈ (1, ∞).

A.2

Short Run Trade Cost Endogeneity

The short run gravity model implies a theory of short run endogenous trade costs. Equation (7) yields a structure that potentially connects inference about trade costs from price
variation to inference from trade flow variation.
Relative price T (i, z) ≡ p(i, z)/p(i, i) is common direct measure of trade cost variation.
Use (7) and the result on the CES price index P (z) = (E(z)/Y )−(1−ρ) Pe(z) from Section
3 where Pe(z) is the buyer’s multilateral resistance. Simplify the exponents of the result to

52

give:

T (i, z) =

t(i, z)
t(i, i)

ρ 

λ(i, z)
λ(i, i)

−ρ/η

Pe(z)
Pe(i)

!1−ρ 

E(z)
E(i)

1/η
.

(33)

T (i, z) → t(i, z)/t(i, i) as λ(i, z)/λ(i, i) adjusts to its efficient level (see Section 3.2). t(i, z)/t(i, i)
is inferred from standard (i.e. long run) gravity equations, while (33) implies that spatial
variation of T (i, z) includes the effect of inefficient bilateral capacities and the spatial variation of demand conditions. Demand variation in the last two terms on the right is direct in
E(z)/E(i) and indirect through its general equilibrium effects on buyers’ relative multilateral resistance Pe(z)/Pe(i). (33) can potentially reconcile the time invariance of t(i, z) inferred
from gravity and the obvious time variation of direct price measures, and also differences
in elasticities inferred from the spatial variation of prices and the spatial variation of trade
flows. Future research on disaggregated price and trade flow data can test the consistency
of (12) and (33).39
-

39
The application of this paper to aggregate manufacturing data is not suitable for use of (33) because
composition effects contaminate the spatial variation of manufacturing price indexes.

53

Appendix B

Empirical Analysis

This appendix reports the results from a series of sensitivity experiments that demonstrate
the robustness of our main results. Following the development of the exposition in the main
text of the manuscript, we present successively robustness experiments for each the two
econometric methods that we employ to test the SR gravity theory.

B.1

Sensitivity Experiments: Econometric Approach

We start this section with a brief summary of the main empirical findings from Section 4.2,
where we tested the short run gravity theory with an estimation approach that employed international border dummies under the assumption that cross-border trade capacities λ(i, z, τ )
are inefficiently small, while domestic capacities λ(i, i, τ ) are inefficiently large and, over time,
capacity investment evolves toward efficiency so that cross-border investment in trade links
rises relative to domestic investment in trade links. The two main findings from the estimates
in Section 4.2 were that (i) the estimates of the standard gravity variables remained statistically unchanged once we introduced the bilateral border dummies; and, more importantly
for our purposes, (ii) we obtained estimates on the bilateral border dummies that were all
positive, statistically significant, and gradually increasing over time, which, consistent with
our theory we interpreted as improvement in efficiency. The following experiments confirm
the robustness of our main findings from Section 4.2:
• The estimates in Table 4 are obtained with size-adjusted trade, Xi,z,τ /Yi,τ , as dependent variable. The motivation for using size-adjusted trade is twofold. First, such
specification is consistent with theory. Second, using size-adjusted trade as dependent
variable mitigates heteroskedasticity concerns by construction, cf. Anderson and van
Wincoop (2003). The estimates from columns (1)-(4) of Table 4 are obtained with the
OLS estimator. Columns (1) and (2) reproduce the estimates with standard gravity
variables from columns (1) and (2) of Table 1. Columns (3) and (4) reproduce the
54

estimates with pair fixed effects from columns (4) and (5) of Table 1. Columns (5)-(8)
reproduce the estimates from columns (1)-(4) with the PPML estimator. All results
are obtained with exporter-time and importer-time fixed effects, whose estimates are
omitted for brevity. Both the OLS and the PPML estimates from Table 4 confirm the
two main findings as summarized at the beginning of this section.
• Figure 2 reports estimates of the evolution of the international border estimates from
column (2) of Table 1, which are obtained with OLS and standard gravity variables,
over time. The figure also obtains the slope of the fitted line, which corresponds to
the parameter bτ from the main text. The estimate of bτ = 0.036 from Figure 2 is
smaller but comparable to the estimate of bτ = 0.046 from the main text. The results
in Figure 3 are constructed based on the estimates from column (5) of Table 2, which
are obtained with the PPML estimator and pair fixed effects, over time. Once again,
we obtain a similar value for the parameter bτ = 0.028.
• Table 5 reproduces the main results from Table 1 with data for all years. The estimates
from columns (1)-(4) are obtained with the OLS estimator. Columns (1) and (2) reproduce the estimates with standard gravity variables from columns (1) and (2) of Table
1. Columns (3) and (4) reproduce the estimates with pair fixed effects from columns
(4) and (5) of Table 1. Columns (5)-(8) of this table reproduce the estimates from
columns (1)-(4) of the same table with the PPML estimator. All results are obtained
with exporter-time and importer-time fixed effects, whose estimates are omitted for
brevity. In addition, also for brevity, we have omitted the estimates on the bilateral
border dummies for the odd years in the sample. These are available by request. The
estimates from Table 5, once again, confirm our main findings as summarized at the
beginning of this section.
• Table 6 reproduces the results from column (3) of Table 1 with data for all years.
We remind the reader that the estimates from column (3) of Table 1 depicted and
55

resolved the ‘distance puzzle’ in international trade. The estimates in column (1) of
Table 6 are obtained with the OLS estimator and the estimates in column (2) of Table
6 are obtained with the PPML estimator. All results are obtained with exporter-time
and importer-time fixed effects, whose estimates are omitted for brevity. In addition,
also for brevity, we have omitted the estimates on the time-varying distance variables
and the estimates on the bilateral border dummies for the odd years in the sample
for each group of countries. The omitted estimates are available by request. In each
case we allow for time-varying distance effects and, in each case, we find no evidence
for time-varying effects of distance. This is consistent with the distance puzzle in
international trade. However, similar to the discussion of our main results, our theory
suggests that the correct interpretation of the effects of distance should combine the
joint impact that is captured by the distance estimates and by the estimates of the
efficiency improvements. Thus, combined with the decreasing border effects (captured
by the positive, significant and increasing estimates on the border dummies), our theory
implies that the impact of distance have steadily decreased over time. In sum, the
estimates from Table 6 confirm that our theory can indeed resolve the famous ‘distance’
and ‘missing globalization’ puzzles in the international trade literature.
• Table 7 reproduces the results from column (6) of Table 1 with data for all years. We
remind the reader that the estimates from column (6) of Table 1 distinguished between
capacity improvement for the developed vs. developing countries in our sample. The
estimates in column (1) of Table 7 are obtained with the OLS estimator and the
estimates in column (2) of Table 7 are obtained with the PPML estimator. In each
case we allow for different efficiency improvement rates depending on whether a country
is developed or developing. All results are obtained with exporter-time and importertime fixed effects, whose estimates are omitted for brevity. In addition, also for brevity,
we have omitted the estimates on the bilateral border dummies for the odd years in
the sample for each group of countries. The omitted estimates are available by request.
56

The estimates from columns (1) and (2) of Table 7 deliver results that are very similar
to our main corresponding findings from Table 1. Specifically, and most important,
we do observe efficiency improvements for both groups of countries. In addition, we
see that the low income countries have actually converged faster toward more efficient
trade during the period of investigation.
• Table 8 reproduces the main results from Table 1 with with the latest edition of the
WIOD data, as described in the data section. The WIOD dataset covers the period
2000-2014 and we use 2-year intervals to obtain the estimates in Table 8. The estimates from columns (1)-(4) are obtained with the OLS estimator. Columns (1) and
(2) reproduce the estimates with standard gravity variables from columns (1) and (2)
of Table 1. Columns (3) and (4) of Table 8 reproduce the estimates with pair fixed
effects from columns (4) and (5) of Table 1. Columns (5)-(8) of Table 8 reproduce the
estimates from columns (1)-(4) of the same table with the PPML estimator. All results are obtained with exporter-time and importer-time fixed effects, whose estimates
are omitted for brevity. The estimates from Table 8 confirm our main findings, as
summarized at the beginning of this section, with the WIOD data.
• Table 9 reproduces the main results from Table 1 by capitalizing on the sectoral dimension of the latest edition of the WIOD data, as described in the data section. Once
again, we use 2-year interval data. For brevity, for each of the six main sectors in the
WIOD database (including Crop and Animal Production, Forestry and Logging, Fishing and Aquaculture, Mining and Quarrying, Manufacturing, and Services), we only
reproduce the main specifications with pair fixed effects, which correspond to those in
columns (4) and (5) of Table 1. All results are obtained with the OLS estimator and
with exporter-time and importer-time fixed effects, whose estimates are omitted for
brevity. The main finding from the results in Table 9 is that the estimates of the timevarying bilateral border dummies are positive, statistically significant, and increasing

57

over time for each sector in our sample. These results are consistent with our main
findings and support the SR gravity theory. In addition, we note that while there
is certain heterogeneity in the bilateral border estimates across sectors, the efficiency
improvements have been significant at the sectoral level and similar in magnitude.
In sum, based on the sensitivity experiments that we employed in this section, we conclude
that our main findings from Section 4.2 represent robust results.

B.2

Sensitivity Experiments: Structural Approach

We start this section with a brief summary of the main empirical findings from Section 4.3,
where we tested the short run gravity theory by developing a formal model of investment,
which resulted in the addition of the lagged dependent variable as a covariate in the estimating equation for SR gravity. Three main findings stood out from the estimates in Section
4.3. First, we obtained a large, positive and statistically significant estimate of the coefficient
on the structural efficiency term. Second, we recovered estimates of the structural efficiency
parameter ranging from 0.202 to 0.371. Third, as predicted by the SR gravity theory, the
estimates that controlled for efficiency improvements were significantly smaller in magnitude as compared to their long run counterparts. The following experiments confirm the
robustness of our main findings from Section 4.2:
• Table 10 uses 3-year interval data to reproduce the results from Table 3 of the main
text. All results are obtained with exporter-time and importer-time fixed effects, whose
estimates are omitted for brevity. The dependent variable in each specification is
the log of nominal bilateral trade. Column (1) reports standard (long run) gravity
estimates. The estimates from column (2) are obtained with lagged trade added as
a covariate. Column (3) reproduces the results from column (2) but with pair fixed
effects, thus implementing the LSDV estimator. Column (4) implements an IV LSDV
estimation. Finally, column (5) implements the Arellano-Bond estimator. In sum, the
58

estimates from Table 10 are in support of all main findings listed at the beginning of this
section. Specifically: (i) We obtain positive and significant estimates of the structural
efficiency term; (ii) Taking into account the use of 3-year interval data, which implies
β̃8 =

(1−δ)3 (1−ρ)
,
1−δ(1−ρ)

we recover ρ̂ ∈ [0.250, 0.534] across the different specifications, which

can be found in the bottom panel of Table 10; (iii) The estimates from each specification
that controls for efficiency improvements are significantly smaller in magnitude as
compared to their long run counterparts from column (1) of Table 10. Finally, we note
that the bounds for ρ that we obtain with sample that includes all years are tighter as
compared to the bounds with the 3-year interval data. This is evidence in support of
using the full sample over using data with intervals.
• Table 11 uses size-adjusted trade as dependent variable and reproduces the results from
Table 3 of the main text. All results are obtained with exporter-time and importer-time
fixed effects, whose estimates are omitted for brevity. The dependent variable in each
specification is the log of nominal bilateral trade. Column (1) reports standard (long
run) gravity estimates. The estimates from column (2) are obtained with lagged trade
added as a covariate. Column (3) reproduces the results from column (2) but with
pair fixed effects, thus implementing the LSDV estimator. Column (4) implements
an IV LSDV estimation. The estimates from Table 11 confirm our main results as
summarized at the beginning of this section.
• Table 12 reproduces the results from Table 3 of the main text with 3-year interval data
on international trade only. All results are obtained with exporter-time and importertime fixed effects, whose estimates are omitted for brevity. The dependent variable in
each specification is the log of nominal bilateral trade. Column (1) reports standard
(long run) gravity estimates. The estimates from column (2) are obtained with lagged
trade added as a covariate. Column (3) reproduces the results from column (2) but
with pair fixed effects, thus implementing the LSDV estimator. Column (4) implements

59

an IV LSDV estimation. Once again, the estimates from Table 12 confirm our main
results as summarized at the beginning of this section.
• Table 13 uses the system-GMM estimator, which will account for the dynamic features
of our model.40 The estimates from column (1) of Table 13 are obtained with data for
all years and pass the Arellano-Bond test for autocorrelation in the disturbances by
rejecting (as expected) the null hypothesis of no AR(1) errors with z = −10.268, but
passing the test for second-order serial correlation AR(2) with z = 1.302. However,
the instruments do not pass the Sargan test of overidentifcation restrictions with χ215 =
168.99 (p-value=0.025). Furthermore, we obtain a suspiciously small estimate of the
coefficient on LN Xij,τ −1 (β̃8 = 0.254, std.err. 0.045), which is clearly outside of the
bounds that we established in columns (2) and (4) of Table 3 from th main text. The
Arellano-Bond estimates from column (2) of Table 13 are obtained with 3-year interval
data and they improve on the estimates from column (1) by delivering an estimate
on LN Xij,τ −1 (β̃8 = 0.603, std.err. 0.161), from which we recover ρ̂ = 0.303 (std.err.
0.178), which is not statistically different from our main estimates.
• Table 15 uses the latest edition of the WIOD data and reproduces the results from
Table 3 of the main text. All results are obtained with exporter-time and importertime fixed effects, whose estimates are omitted for brevity. The dependent variable
in each specification is the log of nominal bilateral trade and we use 2-year interval
data. Column (1) reports standard (long run) gravity estimates. The estimates from
column (2) are obtained with lagged trade added as a covariate. Columns (3) and
40

Anderson and Hsiao (1982) are the first to achieve consistency in short time period setting by using
appropriate lagged levels and differences of the dependent variable as instruments for the lagged dependent
variable. Arellano and Bond (1991) and Arellano and Bover (1995)/Blundell and Bond (1998) extend the
Anderson-Hsiao estimator to the difference-GMM and the system-GMM estimators, respectively, which
use larger sets of orthogonality conditions in order to obtain consistent estimates in dynamic panels with
lagged dependent variable such as ours. We refer the interested reader to Roodman (2009a) for a detailed
discussion and step-by-step implementation of alternative dynamic estimators in Stata. Roodman (2009b)
An additional advantage of this estimation method for our analysis is that it will enable us to obtain estimates
of the coefficient of all gravity variables, which will be used to perform test (27) multiple times. discusses
problems associated with the proliferation of instruments in similar settings.

60

(4) reproduce the results from columns (1) and (2) but with pair fixed effects, thus
implementing the LSDV estimator. The estimates with the WIOD data are consistent
with the main results and they deliver ρ̂ ∈ [0.070, 0.598]. Both the upper and the lower
bounds for ρ are wider as compared to the main estimates, but they are within the
theoretical limits. We offer two possible explanations for the wider bounds. First, the
main sample has longer time coverage, which, according to Roodman (2009a) leads
to more precise estimates. Second, similar to the estimates with the 3-year interval
sample of the main data, the WIOD estimates from Table 15 are obtained with 2-year
interval data.
• Table 16 reproduces the main results from Table 3 by capitalizing on the sectoral
dimension of the latest edition of the WIOD data, as described in the data section.
For brevity, for each sector we only focus on reproducing the main specifications (i)
with lagged trade and standard gravity variables and (ii) with lagged trade and pair
fixed effects. All results are obtained with 2-year interval data, with the OLS estimator,
and with exporter-time and importer-time fixed effects, whose estimates are omitted
for brevity. The sectoral SR gravity estimates are relatively homogeneous and they
confirm our main findings.
In sum, based on the sensitivity experiments that we employed in this section, we conclude
that our main findings from Section 4.3 represent robust results.

61

Table 4: SR Gravity & Efficiency, Size-adjusted Trade
OLS Estimator
PPML Estimator
Efficiency
PairFEs
Efficiency2 Standard Efficiency
PairFEs
Efficiency2
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
(7)
(8)
LN DIST
-1.185
-0.711
-0.723
∗∗
∗∗
∗∗
(0.049)
(0.066)
(0.067)
CNTG
-0.048
0.559
0.554
(0.189)
(0.150)∗∗
(0.151)∗∗
CLNY
0.459
0.060
0.055
(0.159)∗∗
(0.122)
(0.121)
LANG
0.782
0.537
0.541
(0.107)∗∗
(0.117)∗∗
(0.117)∗∗
FTA
0.406
0.165
0.147
0.122
0.043
0.321
0.108
(0.062)∗∗
(0.041)∗∗
(0.041)∗∗
(0.064)+
(0.070)
(0.066)∗∗
(0.063)+
LN TARIFF
-1.704
-1.311
-1.283
-8.345
-7.981
-2.545
-1.420
(0.442)∗∗
(0.308)∗∗
(0.306)∗∗
(0.757)∗∗
(0.794)∗∗
(0.398)∗∗
(0.326)∗∗
-3.733
-3.178
-3.501
INTL BRDR
(0.324)∗∗
(0.179)∗∗
(0.174)∗∗
INTL BRDR 1991
0.215
0.231
0.168
0.148
(0.091)∗
(0.092)∗
(0.027)∗∗
(0.018)∗∗
0.462
0.511
0.358
0.316
INTL BRDR 1994
(0.098)∗∗
(0.098)∗∗
(0.028)∗∗
(0.025)∗∗
INTL BRDR 1997
0.622
0.713
0.412
0.450
(0.122)∗∗
(0.121)∗∗
(0.048)∗∗
(0.032)∗∗
INTL BRDR 2000
0.685
0.812
0.472
0.528
(0.132)∗∗
(0.131)∗∗
(0.060)∗∗
(0.039)∗∗
INTL BRDR 2003
0.722
0.864
0.511
0.597
(0.149)∗∗
(0.144)∗∗
(0.064)∗∗
(0.041)∗∗
INTL BRDR 2006
0.799
0.965
0.440
0.663
(0.160)∗∗
(0.158)∗∗
(0.070)∗∗
(0.039)∗∗
N
18345
18345
18344
18344
18928
18928
18928
18928
R2
0.801
0.801
0.892
0.893
0.974
0.975
Notes: This table reproduces the main results from Table 1 with size-adjusted trade Xi,z,τ /Yi,τ as dependent variable.
The estimates from columns (1)-(4) are obtained with the OLS estimator. Columns (1) and (2) reproduce the estimates
with standard gravity variables from columns (1) and (2) of Table 1. Columns (3) and (4) reproduce the estimates with pair
fixed effects from columns (4) and (5) of Table 1. Columns (5)-(8) of this table reproduce the estimates from columns (1)-(4)
of the same table with the PPML estimator. All results are obtained with exporter-time and importer-time fixed effects,
whose estimates are omitted for brevity. Standard errors are clustered by country pair and are reported in parentheses +
p < 0.10, ∗ p < .05, ∗∗ p < .01. See text for further details.
Standard
(1)
-1.184
(0.049)∗∗
-0.047
(0.189)
0.460
(0.159)∗∗
0.782
(0.107)∗∗
0.413
(0.062)∗∗
-1.723
(0.443)∗∗
-3.235
(0.299)∗∗

62

Figure 2: Evolution of International Borders, 1988-2006.

Note: This figure plots the evolution of the international border estimates
from column (2) of Table 1, which are obtained with OLS and standard gravity
variables, over time. The figure also reports the slope of the fitted line, which
corresponds to the parameter bτ from the main text.

Figure 3: Evolution of International Borders, 1988-2006.

Note: This figure plots the evolution of the international border estimates
from column (5) of Table 2, which are obtained with the PPML estimator and
pair fixed effects, over time. The figure also reports the slope of the fitted line,
which corresponds to the parameter bτ from the main text.

63

Table 5: SR Gravity & Efficiency, All Years: 1988-2006
OLS Estimator
PPML Estimator
Efficiency
PairFEs
Efficiency2 Standard Efficiency
PairFEs
Efficiency2
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
(7)
(8)
LN DIST
-1.187
-0.643
-0.656
(0.049)∗∗
(0.065)∗∗
(0.065)∗∗
CNTG
-0.036
0.492
0.500
(0.189)
(0.145)∗∗
(0.143)∗∗
CLNY
0.457
-0.056
-0.070
(0.158)∗∗
(0.110)
(0.110)
LANG
0.773
0.346
0.362
(0.106)∗∗
(0.137)∗
(0.136)∗∗
FTA
0.412
0.170
0.155
0.127
0.072
0.282
0.102
(0.062)∗∗ (0.037)∗∗
(0.036)∗∗
(0.117)
(0.113)
(0.073)∗∗
(0.065)
-1.497
-1.114
-1.091
-7.444
-6.894
-4.391
-2.383
LN TARIFF
(0.377)∗∗ (0.259)∗∗
(0.257)∗∗
(1.092)∗∗
(1.157)∗∗ (0.631)∗∗
(0.539)∗∗
INTL BRDR
-3.746
-2.652
-3.043
(0.323)∗∗
(0.154)∗∗
(0.153)∗∗
INTL BRDR 1990
0.183
0.195
0.180
0.137
(0.061)∗∗
(0.060)∗∗
(0.022)∗∗
(0.016)∗∗
INTL BRDR 1992
0.343
0.381
0.226
0.170
(0.088)∗∗
(0.091)∗∗
(0.023)∗∗
(0.018)∗∗
0.463
0.515
0.324
0.250
INTL BRDR 1994
(0.098)∗∗
(0.098)∗∗
(0.028)∗∗
(0.024)∗∗
INTL BRDR 1996
0.548
0.633
0.382
0.326
(0.115)∗∗
(0.116)∗∗
(0.039)∗∗
(0.032)∗∗
INTL BRDR 1998
0.657
0.769
0.479
0.459
(0.126)∗∗
(0.122)∗∗
(0.047)∗∗
(0.037)∗∗
INTL BRDR 2000
0.689
0.816
0.543
0.490
(0.132)∗∗
(0.130)∗∗
(0.055)∗∗
(0.042)∗∗
INTL BRDR 2002
0.653
0.789
0.455
0.459
(0.146)∗∗
(0.139)∗∗
(0.057)∗∗
(0.041)∗∗
INTL BRDR 2004
0.723
0.883
0.486
0.538
(0.152)∗∗
(0.148)∗∗
(0.062)∗∗
(0.042)∗∗
INTL BRDR 2006
0.807
0.975
0.509
0.585
(0.160)∗∗
(0.157)∗∗
(0.066)∗∗
(0.041)∗∗
N
49916
49916
49916
49916
51376
51376
51376
51376
R2
0.882
0.882
0.936
0.936
Notes: This table reproduces the main results from Table 1 with data for all years. The estimates from columns (1)-(4)
are obtained with the OLS estimator. Columns (1) and (2) reproduce the estimates with standard gravity variables from
columns (1) and (2) of Table 1. Columns (3) and (4) reproduce the estimates with pair fixed effects from columns (4)
and (5) of Table 1. Columns (5)-(8) of this table reproduce the estimates from columns (1)-(4) of the same table with the
PPML estimator. All results are obtained with exporter-time and importer-time fixed effects, whose estimates are omitted
for brevity. In addition, also for brevity, we have omitted the estimates on the bilateral border dummies for the odd years
in the sample. The omitted estimates are available by request. Standard errors are clustered by country pair and are
reported in parentheses + p < 0.10, ∗ p < .05, ∗∗ p < .01. See text for further details.
Standard
(1)
-1.186
(0.049)∗∗
-0.036
(0.189)
0.457
(0.158)∗∗
0.773
(0.105)∗∗
0.418
(0.062)∗∗
-1.513
(0.378)∗∗
-3.229
(0.297)∗∗

64

Table 6: SR Gravity & Efficiency, All Years: 1988-2006
(1)
(2)
PuzzleOLS
PuzzlePPML
LN DIST
-1.184
-0.634
(0.057)∗∗
(0.074)∗∗
LN DIST 1990
-0.005
0.016
(0.027)
(0.021)
-0.061
0.000
LN DIST 1992
(0.031)∗
(0.023)
-0.027
0.012
LN DIST 1994
(0.040)
(0.023)
LN DIST 1996
0.032
0.029
(0.039)
(0.028)
0.008
-0.037
LN DIST 1998
(0.039)
(0.032)
0.006
-0.032
LN DIST 2000
(0.038)
(0.037)
0.013
-0.041
LN DIST 2002
(0.041)
(0.034)
0.004
-0.051
LN DIST 2004
(0.041)
(0.034)
LN DIST 2006
0.033
-0.063
(0.042)
(0.036)+
CNTG
-0.035
0.501
(0.189)
(0.142)∗∗
CLNY
0.458
-0.072
(0.158)∗∗
(0.110)
LANG
0.772
0.365
(0.105)∗∗
(0.136)∗∗
FTA
0.425
0.072
(0.065)∗∗
(0.113)
LN TARIFF
-1.509
-6.953
(0.379)∗∗
(1.167)∗∗
-3.754
-3.081
INTL BRDR
(0.336)∗∗
(0.164)∗∗
INTL BRDR 1990
0.200
0.152
(0.097)∗
(0.055)∗∗
INTL BRDR 1992
0.543
0.225
(0.129)∗∗
(0.056)∗∗
0.549
0.300
INTL BRDR 1994
(0.159)∗∗
(0.055)∗∗
INTL BRDR 1996
0.443
0.325
(0.167)∗∗
(0.076)∗∗
0.628
0.546
INTL BRDR 1998
(0.170)∗∗
(0.091)∗∗
0.668
0.599
INTL BRDR 2000
(0.174)∗∗
(0.108)∗∗
INTL BRDR 2002
0.608
0.528
(0.192)∗∗
(0.094)∗∗
INTL BRDR 2004
0.707
0.579
(0.201)∗∗
(0.089)∗∗
INTL BRDR 2006
0.693
0.624
(0.209)∗∗
(0.091)∗∗
N
49916
51376
R2
0.882
Notes: This table reproduces the results from column (3) of
Table 1, where we use our theory to resolve the ‘distance puzzle’ of trade, with data for all years. The estimates in column
(1) of this table are obtained with the OLS estimator and the
estimates in column (2) are obtained with the PPML estimator.
In each case we allow for time-varying distance effects. All results are obtained with exporter-time and importer-time fixed
effects, whose estimates are omitted for brevity. In addition,
also for brevity, we have omitted the estimates on the timevarying distance variables and the estimates on the bilateral
border dummies for the odd years in the sample for each group
of countries. The omitted estimates are available by request.
Standard errors are clustered by country pair and are reported
in parentheses + p < 0.10, ∗ p < .05, ∗∗ p < .01. See text for
further details.
65

Table 7: SR Gravity & Efficiency, All Years: 1988-2006
(1)
(2)
DvlpmntOLS
DvlpmntPPML
FTA
0.148
0.171
(0.036)∗∗
(0.049)∗∗
LN TARIFF
-0.870
-1.826
(0.227)∗∗
(0.435)∗∗
0.329
0.341
INTL BRDR HIGH 1990
(0.109)∗∗
(0.041)∗∗
0.572
0.636
INTL BRDR HIGH 1992
(0.163)∗∗
(0.085)∗∗
INTL BRDR HIGH 1994
0.603
0.774
(0.185)∗∗
(0.075)∗∗
0.759
0.882
INTL BRDR HIGH 1996
(0.253)∗∗
(0.147)∗∗
INTL BRDR HIGH 1998
0.998
1.068
(0.250)∗∗
(0.184)∗∗
1.023
1.019
INTL BRDR HIGH 2000
(0.258)∗∗
(0.228)∗∗
INTL BRDR HIGH 2002
0.904
0.937
(0.283)∗∗
(0.197)∗∗
INTL BRDR HIGH 2004
1.023
1.044
(0.289)∗∗
(0.187)∗∗
INTL BRDR HIGH 2006
1.300
1.168
(0.304)∗∗
(0.207)∗∗
0.252
0.339
INTL BRDR LOW 1990
(0.160)
(0.067)∗∗
INTL BRDR LOW 1992
0.636
0.714
(0.215)∗∗
(0.098)∗∗
INTL BRDR LOW 1994
0.946
1.166
(0.212)∗∗
(0.123)∗∗
INTL BRDR LOW 1996
1.116
1.144
(0.194)∗∗
(0.132)∗∗
INTL BRDR LOW 1998
1.132
1.488
(0.257)∗∗
(0.160)∗∗
INTL BRDR LOW 2000
1.232
1.565
(0.271)∗∗
(0.172)∗∗
INTL BRDR LOW 2002
1.323
1.710
(0.296)∗∗
(0.193)∗∗
1.478
2.079
INTL BRDR LOW 2004
(0.327)∗∗
(0.189)∗∗
INTL BRDR LOW 2006
1.528
2.133
(0.347)∗∗
(0.193)∗∗
N
49914
51376
R2
0.956
Notes: This table reproduces the results from column (6) of
Table 1, which distinguished between capacity improvement for
the developed vs. developing countries in our sample, with data
for all years. The estimates in column (1) of Table 7 are obtained
with the OLS estimator and the estimates in column (2) of Table
7 are obtained with the PPML estimator. In each case we allow
for different efficiency improvements depending on whether a
country is developed or developing. All results are obtained with
exporter-time and importer-time fixed effects, whose estimates
are omitted for brevity. In addition, also for brevity, we have
omitted the estimates on the bilateral border dummies for the
odd years in the sample for each group of countries. The omitted
estimates are available by request. Standard errors are clustered
by country pair and are reported in parentheses + p < 0.10, ∗
p < .05, ∗∗ p < .01. See text for further details.

66

Table 8: SR Gravity & Efficiency, Aggregate WIOD Data
OLS Estimator
PPML Estimator
Efficiency
PairFEs
Efficiency2
Standard
Efficiency
PairFEs
Efficiency2
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
(7)
(8)
LN DIST
-1.268
-0.845
-0.846
(0.055)∗∗
(0.042)∗∗
(0.042)∗∗
CNTG
0.342
0.317
0.317
(0.112)∗∗
(0.106)∗∗
(0.106)∗∗
CLNY
0.524
0.244
0.247
(0.134)∗∗
(0.103)∗
(0.103)∗
LANG
-0.034
0.393
0.395
(0.122)
(0.104)∗∗
(0.105)∗∗
RTA
0.402
0.172
0.156
0.180
0.180
0.121
0.023
(0.081)∗∗
(0.062)∗∗
(0.062)∗
(0.065)∗∗
(0.065)∗∗
(0.043)∗∗
(0.045)
INTL BRDR
-3.909
-3.568
-3.621
(0.288)∗∗
(0.107)∗∗
(0.107)∗∗
INTL BRDR 2002
0.075
0.081
-0.053
-0.033
(0.038)∗
(0.038)∗
(0.011)∗∗
(0.009)∗∗
INTL BRDR 2004
0.288
0.309
0.008
0.046
(0.075)∗∗
(0.077)∗∗
(0.018)
(0.016)∗∗
INTL BRDR 2006
0.410
0.433
0.046
0.104
(0.095)∗∗
(0.097)∗∗
(0.020)∗
(0.018)∗∗
INTL BRDR 2008
0.503
0.526
0.065
0.147
(0.103)∗∗
(0.105)∗∗
(0.024)∗∗
(0.020)∗∗
INTL BRDR 2010
0.487
0.511
0.044
0.130
(0.107)∗∗
(0.110)∗∗
(0.025)+
(0.022)∗∗
INTL BRDR 2012
0.577
0.609
0.096
0.185
(0.120)∗∗
(0.123)∗∗
(0.024)∗∗
(0.021)∗∗
INTL BRDR 2014
0.548
0.581
0.097
0.189
(0.126)∗∗
(0.127)∗∗
(0.026)∗∗
(0.021)∗∗
N
14792
14792
14792
14792
14792
14792
14792
14792
R2
0.890
0.891
0.978
0.978
1.000
1.000
Notes: This table reproduces the main results from Table 1 with the latest edition of the WIOD data, as described in the data
section. The estimates from columns (1)-(4) are obtained with the OLS estimator. Columns (1) and (2) reproduce the estimates
with standard gravity variables from columns (1) and (2) of Table 1. Columns (3) and (4) reproduce the estimates with pair
fixed effects from columns (4) and (5) of Table 1. Columns (5)-(8) of this table reproduce the estimates from columns (1)-(4)
of the same table with the PPML estimator. All results are obtained with exporter-time and importer-time fixed effects, whose
estimates are omitted for brevity. Standard errors are clustered by country pair and are reported in parentheses + p < 0.10, ∗
p < .05, ∗∗ p < .01. See text for further details.
Standard
(1)
-1.267
(0.055)∗∗
0.343
(0.112)∗∗
0.524
(0.134)∗∗
-0.034
(0.122)
0.406
(0.081)∗∗
-3.553
(0.247)∗∗

67

68

ForestryLogging
PairFEs
SR PairFEs
(3)
(4)
0.202
0.186
(0.078)∗∗
(0.077)∗
0.083
(0.048)+
0.331
(0.087)∗∗
0.480
(0.115)∗∗
0.544
(0.118)∗∗
0.525
(0.145)∗∗
0.613
(0.165)∗∗
0.566
(0.181)∗∗
14104
14104
0.969
0.969

FishingAquaculture
PairFEs
SR PairFEs
(5)
(6)
0.301
0.283
(0.085)∗∗
(0.084)∗∗
0.091
(0.044)∗
0.293
(0.089)∗∗
0.458
(0.113)∗∗
0.586
(0.131)∗∗
0.535
(0.140)∗∗
0.605
(0.153)∗∗
0.635
(0.149)∗∗
14104
14104
0.966
0.966

MiningQuarrying
PairFEs
SR PairFEs
(7)
(8)
0.136
0.116
(0.079)+
(0.077)
0.155
(0.047)∗∗
0.400
(0.086)∗∗
0.568
(0.107)∗∗
0.671
(0.117)∗∗
0.641
(0.120)∗∗
0.746
(0.136)∗∗
0.707
(0.141)∗∗
14792
14792
0.972
0.972

Table 9: SR Gravity & Efficiency, Sectoral WIOD Data
Manufacturing
PairFEs
SR PairFEs
(9)
(10)
0.159
0.141
(0.059)∗∗
(0.058)∗
0.098
(0.040)∗
0.322
(0.075)∗∗
0.459
(0.098)∗∗
0.550
(0.108)∗∗
0.563
(0.113)∗∗
0.651
(0.127)∗∗
0.638
(0.133)∗∗
14792
14792
0.979
0.979

Services
PairFEs
SR PairFEs
(11)
(12)
0.181
0.164
(0.067)∗∗
(0.066)∗
0.087
(0.038)∗
0.324
(0.082)∗∗
0.443
(0.101)∗∗
0.552
(0.108)∗∗
0.526
(0.112)∗∗
0.618
(0.124)∗∗
0.594
(0.127)∗∗
14792
14792
0.976
0.976

Notes: This table reproduces the main results from Table 1 by capitalizing on the sectoral dimension of the latest edition of the WIOD data, as described in the data section. For brevity,
for each sector we focus on reproducing the main specifications with pair fixed effects, which are reported in columns (4) and (5) of Table 1. All results are obtained with the OLS estimator
and with exporter-time and importer-time fixed effects, whose estimates are omitted for brevity. Standard errors are clustered by country pair and are reported in parentheses + p < 0.10,
∗
p < .05, ∗∗ p < .01. See text for further details.

N
R2

INTL BRDR 2014

INTL BRDR 2012

INTL BRDR 2010

INTL BRDR 2008

INTL BRDR 2006

INTL BRDR 2004

INTL BRDR 2002

RTA

CropAnimal
PairFEs
SR PairFEs
(1)
(2)
0.130
0.112
(0.072)+
(0.071)
0.106
(0.046)∗
0.309
(0.079)∗∗
0.445
(0.098)∗∗
0.562
(0.106)∗∗
0.579
(0.123)∗∗
0.680
(0.132)∗∗
0.643
(0.135)∗∗
14792
14792
0.970
0.970

Table 10: SR Gravity & Efficiency, 3-year Intervals

LN DIST
CNTG
CLNY
LANG
FTA
LN TARIFF
INTL BRDR
L.ln trade

(1)
Standard
-1.184
(0.049)∗∗
-0.047
(0.189)
0.460
(0.159)∗∗
0.782
(0.107)∗∗
0.413
(0.062)∗∗
-1.723
(0.443)∗∗
-3.235
(0.299)∗∗

(2)
LagTrade
-0.404
(0.026)∗∗
0.019
(0.066)
0.146
(0.058)∗
0.238
(0.036)∗∗
0.200
(0.025)∗∗
-0.802
(0.286)∗∗
-0.992
(0.105)∗∗
0.651
(0.014)∗∗
15551
0.940
0.250
(0.015)∗∗

(3)
LSDV

(4)
LSDV IV

0.111
(0.033)∗∗
-0.868
(0.260)∗∗

0.077
(0.054)
-1.195
(0.433)∗∗

0.630
(0.276)∗
N
18345
10122
R2
0.880
0.955
ρ̂
0.273
(0.304)
UnderId χ2
7.092
p-val
(0.069)
Weak Id χ2
2.345
p-val
(0.071)
Over Id χ2
4.056
p-val
(0.131)
Notes: This table uses 3-year interval data to reproduce the
results from Table 3 of the main text. All results are obtained
with exporter-time and importer-time fixed effects, whose estimates are omitted for brevity. The dependent variable in
each specification is the log of nominal bilateral trade. Column (1) reports standard (long run) gravity estimates. The
estimates from column (2) are obtained with lagged trade
added as a covariate. Columns (3) reproduces the results from
column (2) but with pair fixed effects, thus implementing the
LSDV estimator. Column (4) implements an IV LSDV estimation. Robust standard errors are reported in parentheses
+ p < 0.10, ∗ p < .05, ∗∗ p < .01. See text for further details.

69

0.397
(0.017)∗∗
15549
0.953
0.534
(0.020)∗∗

Table 11: SR Gravity & Efficiency, Size-adjusted Trade

LN DIST
CNTG
CLNY
LANG
FTA
LN TARIFF
INTL BRDR
L.ln trade y

(1)
Standard
-1.186
(0.049)∗∗
-0.036
(0.189)
0.457
(0.158)∗∗
0.773
(0.105)∗∗
0.418
(0.062)∗∗
-1.513
(0.378)∗∗
-3.229
(0.297)∗∗

(2)
LagTrade
-0.248
(0.016)∗∗
0.005
(0.039)
0.092
(0.034)∗∗
0.147
(0.022)∗∗
0.108
(0.013)∗∗
-0.348
(0.100)∗∗
-0.635
(0.064)∗∗
0.788
(0.009)∗∗
46868
0.932
0.202
(0.008)∗∗

(3)
LSDV

(4)
LSDV IV

0.070
(0.016)∗∗
-0.446
(0.118)∗∗

0.029
(0.017)+
-0.579
(0.141)∗∗

0.747
(0.107)∗∗
N
49916
35411
2
R
0.802
0.940
ρ̂
0.241
(0.104)∗
UnderId χ2
15.863
p-val
(0.003)
Weak Id χ2
4.135
p-val
(0.003)
Over Id χ2
0.921
p-val
(0.820)
Notes: This table uses size-adjusted trade as dependent variable to reproduce the results from Table 3 of the main text.
All results are obtained with exporter-time and importer-time
fixed effects, whose estimates are omitted for brevity. The dependent variable in each specification is the log of nominal bilateral trade. Column (1) reports standard (long run) gravity
estimates. The estimates from column (2) are obtained with
lagged trade added as a covariate. Column (3) reproduces
the results from column (2) but with pair fixed effects, thus
implementing the LSDV estimator. Column (4) implements
an IV LSDV estimation. Robust standard errors are reported
in parentheses + p < 0.10, ∗ p < .05, ∗∗ p < .01. See text for
further details.

70

0.614
(0.011)∗∗
46868
0.939
0.371
(0.011)∗∗

Table 12: SR Gravity & Efficiency, International Trade Data Only

LN DIST
CNTG
CLNY
LANG
FTA

(1)
Standard
-1.210
(0.040)∗∗
-0.082
(0.192)
0.452
(0.163)∗∗
0.761
(0.104)∗∗
0.420
(0.063)∗∗
-1.204
(0.336)∗∗

(2)
LagTrade
-0.272
(0.014)∗∗
-0.006
(0.042)
0.098
(0.037)∗∗
0.155
(0.023)∗∗
0.116
(0.014)∗∗
-0.304
(0.098)∗∗
0.772
(0.008)∗∗
45932
0.955
0.217
(0.000)∗∗

(3)
LSDV

0.023
(0.018)
-0.458
LN TARIFF
(0.162)∗∗
L.ln trade
0.889
(0.174)∗∗
N
48928
34697
R2
0.879
0.957
ρ̂
0.105
(0.165)
UnderId χ2
10.190
p-val
(0.070)
Weak Id χ2
1.720
p-val
(0.143)
Over Id χ2
6.875
p-val
(0.143)
Notes: This table uses international trade only as the dependent variable to reproduce the results from Table 3 of the
main text. All results are obtained with exporter-time and
importer-time fixed effects, whose estimates are omitted for
brevity. The dependent variable in each specification is the
log of nominal bilateral trade. Column (1) reports standard
(long run) gravity estimates. The estimates from column (2)
are obtained with lagged trade added as a covariate. Column
(3) reproduces the results from column (2) but with pair fixed
effects, thus implementing the LSDV estimator. Column (4)
implements an IV LSDV estimation. Robust standard errors
are reported in parentheses + p < 0.10, ∗ p < .05, ∗∗ p < .01.
See text for further details.

71

0.067
(0.017)∗∗
-0.439
(0.118)∗∗
0.613
(0.011)∗∗
45932
0.960
0.373
(0.011)∗∗

(4)
LSDV IV

Table 13: SR Gravity & Efficiency, Arellano-Bond
(1)
All Years
-0.856
(0.064)∗∗
0.020
(0.117)
0.324
(0.100)∗∗
0.544
(0.077)∗∗
0.248
(0.038)∗∗
-0.927
(0.228)∗∗
-2.352
(0.268)∗∗
0.254
(0.045)∗∗
46868
168.99
(0.025)
-10.268
(0.000)
1.302
(0.193)

(2)
3-Year Intervals
LN DIST
-0.460
(0.194)∗
CNTG
0.024
(0.101)
CLNY
0.162
(0.111)
LANG
0.277
(0.141)∗
FTA
0.184
(0.047)∗∗
LN TARIFF
-0.694
(0.340)∗
INTL BRDR
-1.140
(0.578)∗
0.603
L.LN TRADE
(0.161)∗∗
N
15551
2
Over Id χ
17.530
p-val
(0.041)
AR(1)
-4.514
2
χ p-val
(0.000)
AR(2)
2.293
2
χ p-val
(0.022)
AR(3)
-0.476
χ2 p-val
(0.634)
Notes: This table reports results from
the structural investment approach to test
SR gravity theory with the Arellano-Bond
estimator.
All estimates are obtained
with exporter-time and importer-time fixed
effects, whose estimates are omitted for
brevity. The dependent variable in each
specification is the log of nominal bilateral
trade. Column (1) implements the ArellanoBond estimator with data for all years. Column (2) uses 3-year interval data. Robust
standard errors are reported in parentheses
+ p < 0.10, ∗ p < .05, ∗∗ p < .01. See text
for further details.

72

Table 14: SR Gravity & Efficiency, PPML Estimations
3-year Interval Data
Data All Years
Standard
SRG
SRG LSDV Standard
SRG
SRG LSDV
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
LN DIST
-0.647
-0.073
-0.643
-0.028
(0.065)∗∗ (0.008)∗∗
(0.065)∗∗ (0.002)∗∗
CNTG
0.489
0.021
0.491
0.008
(0.148)∗∗
(0.018)
(0.145)∗∗
(0.007)
CLNY
-0.049
-0.018
-0.056
-0.007
(0.109)
(0.021)
(0.110)
(0.007)
LANG
0.325
0.006
0.346
0.005
∗
∗
(0.139)
(0.016)
(0.137)
(0.006)
FTA
0.142
0.060
0.059
0.126
0.015
0.010
∗∗
∗
∗∗
(0.123)
(0.013)
(0.024)
(0.117)
(0.004)
(0.008)
LN TARIFF
-7.440
0.524
-0.539
-7.441
0.166
-0.209
(1.167)∗∗ (0.150)∗∗
(0.138)∗∗
(1.091)∗∗ (0.055)∗∗
(0.057)∗∗
INTL BRDR
-2.636
-0.124
-2.651
-0.048
(0.154)∗∗ (0.025)∗∗
(0.154)∗∗ (0.008)∗∗
0.913
0.691
0.967
0.869
L trade
(0.007)∗∗
(0.014)∗∗
(0.002)∗∗
(0.006)∗∗
N
18928
15665
15657
51376
47236
47231
ρ̂
-0.033
0.205
0.031
0.124
(0.007)∗∗
(0.015)∗∗
(0.002)∗∗
(0.006)∗∗
Notes: This table uses the PPML estimator to reproduce some of the results from
Table 3 of the main text. All results are obtained with exporter-time and importertime fixed effects, whose estimates are omitted for brevity. The dependent variable in
each specification is nominal bilateral trade. The estimates from columns (1)-(3) are
obtained with 3-year interval data and the estimates from columns (4)-(6) use data for
all years. Column (1) reports standard (long run) gravity estimates. The estimates from
column (2) are obtained with lagged trade added as a covariate. Column (3) reproduces
the results from column (2) but with pair fixed effects, thus implementing the LSDV
estimator. Columns (4)-(6) reproduce the results from columns (1)-(3). Robust standard
errors are reported in parentheses + p < 0.10, ∗ p < .05, ∗∗ p < .01. See text for further
details.

73

Table 15: SR Gravity & Efficiency, Aggregate WIOD Data
(1)
Standard
-1.267
(0.055)∗∗
0.343
(0.112)∗∗
0.524
(0.134)∗∗
-0.034
(0.122)
0.406
(0.081)∗∗
-3.553
(0.247)∗∗

(2)
(3)
(4)
SRG OLS
LSDV
SRG LSDV
LN DIST
-0.144
(0.014)∗∗
CNTG
0.039
(0.017)∗
CLNY
0.066
(0.025)∗∗
LANG
-0.009
(0.023)
RTA
0.110
0.172
0.112
(0.016)∗∗ (0.062)∗∗
(0.051)∗
-0.470
INTL BRDR
(0.045)∗∗
0.870
0.363
L.ln trade
∗∗
(0.009)
(0.022)∗∗
N
14792
12943
14792
12943
2
R
0.890
0.973
0.978
0.982
ρ̂
0.070
0.598
(0.009)∗∗
(0.024)∗∗
Notes: This table uses the latest edition of the WIOD data and
reproduces the results from Table 3 of the main text. All results
are obtained with exporter-time and importer-time fixed effects,
whose estimates are omitted for brevity. The dependent variable in each specification is the log of nominal bilateral trade.
Column (1) reports standard (long run) gravity estimates. The
estimates from column (2) are obtained with lagged trade added
as a covariate. Columns (3) and (4) reproduce the results from
columns (1) and (2) but with pair fixed effects, thus implementing the LSDV estimator. Robust standard errors are reported
in parentheses + p < 0.10, ∗ p < .05, ∗∗ p < .01. See text for
further details.

74

75

FishingAquaculture
SR OLS
SR LSDV
(5)
(6)
0.819
0.303
∗∗
(0.010)
(0.019)∗∗
-0.227
(0.019)∗∗
0.120
(0.029)∗∗
0.110
(0.034)∗∗
-0.054
(0.032)+
0.123
0.183
(0.026)∗∗
(0.074)∗
-0.658
(0.070)∗∗
12341
12341
0.956
0.971
0.121
0.663
(0.010)∗∗
(0.020)∗

MiningQuarrying
SR OLS
SR LSDV
(7)
(8)
0.844
0.318
∗∗
(0.011)
(0.024)∗∗
-0.194
(0.019)∗∗
0.047
(0.024)∗
0.098
(0.033)∗∗
-0.028
(0.029)
0.098
0.118
(0.021)∗∗
(0.067)+
-0.512
(0.059)∗∗
12943
12943
0.965
0.976
0.095
0.647
(0.011)∗∗
(0.026)+

Manufacturing
SR OLS
SR LSDV
(9)
(10)
0.850
0.327
∗∗
(0.009)
(0.021)∗∗
-0.180
(0.015)∗∗
0.046
(0.018)∗
0.070
(0.026)∗∗
-0.002
(0.024)
0.107
0.112
(0.017)∗∗
(0.051)∗
-0.438
(0.047)∗∗
12943
12943
0.974
0.983
0.090
0.637
(0.009)∗∗
(0.022)∗

Table 16: SR Gravity & Efficiency, Sectoral WIOD Data
ForestryLogging
SR OLS
SR LSDV
(3)
(4)
0.841
0.327
∗∗
(0.008)
(0.021)∗∗
-0.223
(0.019)∗∗
0.121
(0.029)∗∗
0.112
(0.038)∗∗
-0.068
(0.033)∗
0.110
0.142
(0.026)∗∗
(0.076)+
-0.580
(0.068)∗∗
12341
12341
0.961
0.974
0.099
0.637
(0.008)∗∗
(0.022)+

SR OLS
(11)
0.870
(0.008)∗∗
-0.140
(0.014)∗∗
0.031
(0.017)+
0.064
(0.025)∗∗
-0.011
(0.024)
0.106
(0.017)∗∗
-0.519
(0.046)∗∗
12943
0.972
0.069
(0.008)∗∗

12943
0.981
0.586
(0.022)∗

0.111
(0.053)∗

Services
SR LSDV
(12)
0.374
(0.020)∗∗

Notes: This table reproduces the main results from Table 3 by capitalizing on the sectoral dimension of the latest edition of the WIOD data, as described in the data section.
For brevity, for each sector we focus on reproducing the main specifications with lagged trade and standard gravity variables and with lagged trade and pair fixed effects.
All results are obtained with the OLS estimator and with exporter-time and importer-time fixed effects, whose estimates are omitted for brevity. Robust standard errors are
reported in parentheses + p < 0.10, ∗ p < .05, ∗∗ p < .01. See text for further details.

N
R2
ρ̂

INTL BRDR

RTA

LANG

CLNY

CNTG

LN DIST

L.ln trade

CropAnimal
SR OLS
SR LSDV
(1)
(2)
0.827
0.288
∗∗
(0.010)
(0.021)∗∗
-0.227
(0.019)∗∗
0.098
(0.023)∗∗
0.069
(0.028)∗
-0.013
(0.027)
0.110
0.122
(0.022)∗∗
(0.066)+
-0.597
(0.060)∗∗
12943
12943
0.961
0.974
0.113
0.679
(0.010)∗∗
(0.022)+

