                            NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                            THE ECU -- AN IMAGINARY OR
                             EMBRYONIC FORM OF MONEY:
                         WHAT CAN WE LEARN FROM HISTORY?




                                Michael D. Bordo

                                Anna J. Schwartz




                             Working Paper No. 2345




                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                           1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                              Cambridge, MA 02138
                                  August 1987




This paper was prepared for a conference on "The ECU and European Monetary
Integration" at the University of Leuven, Belgium, June 12-13, 1987. The research
reported here is part of the NBER's research programs in Financial Markets and
Monetary Economics and International Studies. Any opinions expressed are those
of the authors and not those of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
                                                NBER Working Paper #2345
                                                August 1987




             The ECU -- An Imaginary or Embryonic Form of Money:
                        What Can We Learn from History?


                                 ABSTRACT


    We present historical examples of new forms of money that can be corn—

pared with the ECU. We first define the ECU in its official role before

turning to developments in the private market for ECUs. We then examine

historical antecedents of three attributes of ECUs: a unit of account; a

basket of currencies; a basis for monetary integration. We discuss which

features if any of ECUs are unique, and the contribution of the historical

analysis to assessing the future of ECUs. We then ask whether governments

or markets have been dominant in the emergence of new forms of money.

Whatever emerges as money in an economy becomes the general means of

payment. Prices of commodities, services, and bonds are expressed in units

of the money. Buyers use the money to purchase goods or bonds and sellers

receive the money is exchange for goods or bonds. We conclude that, at

this stage in its history, the ECU at best is an embryonic form of money,

closer to historical imaginary monies than to existing currencies that the

world has known.




Michael 0. Bordo                                    Anna J. Schwartz
Graduate School of Industrial Administration        National Bureau of
Carnegie—Mellon University                            Economic Research
Pitsburgh, PA. 15213                                New York, N.Y. 10003
             The ECU -- An Imaginary or Embryonic Form of Money:
                        What Can We Learn from History?*


    To find examples in history of new forms of money that can be compared

with the ECU, it is first necessary to define the attributes of the ECU

and to determine whether it is in fact a new form of money.

    The ECU -is a Unit of account -- an accounting measure -- based on a

basket of currencies, the majority of which are linked by an exchange rate

agreement. The objective of the arrangement is to establish "a zone of

monetary stability" in Europe. Although the ECU was conceived as an offi-

cial unit, it has since its introduction acquired a private role.

    Six functions of the official ECU have been identified (Vaubel 1980):

as a numeraire for parities; as a reference un-it for divergence of exchange

rates from parities; as a denominator for credit facilities; as a means of

settlement; as a solution to the nth currency problem; as the nucleus of a

European parallel currency. Only the final function is of special rele-

vance to this paper.

    We first define the ECU in its official role before turning to develop-

ments in the private market for ECUs (section I). We then examine histori-

cal antecedents of three attributes of ECUs: a unit of account; a basket of

currencies; a basis for monetary integration (section II). We discuss

which features if any of ECUs are unique, and the contribution of the

historical analysis to assessing the future of ECUs (section III). We then

ask whether governments or markets have been dominant in the emergence of

new forms of money (section IV). Whatever emerges as money in an economy

becomes the general means of payment. Prices of commodities, services, and

bonds are expressed in units of the money. Buyers use the money to

purchase goods or bonds and sellers receive the money in exchange for goods
                                     —2—

or bonds. We conclude that, at this stage in its history, the ECU at best

is an embryonic form of money, closer to historical imaginary monies than

to existing currencies that the world has known. It may, however, succeed

in bringing about the preconditions of monetary unification before the EMS

develops fixed exchange rates. In that eventuality, the ECU can become a

full-fledged currency (section V).


                                      I


    The ECU, conceived as a unit of account, not a means of payment, and as

an official rather than private unit, came into existence on 13 March 1979

when the European Monetary System began operations. It was defined as a

basket of currencies that was a sum of specified amounts of nine EEC

currencies: DM, British pounds, French francs, Italian lire, Dutch guilder,

Belgian francs, Luxembourg francs, Danish krone, and Irish pounds. The

amounts were based on each country's share in intra-European trade, its

GNP, and its quota in the EEC's short-term monetary support arrangements.

The percentage shares of the currencies in the basket sum to 100.

    The value of the ECU in terms of individual EEC currencies varies with

changes in intra—EEC exchange rate relationships. Each country declares a

central rate for its currency in terms of the ECU. The weights of the

currencies in the basket change with changes in exchange rate rela-

tionships. Compulsory intervention limits are fixed on either side of each

pair of currencies' bilateral central rates.

    In September 1984, the composition of the basket was changed to offset

changes from various central rate realignments in the preceding five years.
                                       -3-


The Greek drachma was incorporated, although it, like the British pound,

does not participate in the exchange rate arrangements.

        ECUs are created on a temporary basis through 3-month revolving swaps

with the European Monetary Cooperation Fund against the deposit of 20 per-

cent of each central bank's gold and dollar reserves, The quantity of ECUs

outstanding is variable since the market price of gold (valued at the

average ECU price in the preceding six months or of the two fixings on the

penultimate working day, whichever is lower) and the ECU value of the

dollar (prevailing two working days before) have been highly volatile.

Three—fourths of outstanding ECUs have been created against gold. Since

shares of gold and dollars in reserves of central banks differ signifi-

cantly, the distribution of ECU5 among them is strongly affected by change

in the valuation of the two reserve assets. The volume of ECUs created by

the revolving swaps amounted to ECU 23 billion at the start of EMS, reached

just under 50 billion in April 1981, then fell back to 42 billion in

December 1982, and increased to 51 billion in June 1985.

    Neither debtor nor creditor central banks have found ECUs attractive

since they are inconvertible into other reserve assets, and limits exist,

though liberalized in 1985, on their usability within the EMS. Two-thirds

of interventions were in U.S. dollars through June 1985 (Micossi 1985,

331—2). Most interventions were intramarginal, not at the compulsory

intervention limits. The intramarginal ones were carried out in EC curren-

cies.

    To expand the international role of the official ECU, in 1985 EMS

central banks were authorized to make a temporary exchange with the ECMF of
                                       —4--


ECUs for dollars or with other member central banks for EEC currencies.

Holding of ECUs by non-EEC central banks and specified international mone-

tary institutions was permitted. In addition, the interest rate calcula-

tion on official ECU holdings was raised from a weighted average of the

official discount rate in member countries to the weighted average of

money-market interest rates for the component currencies.

    We do not have current information on whether these changes had the

effect of reversing the decline in official use of ECIJs that had occurred

by 1985.

    In juxtaposition to what happened to official interest in the ECU,

unexpected private interest has developed, from zero in 1980 to $40 billion

in 1985, of which about one-fourth was in bonds denominated in ECUs, the

remainder in bank assets and liabilities. Though it has grown rapidly,

relative to the size of the Euromarket, the private market for ECUs remains

minuscule --   e.g.,   ECU loans and deposits represent 0.7 and 0.3 percent,

respectively, of total EEC bank assets and liabilities (Masera 1987, 9).

    The issuers of ECU-denominated bonds include the World Bank, the

Republic of Italy, the European Investment Bank, the Council of Europe and

other official European institutions, Hydro Quebec, Citicorp, and French

public-.sector entities or firms (Lomax 1983, 178—9; BIS, 1984-5, 1,32).

Main buyers have been Belgian, Italian and French investors. Outside the

EEC, Swiss and Japanese have been buyers. Trading in ECU bonds is common

and settlement of trades is possible through a Brussels-based and a

Luxembourg—based clearing house. ECU deposits began in the interbank

market, available only to large customers. The banks had no possibility at
                                      —5—

the start of employing ECU deposits and unbundled the ECU into the nine

component currencies on the asset side of their balance sheets. With an

increase in the number of ECU depositors, the banks accepted smaller

accounts and also found a private market for borrowing in ECUs so that it

was no longer necessary to unbundle the ECU into the component currencies.

       By 1984 some 200 banks participated in the ECU interbank market. The

nonbank deposit scope of the ECU banking sector expanded not only inside

but also outside the EEC countries. Only West Germany does not authorize

banks to accept ECU denominated deposits. All other countries permit banks

to accept both current and deposit accounts.

       An important development was the agreement the BIS signed with the ECU

Banking Association in March 1986 to assume the functions of agent of the

private ECU clearing and settlement arrangement. Sometime in 1987 the

system is expected to begin operations. The BIS as agent of the clearing

banks will open and operate clearing accounts in their names, each of a

limited number of clearing banks having opened an ECU sight account at the

BIS.

       Other uses of ECUs include the invoicing of foreign trade in some EEC

member countries which to some extent has been settled in ECUs as well as

in charges against credit cards, issuance of travelers' checks and custo—

mers' accounts in Benelux countries (BIS, 1984-5, 132-3). These may be

forerunners of pricing of goods and services generally in ECUs. More

significant would be customary settlement of ECU-denominated transactions

in ECUs, rather than the equivalent of a EEC currency or dollars.

       The final question to consider is the reason for the development of the
                                   -6-

private market for ECU-denominated deposits and loans. One charac-

terization of the ECU is that it represents a form of financial innovation

(Levich 1987; Masera 1987). Private agents transact in ECUs rather than EC

national currencies, on this view, because the former provide greater port-

folio diversification, lower transaction costs, and access to a broader

market. The development of the private market for ECU-denominated deposits

and loans, however, is concentrated in countries with weak currencies, some

of which impose exchange and capital controls. The increase in nonbank

deposits has been concentrated in Belgium and Luxembourg, and

ECU-denominated loans in Denmark, France and Italy. All are countries with

relatively weak currencies, the latter three with capital controls (Greece

and Ireland also control capital movements).

    Countries with weak currencies sometimes prohibit residents to open

foreign currency accounts or hold securities denominated in a foreign

currency. If that is not the case, private agents in weak currency

countries have an incentive to borrow ECUs because the exchange risk is

lower in that denomination than it would be if the loan were in DMs or

guilder. Borrowers in countries with high nominal interest rates may find

ECU5 a cheaper form of borrowing because of its lower interest cost

adjusted for expected changes in the exchange rate, and investors may find

ECUs attractive as an alternative to the dollar without being limited to

the low interest rates of the OM and Swiss franc. Borrowing in ECUs for

firms with affiliates in a number of EEC countries has apparently been less

costly than borrowing in their national currencies (BIS 1984-5, 132).

Treating the ECU as a foreign currency in member countries with foreign
                                    —7—

exchange controls would mean that the ECU would be subject to such

controls. In some countries, however, the ECU is exempt from foreign

exchange controls. This is clearly an incentive for residents of those

countries to acquire ECU-denominated loans and deposits. "In the present

system weak currency countries have to choose between the welfare losses

associated with capital controls and the losses arising from the volatility

of short-term interest rates, and, as the evidence shows, overwhelmingly

opt for the former. Thus capital controls appear to be an important

feature of the EMS, which allows weak currency countries to take part in

the exchange rate arrangement, without suffering from excessive domestic

interest rate fluctuations" (Giavazzi and Giovannini 1986, 21).


                                    II

    In this section we report historical antecedents based on three attribu-

tes of ECUs: a universal unit of account; a basket of currencies; a basis

for monetary integration.


1. A Universal Unit of Account

    The ECU serves as a riumeraire or unit of account for the EMS. It pro-

vides a measuring rod into which the currencies and hence the price level

in terms of different currencies of the member countries can be easily

translated. Provision of a universal unit of account is indispensable in

the creation of a common currency. The ECU, however, is not widely used as

a means of payment, a second indispensable feature of a common currency.

   A precedent for the separation of unit of account and medium of

exchange is exemplified by the "imaginary" or "ghost" monies that were
                                     -8-

known in Europe between the ninth and the eighteenth centuries. From the

reign of Charlemangne until the French revolution, across much of Europe a

distinction was commonly made between actual coins in circulation and

"imaginary" money --   the accounting system of pounds, shillings, and pence

in which prices were stated. In the medieval monetary system, coins were

minted in various weights and sizes, which had no value imprinted on them.

The monarch gave the coins official value in terms of the unit of account.

    This distinction between the unit of account and means of payment is

not found in modern monetary systems where the two functions are embodied

in the same vehicle. The modern system, originally based on the specie

standard, defined the monetary unit as a fixed weight of some precious

metal, either gold, silver, or both. All coins, which had their values

imprinted on them, were multiples or fractions of this basic coin.

Fractional currencies, bank notes and bank deposits were all defined in

terms of the basic coin and were fully convertible into it. The present

fiduciary monetary system derives from the specie standard. Though

government-issued currency and bank deposits are no longer convertible -into

specie, the public has grown to treat them as if they were.

    In the middle ages conditions were very different. In each state many

coins of different metals, of different weights and sizes, coined both at

home and abroad, circulated in common use. The diverse character of

medieval coinage reflected primarily the rudimentary nature of techniques

of minting and fragmented political power.1 In these conditions an

accounting system was necessary to translate values in terms of multiple

currencies into a common denominator. The system used was based on the
                                   -9-

ancient Roman denominations of pounds, shillings, and pence. Hence arose

the distinction between "real" and "imaginary" money.2
    The medieval European monetary system was based on the Carolingian

reforms of the ninth century. Charlemagne established a currency system

consisting of a pound (livre) of silver, divided into 12 shillings (sols),

in turn divided into 12 pennies (deniers). In fact, only silver pennies

were minted.

    Over time, as income and size of transactions increased, and as the

silver content of the penny declined (reflecting both deteriorating quality

and debasement), denominations larger than the penny became imperative. To

facilitate accounting, prices were denominated in terms of shillings and
                                                          and 4
pounds, even though no one had ever seen such coins.3

    Each country in Western Europe used the system of pounds, shillings,

and pence to keep accounts and as a standard of deferred payments. Thus

contracts, mortgages and bookkeeping were denominated in £,s. .d. Actual

payments were made in "real" money --   gold,   silver, copper, or vellum coins

(a mixture of copper and silver) -- whose value in terms of the unit of

account was determined by the ruler.

    As long as the official rating of coins corresponded to that of the

market, the system allowed gold, silver, and other types of coin to cir-

culate freely. Moreover, by adjusting the value of silver (or gold) coins

in terms of the unit of account, the circulation of both gold and silver

coins in a bimetallic standard could be maintained when the market ratio of

the two metals diverged from the official ratio.5 For example, if the

market silver/gold price ratio were to fall from, say, an official value of
                                    - 10   -




12.1 to 11.5:1, the ruler could increase (cry up or enhance) the official
value of the silver currency in terms of the unit of account, thereby

reducing the official bimetallic ratio to that of the market.

    Bank money based on a given weight of gold or silver served as a form

of universal money since it could be rated in terms of the Unit of account

in each country and was more suitable than hard coin to make international

transfers. Thus the bank moneys of Venice, Genoa, and Amsterdam --   conver-
tible into fixed weights of gold -- were used all over Europe.

    In sum the system of imaginary money allowed every state to coin its

own currency, to use foreign coins, and to settle international payments

imbalances based on the universal unit of account. The ability of the

ruler to alter the value of a currency in terms of the unit of account

ultimately led to the demise of the imaginary money system. In the face of

persistent war, internal strife, and varying tax revenues, the rulers of

Europe, but especially France and Burgundy in the fourteenth and fifteenth

centuries, repeatedly resorted to debasement and competitive devaluation.6

Once the public caught on and revenue from use of the "printing press"

declined, the ruler would introduce a "renforceinent" or currency reform

that started the process again.7 The record of monetary instability in

early modern France and other states set the stage for the integration of

the coinage and universal adoption of the specie standard.8

2. A Basket of Currencies

    A second important attribute of the ECU is that it is a basket of

member country currencies, each currency entering with a fixed weight. The

basket or currency cocktail is designed to provide greater stability than
                                        — 11 —



 reliance   on any one currency would. No direct historical antecedents to

 the currency basket can be cited. The only antecedents are immediate pre-

decessors to the ECU. However, a number of arrangements are similar in the

 sense that (a) they represent some composite of more than one currency; (b)

they are believed to promote greater price stability than would relying

solely on one currency. The arrangements to be discussed are: the

electrum; bimetallism; symmetallism; recent ECU predecessors.

 (i) The electrum was a coin that was 75 percent gold, 25 percent silver,

used in Lydia, Asia Minor, circa, the sixth century B.C.      It was apparently

used because the Greeks had not learned how to harden gold with copper.

Use of this coin encountered problems with determining its gold and silver

content. Consequently, pure gold coins were preferred since they could be

assayed with a touchstone. Moreover, the ratio of gold to silver was not

legally defined (Burns 1927).

(ii) Bimetallic standards can be traced in rudimentary form back to the

Middle Ages. From Roman times the commercial world followed a silver stan-

dard, but with the evolution of international trade, gold coins, because of

their higher value, gained favor. By the mid-thirteenth century Venice

fixed the weights of both gold and silver coins, followed soon after by

other Italian city—states, and in the fourteenth century, by England,

France, and Burgundy (Cipolla 1965; Munro 1972).

    Ultimately bimetallism was displaced by the gold standard. In the

period when it was in force --   in   France (1803-78), the United States

(1792-1834) -—   it ensured greater price stability than in the succeeding
period of gold monometallism.
                                     — 12




(iii) Alfred Marshall (1923, 1926) proposed symmetallism to the Gold and

Silver Commission in England in 1886 to solve the shortcomings of reliance

on precious metals, either gold or silver alone or b-imetallism.9 Under the

scheme currency would be exchangeable for a combination of gold and silver

bullion in fixed proportions. Marshall believed the scheme would provide a

stable monetary standard because the value of legal tender money would vary

with the mean of the values of both metals. The scheme was never adopted.1°

(iv) Monetary instability of the post-World War I period led to renewed

interest in a separate unit of account based on gold)1 Thus from its

inception in 1930 the Bank of International Settlements has based its

financial statement on an artificial currency until (ACU) that has a gold

weight of 0.29032 grains of fine gold per unit. Other international agen—

cies during the Bretton Woods era adopted separate units of account based

on the official gold content of the U.S. dollar. These included the

European Payments Union, which adopted it on July 1, 1950, the European

Unit of Account (EUA), with a gold weight of 0.88807 grains of fine gold

per unit, "which might, however, be changed by unanimous decision of the

OEEC Council in which no country would veto an appreciation, or depre-

ciation, no greater than that of its own currency since the inception of

the   Union" (Triffin 1979, 139), and the succeeding European Monetary

Arrangement of Dec. 27, 1958, which used the same measure; the original SDR

adopted on January 1, 1970; and a number of private arrangements.

      With the advent of floating exchange rates in 1973, both official agen—

cies and private organizations began using an ACU based on the concept of a

basket of a number of currencies. The first such use of the basket concept
                                           - 13   -




was the European Composite Unit (EURCO), first introduced in September 1973

by a group of eight European banks. The EURCO consisted of fixed amounts

of the currencies of the nine EC member countries. The country basket con-

cept of the EURCO was subsequently applied to the SDR in June 1974, the

Arab-Currency Related Unit (ARCRU) in November 1974, the Asian Monetary

Unit (AMU) in December 1974, and the European Unit of Account (EUA), the

immediate predecessor of the ECU, in March 1975.12


3. A Basis for Monetary Integration

    The ultimate goal of the EMS is to create a uniform monetary system for

all the member countries of the EEC. Although the objectives of the

current monetary arrangements are much more modest, several historical

antecedents to monetary unification are of interest. We discuss two

regional examples --     the   Latin Monetary Union and the Scandinavian Monetary

Union —- and the monetary unification of three nations -— Germany, Italy,

and the United States.


(a) Regional Monetary Unification

(1) The Latin Monetary Union, effective August 1866, formed by France,

Belgium, Switzerland, and Italy, and subsequently joined by additional mem-

bers, achieved its limited objective to standardize the fineness of curren-

cies of 5-franc pieces that were then issued by each of the countries on

the bimetallic standard. The coins in various other denominations as well

were to circulate freely throughout the union. However, a fall in the

price of silver led to the reduced coinage of standard silver pieces in

1874 and its discontinuation in 1878. Bimetallism's sun set, but the Union
                                      - 14   -




 was not formally dissolved until 1925.

 (ii) A gold-based monetary union to replace the silver standard was created

 by Denmark and Sweden in May 1873, and joined by Norway in October 1875.

 The Scandinavian Monetary Union established a common currency unit, the

 Scandinavian krona. The monetary agreement among the three participants

 provided that gold coins, as well as common subsidiary silver and copper

 coins, were legal tender in all of them, no matter in which country the

 coins were minted. The three central banks accepted each other's notes at

 par and settled balances through a clearing system. It has been noted that

 no closer monetary cooperation was achieved by the union than would have

 been the case had each country independently adopted the gold standard

 (Jonung 1984). This conclusion holds if the only consideration is the

 fixed exchange rates the gold standard sets. However, the monetary union

contributed the additional features of eliminating national currency

distinctions. The union was unofficially gradually dissolved by World War I,

officially not until after the war.


 (b) National Monetary Unification

 (i) In 1790, Germany consisted of 300 principalities. By 1871, all had

been integrated into one country (Kindleberger 1984, 117-20). The unifica-

tion process started with rationalization of the tariff structure and ended

with monetary unification. The Zoliverein treaty of 1833, creating a

customs union among the German states, made provision for the payment of

.customs duties in gold or silver coins of any of its members. Monetary

unification began with treaties -in 1837 and 1838 when the southern members
                                      — 15 -




adopted as a common monetary unit the gulden or florin, and the northern
tier of states adopted the Prussian thaler. This was followed in 1838 by

the Dresden convention which set the exchange rate between the Prussian

thaler and the gulden, and provided for minting a new common coin --    the
VereinsmUrize, equal to two thalers or 3.5 gulden. The next stage in the

process occurred with the 1857 MUnzverein, which abandoned the Cologne mark

of silver for a Zollpfund (customs-union pound) of 500 grams, divided

metrically, and a simplified exchange rate of one thaler equal to 1.75

South German gulden. Finally, after an unsuccessful initiative in 1868 to

adopt the gold five-franc coin as the basic monetary unit, the Monetary

Reform of October 1871 introduced the mark, divided into 100 pfennings, as

the unit of account, established the ten-mark piece as the principal coin,

and linked Germany to the gold standard.

(ii) Like Germany, Italy at the beginning of the nineteenth century was

fragmented into a large number of political entities, all using separate

currencies based on different weights, metals, and systems of division

(Kindleberger 1984, 136—7). The unification process began with the

rationalization of tariffs in 1847, when the Kingdom of Sardinia, con-

sisting of Piedmont and Sardinia, joined with Tuscany and the Pontifical

States to form a single tariff unit. Currency unification came in stages.

Initially, four currencies (the lire of Piedmont and Parma, the Austrian

florin of Lombardy, and the Roman escudo) circulated; then by August 1862,

following the unification of Italy, the lira of the Kingdom of Sardinia

became the basis of a new currency.

(iii) In the early years of the Republic, though the U.S. coinage was
                                      - 16   -




 defined   in terms of fixed weights of gold and silver, the principal media

 of exchange were state bank notes. These notes often circulated at a

 discount from par, especially in remote regions, reflecting the uncertainty

 and the costs of redemption in specie. The Second Bank of the United

 States was founded in 1816 for the express purpose of providing a uniform

 national currency with the note issue everywhere convertible into specie.

 From its inception until its demise in 1836 during the Bank War, the Second

 Bank suceeded by the mid—1820s in creating a unified currency across the

 country (Fraas 1974). It did so by limiting credit in the western branches

 relative to the east and by forcing all its correspondent banks to redeem

 their notes in specie. This policy quickly reduced the discount on western

 notes and led to a convergence of price levels between the two regions.


                                       III

     The ECU is a unit of account based on a basket of currencies. A unit

 of account separate from the medium of exchange is a throwback to imaginary

 monies that existed for many centuries in the past. They were a market

 response to a problem brought about by limited technology and fragmented

 and weak political power --   the problem of making payments with coins of

 diFferent weights, qualities, and units of measurement. The one element

 relevant to the ECU in this explanation for the existence of imaginary

monies is the political dimension. It is not conditions of technology that

account for diverse national monies of EEC countries; for nationalistic

.reasons each country values its own historic forms of money. The ECU as a

unit of account is designed not to disturb that underlying reality.
                                    — 17 -



Another element common to imaginary money and the ECU is that actual

 payments in settlement of transactions in each case were in the past and

are in the present made in currencies other than the unit of account.

     The basket of currencies feature of the ECU is only relatively unique

since that feature was introduced in predecessors that date back to the

1970s. The historical arrangement that bears a resemblance to a basket of

currencies is bimetallism, which was successful for much of the nineteenth

century. It then enjoyed widespread international participation, but has

little to say about the future of the ECU. Symmetallism was an intellec-

tual construct that never saw the light of day.

    From regional and national monetary unification experience, we learn

that a common money is achievable within a fixed exchange rate system.

National boundaries define a fixed exchange rate system. That is what a

national monetary unification signifies. A regional monetary unification

is embedded in a fixed exchange rate system. The Latin Monetary Union was

based on the bimetallic standard, the Scandinavian Monetary Union on the

gold standard. Neither outlasted the prevailing world monetary regimes in

which they were established.

    Is there anything in the historical record that should lead an observer

to expect the ECU either (a) to become acceptable in payment in each member

country, even should national monies continue to exist, or (b) to supersede

national monies? The ECU is a creation of an exchange rate system that is

only temporarily fixed. Based on history, only in a truly fixed rate

exchange system does it seem to us that monetary unification based on the

ECU is conceivable. Yet, arguably, to establish a truly fixed exchange
                                     - 18   -




rate   system ab initio would impose unduly harsh conditions on the par-

ticipating countries. Hence establishment of a parallel currency such as

the ECU is an alternative prefiguring monetary unification, with fixing

exchange rates left to a later stage. Whether this strategy can succeed is

of great interest.

                                     Iv

    The historical evidence supports the proposition that markets and not

governments have been dominant in the emergence of new forms of money.

Commodity money was a market development. From earliest times private

coinage was known in many parts of the world. Nationalization of coining

was a later development for economic, political, or military reasons.

    The financial innovation that was the prototype of all forms of inside

money dates back to the development of the banking business during the

early Renaissance in several important Italian cities. Individuals depo-

sited specie with a banker who did not acquire title to the funds but held

them as agent for the owner and charged a fee for storage.. A subsequent

development was the drawing of orders on the banker to pay some or all of

the deposit to a third party. Eventually, bankers learned that it was safe

to lend a portion of the deposits at interest. Depositors likewise learned

that deposit vouchers issued by bankers made out to individuals and trans-

ferable by endorsement served in place of specie as a medium of payment.

This was the origin of fractional reserve banking and fiduciary money.

Bankers no longer earned a fee for safekeeping specie but acquired title to

the funds left with them for use at their discretion, and earned interest

on loans they extended. Depositors received a rate of return that tended,
                                     — 19 -



as a result of competition among bankers, to equal the interest revenue

 less the bankers' cost of operation.

     In England a parallel evolution occurred Goldsmiths were the first

bankers and goldsmith notes were the oldest form of banknotes in England.

By the time the Bank of England was established in 1694 -—   the   bankruptcy

of the goldsmiths on the suspension of payments by the Exchequer in 1672

(Horsef-leld 1982; Feavearyear 1931, 103) having set the stage for its

founding --   banknotes that it issued were hardly a new form of money. The

Bank at its founding was only a quasi-governmental institution.

    Once banknotes became an established form of money that the private

sector willingly held, there was nothing to prevent the monetary authori-

ties from capturing the seigniorage from their issue. Thus the Bank of

England obtained a monopoly of the note issue within a 65-mile radius of

London in 1826 and throughout England in 1844. In Sweden, the Riksbank

gradually extended its monopoly over the note issue in the last quarter of

the nineteenth century with final prohibition of competing bank issues in

1897 (Jonung 1987).

    Private initiatives converted instruments not originally designed to

serve as money to that use. An example is the postdated check. It was an

instrument that made it possible to circumvent usury laws. Drawn by the

debtor for the face value of the loan plus interest (at an unstated per-

cent) payable to the creditor at the due date, the postdated check was a

flexible form of credit expressed in odd amounts. When passed from hand to

hand with endorsements, the check served as money. Evasion of regulation

by creative private innovation of forms of money has a long history, to
                                      - 20   -




which further reference is made in what follows, including ECU-denominated
deposits and loans.

    Another example of an instrument not originally designed to serve as

money that private agents converted to that use is the bill of exchange.

It has a very long history, dating to Babylonian times. Originally the

bill was an instrument that obligated the borrower who obtained one kind of

money to settle in the debt in a different kind of money --    reminiscent of
using an ECU-denominated deposit to obtain a European currency other than

the local currency of the depositor? By the fourteenth century, however,

both the debt and its repayment were in one kind of money, payable at

fairs. Two centuries later the practice of endorsement gave added protec-

tion to the holder of the instrument, and thereafter endorsed inland bills

of exchange circulated as money in Italy, France, and later England.

    In England endorsed bills of exchange for relatively small amounts of

£10 to £30 served as hand-to—hand currency -- by private market action --

primarily    in the West Riding and Lancashire where no country banknotes cir-

culated. These bills could not, however, be used for making payments

outside those districts. With the establishment of joint stock banks after

1833, remittance first with their note issues and later by check was accom-

panied by the atrophy of the bill of exchange as means of payment --   again
a private market action (see also Nishimura 1971, 29-30 on tax effects that

may account for a decline in the use of bills of exchange as hand-to-hand

currency).

    The issue of Exchequer bills by England is another example of private

market use of the instrument as money. These were interest-bearing bills
                                     - 21


 that acquired a secondary function as currency. Since they were not

 payable on demand and therefore circulated at a discount, and were often

 drawn for large and inconvenient amounts, private use of the bills as

 currency did not long survive.

     Another kind of private money innovation is exemplified by substitutes

 that were introduced when government supply was inadequate. Merchants

 issued lOUs during colonial times in the United States and later during

periods of restriction of payments by banks, that is, periods when govern-

ment issues of outside money did not match the demand for it. The

experience of colonial times was that transactions were occasionally con-

ducted by barter or shopnotes --   notes issued by a merchant, redeemable by

him partly in money, partly in goods (Michener 1983). A multiple price

system emerged, with cash prices serving as the base, payments in shopnotes

raising the price, and prices for barter payments still higher. During

restriction of payments by banks, private clearinghouses monetized bank

assets by issuing hand-to-hand currency. In addition, emergency currency

issues that factories, corporations, and individuals paid out circulated.

    The private issues may not have been new forms of money in a generic

sense, since they were essentially variants of hand-to-hand currency. More

recently, private markets have innovated new forms of money including the

emergence of negotiable certificates of deposit, Eurocurrency, and money

market deposit accounts. The innovation of money instruments seems to

occur when private agents attempt to eliminate or circumvent government

regulation or other constraints imposed on the financial firm (Silber 1975,

64—5).
                                    — 22 —



     Where does the ECU fit in? The official ECU was the creation of an

 official body. The private use of the ECU seems to us to be another case

 of circumventing exchange and capital controls. If the ECU will eventually

 emerge as a full-fledged money, it will not be because of "substantial sup-

 port from international organizations and from national governments" (Lomax

 1983, 312), except in the special sense of support by the participating

 governments for a true fixed exchange rate system in the EEC. Private

 agents may then decide to use the ECU in final payments as a parallel

 European currency superseding the moneys of the individual member

 countries.

     Some have proposed the issue of an ECU coin to hasten the development

 of a parallel currency. In our view that is not a crucial element. ECUs

 could be book entries at banks and nonfinancial firms. The key requirement

 is that they serve as final means of payment, not merely an accounting

 measure that must be converted into a national currency in order to

 discharge debts.


                                      V

     We have traced the development of the ECU both in its official use and

also the unexpected private interest in it as a unit of account in finan-

cial transactions. At this stage, the share of private ECUs in relation to

national and Eurocurrencies is minimal. A potentially important step in

encouraging further use of ECU-denominated bank loans and deposits is the

.forthcoming implementation of the BIS ECU bank clearing arrangement.

    Our search for historical antecedents of the ECU hardly yielded a
                                     - 23   —




 substantial   harvest. We concluded that the ECU as a unit of account bears

 a resemblance to imaginary money that existed for nearly a millenium from

 the ninth century on; as a basket of currencies was prefigured by mixed

 commodity currency standards, actual or hypothetical, and was similar in

construction to more recent official and private currency cocktails; as a

 scheme for monetary integration was differentiated from examples of mone-

tary integration within national boundaries and across regional boundaries

because these were all based on fixed exchange rates.

    There did not seem to us to be particularly unique features in the

emergence of ECUs. The lessons of historical analysis that we stressed

were (1) the importance of the creation of a true fixed exchange rate

system in the EEC for the ECU to become a money that would be acceptable in

payment in each member country; (2) a Unit of account that is not also a

means of payment is only an intermediate stage in the development of a new

European money; (3) a basket of currencies is a reflection of the

unwillingness of the EMS to dispense with national currencies to achieve

monetary integration.

    In examining the role of governments versus markets in the emergence of

new forms of money, we noted the preponderance of private initiatives

historically and contemporaneously -in introducing media of payment. The

incentives for the private sector to innovate in this respect appear to be

to free transactions from government controls and regulation as well as to

overcome other constraints on financial firms. Government has not been an

innovator in the emergence of money. We doubt that it is essential for the

EEC to coin ECUs as a means of expanding its role.
                                    — 24 —




    Private   use of ECUs in weak-currency countries and in countries with

exchange and capital controls that do not apply to the ECU may have suf-

ficient momentum to continue, should controls be removed. The ECU may also

succeed as a 'ttrojan horsett in bringing about the preconditions of monetary

unification before the fixing of exchange rates. If that turns out to be

the shape of the future, the ECU in time can become a full-fledged currency

in a fixed-exchange rate EMS.
                                     —25—


                                     Notes


  *For helpful comments and suggestions, we thank Polly Allen, Paul De Grauwe,

 Lars Jonung, David Laidler, Jacques Melitz, and Angela Redish.


     1Before the invention of milling in the mid-seventeenth century, primi-

 tive refining techniques caused coins to deteriorate quickly. In addition,

 some rulers encountered difficulty in attracting sufficient bullion to the

 mint. These factors combined with the small geographic size of the typical

 European state enforced wide circulation of foreign coins. Medieval rulers

 on occasion tried to ban the use of imported coin but were usually unsuc-

 cessful.

     2The following discussion of imaginary monies is based on Einaudi

 (1936). For related experiences of primitive cultures, see Melitz (1974).

 For a recent discussion of monetary systems that separated the unit of

 account from the medium of exchange, see Cowen and Kroszner (1987, 574-5).

     3Though occasionally money of account was pegged to a real coin equiva-

 lent to a pound, shilling, or penny, such correspondence was accidental or,

 if deliberate, did not last long.

     4According to Cipolla (1956) the system of ghost monies arose because

 rulers were unable to keep stable the relationship between coins of dif-

 ferent denominations. Hence the public used the ghost reckoning system,

which by definition maintained a stable ratio between different denomina-

.tions and between the basic real penny.

     5The value of silver rather than gold coins was altered because of the
                                     - 26   —




 prestige   attached to gold and because gold coins were more widely used in

 international trade.

     61n sharp contrast to Burgundy and France, England was a model of sound

 money. After a Parliamentary prohibition of debasement in 1352, English

 monarchs rarely engaged in the practice until the sixteenth century (except

 periodically to offset deterioration in the quality of the coinage. See

 Glassman and Redish 1987).

     7See Bordo (1980) and the references therein.

     8Alternatively, it may be argued that the adoption of the specie stan-

 dard in the eighteenth century made obsolete the system of imaginary money.

 The adoption of the specie standard was neither uniform nor uneventful.

 For example, in the British American colonies in the eighteenth century,

 though the unit of account was -in £.s.d., because of a prohibition against

 the export of British coin, the principal means of payment was the Spanish

 dollar or piece oF eight. These coins were defined in terms of the colo-

 nial money and given legal tender status. See Michener (1987).

     9Marshall's criticism of monometallism was that changes in demand

 (rising real income and a preference for gold) and supply (improved tech-

 nology and discoveries of precious metals) conditions made the use of gold

 or silver unsuitable to provide long-run price stability. His criticism of

 bimetall-ism was that changes in relative costs of production would lead to

 continuous shifts towards the lower-cost metal, thus producing more insta-

.b-il-ity than relying on one metal alone (1923, p. 63).

    10Marshall (1923) also proposed a tabular scheme. Jevons (1875) earlier
                                   — 27 -




proposed a similar scheme (Laidler 1982). Fisher proposed a scheme for a

compensated dollar (1922 [1965], 498). Einaudi argued that the system of

imaginary money could be used in a similar manner. He proposed that the

ruler cry up the currency when the price level fell below some stated limit

and cry it down when prices rose above it.

   11The following draws heavily on Ascheim and Park (1976).

   12Baskets were also privately arranged: the B—Unit (Barclay's Unit) and

the Credit Lyonnais International Financial Unit (IFU).

   t3For the experience of other countries, see Vaubel (1984).
                                    - 28   -




                                 Ref erences


 Ascheim, J. and Y.S. Park. 1976. Artificial Currency Units: The Formation

     of Functional Currency Areas. Essays in International Finance No. 114.

     International Finance Section. Princeton: Princeton University.

 Bank for International Settlements. 1979-86. Forty-ninth through

     Fifty-sixth Annual Report. Basle.

 Bordo, M.D. 1986. "Money: Deflation and Seignorage in the Fifteenth

     Century: A Review Essay." Journal of Monetary Economics 18 (November):

     337-46.

 Burns, A.R. 1927. Money and Monetary Policy in Early Times. New York:

     Knopf.

 Cipolla, C. 1956. Money, Prices and Civilization in the Mediterranean

     World, Fifth to Seventeenth Century. Princeton: Princeton University

     Press.

 Cowen, T. and Kroszner, R. 1987. "The Development of the New Monetary

     Economics," Journal of Political Economy 95 (June): 567-90.

 Einaudi, L. [1936] 1953. "The Theory of Imaginary Money from Charlemagne

     to the French Revolution." In Enterprise and Secular Change:

    Readings in Economic History, F.C. Lane and J.C. Riemersmal, eds.

    Homewood, Ill.: Richard D. Irwin.

Feavearyear, A.E. 1931. The Pound Sterling: A History ofjlish Money.

    Oxford: Clarendon Press.

.Fisher, I. [1922], 1965. Ib Purchasing Power of Money, New York: Augustus

    M. Kelley.
                                      - 29   -




Fraas, A. 1974. "The Second Bank of the United States: An Instrument for

    an Interregional Monetary Union." Journal of Economic History 34 (2)

     (June): 447—62.

Giavazzi, F. and Giovannini, A. 1986. "European Currency Experience."

    Note di Lavoro, no. 8602, Dipartiinento di Scienze Economiche.

    Universitâ degli Studi di Venezia.

Glassman, D. and Red-ish, A. 1987. "Currency Depreciation in Early Modern

    England and France." Explorations in Economic History (forthcoming).

Horsefield, J.K. 1982. "The 'Stop of the Exchequer' Revisited."

    Economic History_view 35, 511-28.

Jevons, W.S. 1884. Investigations in Currency and Finance. H.S. Foxwell

    (ed.) London: Macmillan.

Jonung, L. 1984. "Swedish Experience under the Classical Gold Standard,

    1873-1914." In A Retrospective on the Classical Gold Standard,

    1821-1931, M.D. Bordo and A.J. Schwartz (eds.), Chicago: University

    of Chicago Press.

             1987. "The Economics of Private Money: The Experience of

    Private Notes in Sweden, 1831-1902." Paper presented at the Western

    Economics Association International Meetings, Vancouver, June.

Kindleberger, C.P. 1984. AFinancialHistoryof Western_Eurpe.          London:

    Allen & Unwin.

Laidler, D. 1982. "Jevons on Money."                                   and

    Social_Studies   50 (4) (December): 326-53.
Levich,   R.M. 1987. "Developing the ECU Markets: Perspectives on Financial

    Innovation." NBER Working Paper 2276 (June).
                                    - 30   -




 Loniax, D.F. 1983. "International Moneys and Monetary Arrangements in

     Private Markets." In International Money and Credit: The Policy Rules.

    G.M. von Furstenberg (ed.). Washington, D.C.: IMF.

Marshall, A. 1923. Money, Credit and Commerce.

Masera, R.S. 1987. "An Increasing Role for the ECU: A Character in Search

    of a Script." Essays in International Finance 167. International

    Finance Section. Princeton: Princeton University.

Melitz, J. 1974. Primitive and Modern Money: An Interdisciplinary

    Approach. Reading, MA: Addison-Wesley.

Micossi, S. 1985. 'The Intervention and Financing Mechanisms of the EMS

    and the Role of the ECU." Banca Nazconale del Lavoro 155. (December):

    327—45.

Michener, R. 1987. "Fixed Exchange Rates and the Quantity Theory in

    Colonial America." Carnegie Rochester Conference Series on Public

    Policy (forthcoming).

Michener, R. 1983. "Shortages of Money in Colonial New England: An

    Explanation." Mimeo.

Munro, J. 1973. Wool, Cloth, and Gold: The Strggle_for   Bullion   in Anglo

    6ianTra4p1478.               Toronto: University of Toronto Press.
Nishimura, S. 1971. The Decline of Inland Bills of Exchae in the London

    Market, 1855-1913. Cambridge. Cambridge University Press.

Peeters, T. 1982. "EMU: Prospects and Retrospect." In i_opeaMonety

    UniOn: Progress and Prospects." M.T. Sumner and G. Zis (eds.). London:

    St. Martin's Press.

Sarcinelli, M. 1986. "The EMS and the International Monetary System:
                                      — 31 —



    Towards Greater Stability." Banca Nazionale del Lavoro 156 (March):

    57-83.

Silber, W.L. 1975. "Towards a Theory of Financial Innovation," In

    Financial Innovation, W.L. Silber (ed.). Lexington, Mass.: D.C. Heath.

Triffin, R. 1979. "Units of Account and Parallel Currencies in

    Transnatjonal Transactions." In 1. Peters and M. Fratianni, eds., One

    Money For Europe. New York: Praeger.

Ungerer, H. 1983. The European Monetary System: The Experience, 1979-82.

    Occasional Paper No. 19. Washington, D.C.: IMF.

Vaubel, R. 1980. "The Return to the New European Monetary System:

    Objectives, Incentives, Perspectives." In Monetary Institutions

    and the Policy Process. Carnegie-Rochester Conference Series on

    Public Policy 13.     K. Brunner and A.H. Meltzer (eds.) Amsterdam:

    North Holland.

_________    1984.   "Private Competitive Note Issue in Monetary History." In

    P. Salin, ed., Currency Competition and Monetary Union. The Hague:

   Mart-inus Nijhoff, 59—73.

Zis, G. 1985. "Whether ECU?" Greek Economic Review 7(2) (August):

   108—24.
