                             NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                FLEXIBILITY OF ADJUSTMENT TO SHOCKS:
     ECONOMIC GROWTH AND VOLATILITY OF MIDDLE-INCOME COUNTRIES
         BEFORE AND AFTER THE GLOBAL FINANCIAL CRISIS OF 2008


                                      Joshua Aizenman
                                       Yothin Jinjarak
                                       Gemma Estrada
                                          Shu Tian

                                     Working Paper 23467
                             http://www.nber.org/papers/w23467


                    NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                             1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                               Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    June 2017




Donghyun Park provided overall guidance for the paper. Ilkin Huseynov provided able assistance
with the data. Akiko Terada-Hagiwara and participants at the ADB workshop on “Transcending
the Middle-Income Challenge” provided useful comments and suggestions. Financial support
from the ADB is gratefully acknowledged. Any errors are ours. The views expressed herein are
those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the Asian Development Bank
(ADB) and the National Bureau of Economic Research. Financial support from the ADB is
gratefully acknowledged.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2017 by Joshua Aizenman, Yothin Jinjarak, Gemma Estrada, and Shu Tian. All rights reserved.
Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission
provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Flexibility of Adjustment to Shocks: Economic Growth and Volatility of Middle-Income Countries
Before and After the Global Financial Crisis of 2008
Joshua Aizenman, Yothin Jinjarak, Gemma Estrada, and Shu Tian
NBER Working Paper No. 23467
June 2017
JEL No. E02,F43

                                          ABSTRACT

The pronounced and persistent impact of the global financial crisis of 2008 motivates our empirical
analysis of the role of institutions and macroeconomic fundamentals on countries’ adjustment to
shocks. Our empirical analysis shows that the associations of growth level, growth volatility,
shocks, institutions, and macroeconomic fundamentals have changed in important ways after the
crisis. GDP growth across countries has become more dependent on external factors, including
global growth, global oil prices, and global financial volatility. After accounting for the effects
global shocks, we find that several factors facilitate adjustment to shocks in middle income
countries. Education attainment, share of manufacturing output in GDP, and exchange rate stability
increase the level of economic growth, while exchange rate flexibility, education attainment, and
lack of political polarization reduce the volatility of economic growth. Countries cope with shocks
better in the short to medium term by using appropriate policy tools and having good long-term
fundamentals.

Joshua Aizenman                                 Gemma Estrada
Economics and SIR                               Asian Development Bank
USC                                             6 ADB Ave, Ortigas Center, Mandaluyong
University Park                                 Philippines
Los Angeles, CA 90089-0043                      gestrada@adb.org
and NBER
aizenman@usc.edu                                Shu Tian
                                                Asian Development Bank
Yothin Jinjarak                                 6 ADB Ave, Ortigas Center, Mandaluyong
School of Economics and Finance                 Manila, Philippines
Victoria University of Wellington               stian@adb.org
PO Box 600
23 Lambton Quay, Wellington
New Zealand 6140
yothin.jinjarak@vuw.ac.nz
1 Introduction

        The global financial crisis of 2007-2009 marked a watershed moment in

postwar economic history of the world. Prior to the global crisis, most financial and

economic crises occurred in emerging markets in Asia, Latin America and elsewhere.

While those crises inflicted a great deal of economic and social hardship on the affected

economies, the spillover effects of those crises on other economies was by and large

limited. For example, the Asian financial crisis of 1997-1998 sharply curtailed growth

and caused high unemployment and other humanitarian suffering in four high-flying

East and Southeast Asian economies, namely Indonesia, Korea, Malaysia and Thailand,

but those effects did not spill over to the rest of the world. Similarly, the adverse effects

of crises that Argentina, Mexico, and other Latin American countries suffered prior to

the global crisis were mostly confined to the crisis-hit economies themselves.

        What is qualitatively different about the global financial crisis was that it broke

out in the U.S., the world’s largest economy and home to world’s biggest, deepest and

most liquid and sophisticated financial markets. As such, it was bound to have

incomparably larger effects on the rest of the world and so it proved. The crisis was

rooted in the U.S. subprime mortgage crisis which, in turn, was rooted in colossal

market failures in the U.S. housing and financial markets. Simply put, in their quest for

yield, U.S. banks lent far too much mortgage to borrowers with poor credit ratings,

fuelling a housing bubble that burst when Lehman Brothers went under. The crisis

paralyzed credit flows in the U.S. and spread like wildfire across the Atlantic to Europe,

due to the heavy exposure of many European banks to U.S. subprime mortgage assets.

The primary channel of crisis transmission to emerging markets was via reduction of

trade and disruption of capital flows.




                                             2
       As credit flows seized up, business and consumer confidence took a major hit,

and investment and consumption plummeted, crimping growth. The global crisis thus

spread quickly from the financial markets to the real economy. The U.S. and other

advanced economies went into recession and in 2009 suffered a contraction of output.

Although emerging markets as a whole grew in 2009, emerging-market growth was not

enough to offset advanced-economy contraction, and global GDP fell marginally for

the first and only time in the postwar period (Figure 1). While the decline in global

GDP was marginal, the decline in global trade was more substantial (Figure 2). When

the global crisis broke out, there were genuine, widespread fears of another Great

Depression, the interwar catastrophe that devastated the world economy. In fact, only

concerted, forceful fiscal and monetary policy interventions by governments and

central banks around the world averted another Great Depression.




                                         3
                                  Figure 1
 GDP growth of advanced economies, emerging market and developing economies,
                          and the world, 2000-2015


   %


  12




   8




   4




   0




   -4
        2000200120022003200420052006200720082009201020112012201320142015
                        World
                        Advanced economies
                        Emerging market and developing economies

Source: International Monetary Fund, World Economic Outlook database October
2016.




                                       4
                                         Figure 2
                                   Global Trade Growth

   %
  18


  12


   6


   0


   -6


 -12
        2000 2001 2002 2003 2004 2005 2006 2007 2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 2013 2014 2015
Source: International Monetary Fund, World Economic Outlook database October
2016.

        There is a visible slowdown of global growth momentum since the global

financial crisis. In other words, the effects of the crisis continue to reverberate. Initially,

the slowdown was more evident in the advanced economies, giving rise to the notion

of a two-speed economy of fast-growing emerging markets and slow-growing advanced

economies. However, in more recent years, the growth deceleration has spread to

emerging markets, causing the world economy as a whole to slow down. The effect of

the global financial crisis on global growth is thus significant and persistent. In addition,

a number of structural factors also contributed to the weakening of the world economy

since 2008. For example, China’s growth has moderated in recent years, largely due to

structural factors such as population aging, convergence toward high income, and

rebalancing toward domestic demand. Above all, population aging is not confined to

China but poses an increasingly global headwind against growth. Whereas the

demographic transition toward older population structures was almost exclusively a




                                              5
rich-country trend, in recent decades it has spread to developing countries, including

much of Asia (Figure 3).

                                     Figure 3
         Share of Population, Aged 65 and Above, Selected Asian Countries
    %
  30




  24




  18




  12




    6




    0
          1980      1985     1990       1995     2000      2005      2010      2015

                   People's Rep. of China                   India
                   Indonesia                                Japan
                   Malaysia                                 Philippines
                   Rep. of Korea                            Singapore
                   Thailand                                 Viet Nam
  Source: United Nations, Department of Economic and Social Affairs, Population
  Division (2015). World Population Prospects: The 2015 Revision, DVD Edition.

        While structural factors such as population aging are also at play, the size and

persistence of the slowdown of global growth momentum since the global financial

crisis suggests that it is worthwhile to examine and compare vulnerability to economic

shocks before and after that crisis. While it is admittedly too early to tell whether the

global crisis will permanently lower the global growth trajectory, nevertheless it has so

far been a game changer that has had profound effect on the global economic and


                                            6
financial landscape. One natural question that arises is whether vulnerability and

adjustment to shocks has changed in fundamental ways since the crisis. While this

question is relevant for all countries, it is perhaps especially relevant for middle income

countries in light of their growing integration into the world economy. For example,

whereas much of foreign capital which flows into low income countries are foreign aid

and foreign direct investment (FDI) in natural resource industries, middle income

countries receive greater amounts of potentially volatile short-term capital inflows,

rendering them more vulnerable to shocks. Furthermore, the policy tools and

institutions for coping with shocks tend to be less developed in middle income countries

than in high income countries. Of particular interest is the volatility and level of growth.

         The rest of this paper is organized as follows. Section 2 briefly reviews the

literature of studies that examine the factors which hinder or facilitate smooth growth

adjustment to macro shocks. Section 3 describes the data and empirical framework.

Section 4 reports and discusses the main empirical findings. Section 5 concludes the

paper.




                                             7
2. Selective Literature Review

         A key feature of developing countries is their greater exposure to domestic and

external macroeconomics shocks than the industrial countries (Hausmann and Gavin

(1996)). Understanding the root causes of this exposure, and ways to mitigate it remains

a vibrant research agenda. This section provides a selective review of the recent

literature on this important issue. The higher volatility of developing countries reflects

the larger size and greater volatility of exogenous external shocks, such as terms of

trade volatility, greater vulnerability of developing countries to such shocks, sometimes

exacerbated by volatile domestic policy, along with limited absorption and adjustment

capacities.

         While the association between shocks, investment, and economic growth is

generally ambiguous (Caballero (1991) and the references therein), the empirical

research during recent decades convincingly showed a negative association between

macroeconomic volatility and growth. Pindyck and Solimano (1993) showed that

decade-to-decade changes in volatility have a moderate effect on investment, and the

effect is greater for developing countries than for industrialized countries. Aizenman

and Marion (1993) showed that policy uncertainty is negatively associated with private

investment and growth in developing countries. Ramey and Ramey (1995) found a

negative association between growth and volatility in a comprehensive study that

included the OECD and the developing countries. 2 The study linked volatility to the

debate about the cost of the business cycle. 3


2
  Ramey and Ramey (1995) failed to detect a negative association of macro volatility to investment.
Aizenman and Marion (1999) noted that the Ramey and Ramey (1995) reflects their focus on aggregate
investment, but there is a robust negative association of macro volatility and private investment.
3
  These results are in sharp contrast to Lucas (1987), who showed in a calibrated model that the cost of
business cycle volatility is of second order magnitude. Lucas’ results reflected his presumption that the




                                                   8
        A seminal paper by Rodrik (1999) identified weak institutions and latent social

conflict as the main reason for the negative impact of volatility on growth. He

emphasized the manner in which social conflicts interact with external shock on the one

hand, and the domestic institutions of conflict-management on the other. Countries that

experienced the sharpest drops in growth after 1975 were those with divided societies,

as measured by indicators of inequality, ethnic fragmentation, and the like, and with

weak institutions of conflict management, proxied by indicators of the quality of

governmental institutions, rule of law, democratic rights, and social safety nets. The

implication is that strong institutions dampen volatility, while weak institutions

magnify the negative consequences of volatility.

        Easterly, Islam, and Stiglitz (2000) honed in on the financial system as the

primary factor in growth volatility. They found that up to a point, greater financial depth

is associated with lower growth volatility; but as financial depth and leverage grow, the

financial sector could become a source of macroeconomic vulnerability. Aghion et al.

(2009) offered empirical evidence that real exchange rate volatility can have a

significant impact on long-term rate of productivity growth, but the effect depends

critically on a country’s level of financial development.

        Acemoglu, Johnson, Robinson, and Thaichoren (2003) took the primacy of

institutions a step further, arguing that crises are caused by bad macroeconomic

policies, which increase volatility and lower growth. But more fundamentally, bad

macro policies are the product of weak institutions. In order to avoid problems with

endogeneity and omitted variables, they develop a technique to isolate the historically

determined component of institutions, based on the colonization strategy pursed by




economic growth is independent from business cycle volatility, a presumption that is not supported by
the data.


                                                 9
European settlers, and show that this is the critical factor in explaining volatility, crises,

and growth.

        Macroeconomic volatility depends on economic structure - e.g. sectoral

composition of output, trade openness, and financial openness - as well on the

economy's institutional structure and economic policy regimes. While the openness of

the economy may be given in the short run, in the long run it is the endogenous outcome

of geography, history, demographics, policies, institutions, and other factors. We

review below several of these channels

        IDB (1995) and Hausmann and Gavin (1996) found that higher volatility was

associated with both lower growth and higher inequality, with the latter tending to be

highly persistent. The impact of volatility on inequality was transmitted mainly through

educational attainment. Furthermore, institutional shock absorbers are important

determinants of macroeconomic volatility. Specifically, deep financial markets act as a

shock absorber. Furthermore, the exchange-rate regime has a significant impact on

volatility. In particular, pegged exchange rate regimes appear to stabilize the real

exchange rate, at the cost of destabilizing real output. Switches between exchange rate

regimes are highly destabilizing, suggesting that unsustainable regimes are

destabilizing.

        The follow up literature provided ample evidence that, for developing and

emerging market countries, less flexible exchange rate regimes are associated with

slower growth, as well as with greater output volatility [Broda (2004), Edwards &

Levy-Yeyati (2005), and Céspedes & Velasco (2012)]. In a related research by the

IDB, Gavin at al. (1996) identified the procyclicality of fiscal policy as a major

amplifier of developing countries’ vulnerability to shocks. Remarkably, over the last

two decades the fiscal policies of about a third of developing countries have become



                                             10
counter-cyclical. Chile is a case in point, with institutional design facilitating smoother

counter-cyclical adjustment of fiscal and other macroeconomic policies [see Frankel

(2011) and Frankel, Vegh, and Vuletin (2013)].

        This discussion can be framed in the broader context of influential changes in

the configuration of Mundell’s Trilemma following the collapse of the Bretton-Woods

system. Remarkably, emerging markets (EMs) increased their financial integration in

the 1990s, a process that heightened their vulnerability to shocks. In some vulnerable

countries, capital flight induced banking and balance of payment crises, crises that were

dubbed as ‘sudden stop crises’ by Calvo (1998) and Calvo and Reinhart (2000), and

studied by Eichengreen et al. (2008). The position of developing countries was further

compromised by their inability to borrow in their own currency - the original sin

articulated by Eichengreen, Hausmann and Panizza (2002) - and by their limited and

uncertain access to capital markets due to high sovereign risk.

        In line with the Trilemma’s prediction, over time the growing financial

integration of emerging markets came at a cost of lower exchange rate stability - i.e.

greater managed flexibility of the exchange rate. Through a trial and error learning

process, emerging markets gradually found the trilemma middle ground—greater

exchange rate flexibility, limited financial integration, and controlled monetary

independence, buffered by macroeconomic prudence. This approach is evident in

precautionary hoarding of international reserves, aimed at reducing the frequency and

the costs of capital flight crises.

        Relevant studies include Aizenman and Lee (2007) and by Aizenman, Chinn

and Ito (2011, 2013) and other papers listed in Aizenman, Chinn and Ito’s Trilemma

Indexes webpage (http://web.pdx.edu/~ito/trilemma_indexes.htm). They found that

greater monetary independence is associated with lower output volatility while greater



                                            11
exchange rate stability is associated with greater output volatility, which can be

mitigated if a country has sizable international reserves. Prudent management of buffers

like international reserves and sovereign wealth funds can substantially reduce the real

exchange rate volatility associated with terms of trade shocks that affect commodity

countries (Aizenman, Edwards and Riera-Crichton 2012, Aizenman and Riera-Crichton

2014).




3. Empirical Framework

         In this section, we describe the data and empirical framework used for our

analysis. We put together data on real GDP growth, country-specific and external

shocks, institutions and fundamentals for a set of high-income, middle-income, and

low-income countries spanning 1990-2015. Our final sample period is 2004-2014.

Most series are from the Economist Intelligence Unit, Federal Reserve Economic Data,

World Economic Outlook database, World Development Indicators, and World Trade

Flow database, supplemented with series from several sources. Data sources,

definitions, and year coverage are provided in the Appendix.



3.1 GDP Growth and Volatility: A First Look

         For our main variables of interests – GDP growth and GDP volatility – we

follow the country-income classification in Han and Wei (2015) to classify country

observations into income groups, as follows:

         Extremely low-income economies: GDP per capita (2011 PPP) < $1,096;

         Low-income economies: $1,096 < GDP per capita < $2,527;

         Lower-middle-income economies: $2,527 < GDP per capita < $5,223

         Upper-middle-income economies: $5,223 < GDP per capita < $17,600


                                          12
        High-income economies are countries with GDP per capita > $17,600

        Of course, the adjustment of GDP growth and volatility does not necessarily

follow the same pattern all across countries in an income group. In any case, we will

also examine the patterns of data in the whole sample regardless of the income

classification.

        Figure 4 plots for each income group the GDP growth and GDP volatility,

respectively. Comparing across income groups, GDP growth of the upper-middle

income and high-income countries have shown no tendency to fully recover from the

crisis after almost ten years. These simple plots also suggest that GDP volatility

declined in middle-income countries and high-income countries after peaking in 2009-

2011, but remains above the level before the crisis.



3.2 Empirical Approach

        The study aims to uncover how countries cope with crises and shocks. We

approach the subject by looking at whether better coping mechanisms are associated,

on average, with lower volatility of GDP growth, and higher average growth rates.

More concretely, the research questions for our empirical analysis are the following:

        (i) What are the conditions enhancing faster and smoother adjustment of growth

to shocks, especially for middle-income countries, before and after a crisis?

        (ii) Is faster and smoother adjustment to shocks associated with higher average

growth rate and/or lower output volatility, before and after a crisis?




                                           13
Figure 4. GDP Growth and Volatility across Income Groups.




Source: Authors’ estimates.

       By and large, greater flexibility of adjustment to external and domestic shocks

is likely to help countries sustain growth. More formally, we need to estimate the

relationship between flexibility and various factors, including institutions and economic

fundamentals. This should allow us to analyse the factors accounting for adjustment of

countries to shocks in terms of growth and volatility. The main variables are the

following:

       Shocks: Global growth shocks (globGrwt); Global oil prices [WTI crude as a

proxy] (globOilp); Global financial risk tolerance and volatility [VIX as a proxy]

(globFVol); Wars and civil conflicts (warConfl); Natural-disaster deaths (disaster);

Growth spillovers emanating from trade partners (spillOvr).




                                           14
       Institutions: Financial openness (finaOpen); Exchange rate stability (exrStabl);

Political stability (polStabl); Political polarization (polPolar); Checks and balance

(chknBalc); Rule of law (ruleoLaw); Economic freedom (econFree)

       Fundamentals: Manufacturing output (manufOut); Foreign reserves (fxReserv);

Working-age population (wkAgePop); Schooling (eduSchlg)

       While the list of controls is not exhaustive, these variables cover the basis for

growth and volatility adjustment, and serve the purpose of our study. Our analysis

proceeds by:

       (a) Studying the natural patterns of growth and volatility adjustment to shocks

in the window of the corresponding shock, focusing on the difference between pre-2008

and the post-2008 periods, comparing middle-income countries and other income

groups.

       (b) Estimating GDP growth and volatility adjustment – i.e. dependent variables

– on a set of domestic and external macroeconomic shocks, and then mapping the

estimates and residuals from the growth and volatility estimation to country's

institutions and fundamentals;



3.3 Constructing Growth-Shock Spillovers from Trade Partners

          Most of our control variables, shocks, institutions, and fundamentals are readily

available for the regression analysis. We construct an additional variable, growth

spillovers emanating from trade partners (spillOvr), from GDP growth and bilateral

trade data. Our data are drawn from the real GDP growth and forecasts from IMF World

Economic Outlook database based on semi-annual forecasts since 1990. To construct

the growth spillover, spillOvr,




                                             15
          (1) We use 2-years historical data and 6-years forecast data of real GDP growth,

made available in World Economic Outlook database (series: ngdprpch). Historical

data are updated on a continual basis, as more information becomes available, and

structural breaks in the data are often adjusted to produce smooth series with the use of

splicing and other techniques. These IMF staff estimates continue to serve as proxies

for historical series when complete information is unavailable. As a result, WEO data

can differ from other official data sources, including the IMF International Financial

Statistics;

          (2) We regress real-time 1-period-ahead percent forecast errors for real GDP

growth from WEO database in each country - i.e. the gap at time t of the growth rate

of country q form the WEO projection on a set of country and period fixed effects;

          (3) We take the estimated residual,     , from the above regression to capture

innovations in real GDP growth orthogonal to professional forecasts and unobserved

country and period fixed effects; the residual is a measure of unanticipated growth

shocks.

          Denoting the growth shock in source country or trade partner q as    , measured

in percent, we aggregate across countries using bilateral trade as a measure of

interdependence


(2)



where          is a weight of independence between source country or trade partner q and


recipient country or country of interest i, scaled by the share of i’s trade in source

country q’s total trade. Essentially, we employ a certain factor of trade that translates,

directly or indirectly, into bilateral growth spillovers with other countries, which


                                            16
influence the growth adjustment in those countries. We explore scaling by export

dependence - i.e. higher growth of importing country trade partner q generates greater

demand for i’s output - in our main setup, and also import dependence.

       Real GDP growth and forecasts come from IMF World Economic Outlook

database based on semi-annual forecasts since 1990. We estimate impulse responses

for 3 semi-annual horizons, starting in the 1st half of 2004. We use the maximum

horizon H = 2 and estimate equations for 0 to 2 periods ahead, with maximum lags m


= 2. Across countries, the average standard deviation of                   is .642. The


average size of these shocks ranges from -3.3 for Hong Kong, China, to -.21 for the

U.S., to .18 for Uruguay. The correlation of shock series varies across countries and

trade partners. Countries sharing similar key trading partners tend to have more

correlated shock series.

4 Empirical Results

       In this section, we report and discuss the main findings which emerge from our

empirical analysis.

4.1 Patterns of data

From an initial sample of more than 140 countries, combining the variables and dealing

with missing values provide us a final sample of 80 countries, covering 2004 to 2014.

Figure 5, which shows the scatter plot of GDP growth and volatility, suggests that there

is no clear cluster of growth and volatility pattern based on country-income

classifications. To learn more about the natural patterns of data, Figure 6 reports the

summary statistics of variables. We pursue a number of different approaches to better

understand patterns of data. A couple of key questions emerge. With respect to growth-

shock-institution-fundamental associations, do the country observations cluster around




                                          17
the designated country-income classification? In the presence of multicollinearity

among controls of growth adjustment estimation, which variables - e.g. shocks,

institutions, fundamentals - explain much of the flexibility of growth adjustment?



Figure 5. GDP Growth and Volatility, 2004-2014.




Source: Authors’ estimates.




                                          18
Figure 6. Summary Statistics: Means and Standard Deviations.




Source: Authors’ estimates.



Looking the correlations among the variables in Figure 7, several notable patterns

emerge. Growth of real GDP is correlated with political stability and education

attainment in both pre-2008 and post-2008 periods. In the aftermath of the global




                                       19
financial crisis, GDP growth has become more correlated with financial openness,

exchange rate stability, political polarization, and old-age dependency ratio.


Figure 7. Correlation of Variables.




Source: Authors’ estimates.




                                           20
       Volatility of GDP growth is correlated with global growth, global financial

volatility, and global oil prices in the post-2008 period. Global growth is correlated with

global financial volatility and global oil prices. Wars and conflicts are correlated with

political stability in both pre- and post-2008 periods. Growth spillovers are correlated

with manufacturing output in the pre-2008 period, and with dependency ratio and

education attainment in the post-2008 period. Financial openness is correlated with

political stability, political polarization, dependency ratio, and education attainment in

the pre- and post-2008 periods. Political stability is correlated with political

polarization, dependency ratio, and education attainment in both pre- and post-2008

periods. Political polarization is correlated with dependency ratio and education

attainment in both pre- and post-2008 periods. Manufacturing output is correlated with

dependency ratio in both pre- and post-2008 periods. Dependency ratio is correlated

with education attainment in both pre- and post-2008 periods. The patterns of

correlations suggest that most variables are corrrelated in the Pre- and Post-2008

periods.

       An alternative approach to study the data patterns is to ask how many country

groups would fit with the current set of country observations.             Based on the

multidimensional scaling, shown in Figure 8, it is not clear how the associations of

growth-shock-institution-fundamental can help classify countries into distinct groups

in the pre-2008 and in the post-2008 period. The evidence seems to suggest that, in

terms of growth-shock-institution-fundamental associations, the country observations

do not cluster around the designated country-income classification. That is, there is

nothing unique in this respect about middle income countries or other income groups

of countries.



                                            21
Figure 8. Multidimensional Scaling of Countries, Pre- and Post-2008.




      Source: Authors’ estimates.




                                      22
       Figure 9 provides an alternative way to cluster the country data. The figure

shows clustering analysis of countries based on observed growth, volatility, shocks,

institutions, and fundamentals. The alphabetically ordered groups are based on the

designated country-income classification, while the numerically ordered groups are

based on the clustering analysis. Essentially, the analysis contrasts the designated

country-income classification with the patterns of country observations based on all the

variables in our sample. In the pre-2008 period, it is not clear if the income grouping

fits with a matrix of variables. For example, based on the macroeconomic

characteristics - i.e. growth-shock-institution-fundamental - several middle-income

countries can be grouped with the high-income countries. Similarly, in the post-2008

period, the clustering analysis indicates that income classification does not translate

into the similar associations of growth, volatility, institutions, and fundamentals of

countries in the same designated groupings. A notable result is that global and country

specific shocks seem to be driving the differences across countries.




                                          23
Figure 9. Clusters of Country Observations, Pre-2008 and Post- 2008.




       Source: Authors’ estimates.



       Next we look at which variables - i.e. shocks, institutions, and fundamentals -

explain much of the movements of GDP growth and volatility in the presence of

multicollinearity among control variables. Following Hastie, Tibshirani, and Friedman

(2008), the least absolute shrinkage and selection operator (LASSO) estimate is defined

by




                                          24
The equivalent Lagrangian form is




where,        is the shrinkage (regularization) factor,   the dependent variable (GDP


growth), and         the vector of explanatory variables (macroeconomic controls). Note

that unlike the fixed-effect estimation, this setup does not directly account for country-

specific fixed effects

         Figure 10 provides the trace plots of coefficient fit by LASSO for middle-

income and high-income countries, respectively. For middle-income countries,

globFVol, warConfl, and GFC are the most significant in accounting for the growth

adjustment, but none help to explain volatility adjustment. For high-income countries,

globFVol, spillOvr, finaOpen, exrStabl, fxReserv, depRatio, and GFC are the most

significant in accounting for growth adjustment, whereas globGrwt, globFVol,

manufOut, fxReserv, depRatio, and GFC are the most significant in accounting for the

volatility adjustment. The analysis supports the notion that the global financial crisis

was a game changer, with global factors and shocks largely driving growth and

volatility.




                                             25
Figure 10. Accounting for Growth and Volatility




                                      26
Source: Authors’ estimates.




                              27
4.2 Panel Estimation

        More specifically, we want to estimate the associations between the dependent

variable - i.e. GDP growth and GDP volatility - and domestic and external shocks as

well as GDP growth spillovers from trade partners, using direct projections from a

series of regressions for different horizon, h = 0, …, H



(1)



where Y denotes the dependent variable (GDP growth, GDP volatility); X is a vector of

controls (domestic and external shocks);          and   are horizon-specific country and

time fixed effects; spillOvr is the measure of growth spillovers emanating from trade

partners; i stands for country; and t stands for time period. Impulse response for H

periods is constructed from a sequence of estimated            .

        Table 1 reports the GDP growth and volatility accounted for by shocks and

growth spillovers emanating from trade partners - i.e. top importing countries. The

coefficient estimates are reported with standard errors in parentheses. The first two

columns report the growth estimates for the whole sample, split into pre-2008 and post-

2008 periods, while the following two columns report estimates for the middle income

sample. The estimation results suggest that global growth (+), global financial volatility

(+), and global oil prices (-) are associated with country growth in the pre-2008 period,

while global growth (+), global financial volatility (-), and global oil prices (+) are

associated with country growth in the post-2008 period. These qualitative results are

applicable to the whole sample and the middle-income sample. The overall explanatory

power is a quarter to a third in this set of estimations.




                                             28
        The second half of Table 1 reports the growth volatility estimation. The

coefficient estimates are reported with standard errors in parentheses. The estimation

results suggest that global growth (-), global financial volatility (-), global oil prices

(+), and natural disaster (+) are associated with growth volatility in the pre-2008 period,

while global growth (-), global financial volatility (+), and global oil prices (-) are

associated with growth volatility in the post-2008 period. For the middle-income

sample, the estimation results are qualitatively similar. The overall explanatory variable

is about a tenth to a quarter in this set of estimations.

        Focusing on the associations between GDP growth and growth spillovers from

trade partners, it is useful to look at the impulse responses of growth over a number of

time periods. Table 2 reports the average growth spillovers from trade partners’ growth


shocks over three periods,                        , with standard errors in parentheses. The


calculation is done using different trade weights - all top trade partners in the first

column, top importers in the second column, and top exporters in the third column. The

results suggest that growth shocks emanating from trade partners are associated with

growth spillovers (+) in the pre-2008 period, but become much less significant in the

post-2008 period.




                                             29
Table 1. Growth, Volatility, and Shocks, 2004-2014.




Source: Authors’ estimates.




                                                      30
Table 2. Growth Spillovers from Trade Partners, 2004-2014.
This table reports the average growth spillovers from trade partners’ growth shocks over three half-yearly (six quarterly) periods,
                 . Standard errors are in parentheses.




Source: Authors’ estimates.




                                                                        31
       To identify the conditions that drive faster and smoother adjustment of growth

to shocks for the middle-income countries in the 2004-2014 period, we correlate the

estimated residuals of growth and volatility, controlling for domestic and external

shocks, with institutions and economic fundamentals, measured by their coefficient of

variation over five-year periods. Figure 11 shows that shock-adjusted growth is

positively associated with higher education attainment, manufacturing output, and

exchange rate stability, while the shock-adjusted volatility is positively associated with

higher exchange rate stability and polarization, and lower education attainment.

       Focusing on the most significant variables, Figure 12 plots the data between two

sub-periods for middle income countries. The scatterplots suggest that economic

fundamentals such as manufacturing output to GDP ratio and education attainment

showed persistent pattern over the years, while institutional factors such as exchange

rate stability and political polarization changed significantly between 2003-07 and

2010-14 across the middle-income countries. Understanding the country-specific

persistence and evolution over time of these variables is therefore useful in accounting

for the adjustment of GDP growth and volatility.




                                           32
     Figure 11. Correlatons of Shock-Adjusted Growth and Volatility with

      Fundamental and Institutional Factors in Middle-Income Countries.




Source: Authors’ estimates.




                                     33
Figure 12. Scatterplot of Selected Institutions and Fundamental Variables for
Middle-Income Countries.




Source: Authors’ estimates.

5. Concluding Observations

       In this paper, we examine how economic growth and growth volatility are

associated with internal and external shocks, as well as shock spillovers from trade

partners, before and after the global financial crisis, taking into account country-specific

economic institutions and fundamentals. Flexibility of growth adjustment is an issue of

high and growing importance, especially against the background of post-crisis global

growth slowdown and heightened political and policy uncertainty. The vulnerability of

middle income countries to shocks is an interesting issue since these countries are

typically more integrated into the world economy but, unlike most high income

countries, often lack well-established policies and institutions to cope with shocks.




                                            34
       Our analysis examines and compares the role of institutions and fundamentals

on the adjustment of growth and volatility to shocks in the pre-crisis and post-crisis

periods. Empirical analysis of panel data of high-income, middle-income, and low-

income countries over 2004-2014 shows that the associations of growth, volatility,

shocks, institutions, and economic fundamentals have changed in important ways after

the crisis. More specifically, we find that GDP growth across all income groups of

countries have become more dependent on the external factors, including global

growth, global oil prices, and global financial volatility. In addition, despite the

slowdown of global trade after the crisis, there is evidence that growth spillovers from

trade partners have economically significant effects on country's growth. There is

nothing unique about the exposure of middle income countries to such global shocks.

   A country’s response and adjustment to shocks depends on several factors – age

dependency ratio and foreign reserves, to name just two. After accounting for the effects

from global shocks, for middle income countries we identify some factors that facilitate

adjustment to shocks, in terms of growth and volatility. Higher education attainment,

higher manufacturing output in GDP, and higher exchange rate stability increase

economic growth. Lower political polarization, higher exchange rate flexibility, and

higher education attainment reduce the volatility of economic growth. Therefore,

overall, our cross-country findings suggest that countries can cope with shocks better

in the short to medium term by appropriately using flexible policy tools - for instance,

greater exchange rate flexibility help reduce growth volatility – as well as maintaining

solid long-term fundamentals - for instance, higher education and lower political

polarization help reduce growth volatility.




                                           35
                                    References

Acemoglu, Daron, Simon Johnson, James A. Robinson, and Yunyong Thaicharoen.
         2003. “Institutional Causes, Macroeconomic Symptoms: Volatility, Crises
         and Growth.” Journal of Monetary Economics 50 (1) :49—123.
Aghion, P., P. Bacchetta, R. Rancier, K. Rogoff (2009) “Exchange rate volatility
         productivity growth: The role of financial development” Journal of
         Monetary Economics 56: 494–513.
Aizenman, J., Chinn, M. D., and Ito, H. 2013. The “Impossible Trinity” Hypothesis in
         an Era of Global Imbalances: Measurement and Testing. Review of
         International Economics, 21: 447–458.
_______ 2011. "Surfing the waves of globalization: Asia and financial globalization
         in the context of the trilemma," Journal of the Japanese and International
         Economies, Elsevier, vol. 25(3), pages 290-320, September.
Aizenman, Joshua, and Jaewoo Lee. "International reserves: precautionary versus
         mercantilist views, theory and evidence." Open Economies Review18.2
         (2007): 191-214.
Aizenman J., S. Edwards and D. Riera-Crichton (2012). “Adjustment patterns to
         commodity terms of trade shocks: the role of exchange rate and international
         reserves policies,” Journal of International Money and Finance, 31, 8: 1990-
         2016.
Aizenman, J. and D. Riera-Crichton (2014) Commodity Prices and Macroeconomic
         Policy, Rodrigo Caputo, Roberto Chang, Claudio Raddatz (eds). Central
         Banking, Analysis, and Economic Policies, volume 20 [and NBER WP #
         20646].
Aizenman, Joshua, and Nancy Marion. 1993. "Policy Uncertainty, Persistence and
         Growth." Review of International Economics 1(9):145-63.
______________ “Volatility and Investment” Economica, Vol. 66 (1999): 157-179.
Barro, Robert J. and Lee, Jong Wha. 2013. A new data set of educational attainment
         in the world, 1950–2010, Journal of Development Economics, Volume 104,
         Pages 184-198.
Beck, Thorsten, George Clarke, Alberto Groff, Philip Keefer, and Patrick Walsh,
         2001. "New tools in comparative political economy: The Database of
         Political Institutions." 15:1, 165-176 (September), World Bank Economic
         Review.
Broda, Christian, 2004, "Terms of Trade and Exchange Rate Regimes in Developing
         Countries," Journal of International Economics, 63(1), pp. 31-58.
Caballero, Ricardo J. 1991. “On the Sign of the Investment-Uncertainty
         Relationship.” American Economic Review 81 (1) :279--88.
Calvo, Guillermo A. (1998). "Capital Flows and Capital-Market Crises: The Simple
         Economics of Sudden Stops". Journal of Applied Economics. 1 (1): 35–54.
Calvo, Guillermo A.; Reinhart, Carmen (2000). "When Capital Inflows Come to a
         Sudden Stop: Consequences and Policy Options". In Kenen, P.; Swoboda,
         A. Reforming the International Monetary and Financial System.
         Washington, DC: International Monetary Fund.
Céspedes, Luis Felipe, and Andrés Velasco, 2012,"Macroeconomic Performance
         During Commodity Price Booms and Busts." IMF Economic Review 60,
         no.4: 570-599.
Easterly, William, Roumeen Islam, and Joseph E. Stiglitz. 2000. “Shaken and Stirred:
         Explaining Growth Volatility.” In Boris Pleskovic and Joseph E. Stiglitz,


                                         36
         eds., Annual World Bank Conference on Development Economics 2000.
         Washington, D.C.: World Bank.
Edwards, Sebastian, and Eduardo Levy Yeyati, 2005, “Flexible Exchange Rates as
         Shock Absorbers,” European Economic Review, Vol. 49, Issue 8, November,
         pp. 2079-05.
Eichengreen, Barry, Ricardo Hausmann, and Ugo Panizza. "Original sin: the pain, the
         mystery, and the road to redemption." IADB Conference “Currency and
         Maturity Matchmaking: Redeeming Debt from Original Sin. 2002.
Eichengreen, Barry, Poonam Gupta, and Ashoka Mody. "Sudden stops and IMF-
         supported programs." Financial markets volatility and performance in
         emerging markets. University Of Chicago Press, 2008. 219-266.
Frankel, J. A. (2011). "A Solution to Fiscal Procyclicality: the Structural Budget
         Institutions Pioneered by Chile," Journal Economía Chilena (The Chilean
         Economy), 2: 39-78, August.
Frankel, J. A. & Vegh, Carlos A. & Vuletin, Guillermo (2013). "On graduation from
         fiscal procyclicality," Journal of Development Economics, vol. 100: 32-47.
Gavin, Michael, Ricardo Hausmann, Roberto Perotti y Ernesto Talvi. (1996).
         Managing Fiscal Policy in Latin America and the Caribbean: Volatility,
         Procyclicality, and Creditworthiness, Inter-American Development Bank,
         Office of the Chief Economist, Working Paper 326.
Han, X. and Wei, S.J. 2015. Re-examining the Middle-Income Trap Hypothesis:
         What to Reject and What to Revive? Asian Development Bank.
Hastie, Trevor, Tibshirani, Robert, and Friedman, Jerome, 2009. The Elements of
         Statistical Learning: Data Mining, Inference, and Prediction, Second
         Edition, Springer-Verlag New York.
Hausmann, Ricardo and Michael Gavin. (1996) "Securing Stability and Growth in a
         Shock Prone Region: The Policy Challenge for Latin America." IDB,
         Working Paper Series; 315.
IDB (Inter-American Development Bank). (1995) Overcoming Volatility. Economic
         and Social Progress in Latin America. 1995 Report. Washington, D.C.: Inter-
         American Development Bank.
Keefer, Philip and David Stasavage. 2003. "The Limits of Delegation: Veto Players,
         Central Bank Independence and the Credibility of Monetary
         Policy." American Political Science Review, 97, 3, 407-423.
Lucas, Robert E., Jr. Models of business cycles. New York: Basil Blackwell, 1987.
Marshall, Monty G., Keith Jaggers. 2002. Polity IV Project: Political Regime
         Characteristics and Transitions, 1800-2002.
Pindyck, Robert S. and Andrés Solimano (1993) "Economic Instability and Aggregate
         Investment", in Olivier Jean Blanchard and Stanley Fischer (eds) NBER
         Macroeconomic Annual: 1993, The MIT Press.
Ramey, Garey, and Valerie A. Ramey. 1995. “Cross-country Evidence on the Link
         between Volatility and Growth.” American Economic Review 85 (5) :1138--
         51.
Reinhart, Carmen M., and Kenneth S. Rogoff. This time is different: eight centuries of
         financial folly. Princeton university press, 2009.

Rodrik, Dani. 1999. “Where Did All the Growth Go? External Shocks, Social Conflict
        and Growth Collapses.” Journal of Economic Growth 4 (4):385--412.




                                         37
                              Appendix. Data Sources



Variables   Description                                                   Source
grwtRate    Percent change of Gross Domestic Product, constant prices     World Economic Outlook Database
                                                                          Years covered: 1993-2015
                                                                          Country Coverage: 178

grwtVola    Standard deviation (5-year) of real GDP growth                World Economic Outlook Database
                                                                          Years covered: 1993-2015
                                                                          Country Coverage: 178

manufOut    Manufacturing, value added (% of GDP)                         World Development Indicators
                                                                          Years covered: 1960-2015
                                                                          Country Coverage: 227

wkAgePop    Age dependency ratio (% of working-age population)            World Development Indicators
                                                                          Years covered: 1960-2015
                                                                          Country Coverage: 227

ruleoLaw    Percentile ranking of the Rule of law index with higher       World Governance Indicators
            values indicating better institutional quality                Years covered: 1996-2015
                                                                          Country Coverage: 215

eduSchlg    Educational Attainment for Population Aged 25 and Over        Barro and Lee (2013) Educational
                                                                          Attainment
                                                                          Years covered: 1960-2010
                                                                          Country Coverage: 146

exrStabl    Exchange rate stability and Monetary independence             Aizenman, Chinn, and Ito. The
            indices                                                       Trilemma Indexes
monIndep                                                                  Years covered: 1970-2014
                                                                          Country Coverage: 170

fxReserv    Foreign reserves accumulation (billion US$)                   Economist Intelligence Unit
            [correlation with GDP = .55; with reserves/GDP = .25]         Years covered: 1993-2014
                                                                          Country Coverage: 206

finCrisi    A dummy variable indicating any type of Reinhart-Rogoff       Reinhart and Rogoff (2009). This time
            (RR) financial crises                                         is different
                                                                          Years covered: 1800-2010
                                                                          Country Coverage: 70

exrEffec    Real Effective Exchange Rates, CPI index                      IMF. International Financial Statistics
                                                                          Years covered: 1960-2015
                                                                          Country Coverage: 95

warConfl    Measuring the intensity of battle related death in a given    UCDP/PRIO Armed Conflict Dataset
            year                                                          Years covered: 1946-2015
                                                                          Country Coverage: 153

disaster    Total number of death per year resulting from a nature        EM-DAT International Disaster
            disaster                                                      Database
                                                                          Years covered: 1900-2016
                                                                          Country Coverage: 217

chknBalc    Starts off with a value of 1 and rises with competitiveness   Database of Political Institutions 2015
            of executive elections, the existence of additional           update. Inter-American Development
            legislative chambers, divided government, the number of       Bank. Updated version of Beck et al.
            coalition parties                                             (2001) and Keefer and Stasavage (2003)
                                                                          Years covered: 1975-2015
                                                                          Country Coverage: 181




                                              38
 polPolar      The maximum ideological difference (left-right-center          Database of Political Institutions 2015
               orientation) between the chief executive’s party and the       update. Inter-American Development
               four largest parties of the legislature based on seat shares   Bank. Updated version of Beck et al.
                                                                              (2001) and Keefer and Stasavage (2003)
                                                                              Years covered: 1975-2015
                                                                              Country Coverage: 181

 polStabl      Polity Score - captures the regime authority spectrum on a     Marshall and Jaggers (2002).
               21-pont scale ranging from -10 (hereditary monarchy) to
               +10 (consolidated democracy)                                   Years covered: 1800-2015
                                                                              Country Coverage: 193

 exeConst      The variable is between 0 and 10 measuring the extent of       Marshall and Jaggers (2002).
               institutionalized constraints on the decision making powers
               of chief executives.                                           Years covered: 1800-2015
                                                                              Country Coverage: 193

 econFree      Index of economic freedom.                                     Fraser Institute
                                                                              Years covered: 1970-2014
                                                                              Country Coverage: 159

 usIntRat      US interest rates on medium and long term government           IMF. International Financial Statistics
               bonds. Percent per Annum                                       Years covered: 1954-2016

 globGrwt      Annual global GDP growth.                                      IMF. World Economic Outlook
                                                                              Years covered: 1990-2016

 globFVol      Global Volatility Index (VXO) calculated by the Chicago        Chicago Board Options Exchange
               Board Options Exchange.                                        Years covered: 1990-2016

Source: Authors.




                                                  39
