                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




 EXIT, VOICE OR LOYALTY? AN INVESTIGATION INTO MANDATED PORTABILITY
                 OF FRONT-LOADED PRIVATE HEALTH PLANS

                                       Juan Pablo Atal
                                        Hanming Fang
                                       Martin Karlsson
                                      Nicolas R. Ziebarth

                                      Working Paper 23468
                              http://www.nber.org/papers/w23468


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     June 2017




We thank Christophe Courbage, Wanda Mimra, Martin Salm and seminar participants at the
University of Oslo, the Gesundheitsökonomischer Aussschuß of the Verein für Socialpolitik as
well as the World Risk and Insurance Economics Congress (WRIEC) 2015 for excellent
comments. In particular, we thank Roland Eisen and Peter Zweifel for excellent discussions of
this paper. We take responsibility for all errors in and shortcomings of the paper. Generous
funding by the German Federal Ministry of Education and Research (FKZ: 01EH1602A) is
gratefully acknowledged. We do not have financial interests that would constitute any conflict of
interests with this research. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not
necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2017 by Juan Pablo Atal, Hanming Fang, Martin Karlsson, and Nicolas R. Ziebarth. All rights
reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit
permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Exit, Voice or Loyalty? An Investigation into Mandated Portability of Front-Loaded Private
Health Plans
Juan Pablo Atal, Hanming Fang, Martin Karlsson, and Nicolas R. Ziebarth
NBER Working Paper No. 23468
June 2017
JEL No. G22,I11,I18

                                         ABSTRACT

We study theoretically and empirically how consumers in an individual private long-term health
insurance market with front-loaded contracts respond to newly mandated portability requirements
of their old-age provisions. To foster competition, effective 2009, German legislature made the
portability of standardized old-age provisions mandatory. Our theoretical model predicts that the
portability reform will increase internal plan switching. However, under plausible assumptions, it
will not increase external insurer switching. Moreover, the portability reform will enable
unhealthier enrollees to reoptimize their plans. We find confirmatory evidence for the theoretical
predictions using claims panel data from a big private insurer.


Juan Pablo Atal                                 Martin Karlsson
Department of Economics                         CINCH Health Economics Research Center
3718 Locust Walk                                Weststadttürme Berliner Platz 6-8
University of Pennsylvania                      45127 Essen, Germany
Philadelphia, PA 19104                          martin.karlsson@uni-due.de
ataljp@econ.upenn.edu
                                                Nicolas R. Ziebarth
Hanming Fang                                    Cornell University
Department of Economics                         Department of Policy Analysis
University of Pennsylvania                        and Management (PAM)
3718 Locust Walk                                106 MVR,
Philadelphia, PA 19104                          Ithaca, 14853
and NBER                                        nrz2@cornell.edu
hanming.fang@econ.upenn.edu
1       Introduction

Very few countries in the world organize their health insurance system around private health in-

surance markets. Even in the US, the leading example of a largely private system, public health

insurance accounts for an increasing share of overall spending. In addition, private health in-

surance has been increasingly regulated. For instance, the Affordable Care Act (ACA) prohibits

experience rating of premiums and pre-existing condition clauses. One major question of inter-

est is how to regulate private insurance markets in order to foster competition between insurers,

while containing premium growth and allowing for consumer choice.

        Besides the US and Chile, Germany is one of the countries with an entirely private health

insurance market, not just a supplemental one.1 The existence of this individual private mar-

ket is due to historical reasons and allows the self-employed, civil servants, and high-income

earners to irreversibly opt out of the public system and insure their entire health risks privately

and individually. The German individual private market is in some respects less regulated than

the US market after the ACA. For example, there exists no guaranteed issue and pre-existing

condition clauses are legal. Furthermore, at the beginning of the contract period, premiums

are individually underwritten and risk-rated. After the initial risk-rating and in subsequent

periods—to avoid jumps in premiums due to health shocks—all premium increases are strictly

community-rated at the health plan level and guaranteed renewability exists.

        One special feature of the German private market is the legal obligation of insurers to build

up old-age provisions for each enrollee. The rationale behind this regulation is to incorporate a

mandatory savings component in order to keep premiums stable over the life-cycle and to pre-

vent excessively high premiums for the elderly.2 Therefore, the premiums for the young exceed

their actuarially fair value, whereas they fall behind for the elderly. Old-age provision builds up

when the enrollee is young and is gradually exhausted as the enrollee ages. Furthermore, there

is no official enrollment period and enrollees remain insured until they actively decide to cancel

their contracts and switch insurers. Guaranteed renewability exists and, while the insured can

cancel contracts, insurers cannot cancel contracts as long as premiums are paid. This leads to a

one-sided insurer commitment and poses challenges for the insurer if good risks predominantly

lapse their contracts (Hofmann and Browne, 2013). Until 2009, this one-sided commitment was,
    1In contrast, there basically exists no private group market in Germany.
    2In Germany, there exists no Medicare for the elderly which means that individuals are privately insured for the
rest of their life.


                                                         1
however, limited because old-age provisions were not transferable to competing insurers. Along

with the renewed risk-rating when lapsing contracts and switching insurers, the non-portability

of provisions and front-loading of premiums created a substantial lock-in effect because switch-

ing insurers typically entailed considerable financial losses. Currently, the average old-age pro-

vision is around $24,000 per policyholder (Association of German Private Healthcare Insurers,

2016). Consequently, effective 2009, the German legislature passed a bill that mandated old-age

provisions to be made portable (to a standardized extent). The intention of the bill was to reduce

switching costs, restore consumer confidence, and foster market competition.

   The objective of this paper is to theoretically and empirically investigate the effects of this

2009 portability reform. First we develop a simple two-period model where consumers have

the option to keep their current long-term contract, renegotiate with the insurer and switch

internally, or lapse their contract and switch externally. Likewise, insurers derive value from

existing contracts, depending on how enrollees’ health has developed since its inception and

initial risk-rating. Due to the one-side commitment in the market, insurers can only decide to

renegotiate contracts or not, but consumers can also lapse. As a result of the reform, the model

predicts primarily an increase in contract renegotiations and internal switching rather than an

increase in lapsing and external switching. Moreover, the model suggests that the decrease in

switching costs and the increase in outside options enables sicker enrollees (than prior to the

portability reform) to renegotiate and switch internally or externally.

   Next, we test whether real-word data are in line with our model predictions. We base our

empirical investigation on detailed claims panel data from one of the largest German individual

private health insurers. In total, we observe more than 300,000 policyholders from 2005 to 2011.

We not only know their diagnoses and claims but also have detailed information on their plan

choices and plan parameters such as cost-sharing amounts and benefit generosity.

   In line with our model, our empirical findings provide only very modest evidence for an

impact of the reform on canceling contracts and switching insurers. However, again entirely

in line with our model, the likelihood of reoptimizing plans and switching internally increased

substantially. And we can also confirm our last theoretical prediction, namely that switchers

are more unhealthy post-reform. In the model context, these empirical patterns are explainable

with the increase in consumer bargaining power in interaction with insurer retention efforts to

keep some policyholders. The findings illustrate that regulatory efforts to strengthen consumer

sovereignty in the health care sector can enable consumer action and lead to a reoptimization of
                                                2
health plan choices.

    The issue of consumer lock-in effects is inherent in several markets (for theoretical deriva-

tions, see e.g. Klemperer, 1987; Beggs and Klemperer, 1992). Farrell and Klemperer (2007) iden-

tify lock-in effects that are caused by the incompatibility of products in a network market (net-

work effects), which explains the dominance of some companies in the software market (Werden,

2001). Initial investments are another source source of consumer lock-in. Zauberman (2003)

show that even small initial investments by customers can lead to long-term lock-in. Cognitive

lock-in is another area of research, mostly in the management and psychology literature (e.g.

Yang and Peterson, 2004; Bell et al., 2005).

    In the broadest sense, the paper relates to the large literature on the design of private health

insurance markets (Fang and Gavazza, 2011; Starc, 2014; Bajari et al., 2014; Handel et al., 2015;

Hackmann et al., 2015; Einav et al., 2016) and markets with lock-in effects and one-sided com-

mitments (Cardon and Hendel, 2001; Crocker and Moran, 2003; Herring and Pauly, 2006; Viard,

2007; Bouckaert et al., 2010; Crocker and Snow, 2011; Biglaiser et al., 2013). Because the German

private health insurance market is comparable to life insurance markets in other countries—

well-known examples of front-loaded contracts—the paper contributes to a better understand-

ing of the functioning of front-loaded insurance markets and the issue of portability (Hendel

and Lizzeri, 2003; Gründl et al., 2006; Farrell and Klemperer, 2007; Fang and Kung, 2010; Mc-

Shane et al., 2010; Schmeiser et al., 2012; Fang and Kung, 2012; Eling and Kiesenbauer, 2014;

Schmeiser et al., 2015).3

    In the narrowest sense, this paper is the first to evaluate the 2009 German portability reform

theoretically and empirically. In that sense, the following papers are closest in spirit to ours

because they all analyze switching behavior in the German PHI market: Using claims panel data

from a German private insurer, Hofmann and Browne (2013) empirically test several theoretical

hypotheses about enrollees’ switching behavior in front-loaded contracts. Their main results are

that front-loading creates a lock-in effect and that more front-loading is associated with lower

lapsing rates. Hofmann and Browne (2013) do not cover the 2009 reform but discuss the reform

as promising field for future research. Exploiting 2010 claims data of another German private

insurer, Christiansen et al. (2016) empirically study determinants of lapsing and switching and
   3 The paper also contributes to the literature studying health plan switching and switching costs (Buchmueller
and Feldstein, 1997; Cutler and Reber, 1998; Strombom et al., 2002; Schut et al., 2003; Nuscheler and Knaus, 2005;
Abraham et al., 2006; Dijk et al., 2008; Dafny and Dranove, 2008; Bouckaert et al., 2010; Schram and Sonnemans,
2011; Biglaiser et al., 2013; Grunow and Nuscheler, 2014; Boonen et al., 2015; Bünnings et al., 2017; Schmitz and
Ziebarth, 2017).

                                                        3
find that premiums play a crucial role. Eekhoff et al. (2006) discuss the possibility of portable

old-age provisions to increase competition in the German private health insurance market. And

Baumann et al. (2008) theoretically model the life-cycle premium development in the German

private market. Because the accumulated reserves rise fast enough at the beginning of a contract,

their simulations show that a considerable part of the old-age provisions could be made portable

between insurers without harming insurers; the latter was a typical pre-reform complaint by the

insurance industry.

      The remainder of the paper is structured as follows. In Section 2 we present the institutional

background of the German health insurance system and the 2009 reform; in Section 3 we de-

scribe our model and generate theoretical predictions regarding the impact of the portability

reform of old age provisions; in Section 4, we describe the data and provide empirical evidence

for the model predictions; and in Section 5 we conclude.



2     Background

This section provides a brief overview of the German health care system. In particular, we

explain the German private health insurance market and the 2009 portability reform.


2.1     The German Individual Private Health Insurance Market

The German health insurance system consists of two co-existing markets: Statutory Health In-

surance (SHI) and Private Health Insurance (PHI). The default is SHI which insures 90% of the

population. SHI premiums are charged as income-dependent contribution rates. Currently the

contribution rate is 15.5% of the gross wage and split roughly evenly (by law) between employ-

ees and their employers. Non-working family members are covered by SHI family insurance

without extra costs. Social law regulates the 120 not-for-profit insurers (“sickness funds”). Es-

sential health benefits are generous in international comparison and deductibles or co-insurance

rates prohibited (Bünnings et al., 2017; Schmitz and Ziebarth, 2017).

      Opting out of SHI. For historical reasons, select population sub-groups can opt out of SHI:

(a) the self-employed; (b) high income earners with gross labor incomes above a politically de-

fined federal threshold (2017: e 57.6K or about $60K p.a.); and (c) civil servants. Opting out of

SHI is essentially a lifetime decision: to avoid that individuals game the system, switching back

to SHI is only possible when enrollees are younger than 55 years and when their incomes fall
                                              4
below the income threshold.

   In SHI and PHI, provider networks and managed care are unknown. Hence people can

freely choose their provider. In addition, in both SHI and PHI, reimbursement rates are centrally

determined and do not vary by insurers or health plans. In the first place, private insurers

customize health plans and process, scrutinize, and deny claims.

   The PHI market consists of 44 private insurance companies that provide “comprehensive”

and “supplemental” insurance coverage. Comprehensive or “full” policies are solely sold as

individual non-group policies. In 2016, German private insurers provided 8.8 million compre-

hensive and 25.1 million supplemental policies (Association of German Private Healthcare In-

surers, 2017). The supplemental policies are mostly held by SHI enrollees who top up their SHI

essential benefit package by insuring dental care, glasses, or other non-essential SHI benefits.

This paper abstains from the supplemental private market.

   One main consumer advantage of getting comprehensive PHI is choice. Compared to the

post-ACA era in the US, the German private individual market is less regulated. Applicants can

freely choose their level of coverage in terms of benefits and cost-sharing amounts. This results

in thousands of different health insurance plans among the 8.8 million policyholders, most of

which are sold across state lines and nationwide. The majority of private insurers operate na-

tionwide and are open to all applicants who opt out of SHI. Pre-existing condition clauses are

allowed and insurers can deny coverage.

   Guaranteed Renewability and One-Sided Commitments. While insurers can initially deny

coverage to bad risks, insurers cannot cancel ongoing contracts and dump enrollees who ex-

perience health shocks or consume more health care than expected. In addition, whereas the

initial premium is risk-rated, all subsequent premium increases have to be community-rated at

the health plan level and guaranteed renewability exists. These regulations intend to ban active

cream-skimming on the insurer side. Because, after the initial screening, insurers are prohibited

from canceling contracts while policyholders can lapse and switch to a different insurer, it is a

market with a one-sided commitment. Also note that no fixed enrollment period exists in the

German PHI. Contracts are permanent and do not have to be renewed. After opting out of SHI

or leaving PHI family insurance and signing an individual contract, it is not uncommon that

enrollees remain insured with their carrier until they die (Medicare does not exist in Germany).

In our sample, the policyholders’ average age is 46 years and enrollees have been clients for an

average of 14 years (max. is 85 years).
                                               5
       PHI Premium Calculation. In order to understand switching behavior and how switching

interacts with health risks, the premium calculation is crucial. When opting out of SHI and

first signing a private contract, the initial PHI premium is individually underwritten and risk-

rated.4 Premiums consist of several components whose calculations are regulated by the Kalku-

lationsverordnung (KalV). The specific actuarial calculations are carried out by the actuaries of

each insurer and have to be approved by the federal financial regulatory agency Bundesanstalt

für Finanzdienstleistungsaufsicht (BaFin) : The basic premium components are:


   1. Risk-rated actuarial part. It depends on age, sex, health status and the plan’s actuarial

         value (benefits, cost-sharing, family vs. single plan).

   2. Old-age provisions. They depend on enrollees’ age, the accumulated capital stock, and

         (1). Adjustments are made continuously over the life-cycle.

   3. Administrative loading factor. It includes a variety of different positions, from a “safety

         charge” of at least 5% on top of the sums of (1) and (2) (§7 KalV) to the possibility to prorate

         broker commissions (§8 KalV, see below).

   4. Old-age provision loading factor. It is calculated as 10% of (2). (§12 4a Versicherungsauf-

         sichtsgesetz (VAG)).


       As mentioned, guaranteed renewability exists and premiums have to be community-rated at

the plan level after the initial risk-rating. However, when switching insurers, a new risk rating

is routinely carried out and the actuarial part (1) might change. This has been the case pre- and

post-reform.

       Old-Age Provisions. One important and distinct characteristic of the market is the legal

obligation of insurers to build up old-age provisions, typically until around age 60 of the poli-

cyholder, constituting parts (2) and (4) above. Thus premiums are heavily front-loaded over the

individuals’ life cycles. Young enrollees’ premiums significantly exceed their expected health

care spending, while old enrollees’ premiums are significantly lower than their expected health
   4 The only exception is the “Basic Plan” (Basistarif ). The Basic Plan has to be offered by all insurers and must be
structured after the SHI standardized health plan with the same set of essential benefits and actuarial values. for the
Basic Plan, guaranteed issue exists for people above 55 or those who joined the PHI after 2009. The maximum pre-
mium is capped at the maximum SHI premium (2017: e 683 per month). The legislature mandated the introduction
of the Basic Plan in 2009 to provide an “affordable” private option for PHI enrollees who cannot switch back to SHI,
are uninsured, would have to pay excessive premiums, or would be denied coverage. However, the demand for the
Basic Plan is negligible which is why, henceforth, we will abstain from further considering it. In 2015, in the entire
PHI, only 29,400 people or 0.3% were enrolled in the Basic Plan (Association of German Private Healthcare Insurers,
2016). In our data, only 1,006 enrollees chose the basic plan in 2010.
                                                          6
care spending. The idea is to dampen age-related increases in health care spending (and thus

premiums) through old-age provisions and a capital stock. Ideally, real premiums would then

remain stable over enrollees’ life cycles. In 2015, total PHI old-age provisions amounted to

e 189 billion ($208 billion) for 8.8 million policies, or to e 21.5K ($23.7K) per policy (Association

of German Private Healthcare Insurers, 2016).

      Pre-Reform Non-Portability. Pre-reform, when switching insurers, enrollees would lose

their entire capital stock, the sum of components (2) and (4) above over their tenure with the

insurer. Old-age provisions were not portable. Or, to be more specific, there was no porta-

bility mandate and insurers did not transfer them to competitors when consumers switched.

This resulted in high switching costs that created a lock-in effect and dampened competition.5

Choosing private insurers was essentially a life-time decision. Switching rates were very low.

Only young and healthy individuals would even consider switching insurers due to (i) the loss

of the capital stock, (ii) the associated age-related increase in premiums, (iii) the new risk-rating,

(iv) no guaranteed issue and the possibility of insurers to exclude pre-existing conditions or

deny coverage.


2.2     The Portability Reform of 2009

Effective January 1, 2009, old-age provisions (component (2) above) had to be made portable

when enrollees would cancel their contracts and switch to a competitor. However, after lob-

bying by the industry and to reduce the administrative burden for insurers, the portability of

provisions was standardized. The standardization follows the standard SHI plan which im-

plies that policyholders with more generous coverage lose parts of their old-age provisions.6

Hence, although external switching costs clearly decreased for basically all policyholders, they

remained (prohibitively) high for some enrollees, particularly for older people due to reasons (i)

to (iv) above.

      The reform differentiated between two groups of policyholders. (a) First, for policyhold-

ers with existing contracts before January 1 2009 (the great majority), external switching and

portability was only possible in the six months period between January 1 and June 30, 2009.

To be specific, old-age provisions had to be made portable as long as the contract was canceled
   5 Another factor reinforces the lock-in effect and resembles the life insurance market: due to the very long average

contract periods, insurance brokers receive a relatively high commission of typically six monthly premiums. Insurer
can deduct these acquisition costs from the old-age provisions during the first years of the contract via the “Zillmer”
method (§8 KalV). When switching insurers, typically commission has to be paid again.
   6 When the actuarial value is below the SHI plan, then insurers solely make the actuarial value portable.

                                                          7
between January 1 and June 30, 2009 (§204, 2b, Versicherungsvertragsgesetz (VVG)).7

    Our data do not identify when exactly the contract was canceled but we see when the old

contract formally ended and the new coverage began (which is typically at the beginning of a

calendar year). Thus, we assume that enrollees who canceled contracts and switched insurers

effective January 2010 had canceled their contract during the six months cancelation period

between January 1 and June 30, 2009.

    (b) Second, for new policyholders whose coverage became effective after December 31, 2008,

standardized provisions have been always portable. However, because the minimum contract

period in our sample is two years8 and because our data only cover years up to 2011, we disre-

gard subgroup (b) and exclusively focus on the majority of existing policyholders (a). This has

the advantage that reform-induced selection into PHI is not a serious concern here.



3    Model

This section develops a simple two-period model to generate predictions of how enrollees’

switching behavior may change as a result of the portability reform described in Section 2.

    Consider two periods, indexed by t ∈ {0, 1}, and two insurance companies, indexed by f ∈

{1, 2}. We consider individuals who are enrolled in one of the two companies in period 0, and
focus on the enrollees’ switching decisions in period 1. In period 1, enrollees have three options:

(i) keep the guaranteed-renewable contract that they purchased in period 0; (ii) renegotiate the

terms of the contract with their current insurer and switch internally; and (iii) switch externally

to a spot contract with a different insurer.

    We denote by ht an individual’s expected health expenditures, i.e., her risk type. Since we

focus on the individual’s decision in period 1, we normalize h0 = 0 and we simply label h1 as

h. We assume symmetric learning in the sense that both the insurer and the enrollee know the

realization of h in period 1. Also, following the German institutional setting, this is a market

with one-sided commitment: the insurer cannot cancel the contract, but enrollees can switch

externally if the value of the current contract lies below the value of a new spot contract with a

competitor.
   7 Policyholders above 55 were exempt from the six month cancellation period as long as they switched to the

(unpopular) Basic Plan, see footnote 4.
   8 This is part of private law and not regulated. Most insurers specify a minimum contract period of two years and

some of one year. When contracts are canceled before the two year minimum duration, the premiums for the entire
two period have to be paid which is why canceling prior does basically not happen.
                                                         8
                                                                                                              f
    We use Y to denote a consumer’s total income, Pf the premium with insurer f , and θt the

preference parameter for insurer f at time t, which may change over time. We write


                                                                 f
                                                  u (Y − P f , θ t )                                              (1)


as the individual’s indirect flow utility at time t from being enrolled in a plan with premium

Pf offered by company f . We assume that u (·, θ ) is increasing and concave in consumption,

and u (c, ·) is increasing in θ. Throughout the model, we omit plan characteristics and assume

that plans provide full insurance. Without loss of generality, we consider individuals who were

insured with insurer 1 at the end of period 0. We normalize θ12 = 0, so that θ ≡ θ11 equals

individuals’ period-1 relative preference of company 1 over company 2.

    Consider an individual who is currently insured with insurer 1 under a guaranteed-

renewable contract with premium P0 for both periods.9 Suppose her period-1 health realization

is h and her relative preference realization is θ. If she switches to insurer 2, she will be risk-rated

for a spot contract at an actuarially fair premium, which we denote by P∗ (h), assuming a per-

fectly competitive spot market in period 2. To simplify the exposition, we assume without loss

of generality that P∗ (h) = h.

    Let VI (h, θ ) be the individual’s value of the contract at t = 1 relative to the outside option of

switching to a spot contract with insurer 2. This value is a function of her realized risk type h

and her realized preference shock θ in period 1, and is given by:



                                  VI (h, θ ) = u (Y − P0 , θ ) − u (Y − h, 0) .                                   (2)


Since u (·, θ ) is increasing and concave, we have ∂VI (h, θ )/∂h > 0 and ∂2 VI (h, θ )/∂h2 > 0. Also,

by definition of θ, ∂VI (h, θ )/∂θ > 0.

    Analogously, let VF (h) be firm 1’s value from keeping the customer, which is given by:



                                                VF (h) = P0 − h


where P0 is the insurer’s premium revenue and h is the expected cost of insuring the consumer.
   9 Firm’s expected profits equal zero during the duration of the contract. Premiums are endogenously determined
by the firm’s zero-profit condition, taking into account endogenous lapsing. Because we study the short-term effects
of the portability reform on current customers, we take P0 as given.


                                                          9
The functions VI and VF are plotted in Figure 1, assuming h ∈ [hmin , hmax ] and θ ∈ [θmin , θmax ].10


                                            [Figure 1 About Here]


      Figure 1 shows that VF (·) is a monotonically decreasing function of the individual’s period-

1 risk realization h. VF (h) is equal to zero if h = P0 , i.e., if the individual’s period-1 health

realization equals the risk-rated premium of period-0 (i.e., expected health risk) of the long-

term contract. Contrarily, VI (·) is a monotonically increasing function of h. If h equals P0 , then

the enrollee is indifferent between keeping the contract and switching to a competitor—as long

as θ = 0, i.e., if the individual has no relative preference for insurer 1. A higher θ shifts the

VI (·, θ ) curve upward.


3.1     Pre-Reform Switching

Whether the policyholder will (i) keep the current guaranteed renewable contract, or (ii) rene-

gotiate and switch internally to a new contract, or (iii) switch externally to a different insurer

depends on (a) the sign of the total value VI (h, θ ) + VF (h) for both the individual and the firm,

and (b) the sign of VI (h, θ ) for the individual. We can distinguish between three cases:


   1. If VI (h, θ ) ≥ 0, the individual will keep the current guaranteed renewable contract.

   2. If VI (h, θ ) < 0 but VI (h, θ ) + VF (h) ≥ 0, the individual and the firm will renegotiate a

        new contract, i.e., internal switching occurs.

   3. If VI (h, θ ) < 0 and VI (h, θ ) + VF (h) < 0, the individual will switch to a different insurer,

        i.e., external switching occurs.


      In case (1), the individual is strictly better off by keeping the current contract (vs. switching),

given her realized (h, θ ) . We assume that, in this case, the insurer does not consider it necessary

to renegotiate the contract to keep the enrollee. If the insurer does not observes the enrollee’s

preference for the insurer, θ, one may be concerned that the enrollee could pretend to have a
  10 Note that we have placed some parametric restrictions on preferences.  This implicitly puts bounds on preference
heterogeneity which is not essential for the analysis but made explicit here for the sake of clarity: First, we assume
that VI (hmin , θmax ) < 0. This means that, under the most favorable health shock hmin , the individual is always
better off by switching insurers. This places an upper bound on preference heterogeneity because it implies that an
individual whose risk is reclassified very favorably in the spot market always prefers to switch insurers. Second, we
assume that VI (hmax , θmin ) > 0. This means that, under the most negative health shock hmax , the individual always
prefers to keep the current contract. This places a lower bound on preference heterogeneity because it implies that
an individual whose risk is reclassified very negatively in the spot market never wants to switch insurers.

                                                         10
large negative θ in order to negotiate a better contract. We abstract away from this type of

strategic behavior by assuming that consumers can only credibly prove that VI (h, θ ) < 0 by

obtaining a quote from another insurer. Obtaining such a quote would reveal the individual’s

true health realization h through the risk-rating and would also be costly when the consumer is

not prepared to switch externally; as such, we rule this type of strategic behavior out.

    In case (2), the individual is better off by switching to a different insurer (vs. keeping the

current contract). However, the incumbent insurer is willing to renegotiate the contract to ensure

that the individual is at least equally well-off by staying. The individual switches internally.

    In case (3), the individual is better off by switching to a different firm (vs. keeping the current

contract), and the incumbent insurer is unwilling to renegotiate the contract. The individual

switches externally.

    We denote the total value of the current contract for both the individual and the firm by

W (h, θ ). It is given by



                 W (h, θ ) ≡ VI (h, θ ) + VF (h) = u(Y − P0 , θ ) − u(Y − h, 0) + P0 − h.               (3)


Figure 2 plots W (·) as a function of h for different values of θ. Because u (·, θ ) is concave in h,

W (·, θ ) is concave in h for all θ. The concavity of W (·, θ ) in h, together with the fact that W (h, ·)

is increasing in θ, implies that there exists a unique value θ ∗ for which there is exactly one value

of h̄(θ ∗ ) such that W h̄(θ ∗ ), θ ∗ = 0 and W (h, θ ∗ ) > 0 for all h 6= h̄ (θ ∗ ).
                                     



                                         [Figure 2 about here]


    Moreover, for preference shocks satisfying θ > θ ∗ , it holds that W (h, θ ) > 0 for all h. For

preferences shocks θ < θ ∗ , the concavity of W (·, θ ) implies that there are two threshold values,

hl (θ ) and hu (θ ), such that W (h, θ ) < 0 if and only if h ∈ [hl (θ ) , hu (θ )]. When θ is sufficiently

small, hl (θ ) equals hmin .


                                         [Figure 3 about here]


    The characterizations of VI (·, ·) in Figure 1 and W (·, θ ) in Figure 2 allow us to depict VI (·, ·)

and W (·, ·) in the (h, θ )-space via iso-curves. Figure 3 graphs the loci in the (h, θ )-space for

W (h, θ ) = 0 and for VI (h, θ ) = 0. Note that both loci intersect at the point (h, θ ) = ( P0 , 0), where

both the individual value and the total surplus are zero. Note that the iso-curve for W (h, θ ) = 0
                                               11
lies below θ = θ ∗ because the axis for θ is inverted. The loci depicted in Figure 3 define three

relevant areas:


   1. The iso-curve for VI (h, θ ) = 0 defines the first area in the south-east part of the (h, θ )-

          space where the value for the individual is positive, i.e., VI (h, θ ) > 0. This area represents

          individuals who are relatively sick and relatively attached to the insurance company, and

          therefore do not want to switch plans.

   2. The second area is defined by the conditions W (h, θ ) > 0 and VI (h, θ ) < 0 in the

          south-west corner of the (h, θ )-space, where the total surplus is positive but the value

          for the individual is negative. In such cases, the insurer and the policyholder negoti-

          ate new contract terms and the enrollee optimizes her plan. This area defines the (h, θ )

          combinations for which individuals will switch internally to a different plan. Formally:

          Pr(Internal Switch) = Pr ((h, θ ) : W (h, θ ) > 0 and VI (h, θ ) < 0).

   3. The third area is defined by the conditions W (h, θ ) < 0 and VI (h, θ ) < 0 in the north-

          west corner of the (h, θ )-space. In such cases, both the individual and the total surplus

          are negative; hence, the parties are not able to negotiate better contract terms. This area

          defines the (h, θ ) combinations for which the individual and the firm will split, i.e., the

          individual will switch externally to a different insurer. Formally: Pr(External Switch) =

          Pr ((h, θ ) : W (h, θ ) < 0 and VI (h, θ ) < 0).


3.2       Post-Reform Switching

Next we analyze the short-run effects of the portability reform through the lens of the simple

model developed above. Under the portability reform, an individual who has signed a long-

term contract in period 0 will be entitled to carry an old-age provision A if she decides to switch

to a different insurer in period 1. The value of A > 0 does not depend on the individual’s

realized value of h or θ.11

      As in Section 3.1, we will analyze the individual’s value from switching to a different insurer

relative to renewing the current contract. If the individual switches externally to a different

insurer, her new premium will be rated at h, but now she will be entitled to receive the old-

age provision A > 0 from the current insurer. Thus, with old-age provision portability, the
  11 Inpractice, A depends on the individual’s tenure in the contract, the type of contract as well as demograph-
ics. These factors are not explicitly considered in this basic model – which may be thought of as being implicitly
conditional on these baseline characteristics.
                                                             12
individual’s relative value of renewing the current long-term contract, now denoted by ṼI (h, θ ),

is given by:



                              ṼI (h, θ ) = u(Y − P0 , θ ) − u(Y − h + A, 0).                            (4)


Interestingly, because the portability reform mandates the incumbent insurer to make the age

provision A portable to the consumer when leaving the insurer, it increases the value of the

insurer of keeping the customer by an amount equal to A:



                                           ṼF (h) = P0 − h + A.                                         (5)


The total value of the relationship after the portability reform is therefore given by



         W̃ (h, θ ) = ṼI (h, θ ) + ṼF (h, θ ) = u(Y − P0 , θ ) − u(Y − h + A, 0) + ( P0 − h + A)       (6)


Comparing VI (h, θ ) and ṼI (h, θ ) in equations (2) and (4), we obtain:



                                    ṼI (h, θ ) = VI (h − A, θ ) , for all θ                             (7)


Similarly, comparing W (h, θ ) and W̃ (h, θ ) in equations (3) and (6), we obtain:



                                    W̃ (h, θ ) = W (h − A, θ ), for all θ                                (8)


The relationships represented by equations (7) and (8) crystallize the impact of the portability

reform on the switching decisions. Analogous to Figure 3, we can now depict the iso-curves

for ṼI (h, θ ) = 0 and W̃ (h, θ ) = 0 in the (h, θ )-space. Figure 4 shows graphically what we see in

equations (7) and (8): that ṼI (h, θ ) = 0 and W̃ (h, θ ) = 0 are shifts of VI (h, θ ) = 0 and W (h, θ ) = 0

to the right by A.

                                          [Figure 4 about Here]

    Figure 4 also illustrates how the internal and external switching domains change as a result

of the portability reform:

    Internal Switching. First, the model predicts that basically all (h, θ ) combinations that led to

internal switching pre-reform are also included in the internal switching domain post-reform.
                                              13
Thus, the model predicts an increase of internal switching rates due to the reform. This is es-

pecially true for individuals with positive tastes for the insurer (θ > 0). The portability reform

reduces these individuals’ incentives to renew their long-term contract (case (1)). However,

because the total surplus of these individuals and the incumbent insurer exceeds the outside

option, both parties prefer to renegotiate a new contract (which creates higher utility for the in-

dividual) than parting ways. Individuals who are able to renegotiate with the insurer represent

relatively good risks so that the insurer would like to keep them. However, as seen in Figure 4,

post-reform, a share of less healthy enrollees are now also attractive for the insurer to keep as

customers; at the same time, these enrollees are less attached to their insurer.

      External Switching. Second, the model predicts that there may be an increase in the mass of

(h, θ ) combinations that switch externally. However, this increase of external switchers is con-
centrated among individuals with negative preference shocks for the insurer (θ < 0). However,

as we focus on consumers who are currently insured with the incumbent firm, by revealed pref-

erences, consumers with θ < 0 are likely underrepresented among the pool of existing enrollees.

In our data, external switching rates were low pre-reform, which indicates θ > 0.

      Composition of Switchers. Third, the model predicts that both internal and external switch-

ers are less healthy after the reform. This is because, before the portability reform, unhealthy

individuals were locked in with the incumbent insurer. Mandated portability opens the possibil-

ity, even for relatively unhealthy individuals with weak preferences for the insurer, to credibly

threaten the insurer to leave (and then to switch internally or externally).


3.3     Summary of Testable Hypotheses

The framework above delivers the following testable hypotheses on the short-run effects of the

portability reform:


Hypothesis 1. Internal switching will (almost) unambiguously increase post-reform.

Hypothesis 2. External switching will be roughly constant post-reform (under plausible as-

        sumptions).

Hypothesis 3. Both internal and external switchers will, on average, be in worse health post-

        reform.



                                                14
      In addition, if h and θ are independent, then Figures 3 and 4 also predict that external switch-

ers will, on average, be healthier than internal switchers. This holds both before and after the

portability reform.


Hypothesis 4. The health status of internal switchers is, on average, worse than the health sta-

        tus of external switchers, pre-and post-reform.


3.4     A Numerical Example

This section offers a numerical example to illustrate the workings of the model. We simulate

5,000 individuals whose period-1 health type h is drawn from U [0, 2]. Moreover, we set Y = 2,

and parameterize the flow utility as


                                                            √
                                   u(Y − P, θ ) = 2.5 ×         2−P+θ


      In addition, we set A = 0.5 and P0 = 1 and use two assumptions for the distribution of θ.

First, we assume that θ ∼ [−1, 1], the Uniform Case. This is an unrealistic assumption consid-

ering that θ is the preference for an insurer among existing enrollees. Hence, alternatively, we

assume a linear p.d.f for θ, such that f (θ ) =   1+ θ
                                                   2 ,   the Triangular Case. This yields E(θ ) = 13 .


                                         [Table 1 about here]


      Table 1 shows the simulated impact of the portability reform on the number of internal and

external switchers and their average health status. First, assuming θ was uniform and symmet-

ric around zero (Uniform Case), external switching rates would almost be three times higher

pre-reform (column (1)). As we will see below, this is inconsistent with our data. In column

(1), internal and external switching rates would increase substantially post-reform. The reform

would also worsen the average health status of internal and external switchers.

      Second, assuming θ was triangular and had a positive mean (Triangular Case), internal and

external switching rates would be very similar pre-reform (column (3)). In this case, we also find

that the reform would have a much stronger effect on internal than on external switching rates.

Finally, post-reform, internal and external switchers would be in worse health than pre-reform.

These observations are all very consistent with our data.


                                                    15
4     Empirical Analysis

This section assesses whether the empirical observations are in line with the model predictions

as summarized in Section 3.3. To do so, we use claims panel data from a big private German

insurer and simple regression diagnostics.


4.1     Data

This section uses claims panel data from a large German non-group health insurer. The database

includes the universe of contracts and claims between 2005 and 2011, and therefore allows for

an evaluation of the 2009 portability reform. In total, we observe more than 300,000 unique

enrollees along with detailed information on plan parameters such as benefits and cost-sharing

amounts as well as claims and diagnoses. More details about the data and its descriptives are

provided by Karlsson et al. (2016).

      Sample Selection. First, we disregard enrollees with missing observables and only focus

on actual policyholders, i.e., those who pay the premium and likely make switching decisions.

In other words, we disregard insured family members. Second, we ignore observations with

contract durations of less than three years, because the minimum contract period for enrollees

in our sample is two years. Only after this minimum contract period can a contract be lapsed.

This means that we disregard inflows after the 2009 reform, which entails the positive side-effect

of shutting down potential treatment-induced selection into PHI. It is also consistent with our

model which focuses on pre-reform enrollees. The final sample consists of 1,206,286 enrollee-

year observations. Table A1 in the Appendix shows descriptive statistics.

      Outcome Measures. The main individual-level outcome measures are realized health plan

switches. First, we observe whether enrollees cancel their contract and switch insurers. Accord-

ingly, we generate a binary variable External Switch. Table A1 shows that an External Switch

occurs in 6.4% of all enrollee-year observations. Second, we also observe whether enrollees

switch within the insurer to a different health plan. Hence, we generate a second binary vari-

able Internal Switch which is one for 8.5% of all enrollees-year observations.

      Risk Types. Two key predictions of the theoretical model regard h, the realized risk types, of

people who lapse their initial contract. This variable represents the extent to which the expected

costs in the current period deviate from the expectation, based on which the initial underwriting

was made. We construct two different empirical proxies for h. First, we exploit the fact that P0 ,
                                                  16
the premium of the existing contract, represents a sufficient statistic for the the initial estimate

h0 (which was assumed to be equal to zero in the theoretical model) after controlling for sex,

age, insurance plan, and age at entry.12 We thus estimated the auxiliary regression equation

Cit = β t P0 + f t ( Ait , Fi , Iit , Mi ) where Cit is enrollee i’s claims amount in year t, ( Ait , Fi , Iit , Mi )

represent age, sex, plan, and age at entry, respectively.13 Our proxy for h is defined as the

residual from that regression: ĥ1 = Cit − Ĉit .

    Our alternative proxy for h, ĥ2 , is based on residuals from the regression Cit = f t ( Ait , Fi , Iit ),

which does not use the premium information but instead considers only age, sex, and the health

plan. This alternative proxy is thus more closely related to factors determining a person’s health

care demand, but reveals less about whether the client is profitable from the insurer’s point of

view (which requires using premium information).

    Socio-Demographics. As displayed in Table A1, we know the age and gender of enrollees.

We also know their profession and the age when they first signed a contract with the current

insurer. The mean age is 46 years and 72% of all policyholders are male. Almost half of all

policyholders are high-income earners and the other half is self-employed. On average, poli-

cyholders have been clients of the insurer for 14 years and have been enrolled in their current

health plan for 8 years.

    Inflation Adjustment. All monetary values are expressed in 2011 Euros. In order to ensure

internal comparability between different years, we derived the deflator from the data: we re-

gressed total annual claims per policyholder on all observables and plan parameters along with

year fixed effects. The year dummies were then used to purge the monetary variables.

    Health Plan Parameters. As seen in Table A1, the average deductible is e 573 per year.

Policyholders’ average annual premium is e 4,263 ($4,900) and slightly lower than the aver-

age premium for a single plan in the US group market (Kaiser Family Foundation, 2014). Note

that premium is the total premium paid—including employer contributions for privately in-

sured high-income earners. Employers cover roughly one half of the total premium and the

self-employed pay the full premium.

    In terms of the benefits covered, we simplify the rich data and focus on the main generosity

indicators provided by the insurer. These classify plans into Top, Plus, and Eco plans. About
  12 In order to see this, note that with actuarial premiums (and ignoring time discounting) E0 (ht ) = TP0 +
∑τ 6=t E0 (hτ ) where T is the expected duration of the contract. T is a function of age and sex, and the relationship
between P0 and ht is also determined by the age at entry.
  13 Our specification for f ( A , F , I , M ) includes year-specific fixed effects for insurance plan; age at entry; and
                             t   it i it    i
sex times calendar age.
                                                           17
46% of all policyholders chose the Top plan, 32% the Plus plan, and 21% the Eco plan.


4.2     Descriptives

Before we turn to the regression analysis, this section provides graphical and descriptive evi-

dence on whether the theoretical predictions in Section 3.3 are in line with our data. We start

with the internal and external switching rates, and then carry on to possible changes in the

composition of switchers.

      Switching Rates. Figures 5a and 5b show external and internal switching rates over time.

The pre-reform period from 2005 to 2008 is characterized by relatively smooth and stable switch-

ing rates without much trending. The internal and external switching rates are very similar, at

around 6.5%. As discussed in the previous section, this stylized fact is in line with the Triangular

Case in Table 1.

      Without a natural control group and in a pure before-after estimation framework, the iden-

tifying assumption for a causal effect is the absence of significant changes in switching rates in

post-reform years in a world without a reform. The absence of major pre-reform trends makes

this assumption obviously more credible.


                               [Insert Figures 5a and 5b about here]


      As for Figure 5a and external switches: we only observe a slight uptick in the switching rate

from 2009 to 2010. As discussed, this slight increase in cancelations was very likely triggered

in the first six months of 2009 when reserves were made portable in case of an external switch.

However, overall, it is hard to eyeball a substantial impact of the reform on the external switch-

ing rate. This is in line with Hypothesis 2 in Section 3.3 according to which the effect on external

switching should be small.

      As for Figure 5b and internal switches: After a minor decrease between 2007 and 2008

(which could be interpreted as an anticipation effect), we observe a strong increase in the in-

ternal switching rate from 4.8% to 17.3% between 2008 and 2009. From 2009 to 2010, the internal

switching rate decreases again to 6.8% and pre-reform levels (recall that existing customers only

had the opportunity to switch once within a six months window). The observation of a poten-

tially strong reform-induced increase in the internal rather than the external switching rate is

entirely in line with our model predictions and Hypotheses 1 and 2.

                                                 18
      Socio-demographics. Next, we investigate socio-demographics by switching status and the

pre- vs. post-reform period. Hypothesis 3 predicted that both internal and external switchers

would be in worse health post-reform. And Hypothesis 4 suggested than internal switchers may

be unhealthier than external switchers, both pre- and post-reform. Table 2 provides descriptives

along with information on how switchers are different pre- and post-reform (∆) and whether

such trends diverge compared to stayers (∆2 ).

      Apparently, the stock of clients ages over the observation period. As seen in the first two

columns, the average age increases from 45.9 years to 47.7 years. However, most other socio-

demographics remain relatively stable for the non-switchers. The bottom of the panel reports

descriptives on our two health proxy indicators. These measure deviations in a person’s risk

type relative to initial expectations (Section 2). We use these to evaluate Hypotheses 3 and 4.


                                    [Insert Table 2 about here]


      Table 2 shows the following facts which are consistent with Hypotheses 3 and 4 : Internal and

external switchers are in worse health after the reform—and the change is of similar magnitude

in the two groups. In addition, internal switchers represent worse risks than external switchers,

pre- and post-reform: in both cases, the mean difference is between e 300 and e 400 and for both

proxies of h.


4.3     Regression Analysis

The empirical section uses claims panel data from a big private non-group insurer. While these

data have great advantages, they do not easily lead to a natural control group. Identifying

causal reform effects absent a control group requires one additional assumption: namely, the

absence of significant changes in the outcome variable in post-reform years absent a reform.

Depending on the outcome variable of interest and the pre-reform trends, this may be a very

strong or a weak(er) assumption. In our case, Figures 5a and 5b suggests that the assumption

seems credible. Despite some minor trending, the pre-reform trends of our main variables are

relatively smooth and stable. A priori there is no reason to believe that, without the portability

reform, the switching rates would not have continued to be smooth and stable.

      Econometric Model. The parametric model can be written as:



                                                 19
                                    Yi =α + δpostre f orm

                                          + Xi β + Zi θ + ρ p + ψt + χr + ei                                     (9)


where Yi is the outcome variable, Internal Switch or External Switch in our main models. Postre-

form is a binary indicator that yields the difference in switching rates in post as compared to

pre-reform years.14

    The second row of equation (9) lists all control variables. Xi are socio-demographics (Table

A1) and include the age and gender of the policyholder as well as their employment type. More-

over, we control for health plan variables Zi like the length of the contract period, pre-existing

conditions, or premium mark-ups due to health risks. ρ p represents 147 health plan fixed effects

which net out persistent differences between plans. ψt represents calendar year fixed effects,

and χr represents 96 region fixed effects based on the first two zip code digits. Standard errors

ei are routinely clustered at the health plan level.15

    An additional model employs a more restrictive specification and includes individual fixed

effects as well as individual-level linear time trends:




                                    Yi =αi + δpostre f orm + γi t

                                          + Xi β + Zi θ + ρ p + ψt + χr + ei                                    (10)


where αi represents the individual fixed effect and γi t is the individual-level linear trend. Note

that these separate time trend parameters cannot be consistently identified. The other parame-

ters are still identified, including the key parameter δ. The key rationale of this extended spec-

ification is that controlling for individual time trends may better capture the underlying indi-

vidual heterogeneity as compared to just controlling for common year fixed effects. Including

individual time trends is feasible because we observe enrollees once a year, up to seven times.

Individual time trends are a more refined variant of individual fixed effects; basically one can

think of them as individual fixed effects with individual-specific slope parameters.
  14 Here we suppress the time index t since we essentially treat our unbalanced panel as a repeated cross-section in

the analysis.
  15 We estimate linear probability models but partial effects from Probit models generate very similar results.


                                                         20
   Main Results. Table 3 presents our main estimates. The first three columns use External

Switch and the last three columns use Internal Switch as outcome variable. For both outcomes,

we increase the number of control variables from one specification to the next, and left to right.

This allows us to assess the relevance of correcting the sample with respect to these covariates.

The top panel is a regression based on year dummies for individual years, whereas the bottom

part summarizes the post-reform change in one parameter like in equation (9). Columns (3) and

(6) of the bottom part estimate models like in equation (10).


                                   [Insert Table 3 about here]


   Hypotheses 1 and 2. In line with Hypothesis 2, the regression results do not deliver much

evidence that making old-age provisions portable has led to a significantly higher share of pol-

icyholders who cancel contracts and switch insurers. The yearly estimates in the top half are

either negative or not statistically significant. The overall post-reform effect in the bottom half

shows: In column (1), just controlling for health plan and year fixed effects, we find a signif-

icantly negative estimate of 1.74 percentage points (ppt), relative to a baseline switching rate

of 6.5%. The effect entirely vanishes when adding demographic controls (column (2)) and is

estimated at -0.4ppt when we add individual trends (bottom model of Column (3)).

   However, in line with Figure 5a and Hypothesis 1, columns (3) to (6) provide strong evidence

that the reform induced more internal switches—and this effect is robust and significant in sta-

tistical and economic terms. According to the overall post-reform effect in the bottom of column

(5), the internal switching rate increased by 6.5ppt in post-reform years. The baseline probability

to switch doubled from 6.5%. When the model considers individual trends as in equation (10),

the effect even increases to 10.4ppt in column (6). As seen in the top panel, this average post-

reform effect is entirely driven by the increase by about 11ppt in 2009. What is noteworthy is

the robustness of the estimated coefficient which barely increases or decreases once we include

sets of individual-level and health plan-level covariates. This suggests that health plan level and

socio-demographic adjusters are not significantly correlated with the increase in the switching

rate from 2008 to 2009.

   Hypotheses 3 and 4. Next, we intend to test hypotheses three and four. To do so, we run

a model similar to equation (9) but use our health measures (h) as outcome variables. Because

we intend to measure changes in enrollees’ health relative to expectations to approximate the

model, we use the policyholders’ annual premium to construct a proxy for h, ĥ1 (see Section
                                           21
4.1).In addition to using our first health risk proxy as dependent variable, the model adds the

binary indicators Internal Switch and External Switch in levels and in interaction with postre-

form as main regressors of interest to our model. The coefficient estimate of Internal Switch

should then indicate whether, pre-reform, internal switchers were healthier than everybody

else. The interaction term with postreform would indicate whether this relationship changed

post-reform.


                                    [Insert Table 4 about here]


       Table 4 shows the results. One observes that the main estimates remain relatively robust

when adding sets of covariates from left to right. When adding individual fixed effects in the

last column, the coefficients decrease but not significantly.

       First, pre- and post-reform, internal and external switchers have been healthier than non-

switchers. Moreover, external switchers appear to be healthier than internal switchers. Second,

both internal and external switchers are more unhealthy post-reform. These findings largely

confirm the nonparametric evidence and are entirely in line with Hypotheses 3 and 4 of Section

3.3.

       Table A2 (Appendix) shows a robustness check with the alternative proxy measure of h, ĥ2

(where we regress individual annual claims on on our full set of covariates and then take the

difference between actual and predicted claims as a measure of the change in enrollees’ health).

As seen, the results are very robust and confirm Hypotheses 3 and 4 : External switchers are

healthier than internal switchers and, post-reform, switchers have become less healthy.


4.4      How Do Internal Switchers Optimize Health Plans?

The theory and empirics of this paper find more internal health plan switches as a result of

the new mandated portability requirements. Although our model does not make any direct

predictions about it, this final subsection empirically investigates how policyholders optimized

their health plans. Because we observe health plan characteristics after an internal switch pre-

and post-reform (Table 2), we can run the following model:




                                                 22
      Yi,t+1 =α + γInternalSwitchit + δpostre f ormt + τ × InternalSwitchit × postre f ormt

                + Xit β + Zit θ + ρ p + ψt + χr + ei                                             (11)


where Yi,t+1 now represents different health plan parameters. We consider the type of plan

(eco, plus, top) as well the deductible, the premium, and annual claims. All outcomes are mea-

sured in year t + 1 (in the year after a switch, if one occurred). Internal Switch elicits changes

in plan parameters after an internal switch in pre-reform years; the interaction term Internal

Switch ×postreform elicits changes in plan parameters after an internal switch in post vs. pre-

reform years.

   Table 5 presents the results of this exercise. Again, in each of the columns from left to right,

we add more control variables to the models. Each panel represents models with the health plan

parameter indicated in the panel header as dependent variable. With 1,125,310 observations, the

analysis sample is slightly smaller than in the previous specifications—due to the fact that we

use leads of the dependent variable.


                                     [Insert Table 5 about here]


   Starting with how health plans had been optimized by internal switchers in pre-reform

years, a clear pattern emerges: Internal switches were typically downgrades. A typical pre-

reform switch was associated with a reduced probability in choosing the most generous ’top

plan’ category by 22ppt, or by more than 50% (Panel A, Table 5). There is more evidence that

pre-reform switches resulted in less generous plans: The deductible increased by e 170 and an-

nual premiums decreased by almost e 700–1,000 (Panel C and D, Table 5). Annual claims even

decreased by between e 1,500 and e 1,800 (Panel E, Table 5).

   Next, the interaction term contrasts internal switches in post-reform years with those in pre-

reform years. Again, a clear picture emerges: Whereas internal switches represented significant

downgrades pre-reform, post-reform switches entail much smaller generosity downgrades. Ob-

viously, consumers re-opimized but not systematically. Post-reform, the likelihood to choose the

most generous top plan category is 12ppt higher as compared to the pre-reform period (but over-

all still a negative -10ppt). Similarly, the likelihood to choose a higher deductible is significantly

lower post-reform; now the deductible remains quite stable when enrollees switch plans (Panel
                                                   23
C, Table 5). Premiums still decrease by an average of e 300 per year, but by significantly less

than pre-reform (Panel D, Table 5). Claims are also still lower post-reform, but only by e 1,000

per year (Panel E). The finding that, post-reform, fewer internal switches are generosity down-

grades is consistent with our previous finding according to which internal switchers are, on

average, in worse health post-reform.



5   Conclusion

This paper is the first to theoretically and empirically evaluate a regulatory reform that man-

dated the portability of old-age provisions in the German non-group private health insurance

market. The German private health insurance market is characterized by a front-loading of

premiums over the life-cycle—in the form of a legal obligation of insurers to build up old-age

provisions. The idea is to include a mandatory savings component that dampens the premium

growth when enrollees become older. However, together with the newly experience rated pre-

miums when switching insurers, it also creates a strong lock-in effect and dampens market com-

petition. Making old-age provision portable was a regulatory attempt to reduce switching costs

and to strengthen consumers’ market position; the idea was to foster competition which may

eventually lead to lower premiums and more consumer choice.

    The paper first developed a simple theory. We derived economic predictions that could

then be tested empirically. Obviously, the portability reform reduced switching costs for policy-

holders. According to our model, this reduction should induce a larger share of policyholders

to renegotiate their contract with their insurer. This is exactly what we find empirically: the

internal switching rate roughly doubled from a baseline of 6.5% in the first post-reform year.

Moreover, our theory predicts that, pre-reform, mostly healthy policyholders were in a position

to renegotiate contracts; and that, post-reform, less healthy consumers were enabled to renego-

tiate their contract conditions. This theoretical model prediction is also confirmed by our data.

In contrast, we do not find much empirical evidence that the newly mandated portability re-

quirement increased the lapsing and external switching rate. Our model can rationalize this

empirical fact with the assumption that preferences for insurance companies are persistent over

time.

    Overall, our findings demonstrate that health care consumers do make active use of in-

creased sovereignty and bargaining power when policymakers enable them. Our findings also

                                               24
demonstrate that consumer lock-in in insurance markets with long-term contracts can result

in low internal and external switching rates as individuals and insurers negotiate the contract

terms. Even though the German portability reform did not increase switching across insurers, it

enabled consumers to negotiate better contract terms.


References
Abraham, J. M., Feldman, R., Carlin, C., Christianson, J., 2006. The effect of quality information
 on consumer health plan switching: Evidence from the Buyers Health Care Action Group.
 Journal of Health Economics 25 (4), 762–781.

Association of German Private Healthcare Insurers, 2016. Financial Report for Private
  Healthcare Insurance 2015. https://www.pkv.de/service/zahlen-und-fakten/
  archiv-pkv-zahlenbericht/zahlenbericht-2015.pdf, retrieved on March 14,
  2017.

Association of German Private Healthcare Insurers, 2017. Zahlen und Fakten. https://www.
  pkv.de/service/zahlen-und-fakten/, retrieved on March 14, 2017.

Bajari, P., Dalton, C., Hong, H., Khwaja, A., 2014. Moral hazard, adverse selection, and health
  expenditures: A semiparametric analysis. The RAND Journal of Economics 45 (4), 747–763.

Baumann, F., Meier, V., Werding, M., 2008. Transferable ageing provisions in individual health
  insurance contracts. German Economic Review 9 (3), 287–311.

Beggs, A., Klemperer, P., 1992. Multi-period competition with switching costs. Econometrica
  60 (3), 651–666.

Bell, S. J., Auh, S., Smalley, K., 2005. Customer relationship dynamics: Service quality and cus-
  tomer loyalty in the context of varying levels of customer expertise and switching costs. Jour-
  nal of the Academy of Marketing Science 33 (2), 169–183.

Biglaiser, G., Crémer, J., Dobos, G., 2013. The value of switching costs. Journal of Economic
  Theory 148 (3), 935–952.

Boonen, L. H., Laske-Aldershof, T., Schut, F., 2015. Switching health insurers: the role of price,
  quality and consumer information search. The European Journal of Health Economics, 1–15.

Bouckaert, J., Degryse, H., Provoost, T., 2010. Enhancing market power by reducing switching
  costs. Economics Letters 109 (2), 131–133.

Buchmueller, T. C., Feldstein, P. J., 1997. The effect of price on switching among health plans.
  Journal of Health Economics 16 (2), 231–247.

Bünnings, C., Schmitz, H., Tauchmann, H., Ziebarth, N. R., 2017. How Health Plan Enrollees
  Value Prices Relative to Supplemental benefits and Service Quality. Journal of Risk and Insur-
  ance forthcoming, –.

Cardon, J. H., Hendel, I., 2001. Asymmetric information in health insurance: Evidence from the
  National Medical Expenditure Survey. RAND Journal of Economics 32 (3), 408–427.

Christiansen, M., Eling, M., Schmidt, J.-P., Zirkelbach, L., 2016. Who is changing health insur-
 ance coverage? empirical evidence on policyholder dynamics. Journal of Risk and Insurance
 83 (2), 269–300.
                                                25
Crocker, K. J., Moran, J. R., 2003. Contracting with limited commitment: Evidence from
  employment-based health insurance contracts. RAND Journal of Economics 34 (4), 694–718.

Crocker, K. J., Snow, A., 2011. Multidimensional screening in insurance markets with adverse
  selection. Journal of Risk and Insurance 78 (2), 287–307.

Cutler, D. M., Reber, S. J., 1998. Paying for health insurance: The trade-off between competition
 and adverse selection. The Quarterly Journal of Economics 113 (2), 433–466.

Dafny, L., Dranove, D., 2008. Do report cards tell consumers anything they don’t already know?
 The case of Medicare HMOs. The RAND Journal of Economics 39 (3), 790–821.

Dijk, M., Pomp, M., Douven, R., Laske-Aldershof, T., Schut, E., Boer, W., Boo, A., 2008. Con-
  sumer price sensitivity in Dutch health insurance. International Journal of Health Care Fi-
  nance and Economics 8 (4), 225–244.

Eekhoff, J., Jankowski, M., Zimmermann, A., 2006. Risk-adjustment in long-term health insur-
  ance contracts in Germany. The Geneva Papers on Risk and Insurance-Issues and Practice
  31 (4), 692–704.

Einav, L., Finkelstein, A., Schrimpf, P., 2016. The response of drug expenditure to non-linear
  contract design: Evidence from Medicare Part D. Quarterly Journal of Economics 130 (2),
  841–899.

Eling, M., Kiesenbauer, D., 2014. What policy features determine life insurance lapse? An anal-
  ysis of the German market. Journal of Risk and Insurance 81 (2), 241–269.

Fang, H., Gavazza, A., 2011. Dynamic inefficiencies in an employment-based health insurance
  system: Theory and evidence. American Economic Review 101 (7), 3047–3077.

Fang, H., Kung, E., 2010. How does life settlement affect the primary life insurance market?
  NBER Working Paper Series 15761.

Fang, H., Kung, E., 2012. Why do life insurance policyholders lapse? The roles of income, health
  and bequest motive shocks. NBER Working Paper Series 17899.

Farrell, J., Klemperer, P., 2007. Coordination and Lock-In: Competition with Switching Costs and
  Network Effects. In: Armstrong, M., Porter, R. (Eds.), Handbook of Industrial Organization,
  1st Edition. Vol. 3. Elsevier, Ch. 31, pp. 1967–2072.

Gründl, H., Post, T., Schulze, R. N., 2006. To hedge or not to hedge: Managing demographic risk
  in life insurance companies. Journal of Risk and Insurance 73 (1), 19–41.

Grunow, M., Nuscheler, R., 2014. Public and private health insurance in Germany: The ignored
  risk selection problem. Health Economics 23 (6), 670–687.

Hackmann, M. B., Kolstad, J. T., Kowalski, A. E., 2015. Adverse selection and an individual
 mandate: When theory meets practice. American Economic Review 105 (3), 1030–1066.

Handel, B., Hendel, I., Whinston, M. D., 2015. Equilibria in health exchanges: Adverse selection
 vs. reclassification risk. Econometrica 83 (4), 1261–1313.

Hendel, I., Lizzeri, A., 2003. The role of commitment in dynamic contracts: Evidence from life
 insurance. The Quarterly Journal of Economics 118 (1), 299–328.

Herring, B., Pauly, M. V., 2006. Incentive-compatible guaranteed renewable health insurance
 premiums. Journal of Health Economics 25 (3), 395–417.

                                               26
Hofmann, A., Browne, M., 2013. One-sided commitment in dynamic insurance contracts: ev-
 idence from private health insurance in Germany. Journal of Risk and Uncertainty 46 (1),
 81–112.

Kaiser Family Foundation, 2014. 2014 Employer Health Benefits Survey. http://kff.org/
  health-costs/report/2014-employer-health-benefits-survey/, retrieved on
  May 14, 2015.

Karlsson, M., Klein, T. J., Ziebarth, N. R., 2016. Skewed, persistent and high before death: Medi-
  cal spending in Germany. Fiscal Studies 37 (3-4), 527–559.

Klemperer, P., 1987. The competitiveness of markets with switching costs. The RAND Journal of
  Economics 18 (1), 138–150.

McShane, M. K., Cox, L. A., Butler, R. J., 2010. Regulatory competition and forbearance: Evi-
 dence from the life insurance industry. Journal of Banking & Finance 34 (3), 522–532.

Nuscheler, R., Knaus, T., 2005. Risk selection in the German public health insurance system.
 Health Economics 14 (12), 1253–1271.

Schmeiser, H., Gatzert, N., Huber, C., 2015. How individuals choose health insurance: An ex-
  perimental analysis. The Journal of Risk and Insurance 82 (2), 401–432.

Schmeiser, H., Holzmüller, I., Gatzert, N., 2012. Creating customer value in participating life
  insurance. The Journal of Risk and Insurance 79 (3), 645–670.

Schmitz, H., Ziebarth, N. R., 2017. Does framing prices affect the consumer price sensitivity of
  health plan choice? The Journal of Human Resources 52 (1), 89–128.

Schram, A., Sonnemans, J., 2011. How individuals choose health insurance: An experimental
  analysis. European Economic Review 55 (6), 799–819.

Schut, F. T., Greß, S., Wasem, J., 2003. Consumer price sensitivity and social health insurer choice
  in Germany and the Netherlands. International Journal of Health Care Finance and Economics
  3 (2), 117–138.

Starc, A., 2014. Insurer pricing and consumer welfare: Evidence from Medigap. The RAND
  Journal of Economics 45 (1), 198–220.

Strombom, B. A., Buchmueller, T. C., Feldstein, P. J., 2002. Switching costs, price sensitivity and
  health plan choice. Journal of Health Economics 21 (1), 89–116.

Viard, V. B., 2007. Do switching costs make markets more or less competitive? The case of 800-
  number portability. The RAND Journal of Economics 38 (1), 146–163.

Werden, G. J., 2001. Network effects and conditions of entry: Lessons from the Microsoft case.
 Antitrust Law Journal 69 (1), 87–111.

Yang, Z., Peterson, R. T., 2004. Customer perceived value, satisfaction, and loyalty: the role of
  switching costs. Psychology & Marketing 21 (10), 799–822.

Zauberman, G., 2003. The intertemporal dynamics of consumer lock-in. Journal of Consumer
  Research 30 (3), 405–419.




                                                27
Figures and Tables

 Figure 1: Individual’s and Firm-1’s Continuation Values, VI (·; θ ) and VF (·) as a Function of h



                              𝑉" , 𝑉.




                                           𝑉. (ℎ)
                                                                     𝑉" (ℎ, 𝜃'() )



                                                                     𝑃0                        ℎ
                                                   𝑉" (ℎ, 0)                                   ℎ'()


                                                                𝑉" (ℎ, 𝜃'+, )




Note: VF (h) is monotonically decreasing in h. VI (·; θ ) is drawn for θ ∈ {0, θmin , θmax } . Note that when θ = 0,
VI (h, 0) is zero when h = P0 .


  Figure 2: Total Surplus W (h, θ ) = VI (h, θ ) + VF (h) as a Function of h for θ ∈ {0, θmin , θmax }




                             1




                                          1 ℎ, &'()



                                        1 ℎ, & ∗                                     1 ℎ, 0


                                                                     /0                           ℎ
                                                          ℎ3(& ∗ )                            ℎ'()


                                                          1 ℎ, &'+,




                                                           Note: Own illustration.




                                                                          28
Figure 3: Pre-Reform: Iso-Curves for VI (h, θ ) and W (h, θ )



                                                   𝑊 ℎ, 𝜃 = 0
             ℎ"#$                             𝑃2                              ℎ"/0

    𝜃"#$

                       𝑊 ℎ, 𝜃 < 0
                       𝑉( ℎ, 𝜃 < 0


    0


    𝜃∗
                                                         𝑉( ℎ, 𝜃 > 0
                     𝑊 ℎ, 𝜃 > 0
                     𝑉( ℎ, 𝜃 < 0




   𝜃"/0


                               𝑉( ℎ, 𝜃 = 0



                               Note: Own illustration.




Figure 4: Post-Reform: Iso-Curves for ṼI (h, θ ) and W̃ (h, θ )


                                                   𝑊 ℎ, 𝜃 = 0 𝑊 ℎ, 𝜃 =0
              ℎ𝑚𝑖𝑛                            𝑃0                     𝑃0 + 𝐴 ℎ𝑚𝑎𝑥

        𝜃𝑚𝑖𝑛



                                                          𝑊 ℎ, 𝜃 < 0
                                                          𝑉𝐼 ℎ, 𝜃 < 0
         0


         𝜃∗

                                                   𝑊 ℎ, 𝜃 > 0
                                                   𝑉𝐼 ℎ, 𝜃 < 0

                                                                 𝑉𝐼 ℎ, 𝜃 >0
     𝜃𝑚𝑎𝑥


                               𝑉𝐼 ℎ, 𝜃 = 0         𝑉𝐼 ℎ, 𝜃 =0


                               Note: Own illustration.




                                             29
        Figure 5: Share of Enrollees Who Switched by Year.




(a) External Switches                         (b) Internal Switches




                               30
Table 1: Simulated Effect of Portability Reform on Internal and External Switching

                                    Uniform Case          Triangular Case
                                     Pre    Post         Pre      Post
                                     (1)     (2)          (3)       (4)
            Internal switch         0.13    0.26         0.18      0.37
            External switch         0.33    0.45         0.16      0.22
            E [h|Internal Switch] 0.33      0.54         0.31      0.52
            E [h|External Switch] 0.67      0.92         0.61      0.89
            Own simulations. h is drawn from U [0, 2].   See Section 3.4 for
            details.




                                         31
                                                   Table 2: Summary Statistics by Switcher Type

                                            (1)         (2)       (3)      (4)        (5)      (6)       (7)       (8)         (9)      (10)     (11)
                                                  Non-Switchers                    Internal Switchers                      External Switchers
                                           Pre         Post       ∆       Pre         Post      ∆        ∆2       Pre         Post       ∆       ∆2
     Socio-Demographics
     Age (in years)                        45.9         47.7      1.8    46.3         46.2     -0.2       -2.0    38.3        39.1        0.8     -1.1
     Female                               0.281        0.301     0.020   0.234       0.209    -0.026    -0.046   0.270       0.298      0.028    0.008
     Policyholder since (years)             8.1          8.5      0.4     8.2          7.7     -0.6       -1.0     5.9         5.9       -0.0     -0.4
     Client since (years)                  14.2         15.4      1.2    13.7         13.1     -0.7       -1.9     8.0         7.9       -0.1     -1.3
     Employee                             0.509        0.480    -0.029   0.494       0.429    -0.065    -0.035   0.349       0.325     -0.024    0.005
     Self-Employed                        0.412        0.445     0.033   0.451       0.524    0.072      0.040   0.597       0.622      0.025   -0.008
     Premium Markup Health Risk           0.301        0.349     0.048   0.267       0.349    0.082      0.034   0.360       0.425      0.065    0.017
     Pre-Existing Condition Exempt        0.014        0.016     0.001   0.013       0.015    0.002      0.001   0.022       0.020     -0.001   -0.003

     Health Plan Parameters
     TOP Plan                             0.513        0.354    -0.159   0.772       0.462    -0.309    -0.150   0.396       0.224     -0.172   -0.013
32




     PLUS Plan                            0.311        0.397     0.086   0.137       0.266    0.129     0.044    0.216       0.280      0.064   -0.021
     ECO Plan                             0.176        0.250     0.074   0.092       0.272    0.180     0.107    0.388       0.496      0.108    0.034
     Annual premium (Euro)                4,365        4,078     -287    5,370       4,377     -993      -707    3,613       3,214      -399     -112
     Annual markup (Euro)                 1,021         799      -222    2,391       1,840     -551      -329    2,430       2,045      -384     -162
     Deductible (Euro)                     549          581        32     681         681        0        -32     597         616         19      -13
     Total Claims (Euro)                  3,343        3,279      -65    2,980       2,537     -443      -378    1,183       1,168       -14       50

     Client Type
     ĥ1                                  139.03      108.06    -30.97   -511.32    -331.37   179.95    210.92   -884.79     -710.12   174.67   205.64
     ĥ2                                  163.54      167.26     3.72    -452.21    -251.95   200.26    196.54   -824.72     -627.50   197.23   193.51

     N                                   666,551      359,743            49,362      53,345                      49,372      27,913
     The table compares covariate means for non-switchers, internal, and external switchers pre- and post-reform. ∆ refers to the
     difference between post- and pre-reform means, and ∆2 refers to the difference between pre-and post-means relative to the corre-
     sponding difference for non-switchers.
              Table 3: External and Internal Switching Pre- and Post-Reform

                                   (1)          (2)           (3)          (4)          (5)          (6)
                                         External Switch                         Internal Switch
Y2006                            0.0012        0.0036      0.0070**      0.0015       0.0008       0.0019
                                 (0.003)      (0.003)       (0.003)      (0.004)      (0.004)      (0.004)
Y2007                          -0.0085***     -0.0031       0.0046      0.0200***    0.0185***    0.0200***
                                 (0.003)      (0.003)       (0.003)      (0.007)      (0.007)      (0.007)
Y2008                          -0.0218***   -0.0130***     -0.0016      -0.0107*     -0.0130**    -0.0114**
                                 (0.004)      (0.004)       (0.003)      (0.006)      (0.006)      (0.005)
Y2009                          -0.0320***   -0.0205***     -0.0057      0.1154***    0.1126***    0.1137***
                                 (0.007)      (0.006)       (0.005)      (0.014)      (0.014)      (0.014)
Y2010                          -0.0198***     -0.0063      0.0100**      0.0147*      0.0113       0.0126
                                 (0.006)      (0.005)       (0.004)      (0.008)      (0.009)      (0.008)
R2                                0.042        0.074         0.085        0.045        0.047        0.055
Postreform                     -0.0174***     -0.0004      -0.0038***   0.0654***   0.0645***    0.1042***
                                 (0.004)      (0.002)        (0.000)     (0.009)     (0.009)      (0.001)
Baseline                          0.065        0.065          0.065       0.085       0.085        0.085
R2                                0.041        0.084          0.064       0.033       0.042        0.019
Individuals                     308,073       308,073       308,073      308,073     308,073      308,073
Observations                   1,206,286     1,206,286     1,206,286    1,206,286   1,206,286    1,206,286
Health Plan Fixed Effects          X             X            X            X            X            X
Year Fixed Effects                 X             X            X            X            X            X
Demographic controls                             X            X                         X            X
Other controls                                   X            X                         X            X
Region Fixed Effects                             X            X                         X            X
Individual Time Trends                                        X                                      X
The table shows regression results from linear probability models. The sample excludes contracts within
the minimum contract period of two years. Demographic controls are in Table 2 and include (among
others) sex and age, years since joining the insurer, risk rating, and a dummy indicating whether pre-
existing conditions restrict coverage. The 96 region fixed effects are based on the first two digits of the
policyholder’s zip code. Individual time trends as depicted by equation (10) are included in all lower-
panel models that only estimate one common postreform effect. The standard errors are clustered at the
plan level. * p < 0.10, ** p < 0.05, ***p < 0.01




                                                      33
                  Table 4: Health Status of Switchers Pre- and Post-Reform

                                             (1)               (2)                (3)                 (4)
                                                Risk realization proxied using premiums (ĥ1 )
Internal Switch × Postreform            206.6408***       203.9049***       210.6489***        175.0206***
                                          (40.587)          (41.259)           (41.161)          (39.614)
Internal Switch                        -654.3279***      -663.9633***       -631.7414***       -366.7459***
                                          (28.493)          (30.360)           (30.262)          (29.515)
External Switch × Postreform            208.4190***       202.7226***       201.8427***        244.8460***
                                          (40.105)          (40.694)           (40.763)          (40.343)
External Switch                       -1025.1433***     -1059.5529***      -1056.4985***       -987.4415***
                                          (25.005)          (25.418)           (25.568)          (24.447)
SD(y)                                       6,705             6,705              6,705             6,705
R2                                         0.001             0.001              0.004
N                                        1,206,245         1,206,245          1,206,245          1,206,245
Year Fixed Effects                          X                  X                 X                   X
Health Plan Fixed Effects                                      X                 X                   X
Demographic Controls                                           X                 X                   X
Additional controls                                                              X                   X
Region Fixed Effects                                                             X                   X
Individual Fixed Effects                                                                             X
The table shows regression results from linear probability models. The sample does not exclude contracts
within the minimum contract period of two years. Demographic controls are in Table 2 and include
(among others) sex and age, years since joining the insurer, risk rating, and a dummy indicating whether
pre-existing conditions restrict coverage. The 96 region fixed effects are based on the first two digits of the
policyholder’s zip code. Individual time trends as in equation (10) are included in all lower-panel models
that only estimate one common postreform effect. The standard errors are clustered at the individual
level. * p < 0.10, ** p < 0.05, ***p < 0.01




                                                      34
                     Table 5: Plan Reoptimization of Internal Switchers

                                          (1)               (2)               (3)                (4)
                                                Dependent Variable: See Panel Heading
A. TOP Plant+1
Internal Switch × Postreform         -0.0663***          0.1265***       0.1254***          0.1258***
                                       (0.003)            (0.002)          (0.002)            (0.002)
Internal Switch                      0.0457***          -0.2211***       -0.2192***         -0.2196***
                                       (0.002)            (0.002)          (0.002)            (0.002)
Baseline                                0.407              0.407            0.407              0.407
R2                                      0.039              0.915            0.915
B. PLUS Plant+1
Internal Switch ×P ostreform         -0.0787***         -0.1325***       -0.1316***         -0.1315***
                                       (0.003)            (0.002)          (0.002)            (0.002)
Internal Switch                      0.0487***           0.1827***       0.1814***          0.1814***
                                       (0.002)            (0.002)          (0.002)            (0.002)
Baseline                                0.330              0.330            0.330              0.330
R2                                      0.003              0.898            0.898
C. Deductiblet+1
Internal Switch × Postreform        -172.4005***      -148.7422***      -148.8370***      -145.2801***
                                       (4.544)           (3.639)           (3.636)           (3.650)
Internal Switch                     315.9883***        174.4020***      174.7709***       171.4676***
                                       (3.627)           (2.898)           (2.898)           (2.904)
Baseline                                 606               606               606               606
R2                                      0.015             0.882             0.882
D. Premiumt+1
Internal Switch × Postreform         103.1071***      700.7012***       712.4047***       340.7889***
                                      (13.201)          (9.896)           (9.552)            (9.713)
Internal Switch                     -104.2469***     -1059.2899***     -1069.8236***      -690.6987***
                                       (9.368)          (7.811)           (7.596)            (7.659)
Baseline                                3,989            3,989             3,989              3,989
R2                                      0.008            0.796             0.821
E. Claimst+1
Internal Switch × Postreform          43.4932         581.3927***       582.8326***        499.4501***
                                      (37.223)          (37.339)          (37.257)           (37.146)
Internal Switch                    -1567.8235***     -1806.2307***     -1766.2864***      -1538.5361***
                                      (26.186)          (28.047)          (27.977)           (27.899)
Baseline                                2,841             2,841             2,841              2,841
R2                                     0.003             0.062             0.066
Individuals                           277,270           277,270           277,270            277,270
Observations                         1,125,310         1,125,310         1,125,310          1,125,310
Health Plan Fixed Effects                X                 X                 X                  X
Year Fixed Effects                       X                 X                 X                  X
Demographic Controls                                       X                 X                  X
Additional controls                                                          X                  X
Region Fixed Effects                                                         X                  X
Individual Fixed Effects                                                                        X
The table shows regression results from linear probability models. The sample does not exclude con-
tracts within the minimum contract period of two years. The number of person-year observations in
all regressions is 1,661,561. Demographic controls are in Table 2 and include (among others) sex and
age, years since joining the insurer, risk rating, and a dummy indicating whether pre-existing conditions
restrict coverage. The 96 region fixed effects are based on the first two digits of the policyholder’s zip
code. Individual time trends as in equation (10) are included in all lower-panel models that only estimate
one common postreform effect. The standard errors are clustered at the individual level. * p < 0.10, **
p < 0.05, ***p < 0.01
                                                   35
Appendix

                                Table A1: Summary Statistics

                                        Mean          SD     Min          Max          N
   External switch                       0.064    0.245      0.000       1.000      1,206,286
   Internal switch                       0.085    0.279      0.000       1.000      1,206,286

   Socio-Demographics
   Age (in years)                         46.0     11.5      19.0        106.0      1,206,286
   Female                                0.282    0.450       0.0          1.0      1,206,286
   Policyholder since (years)              8.1      4.6       2.5         40.0      1,206,286
   Client since (years)                   14.1     10.9       1.0         85.0      1,206,286
   Employee                              0.486    0.500       0.0         1.0       1,206,286
   Self-Employed                         0.441    0.496       0.0          1.0      1,206,286
   Premium Markup Health Risk            0.322    0.467       0.0         1.0       1,206,286
   Pre-Existing Condition Exempt         0.015    0.122       0.0         1.0       1,206,286

   Health Plan Parameters
   TOP Plan                              0.462    0.499        0.0         1.0      1,206,286
   PLUS Plan                             0.323    0.468        0.0         1.0      1,206,286
   ECO Plan                              0.215    0.411        0.0         1.0      1,206,286
   Annual premium (Euro)                 4,263    2,055        0.0       24,364     1,206,245
   Annual markup (Euro)                  1,128    7,866    -2,118,099    18,192     1,206,245
   Deductible (Euro)                      573      607         0.0        3,177     1,206,286
   Total Claims (Euro)                   3,135    7,868        0.0      2,121,752   1,206,286

   Client Type
   ĥ1                                   20.83    7,585     -26,847     2,113,455   1,206,245
   ĥ2                                   62.32    7,605     -21,451     2,115,066   1,206,286
   Authors’ calculations and illustration.




                                                 36
                Table A2: Health Status of Switchers Pre- and Post-Reform

                                           (1)                (2)              (3)                  (4)
                                                    Risk realization relative to cell (ĥ2 )
Internal Switch × Postreform          183.2903***        171.6464***      175.0609***          139.4084***
                                        (40.722)           (41.372)          (41.234)            (39.646)
Internal Switch                      -617.3890***       -624.6657***      -581.4100***         -319.5123***
                                        (28.582)           (30.452)          (30.320)            (29.536)
External Switch × Postreform          196.2986***        151.5124***      151.3980***          197.9521***
                                        (40.172)           (40.737)          (40.785)            (40.336)
External Switch                      -988.4288***      -1043.9324***     -1017.6816***         -947.1198***
                                        (25.042)           (25.440)          (25.573)            (24.438)
SD(y)                                     6,723              6,723             6,723               6,723
R2                                       0.001              0.002             0.006
N                                      1,206,286          1,206,286         1,206,286           1,206,286
Year Fixed Effects                        X                  X                 X                    X
Health Plan Fixed Effects                                    X                 X                    X
Demographic Controls                                         X                 X                    X
Additional controls                                                            X                    X
Region Fixed Effects                                                           X                    X
Individual Fixed Effects                                                                            X
Demographic controls are dummies for sex and calendar age. Additional controls include the profes-
sional group, years since joining the company, risk rating and a dummy indicating whether pre-existing
conditions limit the service package. The regression always use the full sample, do not condition on con-
tracts with less than three years. The number of person-year observations in all regressions is 1,661,561.
The 96 region fixed effects are based on the first two digits of the client’s zip code. The standard errors
are clustered at the individual level. * p < 0.10, ** p < 0.05, ***p < 0.01




                                                    37
