NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

COMPLEX ASSET MARKETS
Andrea L. Eisfeldt
Hanno Lustig
Lei Zhang
Working Paper 23476
http://www.nber.org/papers/w23476

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
June 2017

We thank seminar participants at Wharton, UNC, OSU, the Minnesota Macro Asset Pricing
Conference, the Eighth Annual Conference of the Paul Woolley Centre (PWC) for the Study of
Capital Market Dysfunctionality, BYU, UCLA Anderson, Wash U., the AFA, the NBER
Conference on Long-Term Asset Management, UCSD, University of Michigan, Stanford, CREI,
Bocconi, LSE, and UCL, as well as Santiago Bazdresch, Sebastian DiTella, Vincent Glode, Peter
Kondor, Pablo Kurlat, Leo Li, Francis Longstaff, Benjamin Moll, Tyler Muir, Dimitris
Papanikolaou, Scott Richard, Alexi Savov, Alexis Toda, and Dimitry Vayanos for helpful
comments and discussions. We also thank Leo Li for exceptional research assistance. The views
expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National
Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.
© 2017 by Andrea L. Eisfeldt, Hanno Lustig, and Lei Zhang. All rights reserved. Short sections
of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that
full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Complex Asset Markets
Andrea L. Eisfeldt, Hanno Lustig, and Lei Zhang
NBER Working Paper No. 23476
June 2017
JEL No. G12,J42
ABSTRACT
We develop a dynamic equilibrium model of complex asset markets with endogenous entry and
exit in which the investment technology of investors with more expertise is subject to less assetspecific risk. The joint equilibrium distribution of financial expertise and wealth then determines
risk bearing capacity. Higher expert demand lowers equilibrium required returns, reducing overall
participation. In equilibrium, investor participation in more complex asset markets with more
asset-specific risk is lower, despite higher market- level Sharpe ratios, provided that asset
complexity and expertise are complementary. We analyze how asset complexity affects the
stationary wealth distribution of complex asset investors. Because of selection, increased asset
complexity reduces wealth concentration, even though the wealth distribution for more expert
investors has fatter tails.
Andrea L. Eisfeldt
UCLA Anderson School of Management
110 Westwood Plaza
Suite C4.10
Los Angeles, CA 90095
and NBER
andrea.eisfeldt@anderson.ucla.edu
Hanno Lustig
Stanford Graduate School of Business
655 Knight Way
Stanford, CA 94305
and NBER
hlustig@stanford.edu

Lei Zhang
Faculty of Business and Economics
The University of Hong Kong
Pokfulam, Hong Kong
econlei@hku.hk​

1

Introduction

Complex investment strategies, such as those employed by hedge funds and other sophisticated
investors, appear to generate persistent alphas, high Sharpe ratios1 , and to feature limited
participation, despite free entry. Fixed income arbitrage is a good example of a complex
strategy, because its implementation requires intellectual capital (see Duarte, Longstaff, and
Yu, 2006). More complex strategies within fixed income arbitrage, such as mortgage-backed
security (MBS) strategies, have superior performance.2 We develop an industry equilibrium
model of the complex asset management industry that is consistent with these facts. The
model generates additional testable predictions about the industrial organization of complex
asset markets.
We define a complex asset as one that imposes a significant amount of non-diversifiable
but idiosyncratic risk on risk-averse investors. More complex assets impose more asset-specific
risk on investors holding the asset. Merton (1987) was first to point out that idiosyncratic
risk will be priced when there are costs associated with learning about or hedging a specific
asset. There is a growing empirical literature that documents the importance of idiosyncratic
risk in complex asset strategies.3 Complex assets require a joint investment in the asset itself
and in an investment technology which comprises the investor’s personnel, data, hedging and
risk management technologies, back office operations and trade clearing processes, relationships
with dealers, and relationships with clients.
Our model economy is populated by a continuum of risk-averse agents who choose to be
either non-experts who can invest only in the risk free asset, or experts who can invest in both
the risk free and risky assets. On average, all expert investors in the market earn the common
equilibrium return that clears the market, but their returns are subject to asset-specific (or
strategy-specific) shocks. Expertise shrinks the asset-specific volatility of the complex asset
return, and, as a result, more expert investors earn a higher Sharpe ratio. Thus, expertise
may be interpreted as the ability to implement complex strategies better either by developing
1

See Sharpe (1966).
See Duarte, Longstaff, and Yu (2006) for evidence. Gabaix, Krishnamurthy, and Vigneron (2007) provide
evidence that MBS returns are driven in large part by limits to arbitrage.
3
Several papers provide evidence for the importance of idiosyncratic risk in hedge fund returns (see, e.g.,
Titman and Tiu, 2011; Lee and Kim, 2014). Pontiff (2006) investigates the role of idiosyncratic risk faced by
arbitrageurs in a review of the literature and argues that “The literature demonstrates that idiosyncratic risk
is the single largest cost faced by arbitrageurs”. Greenwood (2011) states that “Arbitrageurs are specialized
and must be compensated for idiosyncratic risk,” and lists this first as the key friction investors in complex
strategies face. To paraphrase Emanuel Derman, if you are using a model, you are short volatility, since you
will lose money when your model is wrong, (see Derman, 2016).
2

1

a superior model or information technology, hiring better employees, or by gathering superior
information. We derive a specific micro-foundation for the idiosyncratic risk in complex assets
based on the returns earned from long position in a fundamental asset with some mispricing
or “alpha” with respect to standard models, and a short position in an imperfect tracking
portfolio. More expert investors build better hedging portfolios.
In our model, risk is asset-specific and idiosyncratic risk is priced.4 Funds cannot be reallocated across individual risk-averse investors. Since the risk in our economy is idiosyncratic,
pooling this risk would eliminate the risk premium that experts require to hold it. For incentive
reasons, asset managers cannot hedge their own exposure to their particular portfolio.5 This
motivates why we endow expert investors in our model with CRRA preferences, but we do not
model the principal-agent relation between the outside investors and asset managers.
We characterize the equilibrium mapping from the endogenous joint distribution of expertise
and financial wealth to complex asset prices. Importantly, in our dynamic equilibrium model,
the stationary distribution for wealth conditional on expertise is endogenous. Market clearing
returns must compensate participating investors for the asset-specific risk they face, but less
expert investors may not be adequately compensated, because equilibrium wealth-weighted
demand from higher expertise investors depresses required returns. In other words, expert
demand and risk bearing capacity act as a barrier to entry below a threshold level of expertise.
More complex assets impose more idiosyncratic risk on investors and earn higher equilibrium
returns, but the compensation per unit of risk may either increase or decrease as complexity
increases. In our model, market-level Sharpe ratios, which aggregate the individual Sharpe
ratios of market participants, increase with asset complexity only if expertise and complexity
are complementary, meaning that a marginal increase in idiosyncratic risk increases the rents
from expertise. To clear the market at the higher risk level, excess returns must increase.
However, if expertise and complexity are complementary, as complexity and therefore risk
increase, participation declines as inexpert investors are driven out. The selection effect–the
exclusion of lower expertise investors–attenuates the negative effect of increased risk on the
market-level Sharpe ratio.
Our model is an example of an “industry equilibrium” model in the spirit of Hopenhayn
4
This is, of course, a useful assumption technically. We could, equivalently, assume that all investors have
the same exposure to systematic risk, applying the results in Krueger and Lustig (2009).
5
In fact, Panageas and Westerfield (2009) and Drechsler (2014) provide important results for the portfolio
choice of hedge fund managers who earn fees based on assets under management and portfolio performance. In
particular, they show that these managers behave like constant relative risk aversion investors. These results
extend the analysis of the impact of high-water marks in Goetzmann, Ingersoll, and Ross (2003).

2

(1992a,b).6 This literature focuses in large part on explaining firm growth, and moments
describing the firm size distribution. Recent progress in the firm dynamics literature using
continuous time techniques to solve for policy functions and stationary distributions include
Miao (2005); Luttmer (2007); Gourio and Roys (2014); Moll (2014); Achdou, Han, Lasry, Lions,
and Moll (2014). We draw on results in these papers as well as discrete time models of firm
dynamics, as in recent work by Clementi and Palazzo (2016), which emphasizes the role of
selection in explaining the observed relationships between firm age, size, and productivity. We
are the first to use a model in this class to study the size or wealth distribution of financial
intermediaries.
In our model, expertise varies in the cross-section but is fixed for each agent over time. This
allows us to solve our model analytically, including the joint stationary wealth and expertise
distribution, in closed form, up to the equilibrium fixed point for expected returns.7 The joint
distribution is determined by the deep parameters which describe preferences, endowments, and
technologies. We analyze the stationary joint distribution of wealth and expertise to examine
the relation between size and skill in complex asset markets. The stationary wealth distribution of participants is Pareto conditional on each expertise level. Because investors with higher
expertise choose a higher exposure to the risky asset, both the drift and the volatility of their
wealth will be greater, leading to a fatter tailed distribution at higher expertise levels. However, our model also predicts, under natural conditions, that more complex asset markets will
have less concentrated wealth distributions. This is because, in equilibrium, selection reduces
expertise heterogeneity, and more so for more complex assets when expertise and complexity
are complementary. We provide evidence for this ancillary prediction using data from Hedge
Fund Research on size distributions across different strategies.
Recently, dynamic heterogeneous agent models have also been used to study wealth distributions in the consumer sector. We build on work by Benhabib, Bisin, and Zhu (2011, 2015,
2016),8 which study the wealth distribution of consumers subject to idiosyncratic shocks to
capital and/or labor income risk. These papers contain fundamental results describing necessary conditions for fat-tailed or Pareto wealth distributions, as well as interesting positive
results about the importance of capital income shocks and taxation schemes in shaping ob6
Such models are typically used to study the role of firm dynamics, entry, and exit in determining equilibrium
prices in an environment which builds on the heterogeneous agent framework developed in Bewley (1986).
7
We use a numerical algorithm to solve the market clearing fixed point problem. However, the solution is
straightforward given our analytical solution for policy functions and distribution over individual states.
8
See also Kaplan, Moll, and Violante (2016) for a model with a portfolio choice over liquid and illiquid assets.

3

served wealth inequality.9 A key distinction of our work is that we clear the market for the
risky asset, and solve the resulting fixed point problem determining equilibrium excess returns
and market volatility, consistent with our interpretation of the complex risky asset market we
study. Another distinction is that we study a participation decision, which plays a key role in
our model’s equilibrium price and allocation outcomes. Our paper also introduces heterogeneity in technologies, which leads to endogenous variation in the drift and volatility of wealth
across agents.10 Finally, another distinction is that we draw on the techniques used in Gabaix
(1999), who studies city size distributions in a model in which relative sizes follow a reflecting,
or regulated, geometric Brownian motion. Because the stationary distribution in our model
depends on the equilibrium fixed point excess return on the risky asset, it is more convenient
for us to employ a reflecting barrier for relative wealth levels, rather than Poisson elimination
as in the Benhabib, Bisin, Zhu (and many other) papers.
In terms of its asset pricing implications, our paper contributes to a large and growing
literature on segmented markets and asset pricing. Relative to the existing literature, we
provide a model with endogenous entry, a continuous distribution of heterogeneous expertise,
and a rich distribution of expert wealth that is determined in stationary equilibrium. Thus,
we have segmented markets, but allow for a participation choice. Our market has limited risk
bearing capacity, determined in part by expert wealth, but in addition to the amount of wealth,
the efficiency of the wealth distribution also matters for asset pricing.
We group this existing literature into three main categories, namely investor heterogeneity,
financial constraints and limits to arbitrage, and segmented market models with alternative
micro-foundations to agency theory. There is closely related work on heterogeneity in trading
technologies and risk aversion (see, e.g., Dumas, 1989; Basak and Cuoco, 1998; Kogan and
Uppal, 2001; Chien, Cole, and Lustig, 2011, 2012).
Our study shares the goal of understanding the returns to complex assets and strategies,
and the features of segmented markets and trading frictions, with the literature on limits of
arbitrage. Gromb and Vayanos (2010a) provide a recent survey of the theoretical literature on
limits to arbitrage, starting with the early work by Brennan and Schwartz (1990) and Shleifer
9

See Gabaix (2009) for a review of the empirical evidence and theoretical foundations for power law distributions in economics and finance.
10
Gabaix, Lasry, Lions, and Moll (2016) also emphasize the importance of heterogeneity in income growth
rates in generating realistic inequality. They do not feature a portfolio choice, or endogenous variation in growth
rates, and thus our study complements theirs. See also Toda (2014) and Toda and Walsh (2015) for related
results describing consumer wealth distributions using double power laws.

4

and Vishny (1997).11 Shleifer and Vishny (1997) emphasize that arbitrage is conducted by a
fraction of investors with specialized knowledge, but similar to He and Krishnamurthy (2012),
they focus on the effects of the agency frictions between arbitrageurs and their capital providers.
Although we do not explicitly model risks to the liability side of investors’ balance sheets, one
can interpret the shocks agents in our model face to include idiosyncratic redemptions. The
asset pricing impact of financially constrained intermediaries has been studied in the literature
on intermediary asset pricing following He and Krishnamurthy (2012, 2013) (see also, for example, Adrian and Boyarchenko, 2013). For empirical applications, see for example, Adrian,
Etula, and Muir (2014), and Muir (2014).
Finally, several papers develop alternative micro-foundations to agency theory for segmented
markets. Allen and Gale (2005) provides an overview of their theory of asset pricing based
on “cash-in-the-market”. Plantin (2009) develops a model of learning by holding. Duffie and
Strulovici (2012) develop a theory of capital mobility and asset pricing using search foundations.
Glode, Green, and Lowery (2012) study asset price dynamics in a model of financial expertise
as an arms race in the presence of adverse selection. Kurlat (2016) studies an economy with
adverse selection in which buyers vary in their ability to evaluate the quality of assets on
the market, and, like us, emphasizes the distribution of expertise on the equilibrium price of
the asset. Gǎrleanu, Panageas, and Yu (2015) derive market segmentation endogenously from
differences in participation costs. Edmond and Weill (2012), Haddad (2014), and DiTella (2016)
study the effects of idiosyncratic risk from concentrated holdings on asset prices. Kacperczyk,
Nosal, and Stevens (2014) construct a model of consumer wealth inequality from differences in
investor sophistication.
The paper proceeds as follows. Section 2 contains the construction and analysis of our
dynamic model, and finally Section 6 concludes. Most proofs appear in the Appendix.

2

Model

According to its general definition, α cannot be generated by bearing systematic risk. However,
capturing α is risky. Complex assets expose their owners to idiosyncratic risk through several
11

See also Aiyagari and Gertler (1999); Froot and O’Connell (1999); Basak and Croitoru (2000); Xiong (2001);
Gromb and Vayanos (2002); Yuan (2005); Gabaix, Krishnamurthy, and Vigneron (2007); Mitchell, Pedersen,
and Pulvino (2007); Acharya, Shin, and Yorulmazer (2009); Kondor (2009); Duffie (2010); Gromb and Vayanos
(2010b); Hombert and Thesmar (2014); Mitchell and Pulvino (2012); Pasquariello (2014); Kondor and Vayanos
(2014).

5

channels. First, any investment in a complex asset requires a joint investment in the front and
back office infrastructure necessary to implement the strategy. Second, their constituents tend
to be significantly heterogeneous, so that no two investors hold exactly the same asset. Third,
the risk management of complex assets typically requires a hedging strategy that will be subject
to the individual technological constraints of the investor. Hedging portfolios, to cite just one
example, tend to vary substantially across different investors in the same asset class.12 Fourth,
firms which manage complex assets may be exposed to key person risk due to the importance
of specialized traders, risk managers, and marketers.13

2.1

Preferences, Endowments, & Technologies

We study a model with a continuum of investors of measure one, with CRRA utility functions
over consumption:
u (c) =

c1−γ
.
1−γ

Investment Technology Investors are endowed with a level of expertise which varies in the
cross section, but is fixed for each agent over time. Each individual investor is born with a
fixed expertise level, x, drawn from a distribution with pdf λ(x), and a continuous cdf Λ(x).
Investors can choose to be experts, and have access to the complex risky asset, or non-experts,
who can only invest in the risk free asset.
Each investor’s complex risky asset delivers a stochastic return which follows a geometric
Brownian motion:
dRi (t, s) = [rf + α (s)] ds + σ (σν , x) dBi (t, s)

(1)

where α (s) is the common excess return on the risky asset and Bi (t, s) is a standard Brownian
motion which is investor-specific and i.i.d. in the cross section. Hereafter, we suppress the
dependence of the Brownian shock on investor i in our notation for parsimony. The effective
volatility of the risky technology, σ (σν , x) is a function of the volatility of the complex asset
12

For example, in MBS, there is no agreed upon method to hedge mortgage duration risk, though most all
active investors do so. Some hedge according to empirical durations, using various estimation periods and
rebalancing periods. Others hedge according to the sensitivity of MBS prices yield curve shifts using their own
(widely varying) proprietary model of MBS prepayments and prices.
13
Finally, complex assets may introduce or amplify idiosyncratic risk on the liability side of the balance sheet,
through the fact that they are difficult for outside investors to understand, but tend to be funded with external
finance. Broadly interpreted, these risks may come either from the asset side, or from the liability side, since
funding stability likely varies with expertise. However, we abstract from the micro-foundations of risks from
the liability side of funds’ balance sheets, and model risk on the asset side.

6

before expertise is applied, and the specific investor’s level of expertise, x. We use the notation
σν and the language “total volatility” to describe the overall level of volatility of a complex
asset class, before expertise is applied. “Effective volatility” is, then, a function of the asset’s
“total” volatility, and the investor’s level of expertise. For now, we focus on describing the
equilibrium for a single asset, and we suppress the positive dependence of σ(x) on the total
volatility of the asset class σν . Below, we describe comparative statics across assets with varying
complexity, with more complex assets characterized by a higher σν , or “total volatility”. We
refer to σ(x) as “effective volatility”, meaning the remaining volatility the investor faces after
expertise has been applied. In particular, we assume that the volatility of the risky technology
σ(x) decreases in the investor’s level of expertise x, i.e.

∂σ(x)
∂x

< 0. For convenience, we assume

that the support of expertise is bounded above by x̄, although most of our results only require
that limx→∞ σ(x) = σ > 0. The implied lower bound on volatility, σ, represents complex asset
risk that cannot be eliminated even by the agents with the greatest expertise, and it guarantees
that the growth rate of wealth is finite.
A simple motivation for the return process in Equation (1) is that in order to invest in the
risky asset and to earn the common market clearing return, an investor must also jointly invest
in a technology with a zero mean return and an idiosyncratic shock. This technology represents
each investor’s specific hedging and financing technologies, as well as the unique features of their
particular asset. We also provide a specific formal micro-foundation for Equation (1) in Lemma
2.1. Investors take a long position in an underlying asset with some alpha or mis-pricing relative
to its systematic risk exposure, and a short position in an imperfectly correlated, investorspecific, tracking portfolio. The long-short position is designed to “harvest the alpha” in the
underlying asset while hedging out unnecessary aggregate risk exposures to the agent’s best
ability. It can also be interpreted as a relative value strategy aimed at over and under weighting
different parts of the cross section in order to capture misvaluation while attempting to hedge
out market level risk, as is common practice in quantitative equity and fixed income strategies.
Investors with more expertise have superior tracking portfolios which hedge out more of the
risk in the underlying asset. As a result, their total net position is less risky and they earn the
common market clearing alpha while bearing less risk. An additional contribution of our paper
is to provide a precise explanation for the idiosyncratic risk that the prior literature has argued
is important for understanding complex asset returns.14
14

We thank Peter Kondor for providing a closely related static micro-foundation in his discussion of our
paper. See Pontiff (1996), Pontiff (2006), and Greenwood (2011) for evidence of idiosyncratic risk as a limit to
arbitrage. Consistent with our model and micro-foundation of complex asset returns, Pontiff (1996) finds that

7

Lemma 2.1 Each investor’s asset-specific return process, given by (1), can be derived as the
net return on a strategy in which the investor takes a long position in an underlying fundamental
asset, and a short position in a tracking portfolio. The returns to the fundamental asset are
given by:
dF (t, s)
= [rf + α(s) + a(s)] dt + σ F dB F (t, s).
F (t, s)

(2)

The returns to each investor’s best per-unit tracking portfolio is given by:
dTi (t, s)
= a(s)dt + ρi (x)σ F dB F (t, s) − σ T (x)dBiT (t, s),
Ti (t, s)

(3)

where dB F (t, s) and dBiT (t, s) are independent Brownian motions, and ρi (x) represents the
dependence of the investor’s tracking portfolio returns on the fundamental risk in the underlying
asset. The correlation between the investor’s tracking portfolio return and underlying asset
return is given by

corr

dTi dF
,
Ti F



ρi (x)σ F
=q
,
((1 − ρi (x)) σ F )2 + (σ T (x))2

which is increasing in ρi (x). We assume that

∂|ρi (x)−1|
∂x

< 0, so that higher expertise investors

have access to tracking portfolios which hedge out more fundamental risk. The net asset returns
are given by:
dRi (t, s) =

dF (t, s) dTi (t, s)
= [rf + α(s)] dt + σ(x)dBi (t, s),
−
F (t, s)
Ti (t, s)

(4)

where
σ(x)dBi (t, s) ≡ (1 − ρi (x)) σ F dB F (t, s) + σ T (x)dBiT (t, s).

(5)

The return process in Equations (4)-(5) generates a single process for expertise level wealth
dynamics in which aggregate risk washes out, and all investors with expertise level x face the
same amount of effective risk, under the sufficient condition in Assumption 1:
Assumption 1 At each level of expertise, half of investors over-hedge (type o with ρo (x) > 1),
closed end mutual funds with portfolios that are more difficult to replicate have values that deviate more from
fundamentals.

8

and half under-hedge (type u with ρu (x) < 1). That is,
ρo (x) + ρu (x)
= 1.
2
We omit the proof, which is given in the calculations provided. Lemma A.1, which we write
formally and prove in the Appendix, states that, given the micro-foundation for the return
process in Equation (1) provided in Lemma 2.1, aggregate shocks do not affect equilibrium
policy functions or prices, and therefore the return dynamics Equation (1) are taken as given
in the remainder of the main text.
Note that, by definition, if the tracking portfolio returns are not perfectly correlated with
the underlying asset returns (in which case there would exist a risk-less arbitrage opportunity),
then the tracking portfolio introduces risk which is independent from fundamental risk. We
assume this independent risk is uncorrelated across investors. Because each investor has their
own model and strategy implementation, tracking portfolios introduce investor-specific shocks.
Formally, we use the fact that any Brownian shock which is partially correlated with the
underlying fundamental Brownian shock dB F (t, s) can be decomposed into a linear combination
of a correlated shock and an independent shock. We denote this independent, investor-specific
shock dBi∗ (t, s). The amount of idiosyncratic risk the tracking portfolio introduces is smaller
the closer to one is ρi (x), which is intuitive. We assume that agents with higher expertise have
better tracking portfolios which eliminate more risk from the underlying fundamental shock.
Across asset classes, more complex assets are characterized by more imperfect models and
tracking portfolios, and hence highly complex assets impose more total risk σν on investors.
This higher total risk can result from overall lower quality tracking portfolios (lower ρi (x)).
Higher total risk can also result from the greater model and execution risk of highly complex
assets, which can be considered part of σ T (x).
To be an expert, an investor must pay the entry cost Fnx to set up their specific technology for investing in the complex risky asset. Experts must also pay a maintenance cost,
Fxx to maintain continued access to the risky technology. We specify that both the entry and
maintenance costs are proportional to wealth:
Fnx = fnx w,
Fxx = fxx w,
which yields value functions which are homogeneous in wealth.
9

Optimization We first describe the Bellman equations for non-experts and experts respectively, and characterize their value functions, as well as the associated optimal policy functions.
With the value functions of experts and non-experts in hand, we then characterize the entry
decision.
We begin with non-experts, who can only invest in the risk free asset. Let w (t, s) denote
the wealth of investors at time s with initial wealth Wt at time t. The riskless asset delivers a
fixed return of rf . All investors choose consumption, and an optimal stopping, or entry time
according to the Bellman Equation:
n

Z

V (w (t, s) , x) =

τ

e

max E

cn (t,s),τ

−ρ(s−t)

−ρ(τ −t)

n

u (c (t, s)) ds + e


V (w (t, s) − Fnx , x)
x

(6)

t

s.t. dw (t, s) = (rf w (t, s) − cn (t, s)) ds

(7)

where ρ is their subjective discount factor, cn (t, s) is consumption at time s, Fnx is the entry
cost, and τ is the optimal entry date.
Under the assumptions of linear entry and maintenance costs, and expertise which is fixed
over time, the optimal entry date in a stationary equilibrium will be either immediately, or never.
Thus, assuming an initial stationary equilibrium, investors who choose an infinite stopping time
are then non-experts, and investors who choose a stopping time τ = t are experts.15
Experts allocate their wealth between current consumption, a risky asset, and a riskless
asset. They also choose an optimal stopping time T to exit the market.
x

Z

V (w (t, s) , x) =

max

cx (x,t,s),T,θ(x,t,s)

T

e

E

−ρ(s−t)

x

u (c (x, t, s)) ds + e

−ρ(T −t)


V (w (t, s) , x) (8)
n

t

s.t. dw (t, s) = [w (t, s) (rf + θ (x, t, s) α (t, s)) − cx (x, t, s) − Fxx ] ds

(9)

+w (t, s) θ (x, t, s) σ (x) dB (t, s) ,
where α (s) is the equilibrium excess return on the risky asset, θ (x, t, s) is the portfolio allocation
to the risky asset by investors with expertise level x at time s, cx (x, t, s) is consumption, Fxx
is the maintenance cost. We include exit for completeness. However, exit will not occur in this
homogeneous model with fixed expertise.
The following proposition states the analytical solutions for the value and policy functions
in our model. We prove this Proposition by guess and verify in the Appendix.
15

Outside of a stationary equilibrium, because α is not constant, both entry and exit are possible.

10

Proposition 2.1 Value and Policy Functions: The value functions are given by
w (t, s)1−γ
1−γ
w (t, s)1−γ
n
n
V (w (t, s) , x) = y (x, t, s)
1−γ
V x (w (t, s) , x) = y x (x, t, s)

(10)
(11)

where y x (x) and y n (x) are given by:
(γ − 1) (rf − fxx ) + ρ (γ − 1) α2
y (x) =
+
γ
2γ 2 σ 2 (x)

−γ
(γ − 1) rf + ρ
y n (x) =
.
γ


x

−γ
and

(12)
(13)

The optimal policy functions cx (x, t, s) , cn (t, s) , and θ (x) are given by:
1

cx (x, t, s) = [y x (x)]− γ w (t, s) ,

(14)

− γ1

cn (t, s) = [y n (x)] w (t, s) and
α(t, s)
θ (x, t, s) =
.
γσ 2 (x)

(15)
(16)

Furthermore, the wealth of experts evolves according to the law of motion:
dw (t, s)
=
w (t, s)



rf − fxx − ρ (γ + 1) α2 (t, s)
+
γ
2γ 2 σ 2 (x)


dt +

α (t, s)
dB (t, s)
γσ (x)

(17)

Finally, investors choose to be experts if the excess return earned per unit of wealth exceeds the
maintenance cost per unit of wealth:
α2 (t, s)
≥ fxx .
2σ 2 (x) γ

(18)

We define x as the lowest level of expertise amongst participating investors, for which
Equation (18) holds with equality. Note that the law of motion for wealth is a sort of weighted
average of the return to the risky and riskless assets, as determined by portfolio choice, net of
consumption. The drift and volatility of investors’ wealth are increasing in the allocation to
the risky asset. This mechanism has important implications for the wealth distribution in the
stationary equilibrium of our model.

11

2.2

The Distribution(s) of Expert Wealth

The total amount of wealth allocated to the complex risky asset, as well as the distribution
of expert wealth across expertise levels, are key aggregate state variables for the the first and
second moments of the equilibrium returns to the complex risky asset. Once the participation
decision has been made, given that we do not clear the market for the riskless asset, the
wealth of non-experts is irrelevant for the returns to the complex risky asset. We solve for the
cross sectional distribution of expert wealth in a stationary equilibrium of our model. Given
that expertise is fixed over time for each investor, constructing the wealth distribution at
each expertise level is sufficient to obtain the cross-sectional joint distribution of wealth and
expertise.
First, we note that in order to construct a stationary equilibrium given that experts’ wealth
on average grows over time, it is convenient to study the ratio z (t, s) of individual wealth to
the mean wealth of agents with highest expertise, E [w|x̄ (t, s)].
z (t, s) ≡

w (t, s)
.
E [w|x̄ (t, s)]

We can replace wealth w with wealth share z in the value and policy functions without consequence, due to the homogeneity described in Proposition 2.1. Next, note that the law of motion
for the growth rate of mean wealth of agents with a given level of expertise x is given by
dE[w|x (t, s)]
≡ [g (x)] dt.
E[w|x (t, s)]
where g (x) is determined in equilibrium. Define the average growth rate amongst agents with
the “highest” level of expertise as g(x̄) ≡ supx g(x). Then, the ratio z (t, s) follows a geometric
Brownian motion given by
dz (t, s)
=
z (t, s)
where

rf −fxx −ρ
γ

+




rf − fxx − ρ (γ + 1) α2 (t, s)
α (t, s)
+
− g (x̄) dt +
dB (t, s) ,
2
2
γ
2γ σ (x)
γσ (x)

(γ+1)α2 (t)
2γ 2 σ 2 (x)

(19)

− g (x̄) < 0 represents the negative drift, or growth rate.

Let the cross-sectional p.d.f. of expert investors’ wealth and expertise at time t be denoted
by φx (z, x, t) . Without additional assumptions, the relative wealth of lower expertise agents
will shrink to zero. Two methods are commonly used to generate a stationary distribution.
The first, for example used in Benhabib, Bisin, and Zhu (2016), is to employ a life cycle model,
12

or Poisson elimination of agents. The second, employed by Gabaix (1999), is to introduce
a reflective or regulating barrier at a minimum relative size.16 We impose a reflective, or
regulating, barrier at a minimum wealth share, zmin , which is relative to the average wealth
of agents with the highest level of expertise. This reflective barrier implies that the growth
rate of any individual agent not at the barrier, even those with the highest level of expertise,
will grow more slowly than the mean wealth of the highest expertise agents. We adopt the
assumption of a minimum wealth share because it leads to a more elegant expression for the
wealth distribution. In particular, wealth shares conditional on expertise are characterized by a
simple Pareto distribution. At the same time, this assumption conveniently avoids the need to
solve the fixed point problem determining the initial conditions for wealth needed to generate
a Pareto distribution with Poisson death.17 Since the reflective boundary mainly affects low
wealth investors, decisions near the boundary matter little for equilibrium pricing, so elegance
and parsimony comes at a low cost. Importantly, using reflecting dynamics, we are able to
construct stationary distributions that can be easily studied analytically.
We adopt an interpretation of possible punishment vs. rescue at zmin which ensures that
policies are not distorted there. Then, since both time and state variables are continuous in
our model, if policies are not distorted at zmin , then they will not be distorted elsewhere. The
strategy we employ is to ensure that the value at zmin from adopting the optimal policy functions
under Brownian wealth share dynamics is equal to the value of adopting those policies given
that with some probability the investor will be punished by being forced to exit, and with some
probability the investor will be rewarded by being able to remain in the market and maintain
a wealth share of zmin . In the case of exit, we assume the investor is replaced by a new entrant
with wealth share zmin and the same level of expertise x as the exiting agent.
Proposition 2.2 The value and policy functions under reflecting, or regulated, Brownian dynamics for wealth shares, given by:
dzt /zt = µz dt + σz dBt for zt > zmin
16

See Harrison (2013), who also notes that the “reflected geometric Brownian motion process” might more
precisely be called a regulated Brownian motion. Gabaix (1999) constructs a model of the city size distribution,
and thus his share variable represents relative population shares. See also the Appendix of that paper for a
related method of constructing a stationary distribution using a Kesten (1973) process, which introduces a
random shock with a positive mean to normalized city size.
17
Adopting the assumption of Poisson death with a fixed initial wealth, for example, would instead lead to
a double Pareto distribution, with a cutoff at the initial value of wealth. For example, see Benhabib, Bisin,
and Zhu (2016) for the wealth distribution under the alternative assumption of Poisson elimination in a closely
related model. Formulas for wealth distributions with Poisson death are available upon request.

13

and
dzt /zt = max (µz dt + σz dBt , 0) forzt ≤ zmin ,
with µz and σz defined in Equation (19), are given by the solution to the alternative model in:
"Z

r

V (z (t, s) , x) =

max

cr (x,t,s),T,θr (x,t,s)

+e

−ρ(s0 −t)

s0

e−ρ(s−t) u (cr (x, t, s)) ds

E
t

i
[(1 − q) V (zmin , x) + qV (z (t, s) , x)]
r

n

s.t. dz (t, s) = [z (t, s) (rf + θr (x, t, s) α (t, s)) − cr (x, t, s) − Fxx ] ds
+z (t, s) θr (x, t, s) σ (x) dB (t, s) ,
where s0 < T is the first time that an agent’s wealth falls below zmin . The value and policy
functions for this alternative model are equivalent to those under the true Brownian dynamics
in the model of Equations (8) - (9), for the appropriately defined probability, q.
The proof, along with the definition of the punishment probabilities are given in the Appendix.18
With this result in hand, we derive the stationary distributions for wealth shares. The
Kolmogorov forward equations describing the evolution of the wealth distributions, conditional
on expertise level x and taking α(t) as given, can be stated as follows:19

i
1
(rf + θ (x, t) α (t, s)) − [y x (x)]− γ − fxx − g (x̄) zφx (z, x, t)

1
+ ∂zz [zθ (x, t) σ(x)]2 φx (z, x, t)
2 


rf − fxx − ρ (γ + 1) α2 (t, s)
x
+
− g (x̄) zφ (z, x, t)
= −∂z
γ
2γ 2 σ 2 (x)
"
#
2
1
α (t, s)
+ ∂zz
z
φx (z, x, t) .
2
γσ (x)

∂t φx (z, x, t) = − ∂z

h

(20)

We then study the stationary distribution of wealth shares, in which ∂t φx (z, x, t) = 0 ∀x.
We take as given, for now, that α(t, s) will be constant, as in the stationary equilibrium we
define in the following section. This will be true given a stationary distribution over investors’
individual state variables. A stationary distribution of wealth shares φx (z, x) satisfies the
18

Our proof should enable more researchers to use reflecting dynamics to ensure stationarity in models with
endogenous policies, especially if analytically tractable Pareto distributions are desired. In the model of Gabaix
(1999), which introduces the method of using reflecting dynamics to generate a stationary Pareto distribution,
cities do not choose size. This is in contrast to models such as ours with endogenous state variables.
19
See Dixit and Pindyck (1994) for a heuristic derivation, or Karlin and Taylor (1981) for more detail.

14

following equation:


rf − fxx − ρ (γ + 1) α2
x
0 = −∂z
+
− g (x̄) zφ (z, x)
γ
2γ 2 σ 2 (x)
"
#
2
α
1
z
+ ∂zz
φx (z, x) .
2
γσ (x)


(21)

We use guess and verify to show that the stationary distribution of wealth shares at each
level of expertise is given by a Pareto distribution with an expertise-specific tail parameter.
This tail parameter, which we denote by β, is determined by the drift and volatility of the
expertise-specific law of motion for wealth shares. Intuitively, the larger the drift and volatility
of the expertise-specific wealth process, the fatter the tail of the wealth distribution at that
level of expertise will be.
Proposition 2.3 The stationary distribution of wealth shares φx (z, x) has the following form:
φ(z, x) ∝ C(x)z −β(x)−1 ,
where
σ 2 (x)
− γ ≥ 1,
α2
= 2γ (fxx + ρ − rf + γg (x̄)) ,

β(x) = C1
C1

C(x) = R

2

1
z −β(x) dz

=

C1 σ α(x)
−γ
2
−C1
zmin

σ 2 (x)
+γ
α2

.

See the Appendix for the Proof. Note that, in this proof, we also show that, in the stationary distribution, β > 1, which ensures a finite integral, and confirms that the distribution
satisfies stationarity. The following Corollary solves for the tail parameter of the highest expertise agents, as well as the average growth rate amongst these agents. Given this growth
rate, we can write the tail parameter for any level of expertise as a function of the coefficient of
relative risk aversion, the minimum wealth share, and the ratio the effective variance relative
to the effective variance for the highest expertise agents. This is convenient, because it clearly
shows the dependence of the thickness of the right tail of the relative wealth distribution on
expertise.

15

Corollary 2.1 For the highest expertise agents, we have
β (x̄) =

1
σ 2 (x̄)
= C1 2 − γ
1 − zmin /z̄
α

where z̄ is mean of normalized wealth of experts with highest expertise,
Z

∞

z̄ =


zφ(z, x̄)dz = zmin

zmin

and
g (x̄) =

1
1+
β (x̄) − 1



rf − fxx − ρ
α2
α2
1
+
+
2
2
2
γ
2γσ (x̄) 2γ σ (x̄) 1 − zmin /z̄

For all other expertise levels, we have

β (x) = γ +

zmin /z̄
1 − zmin /z̄



σ 2 (x)
− γ.
σ 2 (x̄)

The parameter β(x) controls the rate of decay in the tail of each expertise-specific wealth
distribution. We now have two expressions for this parameter:
β(x) = 2γ (fxx + ρ − rf + γg (x̄))

σ 2 (x)
− γ,
α2

(22)

from Proposition 2.3 and

β (x) = γ +

zmin /z̄
1 − zmin /z̄



σ 2 (x)
− γ.
σ 2 (x̄)

(23)

from Corollary 2.1. The smaller is β, the more slowly the wealth share distribution decays,
and the fatter is the upper tail. Both equations clearly show that β(x) an increasing function
of expertise level volatility, σ (x), and thus a decreasing function of expertise, x. That is,
the wealth distribution of experts with a higher level of fixed expertise has a fatter right tail.
Investors with higher expertise allocate more wealth to the risky asset, which increases the mean
and volatility of their wealth growth rate. Both a higher drift, and a wider distribution of shocks,
lead to a fatter upper tail for wealth. Moreover, Equation (23), in which the dependence of
the tail parameter on expertise is given by

σ 2 (x)
,
σ 2 (x̄)

shows that if the relation between expertise

and effective volatility is steeper, then the difference in the size of the right tails of the wealth
distribution across expertise levels increases. In equilibrium, variation in effective volatilities

16

in complex asset markets will be driven both by the functional form for effective volatility, and
by participation decisions which determine how different effective volatilities of participating
agents can be given equilibrium pricing. Finally, we note that the degree of wealth inequality
within each expertise level can be measured by

1
,
2β(x)−1

which is the Gini coefficient for each

expertise level wealth distribution, representing twice the area between the Lorenz curve and
the equidistribution line. High expertise levels exhibit greater size “inequality”. Note that
if the relation between expertise and effective volatility is steeper, then the difference in size
inequality across expertise levels increases.
It is intuitive that investing more in the risky asset leads to a fatter tailed wealth distribution.
However, perhaps surprisingly, as Lemma 2.2 illustrates, not every parameter which increases
the difference in the fraction of wealth allocated to the risky asset leads to an increase in the
degree of fat tails of the expertise-specific wealth distributions. We show in Lemma 2.2 that,
while differences in portfolio choice driven by differences in effective volatilities lead to greater
differences in decay parameters, this is not true for variation in portfolio choice driven by higher
excess returns or lower risk aversion. This result offers a unique prediction for our model of
complexity as differences in risk vs. risk aversion. See the Appendix for the proof.
Lemma 2.2 Relation Between θ (x) and β (x)
Consider two level of expertise, xH > xL . We have that:
θ (xH ) − θ (xL ) =

α σ 2 (xL ) − σ 2 (xH )
,
γ σ 2 (xH ) σ 2 (xL )

and
β (xH ) − β (xL ) = 2γ 2 (fxx + r − rf + γg (x̄))

σ 2 (xH ) σ 2 (xL )
[θ (xL ) − θ (xH )] .
α3

If a larger difference in portfolio choice is due to either a higher excess return or a lower risk
aversion, the dispersion in β is smaller. If it is due to an increase in the difference in effective
volatilities, then the difference in β’s is larger.

2.3

Aggregation and Stationary Equilibrium

The equilibrium market clearing α is determined by equating supply and demand:
Z
S (t) =

λ (x) θ (x, t) W (x, t) dx.
17

In order to ensure that the supply of the complex risky asset does not become negligible as
investor wealth grows, we assume that the supply grows proportionally to the mean wealth of
the highest expertise investors. That is, we assume:
dS (t)
= g (x̄) dt.
S
For convenience, we assume that the support of expertise is bounded above by x̄, although
most of our results only require that σ(x) satisfies limx→∞ σ(x) = σ > 0.
We define a stationary equilibrium for detrended economies. We define detrended aggregate
investment in the complex risky asset to be I, defined as:
Z
I≡

λ (x) I (x) dx,

(24)

where I (x) is the detrended total expertise level investment in the complex risky asset, namely,
I (x) =

α
Z (x) ,
(x)

(25)

γσ 2

where Z (x) is the total expertise level wealth share,

Z (x) = zmin

1
1+
β(x) − 1


.

This is the well-known expression for the mean of a Pareto distribution.20 The condition which
determines the market clearing α in a stationary equilibrium of a detrended economy equates
detrended investment to detrended asset supply.
Definition 2.1 A stationary equilibrium consists of a market clearing α, policy functions for
all investors, and a stationary distribution over investor types i ∈ {x, n}, expertise levels x,
and wealth shares z, φ(i, z, x, t), such that given an initial wealth distribution, an expertise
distribution λ(x), and parameters describing risk aversion, investors’ subjective discount factor,
the risk free rate, entry and maintenance costs, total volatility, minimum wealth shares, and
detrended risky asset supply, {γ, ρ, rf , fnx , fxx , σν , zmin , and S}, the economy satisfies:
1. Investor optimality: Investors choose participation in the complex risky asset market according to Equation (18), as well as optimal consumption and portfolio choices
20

For a simple derivation, see the proof of Corollary 2.1.

18

{cn (t) , cx (x, t) , θ (x, t)}∞
t=0 according to Equations (14)-(16), such that their utilities are
maximized.
2. Market clearing: In a stationary equilibrium, we have:
Z
I≡

λ (x) I (x) dx = S,

(26)

3. The distribution over all individual state variables is stationary, i.e. ∂t φ (i, z, x, t) = 0.

3

Results

3.1

Analytical Asset Pricing Results

With policy functions, stationary distributions, and the equilibrium definition in hand, we turn
to our asset pricing results. We define a more complex asset as one that introduces more
idiosyncratic risk. Comparing across assets, we use σν to denote the total volatility of the asset
before expertise is applied, so that the risk in each investor’s asset is σ(σν , x), and is increasing
in the first argument, and decreasing in the second. We provide specific examples below,
but begin with any general function satisfying these two properties. Importantly, we describe
conditions under which more complex assets, or assets which introduce more idiosyncratic risk,
have lower participation despite higher α’s and higher Sharpe ratios. A key requirement is
complementarity of expertise and complexity, meaning that the higher risk of more complex
assets more negatively impacts investors with lower expertise.
We begin by studying comparative statics over the equilibrium market clearing α. Although
we focus on comparative statics over total volatility, we also provide results for the market
clearing α for changes other parameters which might proxy for asset complexity, such as the
cost of maintaining expertise, or investor risk aversion. Next, we analyze individual Sharpe
ratios. We emphasize across-investor heterogeneity in changes in the risk return tradeoff as
total volatility changes. Because other parameters which might also vary with complexity, such
as γ or fxx , do not change investor-specific volatility, the results for individual Sharpe ratios
are the same as those for α. Finally, we study market level Sharpe ratios, with a focus on the
effects of changes in total volatility on the intensive and extensive margins of participation by
investors with heterogeneous expertise.

19

Investor Demand, Aggregate Demand, and Equilibrium α We first describe the comparative statics for demand conditional on investors’ expertise levels in Lemma 3.1.
Lemma 3.1 Using Equation (25) for investor demand conditional on expertise, x, we have
following comparative statics, ∀x:

∂I(x)
∂σ 2 (x)

< 0,

∂I(x)
∂σν

< 0,

∂I(x)
∂α

> 0,

∂I(x)
∂γ

< 0, and

∂I(x)
∂fxx

< 0.

Demand for the risky asset at each level of expertise is increasing in the squared investorspecific Sharpe ratio, and it is increasing in α. Demand is decreasing in effective variance, total
volatility, risk aversion, and the maintenance cost.
With expertise level total demands in hand, we can construct comparative statics for aggregate demand. We cannot express the equilibrium excess return in closed form. However,
the following Proposition shows that the equilibrium excess return, α, and aggregate demand,
I, form a bijection. This uniqueness result in turn ensures that α can easily be solved for
numerically as the unique fixed point to Equation (26).
Proposition 3.1 Aggregate market demand for the complex risky asset is an increasing function of the excess return, α, and α and I form a bijection. Mathematically,
∂I
> 0.
∂α
Proposition 3.2 provides comparative statics over the aggregate demand for the complex risky
asset, I. Using the result in Proposition 3.1, these comparative statics also hold for α.
Proposition 3.2 Using the market clearing condition, we have that the following comparative
statics hold for aggregate investment in the complex risky asset in partial equilibrium:
1.

∂I
∂σν

2.

∂I
∂γ

3.

∂I
∂fxx

< 0, thus α is an increasing function of total risk
< 0, thus α is an increasing function of risk aversion
< 0, thus α is an increasing function of the maintenance cost.

In partial equilibrium, demand for the risky asset is decreasing in total volatility, risk aversion,
and the maintenance cost. As a result, in general equilibrium α is increasing in total volatility,
risk aversion, and the maintenance cost. An increase in these parameters proxies for greater

20

asset complexity, and thus our model predicts that α will be higher in more complex asset
markets.
We now turn to the effect of the efficiency of the joint distribution of wealth and expertise on
equilibrium pricing. In particular, we demonstrate that the equilibrium required excess return
on the complex risky asset is decreasing in the amount of wealth commanded by agents with
higher levels of expertise. The proof appears in the Appendix.
Proposition 3.3 If

∂σ(x)
∂x

< 0, and Λ1 exhibits first-order stochastic dominance over Λ2 , I (Λ1 ) ≥

I (Λ2 ) . As a result α(Λ1 ) < α(Λ2 ).
The wealth distribution at each expertise level is a Pareto distribution with an expertisespecific tail parameter. By shifting the distribution of expertise rightward, leading to a new
distribution with a relatively larger fraction of higher expertise investors, relatively more wealth
will reside with agents with higher expertise. Thus, with any rightward shift, the joint distribution of wealth and expertise becomes more efficient. Moreover, because the wealth distribution
at higher expertise levels exhibits fatter right tails, there is an additional direct effect on overall
wealth from a rightward shift in the distribution of expertise. Accordingly, Proposition 3.3
shows that if the density of experts shifts to the right, then demand for the complex risky asset
will increase, and the required equilibrium excess return will decrease. The equilibrium excess
return is decreasing in the amount of wealth which resides in the hands of agents with higher
expertise. Note that this result can also be interpreted to state that in asset markets in which
higher levels of expertise are more widespread, or less rare, equilibrium required returns will
be lower. We argue that the scarcity of relevant expertise is increasing with asset complexity,
again implying a higher α in more complex markets.
Investor-specific Sharpe ratios, Investor Participation, and Market-level Sharpe
ratios With the analysis of equilibrium excess returns in hand, we now turn to the equilibrium
risk-return tradeoff at the investor and market-level as described by the investor-specific, and
market-level Sharpe ratios. We emphasize the variation across individual Sharpe ratios as a
function of expertise; all investors face a common market clearing α, but their effective risk
varies. For the market-level Sharpe ratio, two effects are present. First, there is the effect of
any changes on parameters on the individual Sharpe ratios of participants. Second, there is a
selection effect, or the effect on participation. We provide an intuitively appealing condition,
complementarity between expertise and complexity, under which participation declines as the
21

asset becomes more complex. We focus on the equally weighted market-level equilibrium Sharpe
ratio in our analysis. In addition to offering cleaner comparative statics because it does not
depend on investor portfolio choices and market shares, the equally weighted Sharpe ratio
represents the expected Sharpe ratio that an investor who could pay a cost to draw from the
expertise distribution above the entry cutoff would earn. In that sense, it is the “expected
Sharpe ratio”. Note that the Sharpe ratio for non-experts is not defined.
Investor-specific Sharpe ratios: We define the investor-specific Sharpe Ratio as:
SR (x) =

α
.
σ (x)

We provide results for how investor-specific Sharpe ratios change as total volatility changes
under the three possible cases for the elasticity of investor-specific risk with respect to total
volatility in Proposition 3.4. The sign of this elasticity is a key determinant of our Sharpe ratio
results.
Proposition 3.4 The comparative statics for the investor-specific Sharpe ratios with respect
to total volatility depend on whether expertise and complexity display complementarity. Specifically, the results depend on which of the following three possible cases for the elasticity of
investor-specific risk with respect to total volatility, applies:
∂σ(x)/σ(x)
∂σν /σν

1. Case 1, Constant Elasticity: If

is a constant, that is

∂ ∂σ(x)/σ(x)
∂σν /σν
∂x

= 0,

we must have that SR (x) is either an increasing or a decreasing function of total risk for
all expertise levels.
2. Case 2, Increasing Elasticity: If
is

∂σ(x)/σ(x)
∂σν /σν

∂ ∂σ(x)/σ(x)
∂σν /σν
∂x

is an increasing function of expertise, that

> 0,

then there is a cutoff level x∗ , such that for all x < x∗ , we have

22

∂SR(x)
∂σν

> 0; and for all

x > x∗ , we have

∂SR(x)
∂σν

< 0. Further, x∗ exists if for any small ε < 10−6


(0, ε) ⊆

∂σ (x) /σ (x)
| for all x
∂σν /σν


⊆ [0, ∞).

3. Case 3, Decreasing Elasticity (complementarity): If

∂σ(x)/σ(x)
∂σν /σν

is a decreasing

function of expertise, that is
∂ ∂σ(x)/σ(x)
∂σν /σν
∂x

< 0,

then there is a cutoff level x∗ , such that for all x < x∗ , we have
x > x∗ , we have

∂SR(x)
∂σν

∂SR(x)
∂σν

< 0; and for all

> 0.

Since individual Sharpe ratios are ratios of excess returns relative to effective volatilities,
variation in Sharpe ratios as total volatility changes depend on the elasticity of excess returns
relative to the elasticities of effective volatilities as total volatility changes. This is intuitive, as
these elasticities measure the equilibrium percentage change in excess returns vs. the percentage
change in effective volatilities as underlying total risk varies. The change in α is aggregate,
the same for all investors. So, the changes in individual Sharpe ratios with respect to changes
in total volatility depend on the expertise-specific percentage changes in effective volatility
relative to the percentage change in total volatility. Proposition 3.4 demonstrates that the
effect of an increase in total volatility on individual Sharpe ratios varies in the cross section,
except in the special case of Case 1. If the elasticity of effective volatilities as total volatilities
changes is the same for all investors (Case 1), then the percentage change in α relative to the
percentage change in effective volatility is the same for all investors. On the other hand, if the
elasticity of effective volatilities with respect to total volatility is increasing in expertise (Case
2), then Sharpe ratios increase below a cutoff level of expertise and decrease above as total
volatility increases. Finally, if this elasticity is declining in expertise, so that higher expertise
investors face smaller increases in effective volatility as total volatility increases –expertise and
complexity are complementary–, (Case 3), then Sharpe ratios increase above a cutoff level of
expertise and decrease below. In this case, the economic rents from expertise are higher in
more complex markets, characterized by higher total volatility.
We focus our analysis on Case 3, because it leads to the empirically plausible implication
that more complex assets, with higher total volatilities, have lower participation despite having
persistently elevated excess returns. Thus, we argue that the decreasing elasticity case is the
23

most relevant for describing a long-run, stationary equilibrium in a complex asset market.
Moreover, it seems intuitive that the difference in effective volatilities between more and less
complex assets would be smaller for higher expertise investors.
As a concrete example, consider the following two fixed income arbitrage strategies considered by Duarte, Longstaff, and Yu (2006). Mortgages are highly complex securities containing
embedded prepayment options. MBS payoffs are affected by consumer behavior, house prices,
and credit conditions, as well as interest rates. There is no agreed upon pricing model, and
investors’ strategy implementations vary widely as a result. By contrast, swap spread arbitrage
follows a fairly straightforward long-short rule based on current LIBOR swap rates relative to
Treasury yields and repo rates. The way this strategy is implemented is quite similar across
investors. Accordingly, Duarte, Longstaff, and Yu (2006) show that mortgage related strategies
(MBS) earn higher alphas, and Sharpe ratios, than simple swap spread arbitrage strategies.
We argue, in agreement with their motivation and findings, that expertise is more valuable in
MBS arbitrage. Put another way, the difference in the risk which investors face in MBS vs.
Treasuries is decreasing in investor expertise. To be sure, highly sophisticated investors face
more risk in MBS than in treasuries. However, the difference in effective risk across these two
fixed income strategies is not as great for expert investors as it is for an inexpert investor,
consistent with Case 3 in Proposition 3.4.
Investor Participation Before analyzing market-level Sharpe ratios, we first describe investor participation. There are two key inputs into the market-level risk return tradeoff. First,
incumbents’ individual Sharpe ratios change. Second, as equilibrium α changes, participation
also changes. This selection effect plays a key role in determining comparative static results in
general equilibrium. We show in the Appendix that participation increases with total volatility in Cases 1 and 2 of Proposition 3.4. If all elasticities of σ(x) with respect to σν are the
same, or if they are lower for lower expertise investors, then participation will increase with
total volatility. This is intuitive because α must increase with total volatility σν by enough for
lower expertise investors to help to clear the market. Because it is intuitive that participation
should decrease with asset complexity, we thus focus on results under Case 3 of Proposition
3.4. For this case, we provide a natural condition under which participation declines as the
asset becomes more complex and total volatility increases.

24

Proposition 3.5 Define the entry cutoff x as in Equation (18). Participation declines
∂x
>0
∂σν
if the following conditions hold. Condition 1 is necessary. Condition 2 is sufficient.
1. Complementarity of Complexity and Expertise (Case 3 of Proposition 3.4):
∂

∂σ(x)/σ(x)
∂σν /σν

∂x

< 0, and,

2. Non-representativeness of Highest Elasticity Participants:
σν
lsup


> 1+

1
1 + B (x)






∂σ (x) /σ (x)
|x ≥ x ,
E
∂σν /σν

σν
where lsup
is defined to be the highest elasticity of all participating investors’ effective

volatility with respect to total volatility, and
B (x) =

2 β (x) + γ
.
β (x) β (x) − 1

The first condition, namely that the elasticity of effective volatility with respect to total
volatility is decreasing in expertise, is necessary for participation to decline as complexity,
and total volatility, increase. To see this, consider the market clearing condition. For the
market to clear without the participation by, and demand from, lower expertise investors as
total volatility increases, it must be that higher expertise investors’ demand is less adversely
affected. The second condition gives a sufficient condition for participation to decrease if the
first condition is satisfied. This condition states that the elasticity of the agent with the highest
sensitivity of effective volatility to total volatility, which in Case 3 of Proposition 3.4 will be the
lowest expertise agent who participates, must be sufficiently different from the average across
participants, times a constant. Note that the constant will be near one if β is close to one,
which it will be as it is the tail parameter from a Pareto distribution. The function B(x) gives
the elasticity of the mean wealth at expertise level x with respect to total volatility. Intuitively,
what is necessary for participation to decline as total volatility increases is that there is enough
variation in the effect of the change in total volatility across agents with high and low expertise
so that α does not need to increase enough to satisfy the marginal investor or to entice lower
expertise investors to participate. Section 5 provides numerical examples, provides additional
25

intuition, and illustrates that the parameter space for which the second condition is satisfied is
large.
In sum of the results so far, under the conditions for complementarity between expertise and
complexity in Proposition 3.5, our model generates higher persistent α’s and lower participation,
despite free entry, as total volatility and asset complexity increase. Thus, we argue that more
complex assets, in addition to exposing investors to more risk overall, pose a larger difference
in risk across investors with different levels of expertise.

Equilibrium market-level Sharpe Ratio We define the equally weighted market equilibrium Sharpe ratio as:
SR

ew




α
=E
|x ≥ x .
σ (x)

We focus on comparative statics for the equally weighted market equilibrium Sharpe ratio,
however we note the following Corollary holds for the value weighted market Sharpe ratio:

21

Corollary 3.1 In Case 3 of Proposition 3.4, in which expertise and complexity are complementary, and in which participation declines with complexity, we have that an increase in
the equally weighted Sharpe ratio as total volatility increases implies an increase in the value
weighted Sharpe ratio.
We omit the formal proof, which is straightforward. Intuitively, the value weighted Sharpe
ratio weights higher expertise investors’ Sharpe ratios more heavily, since they are wealthier
and they allocate a greater fraction of wealth to the risky asset. Because the value weighted
Sharpe ratio is a more complex equilibrium object, we focus on the equally weighted Sharpe
ratio, SRew to develop our results.
The following Proposition provides sufficient conditions under which SRew increases with
total volatility σν in Case 3 of Proposition 3.4. The other cases are presented in the Appendix,
which also contains the proof. It is possible that the SRew increases with total volatility
even if the increase impacts all investors equally, or more negatively impacts higher expertise
investors. However, we emphasize that the joint observation of participation declining and the
SRew increasing as total volatility changes is possible only in Case 3, in which expertise and
complexity are complementary.
21

See the Appendix for the definition of the value-weighted market equilibrium Sharpe ratio.

26

Proposition 3.6 The equally weighted market Sharpe ratio is increasing with total risk in
general equilibrium, i.e.,

∂SRew
> 0,
∂σν

If the following sufficient conditions are satisfied:
1. Complementarity of Complexity and expertise (Case 3 of Proposition 3.4):
∂

∂σ(x)/σ(x)
∂σν /σν

∂x

< 0, and,

2. Non-representativeness of Marginal Participants:
difference btw marginal SR and average

∂ [1 − Λ (x)] / [1 − Λ (x)]
−
∂σν /σν
|
{z
}

z
}|
{
SR (x)
1−
SRew

elasticity of participation

>−
|

∂SR (x) /SR (x)
∂σν /σν
{z

elasticity of marginal SR

(27)
x=x

}

The above conditions give us the sufficient conditions which yield an increasing Sharpe ratio
when total volatility increases. We show an equivalent statement of the second condition, in
which we substitute out the equilibrium Sharpe ratios with the underlying exogenous parameters and functions, in the Appendix. We use Equation (27) here to provide intuition. From
Case 3 of Proposition 3.4, we have that individual Sharpe ratios increase above, and decrease
below, a threshold level of participating expertise levels, x∗ > x, when total volatility increases.
Thus, for the average Sharpe ratio to increase, the Sharpe ratios of participants with declining
Sharpe ratios cannot be too important in determining the average. The greater holdings of
higher expertise agents makes it more likely that the value weighted Sharpe ratio increases.
For the equally weighted Sharpe ratio, participants above and below x∗ are weighted according
to the distribution of expertise. Thus, what is required is that there are not too many experts
between x and x∗ , or that for these participants between x and x∗ , effective volatility does not
increase by too much relative to the equilibrium average return α. If the Sharpe ratio does decline substantially for low expertise participants, the second condition ensures that the Sharpe
ratio for these participants is not representative of the average over all participants. Equation
(27) precisely formalizes this intuition: On the left hand side, the first term represents the elasticity of participation with respect to total volatility. In Case 3 of Proposition 3.4, participation
is decreasing and so

∂[1−Λ(x)]/[1−Λ(x)]
∂σν /σν

is negative, making this first term positive after applying

the negative sign. The second term involves the relative value of the marginal Sharpe ratio to
the population weighted average. It has a maximal value of one, and is closer to one when the
27

Sharpe ratio of the lowest expertise agent is very small relative to the average Sharpe ratio. On
the right hand side is the elasticity of the marginal Sharpe ratio with respect to total volatility.
This term is always negative before applying the negative sign. Intuitively, on the right hand
side is a force against the market Sharpe ratio increasing. If the marginal agent’s Sharpe ratio
is very adversely affected by the increase in total volatility, the effect on the market Sharpe
ratio is strongly negative. On the left hand side, then, are two positive terms which offset this
negative effect on the market Sharpe ratio by more the larger they are. The first term is large
when a large mass of low expertise agents (with low Sharpe ratios) do not participate. The
second term is large if the marginal agent is not representative of the market average; if for the
marginal agent the decline in the Sharpe ratio is large but the effect is small for the average
participant then the market Sharpe ratio will still increase. In short, this condition is easier to
satisfy if: First, participation is very sensitive to total volatility, because then many low Sharpe
ratio agents will drop out of the market. Second, if the difference between the marginal and
average Sharpe ratios is large, because then the lower Sharpe ratios of the marginal agents are
not representative, and finally if the marginal Sharpe ratio is not too sensitive to total volatility.
Section 5 provides numerical examples, provides additional intuition, and illustrates that the
parameter space for which the second condition is satisfied is large.
In summary, we note that both for participation to decrease, and for the equilibrium Sharpe
ratio to increase with asset complexity, similar conditions suffice. The first is that expertise and
complexity are complementary. The second is that marginal participants are not representative
of average market participants. This second condition ensures that markets can clear without
low expertise agents, and that lower expertise participants with declining Sharpe ratios are not
important for market equilibrium outcomes. Under these conditions, our model delivers a rational explanation for why more complex assets can generate a higher α, a higher equally-weighted
equilibrium market Sharpe ratio, but have low participation, despite free entry. Intuitively, as
in a standard industrial organization model, the superior volatility reduction technologies of
more expert investors provide them with an excess of (risk-bearing) capacity, which serves to
reduce the entry incentives of newcomers despite attractive conditions for incumbents.

4

Extension: Two Complex Assets

In this section, we describe how the intuition from comparative statics across stationary equilibria can be applied to a single economy with multiple complex assets. In particular, we consider
28

an economy with two risky assets with different total volatilities given by σνL and σνH , where
σνH > σνL . We assume that agents can only invest in one risky asset; they must specialize to
take advantage of their expertise. The following Proposition gives a condition for which higher
expertise agents specialize in the more complex risky asset, with total volatility σνH .22
Proposition 4.1 In a two complex asset economy, higher expertise agents choose to specialize
and invest in the more complex asset, with total volatility σνH if and only if
∂ ∂σ(x)/σ(x)
∂σν /σν
∂x

< 0.

The proof appears in the Appendix. The intuition behind this result is very similar to the
intuition for the single asset economy results for the variation in individual Sharpe ratios as
total volatility varies. The condition is the same as Condition 3 for declining elasticities, or
complementarity between complexity and expertise, in Proposition 3.4. Under this condition,
for higher expertise agents, the market clearing α will adequately compensate them for the
higher total risk. Lower expertise agents are not adequately compensated for the higher risk
of the more complex asset. Note that this necessarily implies that the α of the more complex
asset will be higher, because otherwise the high expertise agents would choose the less complex
asset.

5

Numerical Examples and Concentration Results

This section presents numerical results and comparative statics. We provide additional intuition
for our analytical results, and develop new results for wealth concentration across assets with
different complexity. We focus on a functional form for effective volatility which satisfies the
condition in Case 3 from Proposition 3.4, in which the elasticity of effective volatility with
respect to total volatility declines with expertise.23 Specifically, and notationally reintroducing
the dependence of σ(x) on total volatility σν , we specify that:
σ 2 (σν , x) = a + x−b σν2 .
22

(28)

The analysis can be extended to multiple risky assets, and we omit the conditions under which agents with
higher expertise will invest in σνL .
23
Results for the other cases are available upon request.

29

This function is increasing in total volatility at a rate that decreases with expertise, i.e.

it

satisfies:
∂σ (σν , x)
> 0,
∂σν
and,
ν ,x)
∂ ∂σ(σν∂σ,x)/σ(σ
ν /σν

∂x

< 0.

Numerical Comparative Statics: Asset Pricing and Participation We begin with
simple, illustrative numerical comparative statics for our main asset pricing and participation
results. The model generates closed form policy functions and wealth distributions conditional
on expertise levels. To provide intuition for the effects of equilibrium pricing, we provide the
comparative statics in both partial equilibrium and general equilibrium. In partial equilibrium,
the excess return is given exogenously, and held fixed, while aggregate demand (and hence
implicitly supply) varies. In general equilibrium, the excess return is computed endogenously
given a fixed supply of the risky asset. Because α and I form a bijection (Proposition 3.1
provides conditions for which they are one to one and onto), for any given supply of the
complex risky asset, we can find the unique solution to the fixed point problem determining α
through market clearing. The Appendix describes the solution algorithm.
Our baseline parameters are summarized in Table 1. The time interval is one quarter. The
risk-free rate, subjective discount factor, and the maintenance cost are all set to 1%. The
coefficient of relative risk-aversion is 5. The total standard deviation of the risky asset return
is 40%. We set a = 0.48% and b = 1.5. This implies that the highest expertise investors can
eliminate 83% of total risk, and face an effective standard deviation of 6.8%. And the marginal
expertise investors at entry can eliminate 45% of total risk, and face an effective standard
deviation of 22.1%, which is about half that of total volatility. The minimum wealth share is
set to 0.01.
The log-normal distribution of expertise has a mean of 0 and volatility of 4. We choose 500
grid points for expertise levels between the lowest and highest levels of expertise. The lowest
expertise level is pinned down by Equation (18) for participation. We choose a value of 10,000
for the highest expertise level. The value ensures that the policy functions for the most expert
investors very closely approximate the limiting case of infinite expertise, and that there is no
mass point at the upper bound. The density of expertise on the grid points is then chosen to
approximate a truncated log-normal distribution.
30

First, we provide intuition for the sufficient Condition 2 in Proposition 3.5, which requires
non-representativeness of the highest elasticity participants, and the sufficient Condition 2 in
Proposition 3.6, which requires non-representativeness of marginal participants. When these
two sufficient conditions are satisfied, along with the necessary condition for participation to
decline (Condition 1 in Proposition 3.5 and Proposition 3.6, requiring complementarity between
complexity and expertise), the model generates lower participation, higher excess returns, and
higher Sharpe ratios for more complex assets. It is intuitive that high expertise investors face
smaller differences in Sharpe ratios between simple and complex strategies and assets than do
low expertise investors, i.e. that complexity and expertise are complementary. Figure 1 shows
parameters for which the sufficient conditions in Proposition 3.5 and Proposition 3.6 are satisfied. This figure plots model comparative statics showing when these conditions are satisfied
given variation in the dispersion in expertise (y-axis) and the curvature of effective volatility in
expertise (x-axis). The parameter b in σ 2 (σν , x) = a+x−b σν2 describes the curvature of effective
volatility. The distribution of expertise, x, is log-normal with a mean of zero and dispersion
given on the y-axis. These two parameters are the key inputs to determining the representativeness of high elasticity, marginal, participants, since the curvature parameter determines how
fast effective volatility declines with expertise, and the dispersion in the expertise distribution
determines the relative mass of investors with different levels of expertise. All other parameters
are held at the baseline values in Table 1. The top left panel displays blue for parameters for
which the sufficient Condition 2 in Proposition 3.5, which requires non-representativeness of the
highest elasticity participants, is satisfied, and red for parameters for which it is violated. The
top right panel uses the same color scheme to show that participation is decreasing at whenever this sufficient condition is satisfied. The bottom left panel displays blue for parameters for
which the sufficient Condition 2 in Proposition 3.5, which requires non-representativeness of the
highest elasticity participants, is satisfied, and red for parameters for which it is violated. The
bottom left panel uses the same color scheme to show that the equilibrium equally-weighted
Sharpe ratio is increasing whenever this sufficient condition is satisfied. The figure shows that
these two conditions are satisfied for most reasonable parameter combinations.24 It is intuitive
that Condition 2 of Propositions 3.5 and Proposition 3.6 are less likely to be satisfied when b
or σx is small. Both lower curvature in effective volatility, and lower dispersion in expertise,
24

Indeed, as dispersion in expertise decreases, and effective volatility becomes closer to linear (b decreases),
excess returns become implausibly high. At the boundary for participation to be increasing, the smallest α is
38%. This is because when dispersion in expertise is small, or curvature of effective volatility is low, the total
demand from high expertise investors is smaller, implying that α must be large enough to compensate the low
expertise agents to participate.

31

make it more likely that the marginal participant is more similar to the average participant.
Moreover, when b is small, effective volatility is closer to displaying a constant elasticity of
effective volatility with respect to total volatility. In other words, as b gets small, the elasticities of effective volatility with respect to total volatility are closer to satisfying the constant
elasticity Case 1 of Proposition 3.5, for which participation is increasing. The parameter combinations for which the two conditions are satisfied are very similar. The top right and bottom
left panels of Figure 1 together show that Condition 2 of Proposition 3.6 is satisfied whenever
participation is decreasing. Finally, note that the Sharpe ratio appears to be always increasing
in these example economies which satisfy Case 3 of Proposition 3.5.
Figure 2 studies the effects of changes in total volatility, with more complex assets characterized by higher total volatility. Starting in the top row, as total volatility increases, demand
for the risky asset in partial equilibrium decreases, implying a higher α in general equilibrium.
The left hand side of the second row displays the entry cut-off, which is increasing in fundamental volatility, consistent with our result in Proposition 3.5. Accordingly, participation,
graphed on the right hand side of the second row, declines. We note that participation declines
by less in general equilibrium, due to the positive effect of total volatility on α, but still the
decline is nearly as large as in partial equilibrium given our parametric assumptions. Finally,
the third row plots the equally weighted standard deviation of the risky asset returns, which are
increasing in both partial and general equilibrium. In partial equilibrium, α is held constant,
so participation declines substantially as total volatility increases. The selection effect then
significantly attenuates the increase in the equally weighted effective volatility. By contrast,
in general equilibrium the increase in α compensates for the increase in total risk somewhat,
participation declines by less, and so the equally weighted effective volatility increases by more
than in partial equilibrium. Finally, the bottom right panel of Figure 2 shows that despite the
fact that the equally weighted standard deviation is increasing, the larger, positive effect of the
increase in α in general equilibrium implies that the equally weighted Sharpe ratio increases,
consistent with Proposition 3.6. Thus, the numerical example confirms the model’s ability
to generate persistently higher α’s and larger Sharpe ratios, but lower participation despite
free entry, for more complex assets characterized by higher total volatility, consistent with the
empirical findings in Pontiff (1996) and Duarte, Longstaff, and Yu (2006).
Numerical Comparative Statics: Wealth Distributions Finally, we present results on
the size distribution of funds in our model, and in the data, across asset classes which are more

32

and less complex. While we rely on the empirical results in Duarte, Longstaff, and Yu (2006)
for average returns and Sharpe ratios of complex asset strategies, we must use primary data to
study the size distribution of complex asset investors. While in the model it is straightforward
to define a complex asset as one with a higher total volatility, total volatility (before expertise is
applied) is unobservable in the data. Therefore, we use the implication of our model that equally
weighted Sharpe ratios are higher in more complex asset classes. We use the subset of the Hedge
Fund Research (HFR) data which describes Relative Value fund performance for single strategy
funds, namely the asset-backed fixed income, sovereign fixed income, convertible bond arbitrage,
volatility, and corporate fixed income relative value strategies.25 This choice is motivated by two
main considerations. First, we build on the results in Duarte, Longstaff, and Yu (2006), who
show that excess returns and Sharpe ratios are higher for more complex fixed income arbitrage
strategies. Second, relative value funds should be comprised of long-short strategies, consistent
with the micro-foundation we provide for complex asset investment strategies. Moreover, longshort strategies are designed to be market neutral and thus average returns are excess returns.
For each strategy, we compute the “pseudo” Sharpe ratio as the ratio of the average industry
level return to the cross section average of the fund level standard deviations of returns. We
use the industry level return because in our model there is one common market clearing alpha.
We use the ratio of the industry level return to the average fund level standard deviation,
rather than an average of fund level Sharpe ratios, as a parsimonious way of eliminating the
effect of outliers. We then rank strategies from most to least complex by these pseudo Sharpe
ratios, and provide summary statistics in Table 2. The last column of Table 2 gives the Gini
coefficient describing the concentration of wealth within each strategy. We compute the Gini
coefficient using the wealth share by wealth deciles. These Gini coefficients appear to be
higher for less complex strategies, which display lower pseudo Sharpe ratios. This might seem
surprising given that we have argued that there is a natural force toward wealth concentration
in more complex strategies, if expertise and complexity are complementary, due to the portfolio
choice effect described in Lemma 2.2. While the portfolio choice effect is important, the effect
of limited participation tends to dominate in equilibrium. Equilibrium asset prices limit the
amount of heterogeneity amongst participants, driving lower expertise investors out, especially
in more complex asset classes. As a result, investors who participate in the most complex
asset classes, with higher participation cutoffs, are not as different from each other as those in
25

We filter the data using the method in Jagannathan, Malakhov, and Novikov (2010), requiring assets greater
than ten million, and removing back-filled observations.

33

less complex asset markets, which drives the equilibrium wealth concentration down on net.
Using the example functional form for effective volatility in Equation (28), note that differences
in effective volatilities decline with expertise; the function exhibits decreasing returns. Thus,
as the participation cutoff increases, heterogeneity in effective volatilities decreases. However,
note that even if returns to expertise do not decline quickly with expertise, so that effective
volatilities vary more across investors, participation effects will compensate by decreasing faster
with total volatility. As a result, concentration will tend to decline as total volatility increases
regardless of the degree of decreasing returns.
Table 3 and Figure 6 present a comparison of empirical and model generated wealth distributions across strategies. For this comparison, we use the pseudo Sharpe ratio to rank
strategies in the data. We use the average Sharpe ratio and Gini coefficient over all strategies
to describe a complex asset with medium complexity. The asset pricing moments for this average, or medium, complexity asset motivate our baseline calibration in Table 1, and are given
in the columns labeled “model” in Table 3. For the high complexity strategy, in the top row of
Table 3, we target the average Sharpe ratio for the two highest pseudo Sharpe ratio strategies.
Similarly, we target the average Sharpe rato for the lowest pseudo Sharpe ratio strategies for
the least complex strategy in the bottom row. We vary total volatility, σν , between 0.04 and
1.4, holding all other parameters in Equation 28 constant, to match these empirical average
pseudo Sharpe ratios. The implied marginal volatility, which can be computed using the entry
condition described in Equation (18), is 35.6% in the high complexity strategy, 22.08% in the
medium complexity strategy, and 11.73% in the low complexity strategy.
In Figure 6, the top left panel plots the Lorenz curves, or average cumulative wealth shares by
wealth decile for these three strategy groupings. As can be seen, wealth concentration increases
as the average Sharpe ratio decreases. The top right panel compares the concentration of wealth
in the data, and in the model for the baseline parameters, which match the overall average
Sharpe ratio. As is typical, it is difficult to match both the top and bottom of the wealth
distribution simultaneously, however Table 3 shows that the model generates the empirical
average Gini coefficient at the baseline parameters. In addition, the model can closely match
the wealth shares of the top deciles if we do not target the Gini coefficient directly.26 Finally,
the bottom panel of Figure 6 shows that in the model, as in the data, more complex strategies,
with higher Sharpe ratios, display less wealth concentration. Table 3 contains the respective
26

Our result mirrors that in other prominent studies of wealth distributions. See Castaneda, Gimenez, and
Rull (2003) for a review of the literature, and specifically Table 1 for the errors in six prominent models for the
low end of the wealth distribution.

34

Gini coefficients, and shows that the lower concentration is driven by the selection effect from
lower participation rates.

6

Conclusion

We study the equilibrium properties of complex asset markets. A complex asset is defined as
an investment which requires a model and implementation strategy, thereby exposing investors
to idiosyncratic risk. We provide a specific micro-foundation for how complex assets impose
idiosyncratic risk on investors through imperfect hedging or tracking portfolios in long-short
strategies designed to maximize returns while minimizing risk. In our equilibrium model, required returns increase with asset complexity, as proxied for by higher total volatility. We
emphasize heterogeneity in the risk-return tradeoff faced by investors with different levels of
expertise. Accordingly, we show that in our model, if expertise and complexity are complementary, improvements in market-level Sharpe ratios can be accompanied by lower market
participation, consistent with empirical observations. Finally, we describe the implications of
our model for the industrial organization of markets for complex risky assets. Limited participation and selection effects imply that more complex assets display less concentrated equilibrium
size distributions, which we show is consistent with data on relative value hedge fund strategies.

35

References
Acharya, V. V., H. S. Shin, and T. Yorulmazer (2009): “A Theory of Slow-Moving
Capital and Contagion,” (7147).
Achdou, Y., J. Han, J.-M. Lasry, P.-L. Lions, and B. Moll (2014): “Heterogeneous
Agent Models in Continuous Time,” Working Paper.
Adrian, T., and N. Boyarchenko (2013): “Intermediary Leverage Cycles and Financial
Stability,” Working Paper FRB NY.
Adrian, T., E. Etula, and T. Muir (2014): “Financial Intermediaries and the CrossSection of Asset Returns,” The Journal of Finance, 69(6), 2557–2596.
Aiyagari, S., and M. Gertler (1999): ““Overreaction” of Asset Prices in General Equilibrium,” Review of Economic Dynamics, 2, 3–35.
Allen, F., and D. Gale (2005): “From Cash-in-the-Market Pricing to Financial Fragility,”
Journal of the European Economic Association, 3, 535–546.
Basak, S., and B. Croitoru (2000): “Equilibrium Mispricing in a Capital Market with
Portfolio Constraints,” Review of Financial Studies, 13, 715–748.
Basak, S., and D. Cuoco (1998): “An Equilibrium Model with Restricted Stock Market
Participation,” Review of Financial Studies, 11, 309–341.
Benhabib, J., A. Bisin, and S. Zhu (2011): “The Distribution of Wealth and Fiscal Policy
in Economies With Finitely Lived Agents,” Econometrica, 79(1), 123–157.
(2015): “The Wealth Distribution in Bewley Economies with Capital Income Risk,”
Journal of Economic Theory, 159, Part A, 489 – 515.
(2016): “The Distribution of Wealth in the Blanchard-Yaari Model,” Macroeconomic
Dynamics, pp. 1–16.
Bewley, T. (1986): “Stationary Monetary Equilibrium with a Continuum of Independently
Fluctuating Consumers,” in Contributions to Mathematical Economics in Honor of Gerard
Debreu, ed. by W. Hildenbrand, and A. Mas-Collel. North-Holland, Amsterdam.
Boyarchenko, N., A. Fuster, and D. O. Lucca (2014): “Understanding Mortgage
Spreads,” Working Paper FRB NY.
Brennan, M., and E. Schwartz (1990): “Arbitrage in Stock Index Futures,” Journal of
Business, 63, s7–s31.
Castaneda, A., J. D. Gimenez, and J. V. R. Rull (2003): “Accounting for the US
Earnings and Wealth Inequality,” Journal of Political Economy, 111(4), 818–857.

36

Chien, Y., H. Cole, and H. Lustig (2011): “A Multiplier Approach to Understanding the
Macro Implications of Household Finance,” Review of Economic Studies, 78, 199–234.
Chien, Y., H. Cole, and H. Lustig (2012): “Is the Volatility of the Market Price of Risk
Due to Intermittent Portfolio Rebalancing?,” American Economic Review, 102(6), 2859–96.
Clementi, G. L., and B. Palazzo (2016): “Entry, Exit, Firm Dynamics, and Aggregate
Fluctuations,” American Economic Journal: Macroeconomics, 8(3), 1–41.
Derman, E. (2016): “Bloomberg Masters in Business podcast,” .
DiTella, S. (2016): “Uncertainty Shocks and Balance Sheet Recessions,” Journal of Political
Economy.
Dixit, A., and R. Pindyck (1994): Investment Under Uncertainty. Princeton University
Press.
Drechsler, I. (2014): “Risk Choice under High-Water Marks,” Review of Financial Studies,
27, 2052–2096.
Duarte, J., F. A. Longstaff, and F. Yu (2006): “Risk and Return in Fixed-Income
Arbitrage: Nickels in Front of a Steamroller?,” Review of Financial Studies, 20(3), 769–811.
Duffie, D. (2010): “Presidential Address: Asset Price Dynamics with Slow-Moving Capital,”
The Journal of Finance, 65(4), 1237–1267.
Duffie, D., and B. Strulovici (2012): “Capital Mobility and Asset Pricing,” Econometrica,
80, 2469–2509.
Dumas, B. (1989): “Two-person Dynamic Equilibrium in the Capital Market,” Review of
Financial Studies, 2, 157–188.
Edmond, C., and P.-O. Weill (2012): “Aggregate Implications of Micro Asset Market
Segmentation,” Journal of Monetary Economics, pp. 319–335.
Froot, K. A., and P. G. J. O’Connell (1999): The Financing of Catastrophe Risk chap.
The Pricing of U.S. Catastrophe Reinsurance, pp. 195–232. National Bureau of Economic
Research.
Gabaix, X. (2009): “Power Laws in Economics and Finance,” Annual Review of Economics.
Gabaix, X., A. Krishnamurthy, and O. Vigneron (2007): “Limits of Arbitrage: Theory
and Evidence from the Mortgage-Backed Securities Market,” Journal of Finance, 62, 557–
595.
Gabaix, X., J.-M. Lasry, P.-L. Lions, and B. Moll (2016): “The Dynamics of Inequality,” Econometrica, 84(6), 2071–2111.
Gabaix, Z. (1999): “Zipf’s Law for Cities: An Explanation,” Quarterly Journal of Economics,
August, 739–767.
37

Gǎrleanu, N., S. Panageas, and J. Yu (2015): “Financial Entanglement: A Theory of
Incomplete Integration, Leverage, Crashes, and Contagion,” American Economic Review,
105(7), 1979–2010.
Glode, V., R. C. Green, and R. Lowery (2012): “Financial Expertise as an Arms Race,”
The Journal of Finance, 67(5), 1723–1759.
Goetzmann, W. N., J. E. Ingersoll, and S. A. Ross (2003): “High-Water Marks and
Hedge Fund Management Contracts,” Journal of Finance, 58, 1685–1717.
Gourio, F., and N. Roys (2014): “Size-Dependent Regulations, Firm Size Distribution, and
Reallocation,” Quantitative Economics, 5, 1759–7331.
Greenwood, R. (2011): “Investor Demand: Module Note for Instructors,” Harvard Business
School Publishing, 5-211-101.
Gromb, D., and D. Vayanos (2002): “Equilibrium and Welfare in Markets with Financially
Constrained Arbitrageurs,” Journal of Financial Economics, 66, 361–407.
(2010a): “The Limits of Arbitrage: the State of the Theory,” Annual Review of
Financial Economics, 2, 251–275.
(2010b): “A Model of Financial Market Liquidity Based on Arbitrageur Capital,”
Journal of the European Economic Association Papers and Proceedings, pp. 456–466.
Haddad, V. (2014): “Concentrated Ownership and Equilibrium Asset Prices,” Working Paper.
Harrison, J. M. (2013): Brownian Models of Performance and Control. Cambridge University
Press.
He, Z., and A. Krishnamurthy (2012): “A Model of Capital and Crises,” Review of Economic Studies, 79, 735–777.
(2013): “Intermediary Asset Pricing,” American Economic Review, 103(2), 732–70.
Hombert, J., and D. Thesmar (2014): “Overcoming Limits of Arbitrage: Theory and
Evidence,” Journal of Financial Economics, 111(1), 26 – 44.
Hopenhayn, H. A. (1992a): “Entry, Exit, and firm Dynamics in Long Run Equilibrium,”
Econometrica, 60(5), 1127–1150.
(1992b): “Exit, Selection, and the Value of Firms,” Journal of Economic Dynamics
and Control, 16, 621–653.
Jagannathan, R., A. Malakhov, and D. Novikov (2010): “Do Hot Hands Exist among
Hedge Fund Managers? An Empirical Evaluation,” The Journal of Finance, 65(1), 217–255.
Kacperczyk, M., J. B. Nosal, and L. Stevens (2014): “Investor Sophistication and
Capital Income Inequality,” Working Paper.
38

Kaplan, G., B. Moll, and G. L. Violante (2016): “Monetary Policy According to
HANK,” NBER Working Paper, (21897).
Karlin, S., and H. M. Taylor (1981): A Second Course in Stochastic Processes. Academic
Press.
Kesten, H. (1973): “Random Difference Equations and Renewal Theory for Products of
Random Matrices,” Acta Mathematica, 131, 207–248.
Kogan, L., and R. Uppal (2001): “Risk Aversion and Optimal Portfolio Policies in Partial
and General Equilibrium Economies,” Working Paper.
Kondor, P. (2009): “Risk in Dynamic Arbitrage: The Price Effects of Convergence Trading,”
Journal of Finance, 64, 631–655.
Kondor, P., and D. Vayanos (2014): “Liquidity Risk and the Dynamics of Arbitrage
Capital,” Working Paper, LSE.
Krueger, D., and H. Lustig (2009): “When is Market Incompleteness Irrelevant for the
Price of Aggregate Risk (and when is it not)?,” Journal of Economic Theory.
Kurlat, P. (2016): “Asset Markets With Heterogeneous Information,” Econometrica, 84(1),
33–85.
Lee, D. W., and T. S. Kim (2014): “Idiosyncratic Risk and Cross Section of Hedge Fund
Returns,” Working Paper.
Luttmer, E. G. (2007): “Selection, Growth, and the Size Distribution of Firms,” Quarterly
Journal of Economics, 122, 1103–1144.
Merton, R. C. (1987): “A Simple Model of Capital Market Equilibrium with Incomplete
Information,” The Journal of Finance, 42(3), 483–510.
Miao, J. (2005): “Optimal Capital Structure and Industry Dynamics,” Journal of Finance,
60, 2621–2659.
Mitchell, M., L. H. Pedersen, and T. Pulvino (2007): “Slow Moving Capital,” American Economic Review, 97, 215–220.
Mitchell, M., and T. Pulvino (2012): “Arbitrage Crashes and the Speed of Capital,”
Journal of Financial Economics, 104, 469–490.
Moll, B. (2014): “Productivity Losses from Financial Frictions: Can Self-Financing Undo
Capital Misallocation?,” American Economic Review, 104(10), 3186–3221.
Muir, T. (2014): “Financial Crises and Risk Premia,” Working Paper, Yale University.
Panageas, S., and M. Westerfield (2009): “High-Water Marks: High Risk Appetites?
Convex Compensation, Long Horizons, and Portfolio Choice,” Journal of Finance, 64, 1–36.
39

Pasquariello, P. (2014): “Financial Market Dislocations,” Review of Financial Studies.
Plantin, G. (2009): “Learning by Holding and Liquidity,” Review of Economic Studies, 76,
395–412.
Pontiff, J. (1996): “Costly Arbitrage: Evidence from Closed-End Funds,” Quarterly Journal
of Economics.
Pontiff, J. (2006): “Costly Arbitrage and the Myth of Idiosyncratic Risk,” Journal of Accounting and Economics, 42, 35–52.
Sharpe, W. F. (1966): “Mutual Fund Performance,” Journal of Business, 39, 119–138.
Shleifer, A., and R. W. Vishny (1997): “The Limits of Arbitrage,” The Journal of Finance,
52(1), 35–55.
Titman, S., and C. Tiu (2011): “Do the Best Hedge Funds Hedge?,” Review of Financial
Studies, 24, 123–168.
Toda, A. A. (2014): “Incomplete Market Dynamics and Cross-Sectional Distributions,” Journal of Economic Theory.
Toda, A. A., and K. Walsh (2015): “The Double Power Law in Consumption and Implications for Testing Euler Equations,” Journal of Political Economy.
Xiong, W. (2001): “Convergence Trading with Wealth Effects: An Amplification Mechanism
in Financial Markets,” Journal of Financial Economics, 62, 247–292.
Yuan, K. (2005): “Asymmetric Price Movements and Borrowing Constraints: A Rational
Expectations Equilibrium Model of Crises, Contagion, and Confusion,” Journal of Finance,
60, 379–411.

40

Change in participation
10

9

9
Vol of expertise

Vol of expertise

LHS − RHS of Prop 3.5
10

8
7
6
5
4
3

8
7
6
5
4

1

2

3

3

4

1

2

b

4

Change in SR
10

9

9
Vol of expertise

Vol of expertise

LHS − RHS of Prop 3.6
10

8
7
6
5
4
3

3
b

8
7
6
5
4

1

2

3

3

4

1

2

3

4

b

b

Figure 1: Model comparative statics over variation in the dispersion in expertise (y-axis) and the
curvature of effective volatility in expertise (x-axis). Economies satisfy Case 3 of Proposition
3.4, i.e. expertise and complexity are complementary, using the functional form σ 2 (σν , x) =
a + x−b σν2 for effective volatility, and a log-normal distribution for x with a mean of zero and
dispersion given on the y-axis. The top left panel displays blue for parameters for which the
sufficient Condition 2 in Proposition 3.5, which requires non-representativeness of the highest
elasticity participants, is satisfied, and red for parameters for which it is violated. The top
right panel uses the same color scheme to show that participation is decreasing whenever this
condition is satisfied. The bottom left panel displays blue for parameters for which the sufficient
Condition 2 in Proposition 3.6, which requires non-representativeness of marginal participants,
is satisfied, and red for parameters for which it is violated. The bottom left panel uses the same
color scheme to show that the equilibrium equally-weighted Sharpe ratio is increasing whenever
this condition is satisfied.

41

0.1
Excess Return

Demand for Risky Asset

3
2
1
0

0

0.2

0.4

συ

0.6

0.8

1

5

0.04

0

0.2

0.4

συ

0.6

0.8

1

0.16
0.14
0.12
0.1
0.08

0

0.2

0.4

0

0.2

0.4

0

0.2

0.4

συ

0.6

0.8

1

0.6

0.8

1

0.6

0.8

1

0.8
0.6
0.4
0.2

συ

1
Sharpe Ratio

Standard Deviation

0

0.06

Fraction of Experts

Entry Cutoff

10

0.08

0

0.2

0.4

συ

0.6

0.8

1

0.8
0.6
0.4

συ

Figure 2: Model comparative statics over variation in total risk. Blue lines plot partial equilibrium comparative statics, red lines plot general equilibrium comparative statics. Economies
satisfy Case 3 of Proposition 3.4, i.e. expertise and complexity are complementary.

42

Cumulative wealth shares in the data

Lorenz Curve: model versus data

1

1
o

o

45 line
Data, SR=0.49
Data, SR=0.8
Data, SR=1.08

0.9
0.8

0.8

0.7

0.7

0.6

0.6

0.5

0.5

0.4

0.4

0.3

0.3

0.2

0.2

0.1

0.1

0

0

0.2

45 line
α=0.07, SR=0.8
α=0.07, SR=0.8

0.9

0.4

0.6

0.8

0

1

0

0.2

0.4

0.6

0.8

Lorenz Curve with different value of total vol
1
0.9

45o line
σL=0.04, SR=0.5

0.8

σM=0.42, SR=0.8
σH=1.4, SR=1.07

0.7

Data, SR=0.8

0.6
0.5
0.4
0.3
0.2
0.1
0

0

0.2

0.4

0.6

0.8

1

Figure 3: Concentration in complex asset markets, data and model: The top left panel shows
Lorenz curves for Relative Value Fixed Income Strategies in the Hedge Fund Research Database.
Strategies are grouped into complexity rankings by pseudo Sharpe ratios across funds within
α
strategies, E[σ
. The top right panel compares the wealth distribution of the model at baseline
i]
parameters to the average of all five relative value strategies. The bottom panel plots the
average wealth distribution over all five relative value strategies against the model targeted to
match the average Sharpe ratios in the top left panel. As in the data, wealth concentration
decreases with complexity.
43

1

Table 1: Numerical Example: Baseline Parameter Values
Parameter
Discount factor
Risk-free rate
Risk aversion
Entry cost
Maintenance cost
Supply of risky asset
Total volatility of risky asset return
Mean of expertise distribution
Volatility of expertise distribution
Constant in σ 2 (x)
Slope of σ 2 (x)
Minimum wealth share

Symbol
ρ
rf
γ
f nx
f xx
S
σν
µx
σx
a
b
zmin

Value Target
0.01
Annual interest rate
0.01
Annual interest rate
5
0.03
0.01
1.20
Average excess return α = 6.98%
40%
0
4
0.48% Average SR
1.5
Average Gini
0.01

Table 2: Relative Value Hedge Fund Strategies: Summary Statistics. This table provides
data on the five single strategy relative value fund classifications in the Hedge Fund Research
database. The first column provides time series average returns by fund classification. The
α
second column provides the pseudo Sharpe ratios across funds withing strategies, E[σ
.
i]

Strategy Name
FI Asset Backed
FI Sov
FI Conv Bond Arb
Volatility
FI Corp

TS AVG Pseudo
Industry Sharpe
Returns
Ratio
9.06%
7.94%
7.78%
6.32%
3.80%

44

1.15
1
0.87
0.52
0.45

Gini

0.66
0.62
0.66
0.75
0.79

Table 3: Model vs. Data: Asset Pricing and Wealth Distributions. We classify the five single
strategy relative value fund classifications in the Hedge Fund Research database into three
α
groups, by pseudo Sharpe ratios across funds within strategies, E[σ
. The medium complexity
i]
strategy grouping averages over all strategies, the high complexity strategy averages over the
highest two pseudo Sharpe ratio strategies, and the lowest strategy averages over the lowest
two strategy groupings. α measures time series average returns by fund classification grouping.
α
σνH
σνM
σνL

Pseudo Sharpe ratio

Gini

Participation

Model

Data Model

Data

Model

Data

Model

11.25

8.50

1.07

1.08

0.60

0.64

0.32

6.98

6.98

0.80

0.80

0.70

0.70

0.41

3.66

5.06

0.50

0.49

0.78

0.77

0.61

45

A

Appendix

Proof. Proposition 2.1. We prove this Proposition by guess and verify. First, we write the HJB
equations of our model
max

cx (x,t,s),θ(x,t,s)

0 = u (cx (x, t, s)) + Vwx [w (t, s) (rf + θ (x, t, s) α (t, s)) − cx (x, t, s) − fxx w (t, s)]

θ2 (x) σ 2 (x) w (t, s)2 x
Vww − ρV x
+
2
max 0 = u (cn (t, s)) + Vwn (rf w (t, s) − cn (t, s)) − ρV n

cn (t,s)

The first order conditions for optimality are given by:
u0 (cx (x, t, s)) = Vwx ,
u0 (cn (t, s)) = Vwn ,
x
Vwx α (t, s) + θ (x, t, s) σ 2 (x) w (t, s) Vww
= 0.

Next, we guess that the value functions have the following form:
w (t, s)1−γ
x
x
V (w (t, s) , x) = y (x, t, s)
,
1−γ
w (t, s)1−γ
V n (w (t, s) , x) = y n (t, s)
.
1−γ
Given these conjecture, it follows from the Benveniste-Scheinkman condition that the optimal consumption choices are given by:
− γ1

cx (x, t, s) = [y x (x, t, s)]
n

n

− γ1

c (t, s) = [y (t, s)]

w (t, s) ,

w (t, s) ,

and that the optimal portfolio choice is given by
α (t, s)
.
γσ 2 (x)
Plugging these choices into the HJB equations, we get


2 (t, s)
1
α
− 1−γ
−
x
x
x
0 = [y (x, t, s)] γ + y (x, t, s) rf +
− [y (x, t, s)] γ − fxx (1 − γ)
γσ 2 (x)
α2 (t, s) x
y (x, t, s) (1 − γ) − ρy x (x, t, s)
−
2γσ 2 (x)


α2 (t, s)
− 1−γ
x
x
γ
= γ [y (x, t, s)]
+ y (x, t, s) rf +
− fxx (1 − γ) − ρy x (x, t, s) ,
2γσ 2 (x)
θ (x, t, s) =

− 1−γ
γ

0 = γ [y n (t, s)]

+ y n (t, s) (1 − γ) rf − ρy n (t, s) .

Rearranging the equations, we solve for y x (x, t, s) and y n (x, t, s) ,

−γ
(γ − 1) (rf − fxx ) + ρ (γ − 1) α2 (t, s)
x
y (x, t, s) =
+
,
γ
2γ 2 σ 2 (x)


(γ − 1) rf + ρ −γ
n
y (t, s) =
.
γ
Given all policy functions, we get the experts’ wealth growth rates:


rf − fxx − ρ (γ + 1) α2 (t, s)
dw (t, s)
α (t, s)
=
+
dB (t, s)
dt +
2
2
w (t, s)
γ
2γ σ (x)
γσ (x)

46

Finally, given homogeneity of the value functions in wealth, the participation cutoff is constructed by
direct comparison between y x (x, t, s) and y n (t, s) .

Proof. Proposition 2.2. Equivalence of value and policy functions under the reflecting
barrier zmin .
Interpretation of zmin : We assume that one of two things can happen to an investor at zmin . With
probability q, the investor is given a low value as punishment, and is eliminated from the market and
replaced with a new agent with wealth share zmin and the same expertise as the exiting agent. Note
that punishment and elimination in isolation would cause the incumbent agent to be conservative, to
avoid zmin . With probability 1−q, the agent is rewarded by remaining in the market with wealth share
equal to zmin , which we implement with a reflected geometric Brownian Motion. Note that this reward
in isolation would cause the agent to risk shift, to take advantage of limited liability at zmin . Intuitively,
we require that E[V x (z, x)] = qE[V punishment ] + (1 − q)E[V reward ], conditional on the optimal policies
under the true wealth share dynamics. Since the value under the true, non-reflecting, dynamics lies
between the punishment value of dying and the reward value of reflection, we conjecture (and verify
below) that there exists some probability, conditional on parameters, that this is the case. It seems
realistic that investors face uncertainty about what will happen to them if their assets reach a lower
threshold. Will they be liquidated, or rescued? Note that our proof offers a technical contribution for
models with endogenous state variables following a reflecting geometric Brownian motion.
We show that the optimal policies in the model with reflecting barrier zmin are equivalent to
those in the original model under our assumptions for probabilities and values of exit vs. reflection.
Our proof assumes an optimal voluntary exit date. This is without loss of generality in a stationary
equilibrium with no entry or exit.
The model with geometric Brownian motion wealth share dynamics is given by the true Model 1
as follows:
Z T

x
−ρ(s−t)
x
−ρ(T −t) n
V (z (t, s) , x) =
max
E
e
u (c (x, t, s)) ds + e
V (z (t, s))
s.t. dz (t, s) =

cx (x,t,s),T,θx (x,t,s)
t
x
[z (t, s) (rf + θ (x, t, s) α (t, s))
x

− cx (x, t, s) − Fxx ] ds

+z (t, s) θ (x, t, s) σ (x) dB (t, s) ,

The model with reflected Brownian motion wealth share dynamics is given by the alternative
Model 2 as follows:
"Z 0

#
s
r (z
0
(1
−
q)
V
,
x)
min
V r (z (t, s) , x) =
max
E
e−ρ(s−t) u (cr (x, t, s)) ds + e−ρ(s −t)
+qV n (z (t, s) , x)
cr (x,t,s),T,θr (x,t,s)
t
s.t. dz (t, s) = [z (t, s) (rf + θr (x, t, s) α (t, s)) − cr (x, t, s) − Fxx ] ds
+z (t, s) θr (x, t, s) σ (x) dB (t, s) ,
where s0 < T is the first time that the agent’s wealth falls below zmin , the superscript n denotes the
value of a non-expert which cannot re-enter, and the superscript r denotes the value of an expert
under reflected Brownian dynamics, given by dzt /zt = µz dt + σz dBt for zt > zmin and dzt /zt =
max (µz dt + σz dBt , 0) for zt ≤ zmin .27
27

See Harrison (2013), who also notes that the “reflected geometric Brownian motion process” might more
precisely be called a regulated Brownian motion.

47

For parsimony, we only present the case in which the expert wealth share drops below zmin before
the voluntary exit stopping time at which an expert would voluntarily choose to exit, which applies
in the stationary equilibrium with exit time T = ∞ since there is no voluntary entry or exit in
equilibrium.
To equate value and policy functions under the true and reflected wealth share dynamics then
requires the appropriate specification of q, the probability of forced exit vs. being allowed to remain in
the complex asset market with a wealth share of zmin . Two alternative specifications for q both lead
to equal values and policies. The first specifies that the value upon exit is the value of a non-expert
which cannot re-enter, which is the same for all levels of expertise. In this case, the probability of
exit must depend on expertise. The second alternative specifies that the value of exit is increasing in
expertise. In this case, the probability of exit is the same for all agents. In what follows, we use the
case in which the value upon exit is the value of a non-expert.28 Define
h
i1−γ
zmin
y x (x) − z(t,s)
q (z (t, s) , x) =
(29)
h
i1−γ , for z (t, s) ≤ zmin .
zmin
y n (x) − y x (x) z(t,s)
Using this definition and equation (10) from Proposition 2.1, it is straightforward to show that
V x (z (t, s) , x) = (1 − q) V x (zmin , x) + qV n (z (t, s)) , for z (t, s) ≤ zmin .

(30)

Then, it is sufficient to show that
V r (z (t, s) , x) = V x (z (t, s) , x) , for all x and z (t, s) ≥ zmin .
Our proof strategy is to first show that the value function and optimal policy functions are identical
when expert wealth equals zmin . Next, we show that the two models are identical for z > zmin .
First, in Model 2, cr (x, t, s) is the optimal consumption, therefore,
#
"Z 0
s


0
V r (zmin , x) = E
e−ρ(s−t) u (cr (x, t, s)) ds + e−ρ(s −t) (1 − q) V r (zmin , x) + qV n z t, s0
t

"Z
≥ E

s00

−ρ(s00 −t)

e−ρ(s−t) u (cx (x, t, s)) ds + e

#


(1 − q) V r (zmin , x) + qV n z t, s00
,

t

where on the right hand side of the inequality we replace cr with cx and allow the time s0 at which
the wealth share declines to zmin to update to s00 accordingly. Rearranging terms, we have:
#
"Z 0
s

1
0

E
V r (zmin , x) =
e−ρ(s−t) u (cr (x, t, s)) ds + e−ρ(s −t) qV n z t, s0
1 − E (1 − q) e−ρ(s0 −t)
t
"Z 00
#
s

1
00 −t)
−ρ(s−t)
x
−ρ(s
n
00

E
≥
e
u (c (x, t, s)) ds + e
qV z t, s
.
1 − E (1 − q) e−ρ(s00 −t)
t
Second, in Model 1, we can rewrite the value of being an expert as the value of the stream of con28

The alternative is to specify q to be independent of the level of expertise, and given by q (z (t, s) , x) =
z

1−γ

min
1−[ z(t,s)
]

yr −

[

zmin 1−γ
z(t,s)

]

. In this case, the value of exit must be specified to be proportional to the expertise-specific value,

r
i.e. Vexit
(z (t, s) , x) = y r V x (z (t, s) , x) , where y r > 1.

48

sumption before s00 plus the continuation value if wealth falls below zmin . We have:
"Z 00
#
s


00
V x (zmin , x) = E
e−ρ(s−t) u (cx (x, t, s)) ds + e−ρ(s −t) V x z t, s00 , x
t

"Z

s00

= E

#
−ρ(s00 −t)

e−ρ(s−t) u (cx (x, t, s)) ds + e



(1 − q) V x (zmin , x) + qV n


z t, s00

t

"Z

s0

≥ E

e

−ρ(s−t)

r

u (c (x, t, s)) ds + e

−ρ(s0 −t)

#


x
n
0
(1 − q) V (zmin , x) + qV z t, s
,

t

where the second equality uses the result in Equation (30), and the inequality results from replacing
cx with cr and allowing the expected time s00 at which the wealth share declines to zmin under the
policy cr to update to s0 accordingly. Rearranging terms, we have
"Z 00
#
s
1
00

E
V x (zmin , x) =
e−ρ(s−t) u (cx (x, t, s)) ds + e−ρ(s −t) qV n (z (t, s))
1 − E (1 − q) e−ρ(s00 −t)
t
"Z 0
#
s
1
0

E
e−ρ(s−t) u (cr (x, t, s)) ds + e−ρ(s −t) qV n (z (t, s)) .
≥
1 − E (1 − q) e−ρ(s0 −t)
t
We have established two inequalities which hold in opposite directions. Thus, we must have equality,
namely:
"Z 00
#
s
1
00

E
e−ρ(s−t) u (cx (x, t, s)) ds + e−ρ(s −t) qV n (z (t, s))
1 − E (1 − q) e−ρ(s00 −t)
t
"Z 0
#
s
1
0

E
=
e−ρ(s−t) u (cr (x, t, s)) ds + e−ρ(s −t) qV n (z (t, s)) ,
1 − E (1 − q) e−ρ(s0 −t)
t
and
V r (zmin , x) = V x (zmin , x) .
Next, we show that the value functions for Model 1 and Model 2 are identical when z > zmin . Using
analogous logic, we have:
"Z 0
#
s


r
−ρ(s−t)
r
−ρ(s0 −t)
r
n
0
V (z (t, s) , x) = E
e
u (c (x, t, s)) ds + e
(1 − q) V (zmin , x) + qV z t, s
t

"Z

#

s00

≥ E

e

−ρ(s−t)

−ρ(s00 −t)

x

u (c (x, t, s)) ds + e



x

(1 − q) V (zmin , x) + qV

n

00

z t, s



t

"Z

s00

= E

#
−ρ(s00 −t)

e−ρ(s−t) u (cx (x, t, s)) ds + e

Vx

 
z t, s00 , x

t

= V x (z (t, s) , x) , for all z (t, s)
with equality iff cx (x, t, s) = cr (x, t, s) and θx (x, t, s) = θr (x, t, s) . Also, we have:
"Z 00
#
s


00
V x (z (t, s) , x) =
e−ρ(s−t) u (cx (x, t, s)) ds + e−ρ(s −t) (1 − q) V x (zmin , x) + qV n z t, s00
t

"Z
≥ E

s0

#
e−ρ(s−t) u (cr (x, t, s)) ds + e

t

= V r (z (t, s) , x) , for all z (t, s)

49

−ρ(s0 −t)



(1 − q) V r (zmin , x) + qV n z t, s0

with equality iff cx (x, t, s) = cr (x, t, s) and θx (x, t, s) = θr (x, t, s) . Therefore, our definition of the
probabilities for exit vs. remaining in equation (29) yields equivalence for all value and policy functions
under the true and reflected dynamics models:
V x (z (t, s) , x) = V r (z (t, s) , x) , for all x and z (t, s)
cx (x, t, s) = cr (x, t, s) , for all x and z (t, s)
θx (x, t, s) = θr (x, t, s) , for all x and z (t, s) .

Proof. Proposition 2.3 We prove this Proposition by guess-and-verify. We guess that the stationary
distribution takes the following form:
φ(z, x) = C(x)z −β(x)−1 ,
Then, by plugging this guess into the Kolmogorov forward equation, we obtain the following condition:



(γ + 1) α2
−β(x) rf − fxx − ρ
0 = − ∂z z
+
− g (x̄)
γ
2γ 2 σ 2 (x)


α2
1
1−β(x)
+ ∂zz z
2
γ 2 σ 2 (x)


rf − fxx − ρ (γ + 1) α2
= β(x)
+
− g (x̄)
γ
2γ 2 σ 2 (x)

2
1
α
− β(x) (1 − β(x))
2
γσ (x)


rf − fxx − ρ α2 (γ + β(x))
+
−
g
(x̄)
= β(x)
γ
2γ 2 σ 2 (x)
Thus, by collecting terms, we obtain:
σ 2 (x)
β(x) = C1
− γ ≥ 1,
α2
C1 = 2γ (fxx + ρ − rf + γg (x̄)) ,
2

C(x) =

1
R

z −β−1 dz

=

C1 σ α(x)
−γ
2
−C1
zmin

σ 2 (x)
+γ
α2

.

Note there are two roots of equation


rf − fxx − ρ α2 (γ + β(x))
0 = β(x)
+
− g (x̄) .
γ
2γ 2 σ 2 (x)
The negative drift of wealth shares ensures that there will be one root of this equation which is larger
than one. We then take this root in order to ensure that the mean wealth has a finite mean.

Proof. Corollary 2.1. For the highest expertise agents, we have
Z ∞
Z ∞
z̄ =
zφ(z, x̄)dz =
C (x̄) z −β(x̄) dz
zmin
zmin


1
1
−β(x̄)−1 ∞
C (x̄) z
|zmin = zmin 1 +
.
=
−β (x̄) − 1
β (x̄) − 1

50

This gives us another expression for β (x̄) ,
1
.
1 − zmin /z̄
Also, we know that the decay coefficient is given by:
β (x̄) =

β (x̄) = 2γ (fxx + ρ − rf + γg (x̄))

σ 2 (x̄)
−γ
α2

Therefore, by combining these expressions, we have
σ 2 (x̄)
1
2γ (fxx + ρ − rf + γg (x̄))
−γ =
,
α2
1 − zmin /z̄
By rearranging the above equation, we get the following expression:
rf − fxx − ρ
1
α2
α2
+
+
.
g (x̄) =
γ
2γσ 2 (x̄) 2γ 2 σ 2 (x̄) 1 − zmin /z̄
We plug g (x̄) into β (x) , to obtain:

 2
zmin /z̄
σ (x)
β (x) = γ +
− γ.
1 − zmin /z̄ σ 2 (x̄)

Proof. Lemma 2.2 Recall that the risky asset share and the decay coefficients are given by:
α
,
θ (x) =
2
γσ (x)
σ 2 (x)
β (x) = 2γ (fxx + r − rf + γg (x̄))
− γ.
α2
Consider two levels of expertise, xH > xL we have the following expression for the difference in the
risky asset share:


α
1
1
θ (xH ) − θ (xL ) =
−
γ σ 2 (xH ) σ 2 (xL )
α σ 2 (xL ) − σ 2 (xH )
,
=
γ σ 2 (xH ) σ 2 (xL )
and the following expression for the difference in decay coefficient:

1 
β (xH ) − β (xL ) = 2γ (fxx + r − rf + γg (x̄)) 2 σ 2 (xH ) − σ 2 (xL )
α
σ 2 (xH ) σ 2 (xL )
= 2γ 2 (fxx + r − rf + γg (x̄))
[θ (xL ) − θ (xH )] .
α3
If a larger dispersion of portfolio choice is due to either a higher excess return or a lower risk
aversion, the dispersion in β is smaller, since:
∂ [β (xH ) − β (xL )]
∂ [θ (xL ) − θ (xH )]
< 0, and
>0
∂α
∂α
∂ [β (xH ) − β (xL )]
∂ [θ (xL ) − θ (xH )]
> 0, and
<0
∂γ
∂γ
Consider the case where σ 2 (xH ) σ 2 (xL ) is a constant, then
∂ [β (xH ) − β (xL )]
σ 2 (xH ) σ 2 (xL )
= 2γ 2 (fxx + r − rf + γg (x̄))
> 0.
∂ [θ (xL ) − θ (xH )]
α3
A larger dispersion in portfolio choice, resulting from a larger difference between effective volatility,

51

implies a larger dispersion of tail distribution. The condition on the product of the effective variances
is not necessary, however, as can be seen by simple algebra.

Lemma A.1 The micro-foundation for the return process in Equation(1) provided in Lemma 2.1,
along with Assumption 1, are sufficient to ensure that neither policy functions nor equilibrium prices
are functions of the realization of the fundamental shock dB F (t, s).
Proof. Lemma A.1 First, since the innovations in dB F (t, s) are independent over time, the realizations do not affect portfolio choices or consumption decisions. Moreover, Lemma 2.1 describes how
fundamental shocks are absorbed into the asset-specific risk σ(x)dBi (t, s) in Equation 1, which implies
that the proof for our Proposition 2.1 applies as stated. Then, for asset prices to be independent of the
realization of the fundamental shock dB F (t, s), all that remains is to show that the expected growth
rate of wealth, conditional on each expertise level, is the same under the return process stated in (1)
and the return process constructed in Lemma 2.1.
We can rewrite the expected growth rate of wealth as


rf − fxx − ρ (γ + 1) α2 (t, s)
dw (t, s)
α (t, s)
=
+
dt +
dB (t, s)
w (t, s)
γ
2γ 2 σ 2 (x)
γσ (x)



rf − fxx − ρ (γ + 1) α2 (t, s)
α (t, s) 
=
+
dt +
(1 − ρi (x)) σ F dB F (t, s) + σ T (x)dB T (t, s) .
2
2
γ
2γ σ (x)
γσ (x)
Second, because

ρo (x)+ρu (x)
2

= 1, we have that
q
q
σo (x) = σu (x) = [(1 − ρo (x)) σ F ]2 + [σ T (x)]2 = [(1 − ρu (x)) σ F ]2 + [σ T (x)]2 .

Thus, each expert’s expected growth rate of wealth, conditional on the aggregate shock is given by:


rf − fxx − ρ (γ + 1) α2 (t, s) α (t, s)
dw (t, s)
F
E
|x, dB (t, s) =
+
+
(1 − ρi (x)) σ F dB F (t, s).
w (t, s)
γ
2γ 2 σ 2 (x)
γσ (x)
If there is a positive aggregate shock, the growth rate of the wealth of under-hedging investors, with
lower ρ, is higher than the growth rate of wealth for over-hedging investors, with higher ρ, and vice
versa. The difference is exactly canceled out at the expertise-level aggregate. That is:


rf − fxx − ρ (γ + 1) α2 (t, s)
dw (t, s)
E
|x =
+
.
w (t, s)
γ
2γ 2 σ 2 (x)
Aggregating across expertise levels, then, the equilibrium excess return α does not depend on the
realization of aggregate shock.

Proof. Lemma 3.1 Direct calculation. We use 1 to denote a positive sign. For ease of exposition,
we study the partial derivative of the log of expertise level investment in the risky asset. The sign of
the partial derivative of the log and the level will be the same because log is a positive transformation.
We have:
log I (x) = log

α
γσ 2 (x)

+ log Z (x)

= log α − log γ − log σ 2 (x) + log Z (x) ,

52

where Z (x) is the total expertise level wealth share,
Z ∞
Z ∞
Z(x) =
zφ(z, x)dz =
C (x) z −β(x) dz
zmin
zmin


1
1
−β(x)−1 ∞
.
C (x) z
|zmin = zmin 1 +
=
−β (x) − 1
β (x) − 1
Then:
1.

sign

∂I (x)
∂σ 2 (x)






∂ log I (x)
= sign
∂σ 2 (x)


1
zmin
1
= sign −1 −
C
1
Z (x) (β (x) − 1)2 α2
= −1

2.

∂I (x)
sign
∂σν


∂I (x) ∂σ 2 (x)
= sign
∂σ 2 (x) ∂σν

 2


∂σ (x)
∂I (x)
sign
= sign
∂σ 2 (x)
∂σν
= −1.


3.

sign

∂I (x)
∂α




∂ log I (x)
= sign
∂α


2
zmin
σ 2 (x)
= sign 1 +
C1
Z (x) (β (x) − 1)2
α3
= 1


4.

sign

∂I (x)
∂γ





=
=
≤
=


∂ log I (x)
sign
∂γ

 2



1
zmin
σ (x) C1
sign −1 −
+ 2γg (x) − 1
Z (x) (β (x) − 1)2
α2
γ

 2

1
zmin
σ (x) C1
sign −1 −
−1
Z (x) (β (x) − 1)2
α2 γ
−1

5.

sign

∂I (x)
∂fxx






∂ log I (x)
= sign
∂fxx


1
zmin
σ 2 (x)
= sign −
2γ
Z (x) (β (x) − 1)2 α2
= −1

53

Proof. Proposition 3.1 For each level of expertise, we have


∂I (x)
sign
= 1, for x ≥ x.
α
And when α is higher, more experts enter. Thus
∂I
> 0.
∂α

Proof. Proposition 3.2 We use direct calculations. We use 1 to denote a positive sign.
1.

∂I (x)
sign
∂σν


∂I (x) ∂σ 2 (x)
= sign
∂σ 2 (x) ∂σν


 2

∂I (x)
∂σ (x)
= sign
sign
.
∂σ 2 (x)
∂σν


We also have



∂I (x)
sign
= −1
∂σ 2 (x)
Thus for each level of expertise, when total risk is higher, the demand for the complex risky
asset is smaller. And, from Equation (18), since σ(x) is increasing in σν , when σν is higher,
participation is lower.
∂I
< 0.
∂σν
2. For each level of expertise:

∂I (x)
sign
= −1,
∂γ
and from Equation (18), participation is lower. Thus,
∂I
< 0.
∂γ


3. For each level of expertise:



∂I (x)
sign
= −1,
∂fxx
and again from Equation (18), participation is lower. Thus, we also have that
∂I
< 0.
∂fxx

54

Proof. Proposition 3.3 We have




∂I (x)
∂I (x) ∂σ (x)
sign
= sign
=1
∂x
∂σ (x) ∂x
And, using integration by parts, we obtain:
Z
I (Λ1 ) − I (Λ2 ) =
[λ1 (x) − λ2 (x)] I (x) dx
Z
∂I(x)
= −I (x) [Λ1 (x) − Λ2 (x)] −
[Λ1 (x) − Λ2 (x)] dx
∂x
> 0

Proof. Proposition 3.4. Writing out the partial derivative, and using the fact that, for example,
∂α/α
∂ log α
∂ log σν = ∂σν /σν , we have that:
∂SR (x)
∂σν

=

∂σ(x)
∂α
∂σν σ (x) − α ∂σν
σ 2 (x)

=

α
σ(x)σν




∂α/α
∂σ (x) /σ (x)
−
.
∂σν /σν
∂σν /σν

Thus,
∂SR (x)
∂α/α
∂σ (x) /σ (x)
> 0 iff
>
∂σν
∂σν /σν
∂σν /σν
This result illustrates the key role of the elasticity of excess returns vs. the elasticity of effective
volatilities with respect to changes in total volatility.
∂

∂σ(x)/σ(x)

∂

∂σ(x)/σ(x)
∂σν /σν

∂σν /σν
If
∂x
for all x.

If

∂x

is a constant, we must have either

If

∂x

>

∂σ(x)/σ(x)
∂σν /σν

for all x or

< 0, and assume there is a cutoff x∗ such that
∂α/α
∂σ (x∗ ) /σ (x∗ )
=
,
∂σν /σν
∂σν /σν

then for all x < x∗ , we have
∂σ(x)/σ(x)
∂ ∂σ /σ
ν
ν

∂α/α
∂σν /σν

∂SR(x)
∂σν

< 0; and for all x > x∗ , we have

∂SR(x)
∂σν

> 0.

∂SR(x)
∂σν

< 0.

> 0, and assume there is a cutoff x∗ such that
∂α/α
∂σ (x∗ ) /σ (x∗ )
=
,
∂σν /σν
∂σν /σν

then for all x < x∗ , we have

∂SR(x)
∂σν

> 0; and for all x > x∗ , we have

55

∂α/α
∂σν /σν

<

∂σ(x)/σ(x)
∂σν /σν

Value Weighted Equilibrium Sharpe Ratio The market value weighted Sharpe ratio can be
written as
SR

vw



θZ (x) α
= E
|x ≥ x
I σ (x)


α
Z (x)
=
E 3
|x ≥ x .
γI
σ (x)



Participation: Intermediate results and proofs We begin by describing results for bounds
on the elasticity of α with respect to changes in total volatility, σν . As we saw in Proposition 3.4
which describes changes in individual Sharpe ratios as total volatility changes, the relative elasticity
∂α/α
of excess returns, ∂σ
, vs. the elasticity of effective volatilities ∂σ(x)/σ(x)
as total volatility changes,
∂σν /σν
ν /σν

 

∂ log α
∂ log σ(x)
∂α/α
∂σ (x) /σ (x)
−
≡
−
∂ log σν
∂ log σν
∂σν /σν
∂σν /σν
plays an important role in our model economy. Both portfolio and participation policies depend on
excess returns relative to effective risk. Sharpe ratios at both the individual and market level measure
the amount of compensation per unit of risk. Thus, how each of these policies and equilibrium
outcomes change as total volatilities change is driven in large part by the relative elasticity of excess
returns vs. the elasticity of effective volatilities. If α is highly elastic with respect to changes in total
volatility, then many agents will choose to participate even when total volatility is high. On the other
hand, if low expertise agents’ effective volatilities are very elastic with respect to total volatility, and
in particular are more elastic than α is, then they will drop out of the complex asset market when
total volatility increases.
Although we cannot solve for α in closed form, we describe bounds on its elasticity with respect
to changes in total volatility. These bounds depend on the shape of the elasticity of effective volatility
with respect to total volatility. Intuitively, cases in which participation increases are cases in which
the difference in the increase in effective volatility for low and high expertise agents is similar. This
is due to the requirement of market clearing. As volatility increases, demand decreases. If all agents’
volatilities increase by a similar amount, then for demand to meet supply α must increase enough to
satisfy even lower expertise agents. On the other hand, if the change in effective volatility is much
smaller for high expertise agents (Case 3 of Proposition 3.4), then it may be that these agents demand
a lot of the risky asset despite the higher volatility. If high expertise agents’ demand is high enough,
the market can clear at a level of α that does not adequately compensate lower expertise agents.
First, we establish intuition by showing that the percentage change in α has to be large enough
to at least satisfy the investors whose risk-return tradeoff deteriorates the least as total volatility
increases.
Lemma A.2 In the equilibrium, we have

σν
where linf
volatility

∂α/α
σν
> linf
,
∂σν /σν
is the lowest elasticity of all participating investors’ effective volatility with respect to total
σν
linf


≡ inf


∂σ (x) /σ (x)
|x ≥ x .
∂σν /σν

56

Proof. Lemma A.2 Proof by contradiction. Suppose σν is increased by 1%, but the equilibrium α
σν
%, that is
is increased by less than linf
∂α/α
σν
≤ linf
∂σν /σν
The condition implies that

∂α/α
∂σν /σν

1. Less participation: because

−

∂σ(x)/σ(x)
∂σν /σν

α2
2σ 2 (x)γ

<0

= fxx and

∀x ≥ x. We have:
∂α/α
∂σν /σν

<

∂σ(x)/σ(x)
∂σν /σν ,

x increases.

2. Less investment in the complex risky asset:
∂ log I (x)
∂σν
∂α/α
∂σ (x) /σ (x)
1 ∂Z (x)
=
−2
+
∂σν
∂σν
Z (x) ∂σν
zmin
∂α/α
∂σ (x) /σ (x)
1
∂β (x)
=
−2
−
∂σν
∂σν
Z (x) (β (x) − 1)2 ∂σν


∂α/α
zmin
∂σ (x) /σ (x)
1
∂α/α ∂σ (x) /σ (x)
=
−2
−
2
(β
(x)
+
γ)
−
∂σν
∂σν
Z (x) (β (x) − 1)2
∂σν
∂σν



1
∂σ (x) /σ (x)
∂σ (x) /σ (x)
zmin 2 (β (x) + γ)
∂α/α
+
−
= −
1+
∂σν
σν
Z (x) (β (x) − 1)2
∂σν /σν
∂σν /σν




∂α/α
1
∂σ (x) /σ (x)
∂σ (x) /σ (x)
1 2 (β (x) + γ)
=
+ 1+
−
−
σν
∂σν /σν
β (x) β (x) − 1
∂σν /σν
∂σν /σν
< 0 , for all x ≥ x,


β(x)
where for ∂β(x)
,
we
use
Equation
(22).
We
also
use
the
fact
that
Z(x)
=
z
min β(x)−1 . The
∂σν
fact that we have β(x) ≥ 1 is shown in the proof to Proposition 2.3.
Define
1 2 (β (x) + γ)
,
β (x) β (x) − 1
which describes the elasticity of the mean wealth at expertise level x with respect to total volatility.
We can rewrite the partial derivative of expert’s investment with respect to total volatility as



∂ log I (x)
1
∂σ (x) /σ (x)
∂α/α
∂σ (x) /σ (x)
=
−
+ [1 + B(x)]
−
(31)
∂σν
σν
∂σν /σν
∂σν /σν
∂σν /σν
Therefore, in the new equilibrium, the total demand for the risky asset is less than the total supply.
Contradiction. It must be that
∂α/α
σν
> linf
.
∂σν /σν
The last term in the partial derivative for expertise level investment, Equation (31), clearly illustrates
the important role of the relative elasticity of excess returns vs. the elasticity of effective volatilities.
It shows why our bound for the elasticity of α is that its change will be larger than the change in the
effective volatility of the agents with the lowest elasticity of effective volatility with respect to total
volatility (displayed by the highest expertise agents).
B(x) =

The following lemma describes more detailed bounds on the percentage change in α for a given
percentage change in total volatility for the case of decreasing elasticities of effective volatility with

57

respect to total volatility (Case 3 of Proposition 3.4). Case 3 of Proposition 3.4 is the only case
which yields a decline in participation as total volatility increases. The condition for decreasing
participation will be closely related related to the bounds in Lemma A.3. In particular, we show
below that participation increases if Condition 1 of Lemma A.3 holds, but decreases if Condition 2
holds. Intuitively, participation will increase if the change in α is large enough to satisfy lower expertise
investors in Case 3, but will decrease otherwise. Lemma A.3 provides bounds on the percentage change
in α for a given percentage change in total volatility for Case 3, depending on the elasticity of the lowest
expertise agent who participates relative to the elasticity of α, and, depending a condition on the ratio
of the partial equilibrium change in demand with respect to total volatility to the partial equilibrium
change in demand with respect to α. Intuitively, if, in partial equilibrium, demand is more sensitive
to changes in effective volatility than to changes in α, then in general equilibrium participation will
decline. We provide a sufficient condition for participation to decline as total volatility increases in
Proposition 3.5 in the main text.
Lemma A.3 In general equilibrium, in Case 3 of Proposition 3.4, in which
that:

∂

∂σ(x)/σ(x)
∂σν /σν

∂x

≤ 0, we have

1.
∂α/α
σν
σν
> lsup
if lsup
<
∂σν /σν

Rx
x

I (x) (2 + B(x)) ∂σ(x)/σ(x)
∂σν /σν dΛ (x)
,
Rx
[I(x)
(1
+
B(x))]
dΛ
(x)
x

and
2.
∂α/α
σν
σν
>
if lsup
< lsup
∂σν /σν

Rx
x

I (x) (2 + B(x)) ∂σ(x)/σ(x)
∂σν /σν dΛ (x)
,
Rx
x [I(x) (1 + B(x))] dΛ (x)

where
B (x) =

2 (β (x) + γ)
.
β (x) β (x) − 1
∂

∂σ(x)/σ(x)

∂σν /σν
< 0.
Proof. Lemma A.3 In Case 3 of Proposition 3.4, we have
∂x
Using Equation (31) for the change in expertise-level investment with total volatility and accounting for the change in participation we then have for aggregate investment it must be that:
Z x
∂I
∂I (x)
∂x
0 =
=
dΛ (x) − I (x) λ (x)
∂σν
∂σν
∂σν
x


Z x
I (x)
∂α/α
∂σ (x) /σ (x)
=
(1 + B(x))
−
dΛ (x)
σν
∂σν /σν
∂σν /σν
x
Z x
I (x) ∂σ (x) /σ (x)
∂x
−
dΛ (x) − I (x) λ (x)
.
(32)
σ
∂σ
/σ
∂σ
ν
ν
ν
ν
x
Rearranging terms, we have an expression for the change in the participation threshold, weighted by
the mass of agents at the threshold, that must be satisfied in order for the risky asset market to clear:


Z x
∂x
1
I (x)
∂σ (x) /σ (x)
∂α/α
λ (x)
=
[1 + B(x)]
−
dΛ (x)
∂σν
I (x) x
σν
∂σν /σν
∂σν /σν
Z x
1
I (x) ∂σ (x) /σ (x)
−
dΛ (x) .
I (x) x σν
∂σν /σν

58

Collecting terms with the elasticities with respect to α and effective volatility σ(x), we can write this
as:


Z x
1
∂α/α
∂x
I (x)
=
[1 + B(x)]
dΛ (x)
λ (x)
∂σν
I (x) x σν
∂σν /σν
Z x
1
∂σ (x) /σ (x)
I (x)
−
[2 + B(x)]
dΛ (x) .
(33)
I (x) x σν
∂σν /σν
Therefore, from Equation (33) we have:
∂x
> 0⇔
∂σν
σν
lsup

∂σ (x) /σ (x)
=
∂σν /σν

x=x

>

∂α/α
>
∂σν /σν

Rx
x

I (x) (2 + B(x)) ∂σ(x)/σ(x)
∂σν /σν dΛ (x)
.
Rx
[I(x)
(1
+
B(x))]
dΛ
(x)
x

(34)

∂α/α
σν when particiThe first inequality comes from the participation condition. We know that ∂σ
< lsup
ν /σν
pation decreases and x increases. The second inequality is from solving Equation (33) for the elasticity
of α with respect to total volatility in the case that the left hand side of that equation is less than
zero. Using similar arguments, we also have:
∂x
< 0⇔
∂σν
Rx
∂σ(x)/σ(x)
∂σ (x) /σ (x)
∂α/α
x I (x) (2 + B(x)) ∂σν /σν dΛ (x)
σν
<
<
.
(35)
lsup =
Rx
∂σν /σν
∂σν /σν
x=x
[I(x) (1 + B(x))] dΛ (x)
x

To gain intuition for the conditions in Equations (34) and (35), note that the right hand side is the ratio
of the partial equilibrium change in demand with respect to total volatility (holding α and x constant),
and the partial equilibrium change in demand with respect to α. Consider first the numerator of this
ratio. The numerator shows that when σν increases, investors allocate a lower fraction of wealth to
the risky asset. We have that θ = γσ2α(x) . Thus, if all elasticities of effective volatility with respect
to total volatility were one, then if σν increased by 1%, investors would allocate 2% less to the risky
asset. This leads to the 2 in the numerator. The second term, involving β(x) arises because when σν
increases, β(x) increases, so there is lower total wealth in partial equilibrium. The term
1 2 (β (x) + γ)
B(x) =
β (x) β (x) − 1
gives the elasticity of the mean wealth at expertise level x with respect to total volatility. The
denominator similarly shows how changes in α affects aggregate demand in partial equilibrium, holding
x and effective volatilities constant. If α increases by 1%, portfolio allocations to the risky asset increase
by 1%, and we have the 1 term. Then, we again see the effect of the change in α on mean wealth
levels. Now, consider why this ratio matters for the elasticity of α. In Equation (34), participation
declines because the effect of the change in aggregate demand from increasing effective volatilities is
greater than the effect on demand from increasing α. The reverse is true in Equation (35).
We can bound the elasticity of α with respect to total volatility more tightly in Case 3 as follows:
Lemma A.4 When

∂

∂σ(x)/σ(x)
∂σν /σν

∂x

≤ 0, in the equilibrium, we have,

59

1.
∂α/α
σν
σν
> lsup
if lsup
<
∂σν /σν



1
1+
1 + B(x)



σv
.
linf

and
2.
∂α/α
σν
σν
< lsup
if lsup
>
∂σν /σν


1+

1
1 + B(x)






∂σ (x) /σ (x)
E
|x ≥ x ,
∂σν /σν

where
B(x) =

1 2 (β (x) + γ)
.
β (x) β (x) − 1

We show that the percentage change in α for a given percentage change in total volatility will be
greater than the highest elasticity of effective volatility with respect to total volatility (displayed by
the participating investor with the lowest expertise) if that highest elasticity is less than a constant
times the lowest elasticity, displayed by agents with the highest level of expertise. In other words,
if the highest elasticity, displayed by the marginal investor, is close enough to the elasticity of the
highest expertise agents, it must be that the change in α is enough to compensate that investor. If
not, the change in α will not be great enough to satisfy market clearing.
We also show the converse: The percentage change in α for a given percentage change in total
volatility will be less than the highest elasticity of effective volatility with respect to total volatility
(displayed by the participating investor with the lowest expertise) if that highest elasticity is greater
than a constant near one times the average elasticity over participating investors. In other words, if
the marginal investor is different enough from the average, the market can clear despite the fact that
their individual Sharpe ratio declines, since the other investors face smaller declines, or increasing
individual Sharpe ratios.
Note that the constant will be near one if β is close to one, which it will be as it is the tail
parameter from a Pareto distribution. As β(x) − 1 goes to zero, the denominator of the constant,
B(x), goes to infinity, so that the entire constant becomes (1+0). Note also that we derive a sufficient
condition which is based on the wealth distribution of the highest expertise agents, as using the entire
distribution, a mixture of Pareto distributions, is more complicated but would yield similar intuition.
Proof. Lemma A.4 We first derive a lower bound on the ratio of the partial equilibrium change in
demand with respect to total volatility (holding α and x constant), and the partial equilibrium change
σν in the first statement
in demand with respect to α. This lower bound is the condition bounding lsup
of Lemma A.4.
Rx
Rx
∂σ(x)/σ(x)
x I(x) (2 + B(x)) ∂σν /σν dΛ (x)
x I(x) (2 + B(x)) dΛ (x) σv
≥ Rx
linf
Rx
[I(x)
(1
+
B(x))]
dΛ
(x)
[I(x)
(1
+
B(x))]
dΛ
(x)
x
x
Rx
!
x I(x)dΛ (x)
σv
=
1+ Rx
linf
x [I(x) (1 + B(x))] dΛ (x)
Rx
!
x I(x)dΛ (x)
σv
linf
≥
1+
Rx
(1 + B(x)) x I(x)dΛ (x)


1
=
1+
lσv .
1 + B (x) inf

60

σv
is the lowest elasticity, and it replaces the weighted average
The first inequality follows because linf
elasticity. The next equality groups terms, and the following inequality follows because B(x) is replaced
by B(x̄) and we have that β is decreasing in x. The last equality again groups terms. So, if


1
σν
lσv ,
lsup < 1 +
1 + B(x) inf
we have
Rx
∂σ(x)/σ(x)


1
x I (x) (2 + B(x)) ∂σν /σν dΛ (x)
σv
σν
lsup < 1 +
l ≤
,
Rx
B (x) inf
x [I (x) (1 + B(x))] dΛ (x)

and this ratio was the bound on the elasticity of α from Lemma A.3. Thus, we have established our
tighter bound on the elasticity of α in the first case of Lemma A.4 since we have from Condition 1 in
Lemma A.3,
∂σ (x) /σ (x)
∂α/α
σν
lsup
=
.
<
∂σν /σν
∂σν /σν
x=x
Now, we bound the ratio of the partial equilibrium change in demand with respect to total volatility
(holding α and x constant), and the partial equilibrium change in demand with respect to α from
σν in the second statement of Lemma A.4.
above. This upper bound is the condition bounding lsup
Consider:
Z x
∂σ (x) /σ (x)
I (x) (2 + B(x))
dΛ (x)
∂σν /σν
x
R x ∂σ(x)/σ(x)
Z x
x
∂σν /σν dΛ (x)
≤
I (x) (2 + B(x)) dΛ (x)
1 − Λ (x)
x


Z x
∂σ (x) /σ (x)
=
I (x) (2 + B(x)) dΛ (x) E
|x ≥ x .
∂σν /σν
x
Rx
The first inequality follows because the integral x I(x) (2 + B(x)) ∂σ(x)/σ(x)
∂σν /σν dΛ (x) puts more weight
on the average elasticity of wealth times investment relative to total volatility when

∂σ(x)/σ(x)
∂σν /σν

is small

and less weight when ∂σ(x)/σ(x)
is large, whereas the term after the inequality sign uses an equal
∂σν /σν
weighted average of all effective volatilities. The last equality groups terms. We have now bounded
above the numerator in the ratio of the partial equilibrium change in demand with respect to total
volatility (holding α and x constant), and the partial equilibrium change in demand with respect to
α. If we divide through by the partial equilibrium change in demand with respect to α, we have, using

61

similar logic as before:
Rx

I (x) (2 + B(x)) ∂σ(x)/σ(x)
∂σν /σν dΛ (x)
Rx
x [I (x) (1 + B(x))] dΛ (x)
Rx


∂σ (x) /σ (x)
x I (x) (2 + B(x)) dΛ (x)
E
|x ≥ x
Rx
∂σν /σν
x [I (x) (1 + B(x))] dΛ (x)
Rx
! 

∂σ (x) /σ (x)
x I (x) dΛ (x)
1+ Rx
E
|x ≥ x
∂σν /σν
x [I (x) (1 + B(x))] dΛ (x)
Rx
! 

∂σ (x) /σ (x)
x I (x) dΛ (x)
1+
E
|x ≥ x
Rx
∂σν /σν
(1 + B (x)) x I (x) dΛ (x)


 
1
∂σ (x) /σ (x)
1+
E
|x ≥ x .
1 + B (x)
∂σν /σν
x

≤

=

≤
=
So, if

σν
lsup


> 1+

1
1 + B (x)




∂σ (x) /σ (x)
E
|x ≥ x ,
∂σν /σν


we have
σν
>
lsup



1
1+
1 + B (x)



 R x I (x) (2 + B(x)) ∂σ(x)/σ(x) dΛ (x)
∂σ (x) /σ (x)
x
∂σν /σν
E
|x ≥ x ≥
.
Rx
∂σν /σν
x [I (x) (1 + B(x))] dΛ (x)


Then, from Condition 2 in Lemma A.3 we can get
∂σ (x) /σ (x)
σν
=
lsup
∂σν /σν

x=x

>

∂α/α
.
∂σν /σν

We now show conditions under which participation increases, i.e. under which the cutoff level
of expertise for participation x declines, as total volatility increases. In particular, we show that
participation increases with total volatility in Cases 1 and 2 of Proposition 3.4, but only under a tight
restriction in Case 3. In Case 3, participation only increases if the elasticity of the effective volatility
of the lowest expertise investor is not too different from that of the average participating investor.
In other words, participation increases if there is very little difference across expertise levels in the
effect of changes in total volatility on effective volatility, so that elasticities are nearly constant, as in
Case 1, in which participation always increases as total volatility increases. Notice that the condition
restricting the differences in elasticities across investors is the same as Condition 1 in Lemma A.4,
which bounds the change in α from below. Thus, participation will increase only if the change in α is
large enough, which will be the case if all participating investors face similar changes to their effective
volatility as total volatility changes. We discuss the more empirically relevant case for Case 3 of
Proposition 3.4, in which participation declines as total volatility and asset complexity increase, in the
text. Recall that the condition for declining participation requires that elasticities vary enough across
high expertise and low expertise agents, so that market clearing does not require the participation of
lower expertise agents.
Proposition A.1 Define the entry cutoff x,
x=σ

−1



α
√
2γfxx

62


,

where σ −1 (·) is the inverse function of σ (x) . We have that participation increases with total volatility,
∂x
<0
∂σν
if the following conditions hold
1.
2.

∂

∂σ(x)/σ(x)
∂σν /σν

∂x
∂

∂σ(x)/σ(x)
∂σν /σν

∂x

≥ 0, (Proposition 3.4 Cases 1 and 2) or

σν < 1 +
< 0, (Proposition 3.4 Case 3) and lsup

1
1+B(x)



σν
.
linf

Proposition A.1 shows that participation increases in Cases 1 and 2 as total volatility increases. The
reason is that demand for the complex asset by incumbent experts declines, and new wealth must be
brought into the market to clear the fixed supply. However, in Case 3, a tight restriction is required for
participation to increase. The restriction is that there is a very small difference between the highest and
lowest elasticities. The restriction is tight since β is the tail parameter of a pareto distribution, so that
β ≈ 1 ∀x. Then, given the definition of B(x), this implies that B(x̄) → ∞. Intuitively, if the increase
in total volatility adversely impacts low expertise agents much more than high expertise agents, then
high expertise agents can clear the market without the demand from low expertise investors with
substantially deteriorated individual Sharpe ratios.
Proof. Proposition A.1 First,
2

∂ log σ2α(x)
∂x
< 0 iff
∂σν
∂ log σν

x=x

> 0.

We have
2

∂ log σ2α(x)
∂ log σν


x=x

=2

∂α/α
∂σ (x) /σ (x)
−
∂σν /σν
∂σν /σν


x=x

.

Therefore
2

∂ log σ2α(x)
∂ log σν
If

If

∂

∂

x=x

> 0 iff

∂α/α
∂σ (x) /σ (x)
>
∂σν /σν
∂σν /σν

x=x

.

∂σ(x)/σ(x)
∂σν /σν

∂x

∂σ(x)/σ(x)
∂σν /σν

∂x

≥ 0, from Proposition A.2 we have
∂σ (x) /σ (x)
∂α/α
σν
.
> linf
=
∂σν /σν
∂σν /σν
x=x


σν
1
σν < 1 +
< 0 and lsup
1+B(x) linf , from Lemma A.3, we know
∂α/α
∂σ (x) /σ (x)
σν
> lsup
=
∂σν /σν
∂σν /σν

x=x

.

Participation: Participation declining with total volatility. Proof. Proposition 3.5
First,
2

∂ log σ2α(x)
∂x
> 0 iff
∂σν
∂ log σν

63

x=x

< 0.

We have
2

∂ log σ2α(x)
∂ log σν


x=x

=2

∂σ (x) /σ (x)
∂α/α
−
∂σν /σν
∂σν /σν


x=x

.

Therefore
2

∂ log σ2α(x)

If

∂

∂σ(x)/σ(x)
∂σν /σν

∂x

∂α/α
∂σ (x) /σ (x)
σν
< lsup
=
.
∂ log σν x=x
∂σν /σν
∂σν /σν
x=x
 h

i
∂σ(x)/σ(x)
1
σν > 1 +
|x
≥
x
E
< 0 and lsup
, from Lemma A.3, we know
1+B(x)
∂σν /σν
< 0 iff

∂σ (x) /σ (x)
∂α/α
σν
< lsup
=
∂σν /σν
∂σν /σν

x=x

.

We note that the conditions in Proposition A.1 and Proposition 3.5 are sufficient, but not necessary.
As discussed in the main text, we use the tail parameters for the highest and lowest expertise levels
since the entire wealth distribution is a mixture of Pareto distributions (a complicated object). We
also note that the conditions for increasing vs. decreasing participation in Case 3 are not overlapping,
because



 

1
1
∂σ (x) /σ (x)
σν
1+
l ≤ 1+
E
|x ≥ x .
1 + B (x) inf
1 + B (x)
∂σν /σν

Market Equilibrium Equally Weighted Sharpe Ratio The following Proposition describes
sufficient conditions for the equally weighted market Sharpe ratio to be increasing with total risk in
general equilibrium in all three cases of Proposition 3.4. It thus extends the results in Proposition 3.6 in
the main text, which covers Case 3. Equation (36) provides an equivalent statement for Condition 2 in
Proposition 3.6, non-representativeness of marginal participants. This equivalent condition substitutes
out all equilibrium objects which are used in the main text to give intuition.
Proposition A.2 The equally weighted market Sharpe ratio is increasing with total risk in general
equilibrium, i.e.,
∂SRew
> 0,
∂σν
if:
1.

∂

∂σ(x)/σ(x)
∂σν /σν

∂x

≤ 0, (Cases 1 and 3 of Proposition 3.4) and
difference btw marginal vol and avg

z
∂x
∂σν

λ (x)
1 − Λ (x)
| {z }

1 −

}|

{
1

E

h

σ(x)
σ(x) |x

≥x

fraction of threshold experts

i >

1 ∂σ(x)
−
σ (x) ∂x
|
{z

x=x

}

sensitivity of threshold vol w.r.t. expertise

or

64

∂x
∂σν

(36)

2.

∂

∂σ(x)/σ(x)
∂σν /σν

∂x

> 0, (Case 2 of Proposition 3.4) and
difference btw marginal vol and avg

z

∂x
∂σν

λ (x)
1 − Λ (x)
| {z }

1 −

}|

{
1

E

h

σ(x)
σ(x) |x

≥x

fraction of threshold experts

i  >>

1 ∂σ(x)
−
σ (x) ∂x
|
{z

x=x

∂x
∂σν

(37)

}

sensitivity of threshold vol w.r.t. expertise

We first provide intuition for the equivalent statement for Condition 2 in Proposition 3.6, nonrepresentativeness of marginal participants given in Equation (36). We then show this equivalence
formally in Lemma A.5. Finally, we provide the proof for Proposition A.2.
To gain intuition for the equivalent statement for Condition 2 in Proposition 3.6, non-representativeness
of marginal participants given in Equation (36), consider the case in which expertise and complexity
are complementary, Case 3 of Proposition 3.4. Assume that Condition 2 of Proposition 3.5 is also
∂x
satisfied so that ∂σ
> 0 and we can cancel out this term from both sides of Equation (36). The
ν
right hand side of Equation (36) describes how much the effective volatility of the marginal agent
changes with expertise. This term will always be negative before applying the negative sign in the
equation; effective volatilities decline with expertise. Thus, the condition in Equation (36) states that
if the effective volatility of the marginal agent changes substantially as x changes, then the right hand
side will be larger, and it is positive. To intuitively see why the right hand side of Equation (36) is
equivalent to that of Equation (27) in Condition 2 in Proposition 3.6, consider that we know from
the participation condition in Equation (18) that the Sharpe ratio of the marginal agent is always
equal to the same constant, determined by parameters. When the curvature of effective volatility is
higher, effective volatility declines more moving from the initial participation margin x to the new
one as total volatility increases. Then, to keep the Sharpe ratio constant at the new participation
margin as participation declines, the increase in α is smaller than it would be if effective volatility
declined less as the marginal participant changed. Thus, the decline in the Sharpe ratio of the initial
marginal participant as total volatility increases is larger for economies in which effective volatility
displays more curvature, and we have the equivalence of the right hand sides of Equations (36) and
(27). To complete the intuition for the condition in Equation (36), consider the left hand side of the
equation. The term involving the conditional pdf of expertise gives the fraction of experts which reside
at the threshold for entry. The magnitude of the next term on the left hand side is determined by
the difference between marginal agents’ effective volatilities, and the average effective volatility, and
it is also always positive. This term is close to its maximum value of one when the second term in the
parentheses is near zero, which occurs when the marginal agent’s effective volatility is very different
from the average. This condition states that, for the SRew to increase, if the effective volatility of
the marginal agent increases substantially, then, either there must be few agents at the participation
threshold, or the average Sharpe ratio of participants must be different enough from the Sharpe ratio
of the marginal participant. The key to Condition 2 is this middle term. This term, measuring the
representativeness of marginal participants’ effective volatilities, ensures that the impact of the declining Sharpe ratio of low expertise marginal participants as total volatility increases does not determine,
and is not representative of, the overall market Sharpe ratio.
Lemma A.5 shows formally that Equation (36) and Condition 2 of Proposition 3.6 are equivalent.

Lemma A.5 The sufficient condition for the equally weighted market equilibrium Sharpe ratio to
increase with total volatility in Proposition A.2, namely Equation (36), is equivalent to Condition 2

65

in Proposition 3.6. That is,

⇔





∂x λ (x)
∂x
1
1 ∂σ(x)
i >−
1− h
σ(x)
∂σν 1 − Λ (x) 
σ (x) ∂x x=x ∂σν
E σ(x) |x ≥ x 


∂ [1 − Λ (x)] / [1 − Λ (x)]
∂SR (x) /SR(x)
SR (x)
−
>−
1−
ew
∂ log σν
SR
∂σν /σν

x=x

.

Proof. Lemma A.5 We can rearrange some terms in Equation (36) using the following equations:
λ (x)
∂x
∂ [1 − Λ (x)] / [1 − Λ (x)]
= −
,
∂σν /σν
1 − Λ (x) ∂σν /σν
h
i
α


E
|x
≥
x
σ(x)
σ (x)
SRew
E
|x ≥ x =
=
.
α
σ (x)
SR (x)
σ(x)
Further, using this condition,
the change in α as follows:

α2
σ 2 (x)

= 2γfxx , we can get another equation relating the change in x to

F (σν , x) = 2 log α − 2 log σ (x) − log (2γfxx ) = 0.
Using the implicit function theorem, we obtain another expression for the change in the participation
threshold as total volatility changes:
∂x
∂F (σν , x (σν )) /∂σν
1
=−
=
∂σν
∂F (σν , x) /∂x
σν
From Equation (38), we have that
∂SR (x) /SR(x)
∂σν /σν

x=x

=
=

∂α/α
∂σν /σν

−

∂σ(x)/σ(x)
∂σν /σν
x=x

1 ∂σ(x)
σ(x) ∂x x=x

,

(38)

∂σ (x) /σ(x)
∂α/α
−
∂σν /σν
∂σν /σν
x=x
∂x
1 ∂σ(x)
.
∂σν /σν σ (x) ∂x x=x

Thus,

⇔





∂x λ (x)
1 ∂σ(x)
1
i >−
1− h

∂σν 1 − Λ (x) 
σ (x) ∂x
E σ(x)
σ(x) |x ≥ x


SR (x)
∂ [1 − Λ (x)] / [1 − Λ (x)]
−
1−
∂σν /σν
SRew
{z
}
|
{z
}
|
elasticity of participation

∂x
x=x ∂σν

difference between marginal agent and average

∂SR (x) /SR(x)
>−
∂σν /σν
|
{z

x=x

.

}

elasticity of marginal SR

Proof. Propositions 3.6 and A.2
For convenience, we consider the partial derivative of the positive transformation log SRew , namely,
the log of the integral over all participants’ Sharpe ratios divided by the measure of participants:
Rx α
x σ(x) dΛ (x)
log SRew = log
1 − Λ (x)
Z x
α
= log
dΛ (x) − log [1 − Λ (x)]
σ
(x)
x
As σν changes, the equilibrium equally weighted market-level Sharpe ratio will change from several
effects. First, each individual effective volatility will increase, according to the elasticity of effective

66

volatility with respect to total volatility at each expertise level. To clear the market, the equilibrium
α will increase. Finally, participation will change. Taking these effects together, the change in the
equally weighted market-level Sharpe ratio will be the change in the individual Sharpe ratios of each
expertise level of investors, weighted by their mass in the distribution of expertise, plus the effect on
participation. By direct calculation, we have:
∂ log SRew
∂σν


R
x 1
∂σ(x)/σ(x)
∂α/α
∂x
α
α
−
dΛ (x) − σ(x)
λ (x) ∂σ
σν x σ(x) ∂σν /σν
∂σν /σν
∂x
1
ν
=
,
+
λ (x)
Rx α
1 − Λ (x)
∂σν
dΛ (x)
x σ(x)

where the first term gives the weighted average change in individual Sharpe ratios, and the second
term gives the effect on participation. Note the appearance of the expertise-specific differences in
the elasticity of alpha and effective volatility with respect to total volatility. Individual Sharpe ratios
increase for individuals for which this difference in elasticities is positive. The larger these differences
∂x
are on average, then, the more likely it is that the market Sharpe ratio will increase. The sign of ∂σ
ν
depends on which case of Proposition 3.4 applies. Collecting terms, and cancelling α in the numerator
and denominator of the first term, we have:
∂ log SRew
∂σν



R x 1  ∂α/α
∂σ(x)/σ(x)
1

−
dΛ (x)
∂σν /σν
1 x σ(x) ∂σν /σν
∂x 
1
σ(x)
=
+
λ
(x)
−
. (39)
Rx 1
Rx 1
σν
∂σν  1 − Λ (x)
dΛ (x)
dΛ (x) 
x σ(x)

x σ(x)

Equation (39) contains two changes in equilibrium outcomes, α and x. The other variables depend only
on parameters, or distribution or functional form assumptions. The market clearing condition can be
used to eliminate one of the equilibrium outcomes. In particular, we know that aggregate investment
must be unchanged and equated to the aggregate supply of the risky asset. Using Equation (31)
for the change in expertise-level investment with total volatility and accounting for the change in
participation we then have for aggregate investment it must be that:
Z x
∂I
∂I (x)
∂x
0 =
=
dΛ (x) − I (x) λ (x)
∂σν
∂σν
∂σν
x


Z x
I (x)
∂α/α
∂σ (x) /σ (x)
(1 + B(x))
−
=
dΛ (x)
σν
∂σν /σν
∂σν /σν
x
Z x
I (x) ∂σ (x) /σ (x)
∂x
−
dΛ (x) − I (x) λ (x)
.
(40)
σ
∂σ
/σ
∂σ
ν
ν
ν
ν
x
Rearranging terms, we have an expression for the change in the participation threshold, weighted by
the mass of agents at the threshold, that must be satisfied in order for the risky asset market to clear:


Z x
∂x
1
I (x)
∂α/α
∂σ (x) /σ (x)
λ (x)
=
(1 + B(x))
−
dΛ (x)
∂σν
I (x) x
σν
∂σν /σν
∂σν /σν
Z x
1
I (x) ∂σ (x) /σ (x)
dΛ (x) .
(41)
−
I (x) x σν
∂σν /σν
Collecting terms with the elasticities with respect to α and effective volatility σ(x), we can write this

67

as:
λ (x)
=

1
I (x)

∂x
∂σν
Z x
x

(42)
∂α/α
1
I (x)
(1 + B(x))
dΛ (x) −
σν
∂σν /σν
I (x)

Z
x

x

∂σ (x) /σ (x)
I (x)
(2 + B(x))
dΛ (x)
σν
∂σν /σν

Equation (42) essentially states that the change in demand for the complex asset from the change in
participation must be met by an offsetting change in demand by the remainder of participants in the
complex risky asset market. There are two parts to the change in demand of participants above the
threshold. First, there is an increase in demand of 1% for every 1% increase in α, multiplied by the
elasticity of wealth with respect to changes in volatility. Second, there is a decrease in demand of 2%
for every 1% increase in effective volatility, again weighted by the elasticity of wealth with respect to
ew
∂x
changes in volatility. Grouping terms, and then plugging this expression for λ (x) ∂σ
into ∂ log∂σSR
,
ν
ν
we obtain
∂ log SRew
∂σν



R x 1  ∂α/α
∂σ(x)/σ(x)
1


−
dΛ
(x)
∂σν /σν
1 x σ(x) ∂σν /σν
1
∂x
σ(x)
=
+ λ (x)
− Rx 1
Rx 1

σν
∂σν  1 − Λ (x)
x σ(x) dΛ (x)
x σ(x) dΛ (x)




R x 1 ∂σ(x)/σ(x)
1


dΛ
(x)
∂x
1  ∂α/α
1
x σ(x) ∂σν /σν
σ(x)

=
−
+
λ
(x)
−
Rx 1
Rx 1

σν ∂σν /σν
∂σν  1 − Λ (x)
x σ(x) dΛ (x)
x σ(x) dΛ (x)




Z x
1



1
∂α/α  1
1
σ(x)
=
+
− Rx 1
I (x) (1 + B(x)) dΛ (x)
 σν I (x) x

∂σν /σν  σν  1 − Λ (x)
x σ(x) dΛ (x)


Z x
1


∂σ (x) /σ (x)
1
1
σ(x)
− Rx 1
I (x) (2 + B(x))
dΛ (x)
−
 σν I (x) x
 1 − Λ (x)
∂σν /σν
x σ(x) dΛ (x)
R x 1 ∂σ(x)/σ(x)
1 x σ(x) ∂σν /σν dΛ (x)
−
.
Rx 1
σν
dΛ (x)
x σ(x)

Therefore,

∂ log SRew
∂σν

> 0 if and only if

∂α/α
∂σν /σν


1
1−Λ(x)

>

−

1
σ(x)
Rx 1
x σ(x) dΛ(x)

We divide through by



1
1−Λ(x)

1
1−Λ(x)

−



−

1
I(x)

Rx

Rx

Rx

1

∂σ(x)/σ(x)

dΛ(x)

∂σ /σ
Rx 1 ν ν
+ x σ(x)
x I (x) (2 + B(x))
x σ(x) dΛ(x)

1
Rx
σ(x)
1
1
I(x) x [I (x) (1 + B(x))] dΛ (x) + 1

.

x σ(x) dΛ(x)

1
σ(x)
1
x σ(x) dΛ(x)

Rx

∂σ(x)/σ(x)
∂σν /σν dΛ (x)

and rearrange to get an expression that will allow us to

68

more easily bound the elasticity of α. We then have
∂α/α
∂σν /σν
Rx
∂σ(x)/σ(x)
x I (x) (2 + B(x)) ∂σν /σν dΛ (x) +
>

Rx
x

∂ log SRew
∂σν

> 0 if and only if

1 ∂σ(x)/σ(x)
x σ(x) ∂σν /σν dΛ(x)
Rx 1
x σ(x) dΛ(x)

Rx

1
(

1
σ(x)
1
−Rx 1
1−Λ(x)
x σ(x) dΛ(x)

)
1
I(x)

.

1

[I (x) (1 + B(x))] dΛ (x) +

(

1
σ(x)
1
−Rx 1
1−Λ(x)
x σ(x) dΛ(x)

(43)

)
1
I(x)

Now, in order to derive an exact expression for α as a function of parameters, consider again the
∂x
term ∂σ
. The participation condition in Equation (18) can be used to show that the individual
ν
Sharpe ratio of the marginal agent is a constant function of the coefficient of relative risk aversion and
2
the participation maintenance cost. Then, using this condition, σ2α(x) = 2γfxx , we can get another
equation relating the change in x to the change in α as follows:
F (σν , x) = 2 log α − 2 log σ (x) − log (2γfxx ) = 0.
Using the implicit function theorem, we obtain another expression for the change in the participation
threshold as total volatility changes:
1
∂x
∂F (σν , x (σν )) /∂σν
=
=−
∂σν
∂F (σν , x) /∂x
σν

∂α/α
∂σν /σν

−

∂σ(x)/σ(x)
∂σν /σν
x=x

1 ∂σ(x)
σ(x) ∂x x=x

,

(44)

where we see the difference in the elasticity of alpha and effective volatility with respect to total
volatility for the marginal agent in the numerator. Since effective volatility is decreasing in expertise,
the effective volatility for the marginal agent decreases as x increases, and the denominator is negative.
Thus, participation declines and x increases in total volatility the smaller the elasticity of α is relative
to the elasticity of the effective volatility of the marginal agent. Then, from Equations (42) and (44),
we have another expression for the elasticity of α with respect to changes in total volatility:
Rx
I(x)λ(x) ∂σ(x)/σ(x)
∂σ(x)/σ(x)
x I (x) (2 + B(x)) ∂σν /σν dΛ (x) − 1 ∂σ(x) ∂σν /σν
x=x
∂α/α
σ(x) ∂x
.
(45)
=
R
x
I(x)λ(x)
∂σν /σν
x I (x) (1 + B(x)) dΛ (x) − 1 ∂σ(x)
σ(x)

x=x

∂x

Now, from Equation (43) we have a lower bound on what the elasticity of α must be in order for
ew
∂ log SRew
> 0. From Equation (45) we have an expression for α. Thus, we have that ∂ log∂σSR
> 0 if
∂σν
ν
and only if:
Rx
∂σ(x)/σ(x)
I(x)λ(x) ∂σ(x)/σ(x)
x I (x) (2 + B(x)) ∂σν /σν dΛ (x) − 1 ∂σ(x) ∂σν /σν
σ(x)

Rx
x

Rx
x

>

I (x) (1 + B(x)) dΛ (x) −

I (x) (2 + B(x)) ∂σ(x)/σ(x)
∂σν /σν dΛ (x) +
Rx
x

x=x

∂x

I(x)λ(x)
1 ∂σ(x)
σ(x) ∂x

x=x

1 ∂σ(x)/σ(x)
x σ(x) ∂σν /σν dΛ(x)
Rx 1
x σ(x) dΛ(x)

Rx

I (x) (1 + B(x)) dΛ (x) +

1
(

1
σ(x)
1
−Rx 1
1−Λ(x)
x σ(x) dΛ(x)

1
(

1
σ(x)
1
−Rx 1
1−Λ(x)
x σ(x) dΛ(x)

)
1
I(x)

.

(46)

)
1
I(x)

To continue the proof, we define a simplified notation for this condition, namely we write that

69

∂ log SRew
∂σν

> 0 if and only if:
a+c
a+e
>
,
b+d
b+f

(47)

where we define:
x

Z

I (x) (2 + B(x))

a =
x

∂σ (x) /σ (x)
dΛ (x) ,
∂σν /σν

x

Z

I (x) (1 + B(x)) dΛ (x) ,

b =
x

c = −

I (x) λ (x) ∂σ (x) /σ (x)
1 ∂σ(x)
∂σν /σν
σ(x)

d = −

e =

f

=

∂x

I (x) λ (x)

x=x

,

1 ∂σ(x) x=x
σ(x) ∂x
R x 1 ∂σ(x)/σ(x)
x σ(x) ∂σν /σν dΛ (x)

Rx 1
x σ(x) dΛ (x)

1
1
1−Λ(x)

1


1
1−Λ(x)

−

,

1
σ(x)
1
x σ(x) dΛ(x)



Rx

−

1
σ(x)
Rx 1
x σ(x) dΛ(x)



,
1
I(x)

.
1
I(x)

Comparing the right and left hand sides of the condition under which the equally weighted market
Sharpe ratio is increasing,
a+c
a+e
>
,
b+d
b+f
note that the difference is that the left side essentially includes dc , while the right hand side includes
a
a
e
f . Both sides include b . Recall from the proof of Lemma A.3, and Equations (34) and (35), that b is
the ratio of the partial equilibrium change in demand with respect to total volatility (holding α and x
constant), and the partial equilibrium change in demand with respect to α. To gain further intuition
for our condition, we can use the expressions for dc and fe , and simplify to show that:
R x 1 ∂σ(x)/σ(x)
∂σ (x) /σ (x)
e
c
x σ(x) ∂σν /σν dΛ (x)
=
and =
.
Rx 1
d
∂σν /σν
f
x=x
dΛ (x)
x σ(x)

Thus, in loose terms what is needed for the equally weighted market Sharpe ratio to increase is that
the elasticity of the marginal agent is sufficiently larger than the weighted average over all elasticities,
where the weights are increasing in expertise. This condition essentially ensures that α increases by
enough to outweigh the increase in effective volatilities of agents with lower expertise levels who still
choose to participate. We begin by describing sufficient conditions for
a+e
a+c
>
,
b+d
b+f
in the three cases of Proposition 3.4, and depending on whether participation is increasing or decreasing
in total volatility. Then, using these results, we derive a sufficient condition covering all cases.

Case 1 of Proposition 3.4, and Case 3 of Proposition 3.4 with Increasing Participation: First, we have
e
c
a
≤ < .
f
d
b

70

To see this, note that in Case 1 of Proposition 3.4, elasticities are constant in x and so fe = dc . The last
inequality follows from the fact that when participation is increasing, Equation (35) from the proof of
Lemma A.3 shows that ab is larger than the elasticity of the marginal agent, and hence larger than the
elasticity of all agents. In Case 3, we have declining elasticities, generating the first inequality. The
last inequality again follows from Equation (35), which holds when participation increases.
a+e
We can show that a+c
b+d > b+f if
d < f.
This is true because
a+c
b+d

a+e
⇔ (a + c) (b + f ) > (a + e) (b + d)
b+f
⇐ af + cb > ad + be
>

⇔ a (f − d) > b (e − c)
a
e−c
⇐ f > d and >
.
b
f −d
We relate the condition that d < f to underlying parameters and collect the results for all Cases of
Proposition 3.4 at the end of the proof.

Case 2 of Proposition 3.4: First, we prove that
a
=
b

Rx
x

I(x) (2 + B(x)) ∂σ(x)/σ(x)
∂σν /σν dΛ (x)
>
Rx
x [I(x) (1 + B(x))] dΛ (x)

Rx

1 ∂σ(x)/σ(x)
x σ(x) ∂σν /σν dΛ (x)
Rx 1
x σ(x) dΛ (x)

=

e
.
f

To show this, consider the function:
Rx
x

H (K (x)) =
Z
=

x

K (x) ∂σ(x)/σ(x)
∂σν /σν dΛ (x)
Rx
x K (x) dΛ (x)

x

K (x) dΛ (x) ∂σ (x) /σ (x)
dx.
Rx
∂σν /σν
K
(x)
dΛ
(x)
x

This function, H (K (x)), represents a “weighted” average of elasticities, with weights given by K (x).
Suppose we have
K1 (x) = K2 (x) K3 (x) ,
∂

∂σ(x)/σ(x)

ν /σν
where we assume that K3 is monotonically increasing in x. Because we have that ∂σ∂x
≥ 0, and
K3 is monotonically increasing in x, we have that the weights K1 (x) underweight lower elasticities
and overweight higher elasticities relative to the weights K2 (x). Therefore,

H (K1 (x)) ≥ H (K2 (x)) .
Note that we can write:
K2 (x)

z }| {
1
I(x) (1 + B(x)) =
[I (x) σ (x) (1 + B(x))],
{z
} σ (x) |
{z
}
|
K1 (x)

K3 (x)

and further we have that:
I (x) σ (x) (1 + B(x)) =

α
Z (x) (1 + B(x)) ,
γσ (x)

71

Rx
x

which is monotonically increasing, as assumed for K3 (x). Thus, we have:
Rx
R x 1 ∂σ(x)/σ(x)
∂σ(x)/σ(x)
I (x) (2 + B(x)) ∂σ(x)/σ(x)
x I (x) (1 + B(x)) ∂σν /σν dΛ (x)
x σ(x) ∂σν /σν dΛ (x)
∂σν /σν dΛ (x)
>
>
,
Rx
Rx
Rx 1
x [I (x) (1 + B(x))] dΛ (x)
x [I (x) (1 + B(x))] dΛ (x)
x σ(x) dΛ (x)

(48)

where the first inequality is because we replace a one with a two in the numerator, and the second
inequality is because we showed that H (K1 ) > H (K2 ).
So, we have dc < fe < ab . The first inequality follows from the fact that in Case 2 of Proposition
3.4, because elasticities increase with expertise, the lowest expertise agent has the smallest elasticity
σν
. The second inequality follows
of effective volatility with respect to total volatility. Thus, dc = linf
from Equation (48).
Using these results, we can derive the following inequalities
a+e
a
a+c
a
< , and
< ,
b+f
b
b+d
b
a+e
>
if
Therefore, we have a+c
b+d
b+f
d << f.
This is true mathematically because if d is small enough relative to f , then the value of
a+e
closer to ab than b+f
will be.

a+c
b+d

will be

Case 3 of Proposition 3.4 with Decreasing Participation. In Case 3 of Proposition 3.4
we have that dc > fe . Because in Case 3 elasticities decline with expertise, the lowest expertise agent
σν , which will be larger than the
has the largest elasticity with respect to total volatility. Thus, dc = lsup
e
c
a
weighted average f . We also have, then, that d > b from Equation (34). Given these relationships,
we proceed to show that a sufficient condition for
a+e
a+c
>
b+d
b+f
is that
d > f.
We consider each case for
1. First, if

e
f

≤

a
b

a
b

vs.

e
f

separately, since we do not know their relative values in Case 3:

< dc , then
a+e
a
a+c
a
≤ , and
> ,
b+f
b
b+d
b

thus
a+c
a+e
>
,
b+d
b+f
without any restriction on d relative to f .
2. Second, if

c
d

>

e
f

>

a
b

and d > f, we have
a
e
c−e
< <
,
b
f
d−f
where the second inequality is from the following algebraic argument:
e
c−e
c
e
<
⇔ ed < cf ⇔ > .
f
d−f
d
f

72

Then, we have, using these results and our assumption that d > f :
c−e
a
d > f and <
b
d−f
⇒
a (f − d) > b (e − c)
⇔

af + cb > ad + be

⇒

af + cb + cf > ad + be + ed

⇔

(a + c) (b + f ) > (a + e) (b + d)
a+c
a+e
>
.
b+d
b+f

⇔

Combining Conditions for Cases 1-3 of Proposition 3.4

In Case 1 and Case 3 with

increasing participation, we need
d < f.
In Case 3 with decreasing participation, we need
d > f.
Combined with participation effects, we can use the following one condition:
∂x
∂x
d>f
.
∂σν
∂σν
That is,
∂x
∂x I (x) λ (x)
1

−
>
1
∂σ(x)
∂σν 1
x=x
σ(x)
1
1 ∂σν
σ(x) ∂x
R
1−Λ(x) − x 1
I(x)
x σ(x) dΛ(x)

⇔ −

⇔

∂x
∂σν

λ (x)
1 ∂σ(x) x=x
σ(x) ∂x

1

>

(
1
1−Λ(x)

1−

E

h

1
σ(x)
i
1
|x≥x
σ(x)

)

∂x
∂σν





∂x λ (x)
1 ∂σ(x)
1
i >−
1− h
σ(x)
∂σν 1 − Λ (x) 
σ (x) ∂x
E σ(x) |x ≥ x 

∂x
.
x=x ∂σν

Proof. Proposition 4.1 Suppose we have two risky assets with different total volatility, σνH and σνL .
Because each agent can only invest in one risky asset, we only need to compare the value function of
investing in σνH versus the value function of investing in σνL . Suppressing the notation ν, denote the
effective volatilities for each asset as σ H (x) and σL (x) .
From the Proposition 2.1, in a stationary equilibrium, we have
w1−γ
,
1−γ
w1−γ
x
VHx (w, x) = yH
(x)
,
1−γ
w1−γ
VLx (w, x) = yLx (x)
,
1−γ
V n (w, x) = y n (x)

73

x (x) and y x (x) are given by:
where y n (x) , yH
L

2 −γ
(γ − 1) (rf − fxx ) + ρ (γ − 1) αH
x
+
yH (x) =
2 (x)
γ
2γ 2 σH

2 −γ
(γ − 1) (rf − fxx ) + ρ (γ − 1) αL
x
+
yL (x) =
γ
2γ 2 σL2 (x)


(γ − 1) rf + ρ −γ
.
y n (x) =
γ
Consider an equilibrium in which all higher expertise investors, x ≥ x̂, invests in σνH , medium
expertise, x ≤ x < x̂, invests in σνL , and low expertise, x > x, invests in the risk free asset only. Then,
the following conditions must be satisfied,
2
2
αH
αL
≥
, for all x ≥ x̂,
2 (x)
σH
σL2 (x)
2
αH
2 (x)
σH

≤

2
αL
, for all x ≤ x < x̂,
σL2 (x)

2
(γ − 1) αL
= fxx .
2γ 2 σ 2 (x)
Since x̂ is indifferent between investing in σνH and σνL , the equilibrium α’s must satisfy


σH (x̂) − σL (x̂)
σH (x̂)
αL .
αL = 1 +
αH =
σL (x̂)
σL (x̂)
It is straightforward to further show that:
2
αH
2 (x)
σH

≥

2
αL
, for all x ≥ x̂ ⇔
σL2 (x)

σH (x)−σL (x)
σL (x)

σH − σL

≤

αH −αL
αL

σH − σL

σH (x)−σL (x)

,

α −α

H
L
2
2
αL
αH
σL (x)
αL
≤
,
for
all
x
≥
,
≤
x
<
x̂
⇔
2 (x)
σH − σL
σH − σL
σH
σL2 (x)
which is true if the elasticity of effective volatility is decreasing, i.e. if

∂ ∂σ(x)/σ(x)
∂σν /σν

< 0.
∂x
The model can be solved in an analogous way to each single asset economy. There are now four
equations and four unknowns. The participation conditions are:
2
2
αH
αL
=
, and
2 (x̂)
σH
σL2 (x̂)
2
(γ − 1) αL
= fxx .
2γ 2 σ 2 (x)
The equilibrium αL , αH , x̂,and x, must satisfy these two conditions, as well as the two market clearing
conditions equating total demand to total detrended supply of each asset.

Numerical Algorithm Because α and I form a bijection (Proposition 3.1 provides conditions for
which they are one to one and onto), for any given supply of the complex risky asset, we can solve for
the market equilibrium α in the following steps:
1. Choose an upper and a lower bound for α, namely α1 and α2 , (α1 > α2 ).

74

2. Let α =

α1 +α2
,
2

and compute the total demand for the risky asset
Z
λ (x) I (x) dx

R
R
3. If S − λ (x) I (x) dx < −10−4 , let α1 = α and back to step 1; if S − λ (x) I (x) dx > 10−4 , let
α2 = α and back to step 1; otherwise, STOP.

75

