                             NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




     WORLD WAR II AND THE INDUSTRIALIZATION OF THE AMERICAN SOUTH

                                       Taylor Jaworski

                                     Working Paper 23477
                             http://www.nber.org/papers/w23477


                    NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                             1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                               Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    June 2017




I thank Lee Alston, Dominick Bartelme, Nate Baum-Snow, Hoyt Bleakley, Bill Collins, Briggs
Depew, Dan Fetter, Price Fishback, Gautam Gowrisankaran, Theresa Gutberlet, Lila Jaworski,
Shawn Kantor, Ian Keay, Carl Kitchens, Ashley Langer, Frank Lewis, Paul Rhode, Jason Taylor,
Mo Xiao, Fabian Waldinger, Marianne Wanamaker, Nic Ziebarth, and seminar participants at
Arizona, Michigan, Middlebury, Queen’s, RPI, Simon Fraser, Vanderbilt, Warwick, and the 2015
Cliometric Society and Economic History Association conferences for helpful comments. David
Rose provided valuable research assistance. Support for this project was provided by Queen’s
University, National Science Foundation Grant #1155957, the John E. Rovensky Fellowship, and
a Humane Studies Fellowship. All remaining errors are my own. The views expressed herein are
those of the author and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic
Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2017 by Taylor Jaworski. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two
paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including ©
notice, is given to the source.
World War II and the Industrialization of the American South
Taylor Jaworski
NBER Working Paper No. 23477
June 2017
JEL No. N12

                                         ABSTRACT

When private incentives are insufficient, a big push by government may lead to industrialization.
This paper uses mobilization for World War II to test the big push hypothesis in the context of
postwar industrialization in the American South. Specifically, I investigate the role of capital
deepening at the county level using newly assembled data on the location and value of wartime
investment. Despite a boom in manufacturing activity during the war, the evidence is not
consistent with differential growth in counties that received more investment. This does not rule
out positive effects of mobilization on firms or sectors, but a decisive role for wartime capital
deepening in the Souths postwar industrial development should be viewed more skeptically.


Taylor Jaworski
Department of Economics
Queen's University
94 University Avenue
Kingston, ON K7L 3N6
CANADA
and NBER
tjaworski@gmail.com
       Between 1940 and 1945, industrial mobilization for World War II in the United States
created an “arsenal of democracy:”1 over 300,000 aircraft and bombers, 20,000 ships, nearly
90,000 tanks and 350,000 trucks, as well as 9 million rifles and machine guns, and 40 billion
bullets, to equip 16 million servicemen (Klein, 2013, pp. 515-516). Abroad, the result was
the defeat of the Axis powers. On the home front, observers at the time and a generation
of historians since were left to consider whether mobilization fueled recovery from the Great
Depression or facilitated the convergence of underdeveloped areas. Regional disparities in
the United States in the first half of the twentieth century and convergence after 1940 provide
a useful setting to evaluate the impact of coordinated investment and capital deepening on
regional industrialization and catch-up.

       A big push by government may be useful when private incentives alone are insufficient
to spur growth (Rosenstein-Rodan, 1943; Nurkse, 1953; Murphy, Shleifer, and Vishny, 1989;
Azariadis and Stachurski, 2005). In the presence of fixed costs or spillovers from demand,
agglomeration, financing, human capital, coordinated investment that aids the adoption of
increasing returns technology can be socially beneficial. For example, government subsidies
that lower the fixed costs of adopting new technology or public investment that provides
infrastructure useful to firms in many sectors can help to facilitate industrialization.

       This paper uses newly assembled data on the value and location of investment due to
World War II to assess the war’s impact on regional industrialization and structural change
in the southern economy after 1940. The empirical challenge is to identify the particular
features of policies that help move a regional economy toward industrialization and whether
there is the potential for big push dynamics. For the United States, recent research ex-
amines the contribution of government policies to local economic development (see surveys
by Glaeser and Gottlieb, 2008, 2009; Neumark and Simpson, 2013). This work follows a
large literature in economics and economic history that aims to understand the role of spe-
cific aspects of the 1930s New Deal and mobilization for World War II during the 1940s
in structural transformation and regional industrialization in the postwar period (Tindall,
   1
    In his fireside chat on December 29, 1940, President Franklin D. Roosevelt called for an “arsenal of
democracy” and called for a “mightier effort than they have ever yet made to increase our production of all
the implements of/defense, to meet the threat to our democratic faith” (Roosevelt, 1940).



                                                    1
1967; Wright, 1986; Sosna, 1987; Hooks and Bloomquist, 1992; Seltzer, 1997; Fishback, Hor-
race, and Kantor, 2006; Bateman, Ros, and Taylor, 2009; Kitchens, 2014; Kline and Moretti,
2014).

     The new data together with cases studies of specific wartime investment projects have
several advantages over previous research on the impact of World War II in the South. First,
the data contain information on the value and location of individual investments associated
with mobilization for World War II. In particular, I distinguish investment in structures from
investment in equipment or spending on supply contracts to focus on the large shock to the
South’s capital stock as part of mobilization for World War II. If the key barrier to southern
industrialization was the size of the fixed costs associated with adopting modern industrial
technology, then new investment may have encouraged growth (e.g., in aircraft, automobiles,
shipbuilding, synthetic rubber, and aluminum).

     Second, prior to the New Deal and mobilization for World War II, firms and locales
in the South were already involved in production related to national defense. This included
government-owned, contractor-operated (GOCO), government-owned, government-operated
(GOGO), and private industrial facilities. Differences in the level of prewar industrialization
that are correlated with wartime investment will lead to potentially biased results when
assessing the impact of World War II. To address this concern, I construct county-level
measures of prewar industrial capacity based on the prewar Industrial Mobilization Plan
and other prewar economic and demographic characteristics. I also include county-level
fixed effects to control for remaining unobserved differences in prewar industrial capacity.
Thus, the results of the empirical analysis reflect the additional contribution of wartime
investment to regional industrialization and structural change.

     Third, most firms that participated in mobilization for World War II received some
form of subsidy for new plant construction or expansions of existing plants. However, the
source of financing of the investment may have played a role in the postwar impact of
this spending by giving firms more control over the composition of new investment. For
example, investment directly financed by the federal government was typically attached to
the production of specific goods that were not available through other channels. As a result,



                                              2
firms had less control over the details of the investment. In contrast, firms that received
investment financed by the private sector were eligible for indirect subsidies (e.g., from the
accelerated depreciation provisions of the 1940 Revenue Act) but subject to less oversight on
the part of the military or civilian mobilization agencies. In this paper, I exploit information
on whether the source of financing was public or private to understand the role of these two
channels for coordinating investment across the region.

     Ultimately, mobilization for World War II generated substantial economic activity in
the national economy between 1940 and 1945. The South accounted for 32.6 percent of to-
tal investment and 13.3 percent of government spending on World War II supply contracts.
However, from the wars end until 1990, the empirical results indicate no statistically sig-
nificant differential growth in county-level manufacturing due to World War II investments.
Within manufacturing, I find some evidence for reallocation of activity across sectors; fol-
lowing the war the number of establishments in chemicals, rubber, stone, metals, machinery,
and transportation equipment was higher. This suggests that wartime investment did fa-
cilitate a reallocation of manufacturing activity toward more modern sectors, but this did
not consistently translate into more establishments and employment or higher wages and
value-added at the local level.

     Finally, I provide case studies to highlight two different paths following the construction
of new plants related to mobilization for World War II. The case studies suggest that changes
in the southern economy were closely related to the stimulus provided by the military- in-
dustrial complex. For example, wartime investment in Marietta, Georgia (Cobb County),
attracted the Bell Aircraft Company to produce bombers. Over the postwar period, differ-
ences between Cobb and other counties in Georgia (including those that also received wartime
investment) emerged and persisted. In Charleston, West Virginia (Kanawha County), firms
clustered to create a booming synthetic rubber industry during the war, but this difference
did not grow over time. Thus, although there is evidence of the wars effect in some counties,
there is little support for the idea that mobilization alone fueled a long-run divergence across
all counties that received wartime investment or new plants.

     These findings are consistent with work that emphasizes mismatch between military



                                               3
and civilian uses together with high rates of depreciation (Higgs, 1987; Field, 2011; Rockoff,
2012) and also that wartime production achievements alone did not translate into growth
outside the South (Rhode, 2003; Fishback and Cullen, 2013).2 The evidence provided in this
paper is consistent with the large discounts associated with World War II capital calculated
by White (1980),3 which may indicate that the scale or configuration of plants used in war
production did not translate to production for civilian markets or that the deterioration of
facilities due to high utilization during the peak war years was substantial.

       This evidence does not rule out changes during the war years that benefited spe-
cific firms or sectors. Indeed, in shipbuilding and aircraft, large investments and a steady
stream of supply contracts facilitated learning-by-doing in the adoption of mass production
techniques and in government-owned facilities scientists and engineers worked to overcome
temporary shortages in supplies of natural rubber. And these are just a few examples. Yet,
the evidence does not point to mobilization for World War II creating regional industrial
clusters. Instead, wartime investment went to locations within the South that were already
manufacturing hubs and where the defense sector was present in the prewar period. Ul-
timately, a simple and decisive role for wartime capital deepening in the Souths postwar
industrial development should be viewed more skeptically.

                                    Historical Background

       In the antebellum period, rapid economic growth in the South was not initially ac-
companied by large-scale industrialization. After 1880, the southern economy changed. A
national market emerged to support a growing cotton textile sector, along with other in-
dustries closely linked to resource extraction. Attracted by local boosterism, mill villages
sprang up across the South and rates of urbanization increased (although never to rates
comparable to the North). Throughout this period productivity, capital investment, rates
of new technology adoption remained low, and a diversified industrial economy that could
   2
      Lewis (2007, p. 840) summarizes the skeptical view: “Despite the emergence of new capital-intensive,
high-wage manufacturing between 1940 and 1944, the South continued for a generation to be dominated by
a narrowly based economy rooted in earlier industrial forms. . . [T]he foundations of the post-World War II
South’s manufacturing economy did not emerge from wartime capital investments or the human capital built
up during the war.”
    3
      Ramey and Shapiro (2001) show that redeployed capital from the aerospace industry following demobi-
lization from the Cold War was also subject to large discounts.



                                                    4
serve as an engine of growth for the region did not emerge. As a result, income per capita in
the South lagged behind the rest of the country before 1940 (Mitchener and McLean, 1999).

     Nevertheless, the South was a beneficiary of the growth in the defense sector that began
at the end of the nineteenth century and accelerated from World War I through the New Deal
and World War II. Starting in the 1880s, Congress set out to rectify the deterioration of US
armed forces in the several decades after the Civil War. By the 1870s, the number of Navy
vessels had decreased from 700 at the peak to less than 200 and the number enlistments and
officers was reduced more than fivefold, along with government supply contracts. Under the
leadership of George M. Robeson, the Navy contracted for only ten new ships between 1869
and 1877, opting instead to refurbish the existing fleet in public and private yards across the
country (Koistinen, 1998, pp. 19-20).

     As of 1874, 16 firms were building the iron-hulled steamships that would launch a new
era for the US Navy. In the 1880s, particularly beginning with the appointment of Benjamin
F. Tracy as secretary of the Navy, the shipbuilding program expanded rapidly. For the
South, the entry of Newport News Shipbuilding in 1886 and the Drydock Company in 1891
increased the region’s capacity to meet the growth in government demand (Koistinen, 1998,
pp. 44, 48-49). The South also saw expansions in defense-industrial capacity outside of
shipbuilding, including Du Pont plants in Nitro, West Virginia, and Nashville, Tennessee,
and American Cyanamid Company in Muscle Shoals, Alabama (Wilson, 2016, pp. 18, 25).

     Despite the gains in the scale and technical sophistication of defense sector production,
World War I highlighted inefficiencies in contracting and logistics (Koistinen, 1998, pp. 5-9).
In addition, the aftermath of the war and charges of war profiteering revealed a growing
political split over the role of the public ownership and production in matters of national
defense and other sectors. For example, the Muscle Shoals site–including the explosives plant
and eventual hydroelectric dam–was initially slated for sale to the private sector. However,
this plan was halted in the wake of the Teapot Dome scandal and progressive concerns over
private ownership (Wilson, 2016, pp. 25-26). Muscle Shoals eventually provided the starting
point for the growth in electrification under the Tennessee Valley Authority.

     During the 1930s the debate over the interwar defense sector was folded into the growing


                                              5
political struggle over the New Deal. In both the 1920s and 1930s, a key point of contention
was over the extent of public versus private control and the size of profits that would be
allowed under defense contracts. In the mid-1930s, a Senate inquiry led Gerald Nye (R-SD)
publicized the large profits earned by firms such as Du Pont during World War I and called for
reforms. However, specific recommendations from the Nye Committee were never enacted
as civilian and military leaders preferred to maintain the public-private hybrid system of
ownership and production in defense (Wilson, 2016, pp. 34-41).

       In March 1934, the passage of the Vinson-Trammell Act called for an even split between
public and private yards in the construction of new warships, including the aircraft carriers
Enterprise and Yorktown in Newport News, Virginia. This continued a long trend toward
the build-up of the defense sector in the South and elsewhere prior to mobilization for World
War II. Importantly, in the empirical analysis, I consider how differences in manufacturing
capacity across southern counties under the Industrial Mobilization Plan influenced the effect
of wartime investment after controlling for time-invariant characteristics and prewar cross-
county differences.4

       During the New Deal, legislation was passed to address long standing regional imbal-
ances.5 For example, the Agricultural Adjustment Act sought to raise agricultural prices
and encourage modernization on the farm and the Tennessee Valley Authority aimed to
improve infrastructure and provide cheap access to fertilizer and electricity. Still, in speech
on July 4, 1938 to a conference on the economic conditions of the South, President Franklin
D. Roosevelt declared the region, “the nation’s no. 1 economic problem” (Roosevelt, 1938),
and on the eve of World War II many observers concluded the South faced fundamental
obstacles to economic development.

       By the end of the war, spending on supply contracts and investment in new facilities
and equipment in the South was more than $20 billion. Although the South as a whole
received less than other regions, and southern cities received a smaller share than Detroit,
Buffalo, Chicago, and Los Angeles, the gains were substantial relative to the prewar period.
   4
     Bateman and Taylor (2003) provide state-level empirical evidence that spending across of New Deal
agencies in the 1930s was positively correlated with the subsequent spending of those agencies in the 1940s.
   5
     Wallis (1987) and Seltzer (1997) argue that southern politicians, firms, and state governments often
evaded reform efforts.


                                                     6
The southern trade magazine, Manufactures’ Record, routinely boasted, “South’s expansion
breaks all records” (quoted in Schulman, 1991, p. 95). Capital expenditures in the South,
which made up roughly one-tenth of the national total in the prewar period, nearly doubled
during the war. In total, the South accounted for 23.1 percent of wartime plant construction
and 17.6 of expansions (US War Production Board, 1945; Deming and Stein, 1949).6

      In some industries the South enjoyed a particular boom. The region dominated syn-
thetic rubber and developed new competencies in steel and non-ferrous metals. Combat in
the Pacific had cut off most supplies of natural rubber; alcohol and petroleum were necessary
inputs into synthetic rubber and both were available in the South. And although the iron
and steel industry continued to concentrate in the cities of the Upper Midwest, new centers
were established along the Gulf Coast. The war created at least temporary clusters in other
industries as well. In general, wartime expansion accounted for a large portion of newly
available manufacturing capacity (Schulman, 1991; Combes, 2001). However, White (1980)
puts the share of wartime expansion that was useful for peacetime production around 15
percent, while Koistinen (2004, pp. 44, 48-49) argues the useful share was low but closer to
one-quarter to one-third.

      The pace of industrial expansion during wartime led one observer to declare that by
the end of the war, “The South. . . in January 1945 was no longer the nation’s no. 1 economic
problem” (Rauber, 1946, p. 1). Across the entire South, Figure 1 shows changes in manufac-
turing establishments, employment, wages, and value-added and output between 1880 and
1987. In some cases, civilian officials advocated for mobilization to consider “where indus-
trialization during the defense period will contribute to a better long-run balance between
industry and agriculture” and “the need for industrialization of certain regions” (quoted in
Schulman, 1991, p. 101). This was despite the fact that military planners were primarily
interested in maximizing production, which initially delayed the flow of federal funds to the
South, and were less interested in regional and economic development goals (Schulman, 1991;
Koistinen, 2004).

      After the war, the southern economy expanded: income per capita converged to the
  6
    In the online appendix, Figure A1 shows that the South’s share of wartime investment was more than
proportional to the regions share of prewar manufacturing activity.


                                                  7
national average and the regions share of manufacturing increased substantially. The South
attracted modern industries, such as automobile assembly (Hülsemann, 2001), and aggres-
sively implemented policies to entice Northern firms (Cobb, 1982; Holmes, 1998). However,
the South’s distinctiveness as a region did not dissipate (Wright, 2001). In many cases, older
patterns of production persisted along with exclusionary labor market policies (Ferguson,
2001; Lewis, 2007). The postwar economic development of the South was closely related to
changing political-economic dynamics that directed a large share of federal defense spending
to the South. However, the specific link between mobilization for World War II and the
growth of manufacturing in the South in the postwar period remains an open question.

                                     Motivating Theory

     This paper quantifies the spillovers associated with new facilities construction dur-
ing World War II. The motivation for the empirical analysis is twofold. First, there is a
large literature that provides conditions for big push policies to lead to industrialization (see
the survey by Azariadis and Stachurski, 2005). In one class of models, firms face uncer-
tainty about the prospects for revenue from industrialization to cover fixed costs. Under
the control of a social planner, investment coordinated across many sectors alleviates this
uncertainty and industrialization occurs. During the 1940s, the federal government exercised
unprecedented control over economy-wide allocation of resources. The empirical question is
whether the coordination of investment during wartime was useful for overcoming the lack
of industrialization in peacetime.

     Second, coordinated investment may lead to industrialization if it creates agglomeration
economies. In my setting, agglomeration-type spillovers may flow from wartime mobilization
if new investment embodied new technology and forms of industrial organization relevant
for peacetime or if war production helped develop thicker markets for intermediate inputs.
During World War II manufacturing productivity increased due to wartime investment. After
the war, capital owned by the government was sold off to private firms, usually at a discount,
and firms redirected inputs toward output for consumer markets.

     In the absence of consumption disamenities or agglomeration spillovers, the increase
in productivity due to mobilization for World War II increases labor demand and, corre-


                                               8
spondingly, wages and housing costs. Alternatively, the war may have led to deterioration
in the quality of hospitals, schools, and therefore offset the gains in productivity. The war
may also have generated spillovers from improvements in worker training, intermediate in-
put markets, transportation, and technology, that continued to benefit manufacturers in the
postwar period. As a result, wages may increase further to compensate for a decline in the
value of consumption amenities or despite rising local input prices in response to the lasting
benefits from the war economy.

     To the extent that wartime investment facilitated a big push, I expect to see gains in
the manufacturing outcomes combined with changes in the sectoral composition of manu-
facturing at the county level. Because I find little evidence of growth in local manufacturing
activity due to World War II, I then provide evidence for reasons wartime mobilization did
not lead to industrialization. In particular, I emphasize the role of control over the allocation
of investment, the concentration of investment among a few firms, and the mismatch be-
tween technology relevant for military versus civilian uses. The evidence here suggests that
the gains from mobilization were concentrated at the firm level. Recent work by Jaworski
and Smyth (ming) provides specific evidence that military contracts in the 1930s and 1940s
enabled some firms to survive the postwar shakeout in the airframe industry.

                                    Data and Variables

     The data for the empirical analysis are drawn from several sources. First, county-level
information on manufacturing, wholesale and retail trade, and the housing sector is taken
from Haines (2010). In particular, I make use of information on manufacturing establish-
ments, employment, wages, and value-added from 1920 to 1987. Similarly, for the wholesale
and retail sectors. I use information on total sales, employment, and establishments over the
same period. Second, I digitized county-level information on the number of establishments
by manufacturing sector from various years of the Census of Manufactures as well as the
Industrial Market Data Handbook of the United States (US Department of Commerce, 1939).

     Third, I collect data on the location of investment in structures from War Manufactur-
ing Facilities (US War Production Board, 1945). These data provide the most comprehensive
view of individual investment projects during mobilization for World War II. For the main


                                               9
empirical analysis I construct a county-level variable, investc , equal to the aggregate value
of investment in 1940 dollars in each county (plus one). Figure 2A shows the county-level
variation in investment in structures used in the empirical analysis. These data also indicate
whether the source of financing was directly public or private. Even when new establish-
ments received financing directly from the private sector, the owner still benefited from
indirect government subsidies due to, for example, accelerated depreciation. For this reason,
although the main results aggregate both types of investment, I also examine differences in
the effect of public and private investment separately.

      In addition, I collect information on the new plants constructed as part of mobilization
for World War II from the War Industrial Facilities (US Civilian Production Administration,
1946). I also conduct a separate analysis using new plants as the measure of World War
II mobilization and discuss case study evidence for the impact of the largest of new plant
in two states to understand potential heterogeneous impacts. Investment in new structures
due to mobilization for World War II is shown in 2B.

      Finally, to construct a measure of prewar manufacturing capacity related to military
production I use the Industrial Mobilization Plan collected by Fishback and Cullen (2013).
These data give the number of existing establishments assigned to each branch of the military
in the event of war mobilization plans set up in the 1930s from the US Joint Army and Navy
Munitions Board (1938). As additional county-level controls, I include information from
1940 on population density, the share of population living urban area as well as the foreign
and African-American population shares from Haines (2010).

                                       Empirical Framework

      As a starting point for empirical analysis, I quantify the size of spillovers from invest-
ment in structures due to mobilization for World War II. Specifically, I regress the log of
a given manufacturing outcome, Yct , for county c and year t on the log of total value of
investment in new manufacturing facilities constructed during World War II interacted with
year fixed effects:

                         1987
                         X                                           1987
                                                                     X
  ln Yct = αc + αst +             βτ ln(investc + 1) × 1{τ = t} +             Γτ Xc × 1{τ = t} + ct (1)
                        τ =1920                                     τ =1920


                                                   10
The βτ coefficients trace out changes in manufacturing over time due to differences in the
extent of investment from World War II. This specification focuses on investment in struc-
tures as distinct from investment in equipment, which could have been and was redeployed
elsewhere at the end of the war. I take the log of wartime investment (plus one) so that the
βτ coefficients are interpreted as elasticities.7

       County fixed effects included in equation (1) control for county characteristics that are
time-variant. In addition, state-year effects control for unobserved differences at the state
level that impact regional the growth of manufacturing at the local level. This is important
in the postwar period in the South where changes in state right-to-work and industrial
recruitment laws may have played a substantial role in the growth of manufacturing (e.g.,
Cobb, 1982; Holmes, 1998). Equation (1) also includes controls for prewar differences in
county characteristics, Xc , that may predict differential growth in the postwar period. In
particular, Xc includes population density and urban shares of the county population in
1940 to control for differences in postwar industrialization in the South due to urbanization
across the region; I also include the African-American and foreign-born population shares in
1940 to control for the role of demographic composition in industrialization; finally, I include
second-order polynomials in latitude and longitude to allow for topographical and climatic
differences that may have directly or indirectly affected the attractiveness of a county for
new plant location.8 The variables included in Xc are fixed at their 1940 values and so are
interacted with year fixed effects to allow for their impact to be different in each time period.

       In addition, in Xc , I include the value of government spending on World War II supply
contracts interacted with year fixed effects to ensure that my results are robust to the other
major government spending associated with mobilization for World War II.9 I also examine
robustness to including the presence of military bases, which Schulman (1991) discusses as
an important development for the postwar southern economy, and New Deal policies as
part of the Agricultural Adjustment Act and Tennessee Valley Authority, which may have
   7
     In the online appendix, Figure A2 plots the coefficients from a level-level specification of equation (1).
The results are qualitatively similar.
   8
     Heim (2000) summarizes the empirical patterns associated with structural change in the United States
and, at least partially, attributes changes in the composition of economic activity to urbanization, demogra-
phy, and geography.
   9
     In the online appendix, Figure A3 shows the estimated coefficients on the log of supply contracts.


                                                      11
affected the pace of structural transformation (Alston, 1981; Whatley, 1983; Schulman, 1991;
Fishback, Horrace, and Kantor, 2005; Kitchens, 2014; Kline and Moretti, 2014).

      To be clear, the identifying assumption for equation (1) is that in the absence of new
investment during World War II, relative changes across southern counties would otherwise
have been the same for counties that received different amounts of World War II investment.
This assumption is weakened with the inclusion of county fixed effects, state-year fixed
effects, and prewar county control variables. In practice, this assumption is violated if
war planners decided the placement of new facilities with domestic goals in mind. Overall,
the discussion of the mobilization program by Koistinen (2004)–centralized control in the
military rather than the civilian bureaucracy–suggests the location of new facilities was
not motivated by economic development objectives. Instead, planners aimed to maximize
production of standardized and relatively high quality products. In this case, the concern
is that characteristics correlated with planners ability to achieve these objectives were also
correlated with growth potential and, thus, lead to overstating the contribution of wartime
investment to industrialization. In some instances, lobbying by local communities may have
led to the placement of a war-related plant (Schulman, 1991). To examine effectiveness
of these efforts, I also present statistical and case study evidence for the impact of newly
constructed plants as part of wartime mobilization.

      In the absence of exogenous variation in World War II investment a descriptive interpre-
tation of the results from equation (1) is still useful. In particular, the empirical specification
quantifies whether counties that received wartime investment were differentially responsible
for the postwar growth in the Souths share of manufacturing. Even if the observed changes
do not reflect a causal effect, the lack of statistically significant differences documented in the
next section suggests the long-run path of southern industrialization was not substantially
altered by World War II. This type of analysis cannot rule out a relationship between World
War II and local economic activity due to, for example, postwar government contracts that
prevented the decline of manufacturing in some areas. However, in general, the evidence I
present is not consistent with postwar industrialization of the American South due to World
War II investment.



                                                12
     Finally, as an alternative to equation (1), I estimate a specification that exploits ad-
ditional information available due prewar planning under the Industrial Mobilization Plan.
In particular, as part of preparation prior to the outbreak of World War II, war planners
surveyed industrial capacity relevant for military production in the event of sudden mobi-
lization. The survey gives the number of existing plants that would be fully or partially
allocated for war production. That is, the survey indicates war-related capacity that existed
(and would have continued to exist) in the absence of mobilization for World War II. Pre-
viously available industrial capacity may have interacted with new capital investment due
to mobilization and, thereby, helped to facilitate postwar industrialization. To examine this
potential mechanism, I estimate the following equation:

                            1987
                            X                                           1987
                                                                        X
  ln Yct = αc + αst +                β1τ ln(investc + 1) × 1{τ = t} +          β2τ IMPc × 1{τ = t}
                           τ =1920                                   τ =1920
             1987                                                  1987
                                                                                                     (2)
             X                                                     X
        +             β3τ ln(investc + 1) × IMPc × 1{τ = t} +               Γτ Xc × 1{τ = t} + ct
            τ =1920                                               τ =1920


In equation (2), in addition to wartime investment, (investc ), I also include an indicator vari-
able for whether a county had capacity allocated under the Industrial Mobilization Plan and
the interaction between investment and presence of facilities allocated under the Industrial
Mobilization Plan.

     Before showing the main results in the next section, Table 1 presents an analysis of the
relationship between investment spending and prewar characteristics. Each column shows
the results from regressing wartime investment on government spending on supply contracts,
indicators facility in the Industrial Mobilization Plan, and a given manufacturing outcome
in 1920. The results show the positive relationship between wartime investment and prewar
manufacturing outcomes, which highlights the importance of using data before and after
World War II to control for preexisting differences across counties.

     Table 1 also shows a positive relationship between wartime investment and contracts
spending. Finally the presence of facilities allocated under the Industrial Mobilization Plan is
positively correlated with wartime investment. Although this relationship is not statistically
significant, the coefficient is large, which suggests that despite the fact that the Industrial

                                                      13
Mobilization Plan was not formally used to organize mobilization it may still reflect charac-
teristics of a county targeted in deciding the most effective way to carry-out mobilization,
which is consistent with the motivation for estimating equation (2) above.

                        Results for Manufacturing Outcomes

The impact of World War II facilities investment

     The previous literature, which aimed to quantify the impact of World War II by fo-
cusing only on postwar differences in manufacturing activity across counties and states that
received more or less wartime government spending (Hooks and Bloomquist, 1992; Bateman,
Ros, and Taylor, 2009). To illustrate my approach in relation to this literature, I estimate
equation (1) excluding county fixed effects and plot the coefficients on ln(investc + 1) in
Figure 3 for the log number of manufacturing establishments, employment, wage bill, and
value-added. This specification controls for state-year fixed effects and so does not attribute
differences in manufacturing activity at the state level to mobilization for World War II.

     A few interesting patterns emerge from this comparison. First, each panel shows a
clear relationship between the extent of prewar industrialization and war-related govern-
ment spending. For example, a county that eventually received 10 percent more in wartime
investment had up to 2.5 percent more value-added between 1920 and 1940. These existing
differences motivate the inclusion of county fixed effects and prewar county characteristics
when estimating equation (1). A second noteworthy feature of Figure 3 is the absence of
change between the prewar and postwar periods. The remainder of this sub-section provides
additional statistical evidence for the patterns in Figure 3.

     The panels of Figure 4 show the results from estimating alternative versions of equation
(1) including county fixed effects with manufacturing establishments, employment, wage bill,
and value-added as the dependent variable. In each panel, the coefficient for the interaction
of ln(investc + 1) with 1940 is excluded; the remaining coefficients should be interpreted
as the difference relative to 1940. The solid black line shows the estimated coefficients on
wartime investment for each year in the sample from a specification that includes state-year
and county fixed effects as well as prewar county characteristics (interacted with year effects);
the corresponding 95 percent confidence interval is given by the dashed black line.


                                               14
     Overall, the results in Figure 4 do not show a clear break in southern manufacturing
activity associated with wartime investment. To conduct hypothesis testing and provide a
quantitative interpretation of the results, Table 2 shows the estimated coefficients for each
year from the specification that includes county fixed effects, state-year fixed effects, and
county-level control variables. The only effects that are statistically significant at the 10
percent are found in 1972: a 10 percent increase in wartime investment increases the wage
bill by 0.922 percent and value-added by 0.956 percent. Otherwise, the estimated coefficients
reported in Table 2 tend to be small or negative.

     In some cases, imprecise estimates imply that larger effects cannot be ruled out, which
suggests substantial heterogeneity in the postwar experience of counties that received World
War II investment. I further explore this heterogeneity by considering differences in the
source of financing of investment and the characteristics of counties prior to 1940 that may
have influenced postwar industrial development.

     First, in terms of investment, projects where the direct source of financing was either
public or private may indicate more (public) or less (private) scope for coordination and
oversight. Deming and Stein (1949, pp. 3, 12) describe how both privately and publicly
financed project ultimately received some form of government subsidy indirectly through
the accelerated depreciation provisions of the 1940 Second Revenue Act or directly. The
results in Figure 5 allow the effect of investment to vary by public (black) and private (gray)
sources of financing. Investment financed by the public sector shows positive effects in the
immediate aftermath of World War II, but these effects do not persist. In contrast, privately
financed investment has a negative effect initially, but turns positive after 1960. Although
these effects are generally small and not statistically significant they are suggestive of the
potential role of coordination in choosing investment projects.

     Second, in terms of heterogeneity across counties, equation (2) described in the previous
section allows for differences in the effect of wartime investment based on the extent of
prewar capacity for mobilization as identified by the Industrial Mobilization Plan. In the
online appendix, Figure A4 shows the estimated coefficients on ln(investc + 1) in Panel A,
on IMPc in Panel B, and on their interaction in Panel C, for each year. To understand



                                              15
the role of heterogeneity across counties, I test the null hypothesis that the sum of the
coefficients on ln(investc + 1) and its interaction with IMPc is greater than zero, which
captures the marginal impact of investment in counties with at least one plant allocated under
the Industrial Mobilization Plan. To summarize these results, I conduct joint hypothesis tests
on the sum of the coefficients for 1947-58, 1963-72, and 1977-87. Only the null hypothesis
for employment for 1963-72 could be rejected at the 10 percent level.

     In the absence of a clear break in manufacturing activity as a whole it is important to
also consider changes in the composition of manufacturing establishments by sector. In this
context, although the previous results suggest that World War II did not create immediate
gains for manufacturing as a whole, it may have led to the reallocation of establishments
toward higher value-added sectors. To assess the impact of war-related investment across
manufacturing sectors, each column of Table 3 shows the results from regressions of the
number of manufacturing establishments in a given sector. These results provide evidence
that investment during World War II changed the composition of southern manufacturing
in the first part of the postwar period. The estimated magnitudes for lumber, chemicals,
rubber, stone, metals, machinery, and transportation equipment are statistically significant
and economically large: a 10 percent increase in wartime investment increases the number
of establishments between 0.460 (in rubber) and 5.871 (in metals).

     These sectors represented a small share of southern manufacturing prior to the outbreak
of World War II and expanded after 1940. The estimated effects are consistent with their
role in the war effort (Deming and Stein, 1949). Importantly, these results suggest that
despite the wars limited role in local economic development of manufacturing in the South
and elsewhere, investment and government demand may have played a role in the growth
of particular industries. For example, this appears to have been the case in aluminum,
synthetic rubber, and the production of aircraft, among others (Koistinen, 2004). Still, this
reallocation of manufacturing activity across sectors did not translate into substantial growth
in the overall number of manufacturing establishments, employment, wages, or value-added.




                                              16
The impact of World War II plant expansions

     The previous section focused on the total value of wartime investment in facilities and
supply contracts as a potential catalyst for the postwar industrialization of the American
South. Yet, in some cases, the positive impact of mobilization for World War II may have
been concentrated in counties that only received entirely new plants. This was the case in
roughly 100 southern counties, including aircraft in Forth Worth, Texas (Tarrant County)
and Marietta, Georgia (Cobb County), explosives in Sylacauga, Alabama (Talladega County)
and Morgantown, West Virginia (Monongalia County), aluminum in Jones Mill, Arkansas
(Hot Springs County), and synthetic rubber in Charleston, West Virginia (Kanawha County)
and Louisville, Kentucky (Jefferson County).

     Attracting big, national deep-pocketed firms to the South may have stimulated de-
mand for intermediate inputs, increased local labor market thickness, or facilitated learning
across establishments. Alternatively, large firms with scale economies may crowd-out local
entrepreneurs by restricting access to inputs and financial capital or exercising monopoly
power in output markets (Chinitz, 1961; Glaeser, Kerr, and Kerr, 2015). More directly,
Markusen, Hall, Campbell, and Deitrick (1991) provide evidence that firms associated with
the postwar military-industrial complex exercised market power. Figures 6 and 7 provide
case studies of two counties in West Virginia and Georgia with newly constructed plants dur-
ing World War II. The figures follow the postwar manufacturing outcomes of these counties
and compare their performance to other counties in the same state.

     The panels of Figure 6 compare manufacturing activity in Kanawha County, West
Virginia, and the rest of the counties in the state that received investment with counties
that received zero investment. Kanawha County was the site of a new synthetic rubber
plant operated by Union Carbide and Carbon Corporation. The mass production of synthetic
rubber was an outgrowth of mobilization for the war. During the 1920s and 1930s, Standard
Oil of New Jersey monopolized the related intellectual property through contracts with
the Germanys IG Farben. From the early 1940s, due to antitrust actions on the part of
the Justice Department and coordination of mobilization agenciesincluding the Industrial
Materials Division, which created the Synthetic Rubber Committee–production was turned


                                             17
over to a group of companies, among them Union Carbide and Carbon with a new plant in
Kanawha County, West Virginia (Koistinen, 2004, pp. 150-157). The lines in Figure 6 show
that neither Kanawha County (dashed) nor the remaining counties that received wartime
investment (solid) grew more rapidly after World War II relative to counties that received
no wartime investment.

     In contrast, the panels of Figure 7 show manufacturing activity in Cobb County, Geor-
gia, which exhibits more postwar industrialization than other counties in the state. Combes
(2001) describes the efforts on the part of local politicians that led to the opening of a Bell
Aircraft plant in Marietta (Cobb County) in early 1942. The plant, which manufactured the
B-29 during the war, grew from 1,179 employees to 17,094 by the end of 1943 and eventually
reached an employment peak above 20,000. In part, the tremendous growth of manufactur-
ing reflected in this and other accounts of the wartime South (see Schulman, 1991) helped
reinforce the view of structural transformation fueled by World War II investment. In the
case of Bell Aircraft in Georgia and other newcomers to advanced manufacturing across the
South, the war appeared to bring demand and training for new skills.

     From the panels of Figure 7, Cobb County (dashed line) and the remaining coun-
ties with some wartime investment (solid line) show divergence, which suggest the plant
contributed to postwar growth of manufacturing in Cobb County. Importantly, surges in
employment, the wage bill, and value-added in the 1950s and 1970s were largely due to gov-
ernment contracts with the Lockheed Corporation for the C-130, C-141, and C-5B. Thus, at
least for Cobb County, Figure 7 shows the legacy of World War II investment was positive
and closely tied to the postwar military-industrial complex (Combes, 2001).

     These case studies present two alternative scenarios for the impact of new plant con-
struction as part of wartime mobilization. To test for the impact of new plants, I estimate
the following equation:

                               1987
                               X                                  1987
                                                                  X
        ln Yct = αc + αst +             γτ plantc × 1{τ = t} +             Γτ Xc × 1{τ = t} + ct   (3)
                              τ =1920                            τ =1920


which replaces ln(investc + 1) with an indicator, plantc , for whether wartime investment



                                                   18
reflected the construction of a new plant. Figure 8 shows the results from plotting the
coefficients on plantc for each year and manufacturing outcome. Each regression includes
county and state-year fixed effects as well controls for prewar county characteristics (inter-
acted with year fixed effects). In each panel the results show no evidence of a prewar trend
and no statistically significant impact of large World War II plants. The large standard
errors mean I cannot rule out positive effects for some counties, possibly stemming from
the Cold War build-up and growth of the military-industrial complex in the postwar period.
But the results suggest no systematic impact of World War II investment alone on southern
industrialization. In the absence of demand through government contracts, many local en-
trepreneurs elected to return to prewar activities in non-manufacturing sectors or specialize
in types of production spillovers to the local economy were limited.

     Overall, World War II investment may have been too specific to military production
or utilized to the point of near complete depreciation as a result of two- or three-shift runs
during the mobilization period (Higgs, 2006; Field, 2011; Rockoff, 2012). This is consistent
with the substantial discounts tabulated by White (1980, p. 104) that were applied to the
sale of surplus property in the postwar period: his estimates as a share of initial spending
range between 12 and 50 percent. This is also in line with evidence from Ramey and Shapiro
(2001) for the reallocation of capital following a downturn in the aerospace industry in the
1990s due to demobilization from the Cold War. For World War II, specific projects may
have been beneficial, but the typical county experienced few or no gains.

Robustness to controlling for the New Deal and military bases

     Prior to World War II, the onset of the Great Depression hit Southern agriculture and
industry hard. The price of cotton and other agricultural commodities plummeted and, as
a result, farm incomes in 1929 were at their lowest level in three decades (Schulman, 1991,
p. 14, footnote 48). In addition, high rates of unemployment among industrial workers
and persistent regional wage differentials attracted the attention of national policymakers.
Starting in 1933, Congress passed several pieces of legislation. For example, the Agricul-
tural Adjustment Act (AAA) sought to reduce crop production and raise commodity prices
through payments to farmers, while the Tennessee Valley Authority (TVA) worked to im-



                                             19
prove infrastructure and provide cheap access to electricity.

       These policies along with technological change contributed to a reorganization of the
Southern economy that played out fully over the subsequent decades. For example, mech-
anization replaced labor in pre-harvest cotton operations, which reversed previous trends
toward a large number of tenants distributed among smaller sized farms and began to break-
down landlord-tenant relations (Alston, 1981; Whatley, 1983).10 Throughout the 1930s the
TVA sought to attract more small industry (e.g., hosiery, textile, and lumber mills) that
would provide employment for surplus agricultural labor (Schulman, 1991, p. 35). After the
outbreak of World War II the TVA began to pursue a policy based on a close link between
electricity, industrialization, and economic growth.11 As a result, it is important to control
for differences in New Deal policy across southern counties that may also be correlated with
differences in war-related investment.

       In addition to differences in New Deal policy, other aspects of mobilization for World
War II may have played a role in the postwar growth of manufacturing. For example, the
war increased the number of military bases in the region, which may have stimulated local
demand or encouraged the siting of new manufacturing plants (Schulman, 1991). In the
online appendix, results presented in Table A1 show that including all of these controls
together does not alter the main conclusions.

             Results for Population, Housing, Wholesale, and Retail

       The results from the previous section show little impact of World War II investment on
southern industrialization. However, this does not rule out changes in other aspects of the
regions economy. The immediate impact of mobilization for war was a booming economy that
provided a job to anyone willing to work and, in many cases, willing to move. Some workers
left altogether while others moved within the region to take advantage of higher paying
jobs associated with war production in southern cities. This section documents population
movements together with the war’s impact on the housing, wholesale, and retail sectors.
  10
     Structural transformation in the 1930s, including the contribution of other New Deal policies, natural
disasters and the expansion of secondary education have received attention in the literature (e.g., Caselli
and Coleman, 2001; Fishback, Horrace, and Kantor, 2005; Hornbeck, 2012; Hornbeck and Naidu, 2014)
  11
     Kitchens (2014) and Kline and Moretti (2014) study the impact of the TVA on manufacturing growth
in the postwar period.



                                                    20
      Table 4 presents the results of replacing the dependent variable in equation (1) with
variables related to population (Panel A), housing (Panel B), and the retail (Panel C) and
wholesale (Panel D) sectors. Panel A shows that total population increase in counties that
received relatively more wartime investment. Quantitatively, the effect is large: a county
with 10 percent more wartime investment had population that was 0.06 percent larger on
average. Over the entire postwar period wartime investment is correlated with a substantial
decrease in the black population. This is consistent with greater opportunities for white
workers in high-paying industries during and after the war (Schulman, 1991, p. 83). Finally,
the war does not appear to have altered the distribution of population between urban and
rural areas within southern counties. Overall, the differences suggest a strong migration
response among whites within the South and out-migration on part of African-Americans.12

      Panel B shows limited changes in postwar housing markets due to wartime investment.
There were small increases in the number of owner- and renter-occupied units and decreases
in the median house value and gross rent. The magnitudes tend to be economically small:
0.03 percent for the number of owned units and 0.08 to 0.10 percent for housing costs for a 10
percent increase in wartime investment. These results are consistent with the expansion of
housing supply (and some social services) in areas with a booming war economy and influx of
migrants, although the effects are modest (and not always statistically different from zero).
The small effects on housing speak to the temporary nature of wartime mobilization.

      Finally, Panels C and D indicate mixed effects of wartime investment on the number of
establishments, employment, wages and sales in the retail and wholesale sectors. Together
with the impact on population movements, these results suggest that although the war did
not lead to differential growth in manufacturing, mobilization still played an important role
in shaping the economic growth of the American South through the reallocation of the
population across space and the subsequent stimulus provided by consumer demand and
government contracts in these markets. This is part of a process of wholesale and retail
expansion that started in the 1930s and continued to play out over the second half of the
   12
      Additional results (not shown) indicate that the out-migration of southern blacks occurred after 1960,
which is consistent with the ability of Southern elites to maintain agricultural labor supply during mobiliza-
tion and in the immediate postwar period.




                                                     21
twentieth century (Cobb, 1982; Schulman, 1991; Holmes, 2011).

     Both the New Deal and World War II played a prominent role in bringing the influence
of the federal government to the American South and invigorated spending throughout the
region. The legacy of mobilization for World War II does not appear to be a newly created
and dynamic industrial economy. Instead, mobilization spurred the movement of population
and, to a lesser extent, the growth of the wholesale and retail sectors. Indeed, according to
Schulman Schulman (1991, p. 221) and Downs (2014, p. 257), another area where the South
gained was in industries with substantial demand from government contracts, in particular,
the defense industry (Markusen, Hall, Campbell, and Deitrick, 1991).

                                        Conclusion

     Prior to World War II, the South lagged behind the rest of the country, which led Pres-
ident Franklin D. Roosevelt in 1938 to describe the region as “the nation’s no. 1 economic
problem” (Roosevelt, 1938). Through mobilization for World War II the federal govern-
ment stimulated demand for industrial goods and infused the region with substantial new
investment. Many analysts have since attributed the regions postwar growth to the spark
provided by mobilization. Using newly assembled data on the location and value of World
War II investment, I examine the impact of capital deepening on the local manufacturing
activity. My results indicate that previous research has claimed too much certainty in linking
mobilization with the subsequent growth of manufacturing in the American South.

     I present empirical evidence using newly digitized data on the location and value of
wartime investment to show that capital deepening during the 1940s was not decisive. I use
an empirical strategy that controls for prewar differences across southern counties in the level
of industrial development as well as state and federal policies over the period that targeted
the region. This is particularly important given substantial heterogeneity in prewar levels
of industrialization across the South. The estimated coefficients tend to be small and not
statistically significant, although I cannot reject effects that are sizable for some outcomes
due to large standard errors. Indeed, using Cobb (Georgia) and Kanawha (West Virginia)
counties as case studies, I show large investments may have led to markedly different postwar
experiences. Together, these findings are consistent with differences in depreciation across


                                              22
wartime investment projects, specificity for capital redeployed from military uses, and the
mediating role of federal government contracts in the postwar period. Future research should
focus on the relative importance of these factors.




                                             23
References
Alston, Lee J. “Tenure Choice in Southern Agriculture, 1930-1960.” Explorations in Eco-
  nomic History 18.3 (1981): 181–194.
Azariadis, Costas and Stachurski, John. “Poverty Traps.” Handbook of Economic Growth.
  eds. Philippe Aghion and Steven N. Durlauf, vol. 1. New York, NY: Elsvier B.V., 2005.
  295–384.
Bateman, Fred, Ros, Jamie, and Taylor, Jason E. “Did New Deal and World War II Public
  Capital Investments Facilitate a ‘Big Push’ in the American South?” Journal of Institu-
  tional and Theoretical Economics 165.2 (2009): 307–341.
Bateman, Fred and Taylor, Jason E. “The New Deal at War: Alphabet Agencies’ Expendi-
  ture Patterns, 1940–1945.” Explorations in Economic History 40.3 (2003): 251–277.
Caselli, Francesco and Coleman, Wilbur John. “The U.S. Structural Transformation and
  Regional Convergence: A Reinterpretation.” Journal of Political Economy 109.3 (2001):
  584–616.
Chinitz, Benjamin. “Contrasts in Agglomeration: New York and Pittsburgh.” American
  Economic Review 51.2 (1961): 279–289.
Cobb, James C. The Selling of the South: The Southern Crusade for Industrial Development,
  1936-90. Baton Rouge, LA: Louisiana State University Press, 1982.
Combes, Richard S. “Aircraft Manufacturing in Georgia: A Case Study of Federal Industrial
  Investment.” The Second Wave: Southern Industrialization from the 1940s to the 1970s.
  ed. Philip Scranton. Athens, GA: University of Georgia Press, 2001.
Deming, Frederick L. and Stein, Weldon A. Disposal Of Southern War Plants. Washington,
  DC: National Planning Association, 1949.
Downs, Matthew L. Transforming the South: Federal Development in the Tennessee Valley,
  1915-1960. Baton Rouge, LA: Louisiana State University Press, 2014.
Ferguson, Karen. “The Politics of Exclusion: Wartime Industrialization, Civil Rights Mo-
  bilization, and the Black Politics in Atlanta, 1942-1946.” The Second Wave: Southern
  Industrialization from the 1940s to the 1970s. ed. Philip Scranton. Athens, GA: University
  of Georgia Press, 2001.
Field, Alexander J. A Great Leap Forward: 1930s Depression and U.S. Economic Growth.
  New Haven, CT: Yale University Press, 2011.
Fishback, Price V. and Cullen, Joseph A. “Second World War Spending and Local Economic
  Activity in US Counties, 1939-58.” Economic History Review 66.4 (2013): 975–992.
Fishback, Price V., Horrace, William C., and Kantor, Shawn. “Did New Deal Grant Pro-
  grams Stimulate Local Economies? A Study of Federal Grants and Retail Sales during
  the Great Depression.” Journal of Economic History 65.1 (2005): 36–71.
———. “The Impact of New Deal Expenditures on Mobility During the Great Depression.”
  Explorations in Economic History 43.2 (2006): 179–222.
Glaeser, Edward L. and Gottlieb, Joshua D. “The Economics of Place-Making Policies.”
  Brookings Papers on Economic Activity 39.1 (2008): 155–253.
———. “The Wealth of Cities: Agglomeration Economies and Spatial Equilibrium in the
  United States.” Journal of Economic Literature 47.2 (2009): 983–1028.
Glaeser, Edward L., Kerr, Sari Pekkala, and Kerr, William R. “Entrepreneurship and Urban


                                            24
  Growth: An Empirical Assessment with Historical Mines.” Review of Economics and
  Statistics 97.2 (2015): 498–520.
Haines, Michael R. Historical, Demographic, Economic, and Social Data: The united States,
  1790-2000, vol. ICPSR02896-v3. Ann Arbor, MI: Inter-university Consortium for Political
  and Social Research [distributor], 2010.
Heim, Carol. “Structural Changes: Regional and Urban.” The Cambridge Economic History
  of the United States. eds. Stanley L. Engerman and Robert E. Gallman, vol. 3. Cambridge,
  UK: Cambridge University Press, 2000. 93–190.
Higgs, Robert. Crisis and Leviathan: Critical Episodes in the Growth of American Govern-
  ment. Oxford, UK: Oxford University Press, 1987.
———. “Private Profit, Public Risk: Institutional Antecedents of the Modern Military
  Procurement System in the Rearmament Program of 1940-41.” Depression, War, and
  Cold War: Studies in Political Economy. ed. Robert Higgs. Oxford: Oxford University
  Press, 2006.
Holmes, Thomas J. “The Effect of State Policies on the Location of Manufacturing: Evidence
  from State Borders.” Journal of Political Economy 106.4 (1998): 667–705.
———. “The Diffusion of Wal-Mart and Economies of Density.” Econometrica 79.1 (2011):
  253–302.
Hooks, Gregory and Bloomquist, Leonard E. “The Legacy of World War II for Regional
  Growth and Decline: The Cumulative Effects of Wartime Investments on U.S. Manufac-
  turing, 1947-1972.” Social Forces 71.2 (1992): 303–337.
Hornbeck, Richard. “The Enduring Impact of the American Dust Bowl: Short- and Long-
  Run Adjustments to Environmental Catastrophe.” American Economic Review 102.4
  (2012): 1477–1507.
Hornbeck, Richard and Naidu, Suresh. “When the Levee Breaks: Black Migration and
  Economic Devleopment in the American South.” American Economic Review 104.3 (2014):
  963–990.
Hülsemann, Karsten. “Greenfields in the Heart of Dixie: How the American Auto Industry
  Discovered the South.” The Second Wave: Southern Industrialization from the 1940s to
  the 1970s. ed. Philip Scranton. Athens, GA: University of Georgia Press, 2001.
Jaworski, Taylor and Smyth, Andrew. “Shakeout in the Early Commercial Airframe Indus-
  try.” Economic History Review .
Kitchens, Carl. “The Role of Publicly Provided Electricity in Economic Development: The
  Experience of the Tennessee Valley Authority, 19291955.” Journal of Economic History
  74.2 (2014): 389–419.
Klein, Maury. A Call to Arms: Mobilizing America for World War II. New York, NY:
  Bloomsbury Press, 2013.
Kline, Patrick and Moretti, Enrico. “Local Economic Development, Agglomeration
  Economies and the Big Push: 100 Years of Evidence from the Tennessee Valley Authority.”
  Quarterly Journal of Economics 129.1 (2014): 275–331.
Koistinen, Paul A.C. Planning War, Pursuing Peace: The Political Economy of American
  Warfare, 1920-1939. Lawrence, KS: University Kansas Press, 1998.
———. Arsenal of World War II: The Political Economy of American Warfare, 1940-1945.
  Lawrence, KS: University Kansas Press, 2004.

                                           25
Lewis, Robert. “World War II Manufacturing and the Postwar Southern Economy.” Journal
  of Southern History 73.4 (2007): 837–866.
Markusen, Ann, Hall, Peter, Campbell, Scott, and Deitrick, Sabina. The Rise of the Gunbelt:
  The Military Remapping of Industrial America. Oxford, UK: Oxford University Press,
  1991.
Mitchener, Kris and McLean, Ian W. “U.S. Regional Growth and Convergence, 1880-1980.”
  Journal of Economic History 59.4 (1999): 1016–1042.
Murphy, Kevin M., Shleifer, Andrei, and Vishny, Robert W. “Industrialization and the Big
  Push.” Journal of Political Economy 97.5 (1989): 1003–1026.
Neumark, David and Simpson, Helen. “Place-Based Policies.” NBER Working Paper 20049.
Nurkse, Ragnar. Problems of Capital Formation in Underdeveloped Countries. Oxford, UK:
  Oxford University Press, 1953.
Ramey, Valerie A. and Shapiro, Matthew D. “Displaced Capital: A Study of Aerospace
  Plant Closings.” Journal of Political Economy 109.5 (2001): 958–992.
Rauber, Earle L. “Economic Appraisal of the Postwar South.” Monthly Review of the Federal
  Reserve Bank of Atlanta 31.1 (1946): 1–2.
Rhode, Paul W. “After the War Boom: Reconversion on the Pacific Coast, 1943-1949.”
  History Matters: Essays on Economic Growth, Technology, and Demographic Change.
  eds. Timothy Guinnane William Sundstrom and Warren Whatley. Stanford: Stanford
  University Press, 2003.
Rockoff, Hugh. America’s Economic Way of War: War and the US Economy from the
  Spanish-American War to the Persian Gulf War. Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University
  Press, 2012.
Roosevelt, Franklin D. “Fireside Chat.” Dec 29, 1940.
  URL http://www.presidency.ucsb.edu/ws/?pid=15917
———. “Message to the Conference on Economic Conditions of the South.” Jul 4, 1938.
  URL http://www.presidency.ucsb.edu/ws/?pid=15670
Rosenstein-Rodan, Paul N. “Problems of Industrialisation of Eastern and South-Eastern
  Europe.” Economic Journal 53.210 (1943): 202–211.
Schulman, Bruce J. From Cotton Belt to Sunbelt: Federal Policy, Economic Development,
  and the Transformation of the South, 1938-1980. Oxford, UK: Oxford University Press,
  1991.
Seltzer, Andrew J. “The Effects of the Fair Labor Standards Act of 1938 on the Southern
  Seamless Hosiery and Lumber Industries.” Journal of Economic History 57.2 (1997):
  396–415.
Sosna, Morton. “More Important than the Civil War? The Impact of World War II on the
  South.” Perspectives on the American South: An Annual Review of Society, Politics, and
  Culture 4: 145–61.
Tindall, George Brown. The Emergence of the New South, 1913-1945. Baton Rouge, LA:
  Louisiana State University Press, 1967.
US Joint Army and Navy Munitions Board. Industrial Mobilization Plan: Revision of 1938.
  Washington, DC: Government Printing Office, 1938.
US War Production Board. War Manufacturing Facilities Authorized through December
  1944, by State and County. Washington, DC: Government Printing Office, 1945.

                                            26
Wallis, John J. “Employment, Politics, and Economic Recovery during the Great Depres-
 sion.” Review of Economics and Statistics 69.3 (1987): 516–520.
Whatley, Warren C. “Labor for the Picking: The New Deal in the South.” Journal of
 Economic History 43.4 (1983): 905–929.
White, Gerarld T. Billions for Defense: Government Finance by the Defense Plant Corpo-
 ration During World War II. University, AL: University Alabama Press, 1980.
Wilson, Mark R. Destructive Creation: American Business and the Winning of World War
 II. Philadelphia, PA: University of Pennsylvania Press, 2016.
Wright, Gavin. Old South, New South: Revolutions in the Southern Economy Since the Civil
 War. New York, NY: Basic Books, 1986.
———. “Afterword.” The Second Wave: Southern Industrialization from the 1940s to the
 1970s. ed. Philip Scranton. Athens, GA: University of Georgia Press, 2001.




                                          27
                                            Figure 1: Trends in Aggregate Manufacturing in the US South
                                                     Establishments                                                                          Employment
      share of establishments




                                                                                         share of employment
                                .3




                                                                                                                       .3
                                .2




                                                                                                                       .2
                                .1




                                                                                                                       .1

                                     1880    1900   1920    1940      1960   1980                                           1880   1900   1920         1940   1960       1980
                                                                                         share of output/value-added




                                                       Wage Bill                                                                          Output/Value-Added
      share of wage bill
                                .3




                                                                                                                       .3
                                .2




                                                                                                                       .2




                                                                                                                                                                     value-added
                                                                                                                                              output
                                .1




                                                                                                                       .1




                                     1880    1900   1920    1940      1960   1980                                           1880   1900   1920         1940   1960       1980



Notes: The panels show the share of establishments, employment, wages, and output and value
added in the South in each year between 1880 and 1987. The South includes all counties in
Alabama, Arkansas, Delaware, Florida, Georgia, Kentucky, and Louisiana, Maryland, Mississippi,
North Carolina, Oklahoma, South Carolina, Tennessee, Texas, Virginia, and West Virginia, and
the District of Columbia. Data are from Haines (2010).




                                                                                    28
                   Figure 2: World War II Investment in the US South




Notes: The map shows the value of World War II investment.




                                            29
Figure 3: Relationship Between Wartime Investment and Pre- and Post-war Manufacturing

                                           Establishments                                                    Employment
                                0.2




                                                                                                 0.4
       Estimated Coefficients




                                                                        Estimated Coefficients
                                0.1




                                                                                                 0.2
                                0.0




                                                                                                 0.0
                                  1920   1940       1960    1980                                   1920   1940    1960     1980

                                                Wage Bill                                                    Value-Added
                                0.4




                                                                                                 0.4
       Estimated Coefficients




                                                                        Estimated Coefficients
                                0.2




                                                                                                 0.2
                                0.0




                                                                                                 0.0




                                  1920   1940       1960    1980                                   1920   1940    1960     1980



 Notes: Each panel plots regression coefficients on log of wartime investment from an regression
that includes state-year fixed effects and the log of the number establishments, employment, wage
bill, and value-added as the dependent variable. Each panel shows coefficients and the 95 percent
confidence interval in the solid and dashed black lines, respectively. The number of sample counties
is 1,086.




                                                                   30
                                         Figure 4: Impact of Wartime Investment on Manufacturing

                                              Establishments                                                    Employment
                                0.1




                                                                                                    0.2
       Estimated Coefficients




                                                                           Estimated Coefficients
                                0.0




                                                                                                    0.0
                                -0.1




                                                                                                    -0.2
                                  1920     1940       1960     1980                                   1920   1940    1960     1980

                                                  Wage Bill                                                     Value-Added
                                0.4




                                                                                                    0.4
       Estimated Coefficients




                                                                           Estimated Coefficients
                                0.0




                                                                                                    0.0
                                -0.4




                                                                                                    -0.4




                                  1920     1940       1960     1980                                   1920   1940    1960     1980



Notes: Each panel plots regression coefficients on log of wartime investment from equation (1) with
the log of the number establishments, employment, wage bill, and value-added as the dependent
variable. The solid and dashed black lines show coefficients and the 95 percent confidence interval
from a specification that includes state-year and county fixed effects as well as county-level controls
(interacted with year fixed effects). The 95 percent confidence interval is based on standard errors
clustered at the state level. The number of sample counties is 1,086.




                                                                      31
                                           Figure 5: Impact of Public versus Private Wartime Investment

                                                   Establishments                                                                 Employment
                                    0.1




                                                                                                                 0.2
           Estimated Coefficients




                                                                                        Estimated Coefficients
                                    0.0




                                                                                                                 0.0
                                    -0.1




                                      1920       1940    1960        1980                                        -0.2
                                                                                                                   1920      1940       1960    1980

                                                     Wage Bill                                                                    Value-Added
                                    0.4




                                                                                                                 0.4
           Estimated Coefficients




                                                                                        Estimated Coefficients
                                    0.0




                                                                                                                 0.0
                                    -0.4




                                                                                                                 -0.4




                                      1920       1940    1960        1980                                          1920      1940       1960    1980

                                                                    coef, public                                        coef, private




Notes: Each panel plots regression coefficients on log of wartime investment from public (solid
black) and private (dashed gray) sources of financing from versions of equation (1) with the log of
the number establishments, employment, wage bill, and value-added as the dependent variable. All
specifications include state-year and county fixed effects as well as county-level controls (interacted
with year fixed effects). The number of sample counties is 1,086.




                                                                                   32
                                                  Figure 6: Case Study of Kanawha County (West Virginia)

                                                      Establishments                                                                           Employment
                                           6




                                                                                                                                 6
      diff. relative to no WWII spending




                                                                                            diff. relative to no WWII spending
                                           4




                                                                                                                                 4
                                                                                                                                                                    Kanawha
                                           2




                                                                                                                                 2
                                                                            Kanawha                                                                                 positive
                                                                            positive
                                           0




                                                                                                                                 0



                                           1920   1940    1960       1980                                                        1920   1940      1960       1980

                                                         Wage Bill                                                                             Value-Added
                                           6




                                                                                                                                 6
      diff. relative to no WWII spending




                                                                                            diff. relative to no WWII spending
                                           4




                                                                                                                                 4




                                                                            Kanawha                                                                                 Kanawha

                                                                            positive                                                                                positive
                                           2




                                                                                                                                 2
                                           0




                                                                                                                                 0




                                           1920   1940    1960       1980                                                        1920   1940      1960       1980


 Notes: Each panel plots differences between counties in West Virginia with positive wartime
investment (solid line) or Kanawha County (dashed line) relative to counties in West Virginia
that received zero investment. The four panels show differences for the number establishments,
employment, wage bill, and value-added.




                                                                                       33
                                                      Figure 7: Case Study of Cobb County (Georgia)

                                                      Establishments                                                                            Employment
                                            4




                                                                                                                                  4
       diff. relative to no WWII spending




                                                                                             diff. relative to no WWII spending
                                            3




                                                                                                                                  3
                                                                                                                                                                     Cobb
                                                                             Cobb
                                            2




                                                                                                                                  2
                                            1




                                                                                                                                  1
                                                                                                                                                                     positive
                                                                             positive
                                            0




                                                                                                                                  0



                                            1920   1940    1960       1980                                                        1920   1940      1960       1980

                                                          Wage Bill                                                                             Value-Added
                                            4




                                                                                                                                  4
       diff. relative to no WWII spending




                                                                                             diff. relative to no WWII spending
                                            3




                                                                                                                                  3




                                                                             Cobb                                                                                    Cobb
                                            2




                                                                                                                                  2
                                            1




                                                                                                                                  1




                                                                             positive                                                                                positive
                                            0




                                                                                                                                  0




                                            1920   1940    1960       1980                                                        1920   1940      1960       1980


Notes: Each panel plots differences between counties in Georgia with positive wartime investment
(solid line) or Cobb County (dashed line) relative to counties in Georgia that received zero invest-
ment. The four panels show differences for the number establishments, employment, wage bill, and
value-added.




                                                                                        34
                                         Figure 8: Impact of Wartime Plants on Manufacturing

                                            Establishments                                                    Employment




                                                                                                  1.0
                                0.5
       Estimated Coefficients




                                                                         Estimated Coefficients
                                                                                                  0.0
                                0.0




                                                                                                  -1.0
                                -0.5




                                  1920   1940       1960     1980                                   1920   1940    1960     1980

                                                Wage Bill                                                     Value-Added
                                3.0




                                                                                                  3.0
       Estimated Coefficients




                                                                         Estimated Coefficients
                                                                                                  0.0
                                0.0




                                                                                                  -3.0
                                -3.0




                                  1920   1940       1960     1980                                   1920   1940    1960     1980



Notes: Each panel plots regression coefficients on an indicator for a newly constructed plant due
to World War II from equation (3) with the log of the number establishments, employment, wage
bill, and value-added as the dependent variable. Each panel shows coefficients and the 95 percent
confidence interval from specifications that include state-year and county fixed effects as well as
county-level controls (interacted with year fixed effects) The 95 percent confidence interval is based
on standard errors clustered at the state level. The number of sample counties is 1,086.




                                                                    35
                          Table 1: Determinants of Wartime Investment
                                              (1)            (2)          (3)           (4)

             ln(contracts + 1)              0.0610          0.0575      0.0580        0.0582
                                           (0.0140)        (0.0142)    (0.0142)      (0.0142)
             IMP facilities ≥ 1             0.3600          0.3204      0.3660        0.3013
                                           (0.2301)        (0.2298)    (0.2282)      (0.2293)
             ln(est. in 1920)               1.0079
                                           (0.1404)
             ln(emp. in 1920)                               0.5251
                                                           (0.0748)
             ln(wages in 1920)                                          0.4882
                                                                       (0.0686)
             ln(value-added in 1920)                                                  0.5495
                                                                                     (0.0749)

Notes: Each column shows the results of regression of log of wartime investment, ln(invest + 1), on prewar
county characteristics. ln(contracts + 1), is the value of government spending on supply contracts. Indicator
variables are included for the number of facilities assigned under the Industrial Mobilization Plan. The
remaining entries are the lagged number of establishments (column 1), employment (column 2), wages
(column 3), and value-added (column 4) in 1920. All regressions include prewar county characteristics and
state fixed effects. Standard errors (in parentheses) are clustered at the state level. The number of sample
counties is 1,086.




                                                      36
                   Table 2: Impact of Wartime Investment on Manufacturing
                                         Est.        Emp.       Wage Bill      Value-Added
                                         (1)          (2)         (3)              (4)

             ln(invest + 1) × 1920      -0.0197      -0.0404      0.0062          0.0060
                                       (0.0062)     (0.0173)     (0.0400)        (0.0437)
             ln(invest + 1) × 1930      -0.0173      -0.0274      0.0223          0.0283
                                       (0.0043)     (0.0103)     (0.0389)        (0.0437)
             ln(invest + 1) × 1940         –            –            –               –

             ln(invest + 1) × 1947      -0.0061       0.0087      -0.0518         -0.0479
                                       (0.0066)     (0.0126)     (0.0444)        (0.0499)
             ln(invest + 1) × 1954      -0.0040      -0.0014      0.0017           0.0196
                                       (0.0075)     (0.0203)     (0.0569)        (0.0630)
             ln(invest + 1) × 1958      0.0022        0.0067      -0.0327         -0.0187
                                       (0.0086)     (0.0157)     (0.0401)        (0.0432)
             ln(invest + 1) × 1963      0.0059        0.0100       0.0647          0.0782
                                       (0.0085)     (0.0172)     (0.0475)        (0.0542)
             ln(invest + 1) × 1967      0.0035       -0.0243      0.0400           0.0441
                                       (0.0086)     (0.0342)     (0.0824)        (0.0870)
             ln(invest + 1) × 1972      0.0107        0.0061       0.0922          0.0956
                                       (0.0094)     (0.0180)     (0.0527)        (0.0560)
             ln(invest + 1) × 1977      0.0112        0.0006       0.0838          0.0849
                                       (0.0101)     (0.0208)     (0.0513)        (0.0529)
             ln(invest + 1) × 1982      0.0142       -0.0381      0.0075          -0.0011
                                       (0.0119)     (0.0275)     (0.0497)        (0.0513)
             ln(invest + 1) × 1987      0.0096       -0.0086      0.0917           0.0939
                                       (0.0111)     (0.0427)     (0.0928)        (0.0959)

Notes: Each column shows the results of estimating equation (1) for the log of different manufacturing
outcomes: establishments (column 1), employment (column 2), wage bill (column 3), and value-added by
manufacturing (column 4). All columns are from a specification that includes state-year and county fixed
effects as well as county-level controls (interacted with year fixed effects). The years included are 1920,
1930, 1940, 1947, 1954, 1958, 1963, 1967, 1972, 1977, 1982, and 1987. Standard errors (in parentheses) are
clustered at the state level. The number of sample counties is 1,086.




                                                    37
             Table 3: Impact of Wartime Investment on Establishments by Sector
                             food         textiles     lumber         paper        chemicals       petroleum
                              (1)           (2)          (3)           (4)            (5)             (6)

ln(invest + 1) × post       0.1742        0.1465        0.3414        0.0712         0.1661          0.0389
                           (0.1278)      (0.0956)      (0.1899)      (0.0216)       (0.0898)        (0.0185)

                            rubber        leather         stone       metals      machinery        trans. eq
                              (7)           (8)            (9)         (10)         (11)              (12)

ln(invest + 1) × post       0.0460        0.0109        0.2201        0.5871         0.4868          0.1383
                           (0.0178)      (0.0114)      (0.0957)      (0.1922)       (0.2315)        (0.0577)

Notes: The dependent variable in each column is the number of establishments in a given sector. All columns
include county fixed effects, state-year fixed effects, and prewar county characteristics interacted with year
effects. The years included are 1935, 1939, 1947, 1954, and 1958. Standard errors (in parentheses) are
clustered at the state level. The number of sample counties is 1,086.




                                                     38
                                   Table 4: Impact of Wartime Investment on Non-Manufacturing Outcomes
                                              A. Population:                                                   B. Housing:
                                 Total       Black     Urban          Rural           Units Owned      Median Value    Units Rented        Gross Rent
                                  (1)         (2)        (3)           (4)                 (1)             (2)              (3)               (4)

      ln(invest + 1) × post      0.0059      -0.0090      0.0074      -0.0046            -0.0032           -0.0102           0.0002           -0.0075
                                (0.0021)    (0.0055)     (0.0149)    (0.0036)           (0.0046)          (0.0060)          (0.0029)         (0.0033)

                                                 C. Retail:                                                    D. Wholesale:
39




                                  Est.       Emp.       Wages          Sales              Est.              Emp.            Wages             Sales
                                  (1)         (2)          (3)          (4)               (1)                (2)             (3)               (4)

      ln(invest + 1) × post      0.0027      0.0016       -0.0006     0.0022             0.0032            0.0012            -0.0139          0.0022
                                (0.0007)    (0.0010)     (0.0007)    (0.0008)           (0.0014)          (0.0025)          (0.0071)         (0.0074)

     Notes: The dependent variable in each column is a non-manufacturing outcome (in log). Panel A includes total, black, urban, and rural population;
     Panel B includes the number of owner-occupied housing units, the median house value, the number of renter-occupied units, and the value of gross
     rent; Panels C and D each give the number of establishments, employment, wages, and sales. All columns include county fixed effects, state-year
     fixed effects, and prewar county characteristics interacted with year effects. The years included in panels A and B are 1920, 1930, 1940, 1950, 1960,
     1970, and 1980; panels C and D include 1930, 1940, 1947, 1954, 1958, 1963, 1967, 1972, 1977, 1982, and 1987. Standard errors (in parentheses) are
     clustered at the state level. The number of sample counties is 1,086.
A    Online Appendix


                     Figure A1: Prewar Manufacturing Relative to Wartime II Investment
                                     6




                                                                                2




                                                                                                                        1
           percent of war investment




                                                                                                                        .5
                       3




                                                                                1
                          0




                                                                                0




                                                                                                                        0
                                          0            3               6              0             1              2           0             .5             1




                                                                                                                        .05
                                     .5




                                                                                .1
           percent of war investment




                                                                                                                        .025
                      .25




                                                                                .05
                          0




                                                                                0




                                                                                                                        0
                                          0             .25                .5         0             .05            .1          0            .025            .05
                                              percent of value-added                      percent of value-added                   percent of value-added


                                                                                  South             Non-South


Notes: Notes: Each point indicates a county with given share of value-added by manufacturing
in 1939 and given share of war-related investment. The solid (empty) dots indicate counties from
southern (non-southern) states; solid (dashed) lines indicate the best linear fit through the southern
(non-southern) dots. The different panels restrict attention to counties with different levels of
manufacturing activity and war-related investment. Data on the value-added by manufacturing in
1939 and wartime investment are drawn from Haines (2010).




                                                                                               40
                                   Figure A2: Impact of Wartime Investment on Manufacturing (in levels)

                                 .2           Establishments                                                    Employment




                                                                                                    .2
       Estimated Coefficients.




                                                                           Estimated Coefficients
                                 0




                                                                                                    0
                                 -.2




                                                                                                    -.2
                                   1920    1940       1960     1980                                   1920   1940    1960     1980

                                                  Wage Bill                                                     Value-Added
                                 .2




                                                                                                    .2
       Estimated Coefficients




                                                                           Estimated Coefficients
                                 0




                                                                                                    0
                                 -.2




                                                                                                    -.2

                                   1920    1940       1960     1980                                   1920   1940    1960     1980



Notes: Each panel plots regression coefficients on the level of wartime investment a specification
similar to equation (1) with level of the number establishments, employment, wage bill, and value-
added as the dependent variable. Each panel shows coefficients and the 95 percent confidence
interval from a specification that includes state-year fixed effects, county fixed effects, and county-
level controls (interacted with year fixed effects). The 95 percent confidence interval is based on
standard errors clustered at the state level. The number of sample counties is 1,086.




                                                                      41
                                       Figure A3: Impact of Wartime Supply Contracts on Manufacturing

                                               Establishments                                                    Employment
                                0.1




                                                                                                     0.1
       Estimated Coefficients




                                                                            Estimated Coefficients
                                0.0




                                                                                                     0.0
                                -0.1




                                                                                                     -0.1
                                  1920       1940       1960    1980                                   1920   1940    1960     1980

                                                    Wage Bill                                                    Value-Added
                                0.2




                                                                                                     0.2
       Estimated Coefficients




                                                                            Estimated Coefficients
                                0.0




                                                                                                     0.0
                                -0.2




                                                                                                     -0.2
                                  1920       1940       1960    1980                                   1920   1940    1960     1980



Notes: Each panel plots regression coefficients on log of supply contracts from versions of equation
(1) with the log of the number establishments, employment, wage bill, and value-added as the
dependent variable. The gray line shows the coefficients from a specification that includes state-
year and county fixed effects. The solid and dashed black lines show coefficients and the 95 percent
confidence interval from a specification that includes state-year and county fixed effects as well
as county-level controls (interacted with year fixed effects). The 95 percent confidence interval is
based on standard errors clustered at the state level. The number of sample counties is 1,086.




                                                                       42
                                                                                              Figure A4: Impact of Wartime Investment and the Industrial Mobilization Plan
                                           Establishments                                               Employment                                               Establishments                                               Employment                                                Establishments                                               Employment
                                0.1




                                                                                            0.2




                                                                                                                                                      0.3




                                                                                                                                                                                                                  0.9




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            0.1




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         0.2
       Estimated Coefficients




                                                                   Estimated Coefficients




                                                                                                                             Estimated Coefficients




                                                                                                                                                                                         Estimated Coefficients




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   Estimated Coefficients




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                Estimated Coefficients
                                0.0




                                                                                            0.0




                                                                                                                                                      0.0




                                                                                                                                                                                                                  0.0




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            0.0




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         0.0
                                -0.1




                                                                                            -0.2




                                                                                                                                                      -0.3




                                                                                                                                                                                                                  -0.9




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            -0.1




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         -0.2
                                  1920   1940       1960    1980                              1920   1940    1960     1980                              1920   1940       1960    1980                              1920   1940    1960     1980                              1920    1940       1960    1980                              1920   1940    1960     1980

                                                Wage Bill                                               Value-Added                                                   Wage Bill                                               Value-Added                                                    Wage Bill                                               Value-Added
                                0.4




                                                                                            0.4




                                                                                                                                                      1.7




                                                                                                                                                                                                                  1.7




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            0.4




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         0.4
       Estimated Coefficients




                                                                   Estimated Coefficients




                                                                                                                             Estimated Coefficients




                                                                                                                                                                                         Estimated Coefficients




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   Estimated Coefficients




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                Estimated Coefficients
                                0.0




                                                                                            0.0




                                                                                                                                                      0.0




                                                                                                                                                                                                                  0.0




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            0.0




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         0.0
43



                                -0.4




                                                                                            -0.4




                                                                                                                                                      -1.7




                                                                                                                                                                                                                  -1.7




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            -0.4




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         -0.4
                                  1920   1940       1960    1980                              1920   1940    1960     1980                              1920   1940       1960    1980                              1920   1940    1960     1980                              1920    1940       1960    1980                              1920   1940    1960     1980



                                         A. Coefficient: ln(invest + 1)                                                                                                   B. Coefficient: IMP                                                                                      C. Coefficient: ln(invest + 1) × IMP
     Notes: Each panel plots a set of regression coefficients from equation (2) with the log of the number establishments, employment, wage
     bill, and value-added as the dependent variable. Panel A shows the coefficients and 95 percent confidence interval for ln(invest + 1),
     Panel B shows the coefficients on IMP, and Panel C shows the coefficients on the interaction, ln(invest + 1) × IMP. All specifications
     include state-year and county fixed effects as well as county-level controls (interacted with year fixed effects) The 95 percent confidence
     interval is based on standard errors clustered at the state level. The number of sample counties is 1,086.
         Table A1: Robustness for Impact of Wartime Investment on Manufacturing
                                          Est.         Emp.        Wage Bill      Value-Added
                                          (1)           (2)          (3)              (4)

             ln(invest + 1) × 1920       -0.0212       -0.0418       0.0068          0.0069
                                        (0.0056)      (0.0170)      (0.0408)        (0.0444)
             ln(invest + 1) × 1930       -0.0170       -0.0272       0.0244          0.0309
                                        (0.0041)      (0.0101)      (0.0398)        (0.0442)
             ln(invest + 1) × 1940          –             –             –               –

             ln(invest + 1) × 1947       -0.0050        0.0082       -0.0590         -0.0557
                                        (0.0063)      (0.0129)      (0.0474)        (0.0531)
             ln(invest + 1) × 1954       -0.0024       -0.0034       -0.0039          0.0148
                                        (0.0071)      (0.0206)      (0.0582)        (0.0641)
             ln(invest + 1) × 1958       0.0032         0.0044       -0.0359         -0.0206
                                        (0.0083)      (0.0158)      (0.0406)        (0.0438)
             ln(invest + 1) × 1963       0.0066         0.0059        0.0598          0.0745
                                        (0.0082)      (0.0174)      (0.0503)        (0.0567)
             ln(invest + 1) × 1967       0.0043        -0.0317        0.0285          0.0352
                                        (0.0084)      (0.0358)      (0.0839)        (0.0878)
             ln(invest + 1) × 1972       0.0108        -0.0039        0.0787          0.0828
                                        (0.0093)      (0.0189)      (0.0534)        (0.0566)
             ln(invest + 1) × 1977       0.0113        -0.0090        0.0702          0.0725
                                        (0.0101)      (0.0223)      (0.0507)        (0.0530)
             ln(invest + 1) × 1982       0.0141        -0.0487       -0.0060         -0.0146
                                        (0.0120)      (0.0283)      (0.0490)        (0.0506)
             ln(invest + 1) × 1987       0.0092        -0.0167        0.0792          0.0817
                                        (0.0112)      (0.0427)      (0.0931)        (0.0962)

Notes: Each column shows the results of estimating equation (1) for the log of different manufacturing
outcomes: establishments (column 1), employment (column 2), wage bill (column 3), and value-added by
manufacturing (column 4). All columns are from a specification that includes state-year and county fixed
effects as well as county-level controls (interacted with year fixed effects). In addition, all columns include
controls for New Deal Spending under the Agricultural Adjustment Act, an indicator for whether a county
was in the service territory of the Tennessee Valley Authority, and an indicator fro the presence of a military
base. The years included are 1920, 1930, 1940, 1947, 1954, 1958, 1963, 1967, 1972, 1977, 1982, and 1987.
Standard errors (in parentheses) are clustered at the state level. The number of sample counties is 1,086.




                                                      44
