                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                                  INSURGENT LEARNING

                                       Francesco Trebbi
                                          Eric Weese
                                       Austin L. Wright
                                        Andrew Shaver

                                      Working Paper 23475
                              http://www.nber.org/papers/w23475


                    NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                             1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                               Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    June 2017




We thank Matilde Bombardini, Ethan Bueno de Mesquita, Hanna Halaburda, Jason Lyall,
Thorsten Rogall, Oliver Vanden Eynde, and participants at the Defense and Security Economics
Workshop for helpful comments. Members of the Asymmetric Warfare Group provided essential
feedback. We also thank the Pearson Institute for the Study and Resolution of Global Conflicts
for financial support and various government agencies for providing data. Eli Berman, Kyle
Pizzey, and Jacob Shapiro are owed a particular debt of gratitude for their support of this and
related projects. All errors remain our own. The views expressed herein are those of the authors
and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2017 by Francesco Trebbi, Eric Weese, Austin L. Wright, and Andrew Shaver. All rights
reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit
permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Insurgent Learning
Francesco Trebbi, Eric Weese, Austin L. Wright, and Andrew Shaver
NBER Working Paper No. 23475
June 2017
JEL No. O1,P48

                                          ABSTRACT

We study a model of insurgent learning during a counterinsurgency campaign. We test empirical
implications of the model using newly declassified microdata documenting improvised explosive
devices (IEDs) in Afghanistan from 2006 to 2014. This period was characterized by substantial
US investments in anti-IED technology and equipment. We find no evidence of decreasing
effectiveness of IEDs across time. Qualitative evidence suggests that this is due to innovations in
IED devices and tactics. Our results are robust to numerous alternative specifications, and yield
insights on a technological revolution in insurgent violence—the proliferation and evolution of
IEDs—with implications for scholarship on civil conflict and future investment in tactical
countermeasures.

Francesco Trebbi                                 Austin L. Wright
University of British Columbia                   Harris School of Public Policy
6000 Iona Drive                                  University of Chicago
Vancouver, BC V6T 1L4                            1155 East 60th Street
Canada                                           Chicago IL 60637
and CIFAR                                        austinlw@uchicago.edu
and also NBER
ftrebbi@mail.ubc.ca                              Andrew Shaver
                                                 Robertson Hall
Eric Weese                                       Princeton University
Yale University                                  Princeton, NJ 08540
Department of Economics                          ashaver@princeton.edu
Box 208269
New Haven, CT 06520-8269
eric.weese@yale.edu
1     Introduction

Counterinsurgency campaigns are difficult to manage and harder to win. Recent research in
political science and economics investigates a number of difficulties security forces face during
conflicts with insurgent actors. Rebel tactics vary over time [Kalyvas and Balcells 2010;
Wright 2016], development and military aid spending have uneven effects [Berman, Shapiro,
and Felter 2011; Crost, Felter, and Johnston 2014; Beath, Christia, and Enikolopov 2016;
Sexton 2016], their organization is unknown [Dorronsoro 2009; Trebbi and Weese 2015], and
conventional military strategies, including aerial bombardment, can erode civilian support
for the counterinsurgency [Kalyvas 2011; Lyall 2014]. Although states have historically
used mass killings of non-combatants to undermine logistical support for guerrilla actors
[Valentino, Huth, and Balch-Lindsay 2004], evidence from modern insurgencies indicate these
blunt measures may enable mobilization. Rebels may even provoke such indiscriminate state
violence to radicalize the fence-sitting population [Galula 1965; Carter 2016].
    In this article, we focus on another major but understudied challenge counterinsurgents
face: insurgent learning. Because it is difficult for counterinsurgents to cloak their warfighting
technologies, insurgents can learn about and exploit weaknesses within deployed forces. Since
counterinsurgents also directly observe insurgent innovations in the field, there are numerous
opportunities for additional investment in defeat techniques.
    Although insurgents can learn along many dimensions, we emphasize technological inno-
vation with respect to explosive devices. Explosive devices, especially improvised bombs, are
a frustratingly common and inexpensive tool used by rebel actors. We provide historical ev-
idence of nuanced learning by insurgents regarding bomb making and emplacing techniques.
We then model these conflict dynamics as an investment-based learning game over multiple
periods. Insurgent and government actors independently invest in changes to the technology
they deploy against one another. Reasonably, these investments are observed, and adjust-
ments are made in subsequent periods. Variation in contest success (whether or not a bomb
detonates) is a straightforward empirical metric for evaluating adaptation by each side over

                                                1
time.
   We examine insurgent learning using newly declassified microdata on improvised explo-
sive devices (IEDs) during the ongoing Afghanistan conflict. These data allow us to track
the effectiveness of insurgents and counterinsurgents over time. We have information about
latent IEDs cleared before they could be deployed, IEDs that have been planted but were
neutralized by counterinsurgents, and IEDs that were successfully detonated by insurgents.
We use this information to examine changes in the detonation rate over time, during a period
of steadily escalating counterinsurgent investment in IED defeat technologies [U.S. Congress
Oversight Subcommittee 2008]. Consistent with our model, we find little evidence of any
substantial changes in the detonation rate. IEDs were just as likely to explode in 2014 as
they were in 2006.
   Our microdata also includes information on the outcomes of IED detonations, including
whether or not the IED event caused any injuries or deaths or vehicle immobilization. We also
know the actors who suffered from bomb damage. Our evidence indicates that, conditional
on detonation, IEDs at the end of the coalition occupation were just as damaging as at the
beginning. We find no evidence of net changes in casualty rates for coalition forces. On the
other hand, Afghan forces who currently carry out nearly all domestic security operations,
experienced a marginally increasing casualty rate over the course of the counterinsurgent
campaign.
   These results indicate insurgent learning kept pace with changes in the technological
investments made by counterinsurgents. This fact is sobering given that the United States
alone invested roughly 4 billion dollars a year during the study period on anti-IED research
and development. Starting in 2007, an additional 50 billion dollars was allocated to producing
and deploying IED-resistant vehicles in Iraq and Afghanistan [Wilson 2008]. The Joint IED
Defeat Organization (JIEDDO, now JIDA) spent 2.3 billion dollars to develop and field an
electronic signal jamming device that would thwart IED triggers using two-way radios and
garage door openers [JIEDDO Report 2007]. In response, insurgents simply switched the


                                              2
trigger device. Yet our model suggests these investments were not necessarily wasteful. In
the absence of continued investment in IED defeat operations, the detonation and casualty
rates of insurgent devices would have likely increased.
   Our investigation yields insights on a technological revolution in insurgent violence: the
rise and evolution of IEDs. Although rebels (and their state rivals) have weaponized explo-
sive devices for centuries, the recent proliferation of online IED blueprints and substantial
reduction in input costs for bomb production have lead to an unprecedented expansion in
the use of IEDs as a technology of war. IEDs have been reported in a variety of settings in-
cluding Afghanistan, Colombia, India, Iraq, Pakistan, Syria, Thailand, and, in more limited
cases, Mexico, United Kingdom, and United States. With costs ranging from five to several
hundred U.S. dollars, poorly trained and underfunded insurgent organizations can cripple
even the most sophisticated military forces. As a weapon of war, IEDs are now as ubiquitous
as land mines and AK-47s.1 Yet previous research on this technological revolution, and the
learning dynamics that shape the evolving threat posed by IEDs, has been limited by the
restricted nature of microdata on individual IED events.
   Our data allows us to explore this technology of war in novel ways. Using newly declas-
sified military records, we are able to examine the location, timing, targets, and outcomes
associated with 94,679 IED-related events from 2006 to 2014. This includes 36,681 IED det-
onations, 43,420 IED neutralizations, and 14,578 weapon cache discoveries. We are able to
examine national and regional trends in IED effectiveness over the course of the campaign,
as well as decompose changes in the rate of learning by insurgents specific to different types
of actors over time.
   1
     The recent use of IEDs by terrorists also highlights the changing nature of destructive
technologies available to weak yet violent political actors. Attacks on London’s public trans-
portation system, Boston’s 2013 marathon, and the May 2017 Manchester Arena attack were
all conducted using IEDs and resulted collectively in nearly one hundred civilian deaths and
some one thousand injuries. Some of the perpetrators of these attacks—for instance, the
Tsarnaev brothers, responsible for the Boston attacks—had no military background or spe-
cialized educational training necessary otherwise required for the production of sophisticated
explosive devices.


                                              3
    This paper also brings together the rich literature in political science and economics on
learning by strategic actors with recent work on counterinsurgency. Research on learning
highlights how policies diffuse across governments [Mebane and Sekhon 2002; Volden, Ting,
and Carpenter 2008; Callander 2011; Makse and Volden 2011; Callander and Clark 2017],
communication devices enable anti-regime protests to spread [Little 2015], ethnic kin learn
from government repression [Larson and Lewis 2017], unit leaders learn during deployments
[Bueno de Mesquita, Price, and Shaver 2017], and firms and individuals innovate in response
to productivity shocks [Bahk and Gort 1993; Young 1993; Foster and Rosenzweig 1995;
Conley and Udry 2010]. These papers highlight how actors adapt their behavior in a dynamic
fashion. Our model similarly highlights the importance of continuous feedback in strategic
settings, from voting and firm production to insurgent innovation. Our model of insurgent
learning also yields a number of important insights about the features of a counterinsurgency
campaign that we believe are not fully captured in existing models of strategic interaction
between warring actors such as those of Bueno de Mesquita and Dickson [2007], Fey and
Ramsay [2007], and Bueno de Mesquita [2016].
    The rest of the paper is organized as follows. In the next section, we briefly outline
historical evidence of learning by rebel actors. In Section 3, we present a model of sequential
learning in a dynamic environment. In Section 4, we present an overview of our data and
empirical strategy. Section 5 presents visual and regression-based evidence of insurgent
learning. The final section concludes.



2     Insurgent Learning

Insurgencies are typically characterized by substantial asymmetries in capabilities. Armed
groups must recruit, train, and arm fighters, gather intelligence on government targets and
their vulnerabilities, and establish funding streams, all in the presence of more capable
government forces. These government forces vary their investments in counterinsurgent



                                              4
technologies and institutions, including measures taken to harden stationary targets and to
randomly adjust movements of mobile targets [Hayden 2013]. Rebels respond to government
countermeasures through adaptation. Adaptation, on both sides, is dynamic [Jackson 2004].
   Existing research provides ample qualitative evidence of learning across insurgencies [For-
est 2009].2 The Irish Republican Army (IRA), for example, transferred detailed information
about bomb making and mortar design to armed groups in Colombia, Palestine, and Spain.
Before the US-led invasion, the Afghan Taliban operated a number of training camps at-
tended by various Pakistani rebel factions as well as fighters affiliated with al Qaida. Even in
the absence of formal coordination, groups learn from one another. Al Qaida modeled their
2001 bombing of the USS Cole on a similar, highly publicized 1995 operation carried out
by the Tamil Tigers. Insurgents in the Deep South region of Thailand have modeled their
recent explosive devices on designs developed by sectarian fighters in Iraq [Abuza 2007].
   The qualitative record on innovations within insurgencies is equally rich [Jackson et al.
2005]. To enhance the precision timing of their attacks, the Irish Republican Army adapted
the Memopark timer for use in munition detonation. The Memopark timer was a simple,
handheld device used for tracking remaining meter time on parked vehicles. Because this
device was widely available and difficult for counterinsurgent forces to track, the IRA did not
develop new timer technologies for years after the first Memopark explosive. Thai insurgents
have also adapted how to design and plant roadside bombs to avoid detection, including
sophisticated techniques for hiding bombs in objects commonly discarded along the main
traffic corridor from Yala to Pattani.
   In Iraq and Afghanistan, IED technology has rapidly advanced, from primitive wire-to-
battery devices to bombs detonated through encrypted radio signals. Importantly, these
innovations typically occur in response to countermeasures taken by security forces. For
example, a simple pressure-plate IED detonates when a vehicle rolls over it, thereby depress-
ing the plate. A counter-measure for this type of IED is a roller in front of the vehicle: the
   2
       Revolutionaries and counterrevolutionaries also learn from one another [Weyland 2016].


                                               5
IED will detonate when the roller passes over it, potentially destroying the (relatively cheap)
roller, but leaving the vehicle and its occupants unharmed. A counter-counter-measure, how-
ever, is to separate the pressure plate from the explosive, so that when the roller rolls over
the pressure plate and detonates the explosive, the vehicle behind the roller is located above
the explosive. This sequence of adaptation was observed between 2006 and 2007 [JIEDDO
Report 2007].
    We focus on learning within insurgencies, with a special emphasis on explosive devices.
Rebel groups carry out bombings with a certain technology composite. This technology sig-
nature includes emplacement location, bomb size, explosive force, and detonation technology.
Observing this bombing composite, government forces respond by introducing countermea-
sures. These countermeasures include randomizing force movement, enhancing vehicle and
body armor, and developing signal jammers. Taking into account the government’s re-
sponse, rebels adapt their bombing technologies. Before rebels adapt to the government’s
countermeasures, these security innovations should decrease the effectiveness of IEDs de-
ployed against security forces. After rebels adapt to these countermeasures, the effectiveness
of IEDs should increase. We formalize this logic below.



3       A Model of Learning

We focus on an conflict environment with one insurgency force A and a government-aligned
counterinsurgency force G. We assume time is discrete and the conflict is expected to last
T periods t = 1, ..., T .3 Let us indicate with r the discount rate and with Y A and Y G the
respective exogenous total endowments of the two actors. For realism, one can consider it
to be the case that 0 < Y A  Y G .
    In each period t, A can make an investment 0 ≤ ItA ≤ Y A in attacking capability to
augment its current stock ACt−1 . In each period t, G also makes a nonnegative investment
    3
    For the case of Afghanistan, this could be equivalent to a planned and publicly announced
withdrawal of troops.

                                              6
0 ≤ ItG ≤ Y G in defensive technology to augment its current stock DFt−1 .
   We allow both A and G to learn over time from previous conflict experience. It seems
intuitive to assume that some form of learning may occur by repeated interaction, so that,
for example, the past stock of defensive technology DFt−1 may offer opportunity of learning
to A by augmenting its attacking capability ACt . Specifically we posit for A the simple
dynamic process:
                                    ACt = αACt−1 + γDFt−1 + ItA

and similarly for G:
                                    DFt = αDFt−1 + ρACt−1 + ItG .

The processes described above include a realistic component of autocorrelation in conflict
capability, indexed by 0 ≤ α ≤ 1. In addition, learning implies that a defensive investment
on the part of counterinsurgency forces at period t, ItG , can feedback in higher offensive
capability by the insurgents in period t + 1 by a factor 0 ≤ γ ≤ 1 per unit of investment.
Symmetrically, learning operates with a factor 0 ≤ ρ ≤ 1 for the counterinsurgency forces.
   We assume that in every period t there is a conflict event resolved through a conflict
function of the Tullock [1980] form. It posits the probability of a victory for the insurgents
equal to:
                                                           ACt
                                Pr(A’s success at t) =             .                        (1)
                                                         ACt + DFt

We can think of equation (1) as a metric of “effectiveness” in conflict for the insurgent force,
for which IED effectiveness (i.e. detonation rate and casualty rate) may be considered a
valid empirical proxy in our context.
   Finally, let us assume the cost of investment is linear at a per unit cost c ≥ 0 for both A
and G (symmetry is an assumption trivially relaxable here).
   The insurgency force A will have valuation:

                                    T                    
                                    X       ACt
                        V   A
                                =                   − cIt (1 + r)−(t−1) ,
                                                        A

                                    t=1
                                          ACt + DFt

                                                   7
                                                                                   T
which A will maximize with respect to the intertemporal investment profile ItA      t=1
                                                                                          subject
to the budget constraint
                                         T
                                         X
                                               ItA (1 + r)−(t−1) ≤ Y A
                                         t=1

and optimal response by G.4
   In this simple theoretical environment it is possible to observe that the effectiveness in
conflict of the insurgents vis-a-vis counterinsurgency forces will change over time. It is based
on the countervailing effects arising from the fact that investing in offensive technology today
increases the probability of success today and, with an α depreciation, tomorrow, but also
increases the conflict capability of its adversary tomorrow by a factor of ρ.
   To gain insight on the dynamic effects due to learning it is sufficient to set T = 2 and
study the evolution over time of the object (1). To make our results less cumbersome, we
set AC0 = DF0 = 0.
   We can then prove the following proposition.

Proposition 1. Consider the two period model. Then there exists a unique Nash Equilibrium
of this game. Further, (i) the effectiveness of A is constant between period 1 and 2 only if the
                                                                      2
learning process is proportional to resources, i.e. if ρ/γ = Y G /Y A . (ii) The effectiveness
                       ACt
of the insurgents,            ,
                          increases (decreases) over time if the learning process favors the
                     ACt +DFt
                                                             2                    2
counterinsurgency (insurgency) forces, i.e. if ρ/γ > Y G /Y A (if ρ/γ < Y G /Y A ).

Proof. In Appendix.
   4
       Similarly for G we study:
                                       T                      
                                       X         DFt
                            max                          − cIt (1 + r)−(t−1)
                                                             G
                                 T
                           {ItG }t=1   t=1
                                               ACt + DFt

subject to
                                        T
                                        X
                                               ItG (1 + r)−(t−1) ≤ Y G .
                                        t=1




                                                        8
The proposition posits first an intuitive result. Suppose counterfactually that Y A = Y G , then
the effectiveness of the insurgent forces remains constant over time if the learning processes of
A and G move at the same rate, i.e. the learning is symmetric (ρ = γ). Since however initial
resources are skewed in favor of G and a large initial investment by G favors A’s learning,
the insurgency will be able to keep a constant effectiveness rate even with an asymmetry in
                                                                        2
learning ratio ρ/γ if ρ/γ matches the endowment imbalance Y G /Y A .
       The proposition also highlights another result. The effectiveness of the insurgents will
increase over time as T nears, if they operate at a learning disadvantage relative to the
                                        2
counterinsurgency forces (ρ > γ Y G /Y A ).5 The intuition is that, as A learns substantially
more slowly than G in this case, then A has an incentive to initially underinvest in offensive
technology in order not to excessively prop up G’s success probabilities in the following
periods. At the same time, because its adversary does not learn as much, G has an incentive
to over-invest in defensive capacity relative to a hypothetical case without such learning
                                                 AC1             AC2
effects. Hence, in this case it follows that   AC1 +DF1
                                                          <    AC2 +DF2
                                                                          (increasing effectiveness of A).
       We can also prove the following result.

Proposition 2. Consider the equilibrium of two period model. If the effectiveness of the
                                                              A 2
insurgents, ACAC                                         G
                                                               
                 t
              t +DFt
                     , increases over time, i.e. ρ/γ > Y   /Y     , then the growth rate of
investment for insurgents is larger than the growth rate of investment for counterinsurgents,
           I2A   IG
i.e.  > I2G . Similarly, if the effectiveness of the insurgents decreases over time, (ρ/γ <
           I1A
           1

      A 2
  G
       
 Y /Y     ), then the growth rate of investment for insurgents is smaller than the growth
                                                   I2A       I2G
rate of investment for counterinsurgents, i.e.     I1A
                                                         <   I1G
                                                                 .

Proof. In Appendix.

This proposition focuses on an important dynamic. If the effectiveness of insurgents is in-
creasing from one period to the next, the relative change of insurgent investment in techno-
logical innovation must exceed the change in government investments. Relatedly, any decline
       5
     The reader will note here that the restriction ρ ≥ γ seems the empirically realistic one
for the Afghan case.

                                                  9
in bomb success over periods is a function of government investments outstripping insurgent
inputs in relative terms. Notice that this result also obtains if one or the other actor divests
over time at a faster rate than their opponent. That is to say, if counterinsurgent forces
draw down their investments between periods, while insurgent investments remain constant
(or increase) between periods, attack effectiveness will increase. The inverse obtains as well.



4       Data and Empirical Strategy

Our investigation exploits newly declassified conflict data from the United States Central
Command. The data was retrieved by [Author] and [Author]. The detailed nature of this
conflict data allows us to track insurgent activity by the hour, to within several meters of the
event location. Although this data tracks dozens of types of violence, the majority of enemy
action events are characterized as direct fire, indirect fire, and IED explosions. Direct fire
consists of machine guns, AK-47s, and other weapons that are effectively fired on a straight
line from attacker to target. Indirect fire consists of mortars and other weapons that do not
depend on a line of sight between the attacker and the target. IEDs consist of explosives that
have already been emplaced, and are simply detonated by the attacker at the appropriate
time.
    This paper focuses on insurgent learning with respect to IEDs. For each event, we
know the exact location (within several meters), time (within the hour), and detonation
status (whether the IED exploded or was neutralized). Importantly, emplaced IEDs are
not typically retrieved from the field and replanted elsewhere. For IEDs that detonate, we
also know the institutional affiliation the target (Coalition, Host Nation), the type of actor
(Military, Police), and the outcome of the event (Ineffective, Damaged/Disabled/Destroyed,
Injured, Killed).
    The last three of these categories form an ordered scale, describing the effect of the
insurgent attack on Afghan/Coalition forces: if an Afghan or Coalition security force member



                                              10
                                       Figure 1: IED events: detonate/clear and explosion impacts

         200
                                                                                                                          200




                                                                                                                          150


           0
count




                                                                                                                  count
                                                                                                                          100




        −200

                                                                                                                           50




                                                                                                                            0
               2006   2007      2008        2009     2010       2011       2012      2013        2014     2015
                                                         Date
                                                                                                                                2006     2007     2008       2009      2010        2011    2012    2013     2014     2015
                                                                                                                                                                            Date
                        IED Explosion, Effective   IED Explosion, NA         IED Explosion, Ineffective

                        IED Found & Cleared        Cache Found & Cleared                                                               IED Explosion     Ineffective   NA     Dam/Dis/Destroyed   Wounded   Killed




           (a) Detonates (above) vs. Clears (below)                                                                                    (b) Outcomes of IED explosions


dies in an attack (or dies later, from wounds sustained in the attack), then the result is
coded as “Killed”. If no one was killed, but someone was wounded seriously enough such
that they could not return to duty immediately, then the result is coded as “Wounded”.
If nobody was killed or wounded, but their vehicle was affected, then the result is coded
as “Damaged/Disabled/Destroyed”. If none of these things happened, then the result is
coded as “Ineffective”. When the result is left blank, this corresponds to an attack that was
ineffective. Information on the outcome of attacks was not available before 2006, or after
November 2014. For our analysis, we thus consider only the period from January 2006 to
November 2014.
           We also use information about IEDs planted by insurgents that were neutralized by
counterinsurgents before they could detonate. Figure 1a displays trends including “found
and cleared” IEDs, as well as latent IEDs that were neutralized (bomb and bomb material
discoveries). Figure 1b displays outcomes only for IEDs that actually exploded.
           In an ideal setting, we would estimate the effect of otherwise randomly deployed anti-IED
countermeasures on the effectiveness of insurgent bomb deployment. Because no compre-

                                                                                                                 11
hensive account of IED defeat countermeasures exists, we rely on an alternative empirical
strategy. We leverage a well-known, steeply increasing trend in countermeasure investment
over time. That is to say, we know I G is strictly increasing until the end of the conflict.
                                                                       ACt
We aim to estimate changes in the effectiveness of IED attacks,      ACt +DFt
                                                                              ,   over the course
of the counterinsurgency campaign by examining macrolevel (and regional) trends in IED
outcomes and drawing inferences about insurgent technological investments, I A .
   Although we lack microlevel information on countermeasures, our military records allow
us to examine the effectiveness of explosive devices over time. As such, we present measures of
IED effectiveness that take into account equilibrium offensive and defensive best responses
consistent with our model. First, we assess whether an explosive device, once planted,
detonates. To clarify, this outcome takes the value one if an IED, once emplaced, detonates.
This outcome takes the value zero when an IED is neutralized by counterinsurgents. Across
the campaign’s 94,679 unique IED events, devices exploded roughly 39% of the time.
   Second, we investigate what happens to security forces once a planted IED explodes. We
use the explosion as our unit of observation, and examine the damage associated with each
of these detonations. Initially, we classify four discrete, ordered outcomes: “Ineffective” <
“Dam/Dis/Destroyed” < “Wounded” < “Killed”. We examine these hierarchical outcomes
in an ordered logit framework. We also collapse this outcome to a binary variable, and
analyze whether an IED event causes a death (1) or not (0). These two techniques have
the advantage of allowing us to examine characteristics of individual events in great detail,
including how effective IEDs are against various armed actors and civilians.
   We supplement these measures by collapsing insurgent activity at the district-week level.
The administrative district roughly corresponds to internal divisions in insurgent leadership
and the structure of rebel subunits, as well as constraining various counterinsurgent actors.
We chose the week as our temporal unit because it allows us to examine trends (as opposed to
individual events) without raising concerns about large-scale strategic responses by security
forces, which could occur around troop deployment and rotation schedules. We examine the


                                              12
detonation rate of improvised explosives at the district-week level. This outcome is defined
in district-weeks with at least one IED event and undefined otherwise. An average district-
week with at least one IED attack actually experiences roughly four IED explosions. For all
target types, this measure includes 24,603 district-weeks. Our last measure decomposes the
rate at which detonated IEDs cause casualties by target type. That is, once an IED explodes,
how likely is it to injure or kill a member of the Afghan or Coalition security forces. This
measure is similarly calculated at the district-week level, with Afghan forces experiencing a
55% casualty rate for detonated explosives, while Coalition forces are injured or killed during
roughly 30% of IED explosions.
   As we detail below, our primary estimations will rely on a straightforward technique for
examining patterns in insurgent effectiveness: linear time trends. These trends, which we
                                                                                ACt
embed in a battery of alternative specifications, enable us to identify how   ACt +DFt
                                                                                         shifts as a
function of time. Importantly, we know counterinsurgent investments are strictly increasing.
If our trends (which we denote simply as Time) are positive, this indicates that the likelihood
of detonation is increasing throughout the campaign. On the other hand, if the coefficient
on Time is negative, this indicates that IEDs are less likely to explode at the end of the
campaign then at the beginning. If we observe a null result, the harm caused by IEDs in
2014 cannot be distinguished from damage in 2006. Proposition 1 implies that this null
result occurs when the ratio of the rates of counterinsurgent and insurgent learning match
the asymmetry in initial endowments.
   To demonstrate the plausibility of a core assumption of our model (that ρ and γ are
static), we introduce two key facts about the context of our study. First, the Taliban and
allied fighters in Afghanistan have engaged in insurgent operations for nearly four decades.
They coordinated a number of successful offensives against Soviet forces during the 1970s
and 1980s, and adopted sophisticated bombmaking during this period. The Taliban are also
strongly tied to the communities where they operate, hold a wealth of local intelligence, and
engage in meritocratic promotion of military leaders and bombmakers. For these reasons,


                                              13
we find it unlikely that γ, the rate at which insurgents learn, is shifting very much. Second,
when US and allied actors invaded Afghanistan in 2001, conventional military forces were
not fully prepared for the dynamics of a mixed urban/rural insurgency. It took several years
to resolve institutional frictions across foreign forces and establish sound explosive threat
monitoring systems. By 2006, the start of our empirical analysis, security forces had stream-
lined the process of disseminating data to warfighters and newly created agencies (including
JIEDDO) helped deployed units translate observed tactics into IED defeat countermeasures.
These assets were used continuously until the end of our study. With these dynamics in
mind, we expect ρ, the rate of government learning, to have increased until the start of our
investigation, after which ρ remained roughly flat.
    Our formal model yields another interesting result: if the coefficient on Time is positive,
insurgent investments in technological innovation must have expanded rapidly. Why? For the
ratio of learning to exceed the square of initial endowments, the growth rate of investment by
insurgents must exceed the growth rate of counterinsurgent investment. This is Proposition
2. What’s more, this proposition must hold under a known condition about I G , which is
that it is expanding significantly. Consequently, for the coefficient on Time to be positive
and statistically significant, ∆I A across periods must be large in relative terms.
    In the following section, we evaluate insurgent learning during the ongoing Afghanistan
conflict.



5     Are Insurgents “Learning”?

Because of the particular danger posed by IEDs, the US government allocated substantial
funding towards mitigating this threat. JIEDDO (the Joint IED Defeat Organization) was
established in 2006, and grew to have an annual budget of several billion dollars. This does
not include standard procurement budgets, such as the $50 billion allocated to purchase IED-
resistant MRAP vehicles for deployment to Iraq and Afghanistan. It is difficult to calculate



                                              14
a total cost for the anti-IED effort, but approximately half of all coalition casualties in
Afghanistan resulted from IED attacks. The IED was a fundamental component of the
Taliban strategy, and counter-IED efforts were thus a major component of the Coalition
counterinsurgency operations.
   JIEDDO operated from 2006 to 2015, and during that time continually brought new
technologies to bear on the IED threat. A sample of these include personal and vehicle
mounted jamming devices to prevent remote detonation [JIEDDO Report 2006], rollers to
detonate pressure-plate IEDs [JIEDDO Report 2007], robots to examine potential IEDs
[JIEDDO Report 2008], radar systems to identify suicide bombers [JIEDDO Report 2009],
and ground-penetrating radar [JIEDDO Report 2010]. Technological innovation by Coalition
forces continued until the final withdrawal of foreign forces.
   A major problem faced by JIEDDO was that the Taliban was also developing IED tech-
nologies at the same time. For example, metal detectors were deployed in large numbers in
Afghanistan to detect IEDs. The Taliban response to this was to develop IEDs that had
little or no metal content. This lead to the 2010 deployment of radar, in an attempt to
detect these non-metal IEDs [.] Anecdotes such as this suggest that, although there was
a substantial anti-IED research budget and significant deployments of defeat resources, it
is unclear whether Coalition forces were actually becoming more effective against IEDs, or
whether any gains were simply undone by Taliban innovations. Fortunately, our military
records allow for an empirical investigation of this issue.
   In the following subsections, we visualize violence trends in the data and perform an
array of formal estimations to examine how the outcomes of explosive device shifted over
the course of the Afghanistan conflict.


5.1    Visual evidence

We begin by visualizing the data. Figure 2 shows the disposition of planted IEDs, as well
as latent IEDs (held in weapon caches). Consistent with Figure 1, notice the consistent


                                              15
patterns in seasonality associated with detonation rates. This seasonal trends map on the
fighting season in Afghanistan, which typically begins in late March and early April (when
the mountain passes clear of snow) and ends in late September and October. Nearly all full-
time fighters exit the country during the winter and retreat to rebel strongholds in Pakistan’s
border regions. The dip in IED effectiveness is consistent with a change in the composition
of the fighting due to the exit of the most capable bombmakers and IED emplacement
specialists during the off season. Once these seasonal trends are taken into account, there is
no clear downward trend in IED effectiveness from 2006, the left edge of the plot, to 2014, the
right edge of the plot. If anything, there appears to be a marginal increase in the detonation
rate over time. We account for seasonality and evaluate these visual trends more rigorously
below.
   We next focus on the geography of bomb deployment in Afghanistan. Figure 3 shows
the geographic distribution of IEDs across Afghanistan following a technique suggested by
Grolemund and Wickham [2015].6 Degrees of longitude are shown at the top of each chart,
and degrees of latitude at the right. The count of all IED events is on the left edge and
the time range is on the bottom edge. Similar to the previous plots, we examine the period
from 2006 to 2014. The maximum observed number of IED events in a given cell-year is
just over 1600. For each longitude-latitude combination, a histogram following Figure 1 is
shown (for the righthand chart, this is scaled to add up to 100%). Several patterns are
apparent from these plots. First, almost all recorded attacks happen in the eastern and
southern portions of Afghanistan, with very little activity in the north and west. IEDs are
particularly concentrated in Hilmand and Kandahar provinces. A major reason for this is
the ethnic composition of the country. The southern and eastern portions of the country
are densely populated by Pashtuns (i.e., Taliban co-ethnics). Second, given the spatial
concentration of IED activity, one might expect that the rate of insurgent effectiveness,
  ACt
ACt +DFt
         ,   would diverge significantly across space. Yet Figure 3b shows that the effectiveness

   6
       Figures SI-8 and SI-9 show these results for direct fire and indirect fire, respectively.


                                                 16
         Figure 2: Neutralization rate of IEDs (sums to 100%), from 2006 to 2014

                              1.00




                              0.75




                      count



                              0.50




                              0.25




                              0.00


                                     2006   2007    2008      2009      2010       2011    2012      2013      2014   2015
                                                                            Date

                                              cat   IED Explosion    IED Found & Cleared   Cache Found & Cleared




of IEDs in causing damage is nearly uniform across Afghanistan. These plots also give
cursory evidence that no systematic downward trend in IED effectiveness is observable from
2006 to 2014. Instead, many plots trend upwards, indicating an increase in insurgent success
as the campaign progressed.
   We next examine IEDs that actually exploded. Additional information is available in
these cases. Did the deployment of additional armour and other technologies change the
casualty rate for IED explosions? That is, do we see a downward trend across time in the
effectiveness of IEDs in inflicting harm to security forces?
   A major confounding factor in this analysis is that, as shown in Figure SI-1, the type of
forces deployed has changed dramatically over the period spanned by our data. Figures SI-2
and SI-3 appears to show that, if anything, IEDs have gotten deadlier over time, with about
a 75% casualty rate for recent years. However, this could be due to reductions in Coalition
troop levels: in recent years, more of the IED attacks have been against Afghan government
targets, which in general travel in standard pickup trucks, rather than armoured vehicles.



                                                                       17
                           Figure 3: Outcomes of IED explosions in Afghanistan by Lat-Lon grid square
                     62E        63E            64E         65E        66E        67E            68E        69E        70E        71E            72E                                 62E            63E            64E            65E            66E            67E            68E            69E            70E            71E            72E
                                                                                                                                                                       1.00
        1500                                                                                                                                                           0.75




                                                                                                                                                        37N




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      37N
        1000                                                                                                                                                           0.50
         500                                                                                                                                                           0.25
           0                                                                                                                                                           0.00
                                                                                                                                                                       1.00
        1500                                                                                                                                                           0.75




                                                                                                                                                        36N




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      36N
        1000                                                                                                                                                           0.50
         500                                                                                                                                                           0.25
           0                                                                                                                                                           0.00
                                                                                                                                                                       1.00
        1500                                                                                                                                                           0.75




                                                                                                                                                        35N




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      35N
        1000                                                                                                                                                           0.50
         500                                                                                                                                                           0.25
           0                                                                                                                                                           0.00
                                                                                                                                                                       1.00
        1500                                                                                                                                                           0.75




                                                                                                                                                        34N




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      34N
        1000                                                                                                                                                           0.50
         500                                                                                                                                                           0.25
count




                                                                                                                                                               count
           0                                                                                                                                                           0.00
                                                                                                                                                                       1.00
        1500                                                                                                                                                           0.75




                                                                                                                                                        33N




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      33N
        1000                                                                                                                                                           0.50
         500                                                                                                                                                           0.25
           0                                                                                                                                                           0.00
                                                                                                                                                                       1.00
        1500                                                                                                                                                           0.75




                                                                                                                                                        32N




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      32N
        1000                                                                                                                                                           0.50
         500                                                                                                                                                           0.25
           0                                                                                                                                                           0.00
                                                                                                                                                                       1.00
        1500                                                                                                                                                           0.75




                                                                                                                                                        31N




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      31N
        1000                                                                                                                                                           0.50
         500                                                                                                                                                           0.25
           0                                                                                                                                                           0.00
                                                                                                                                                                       1.00
        1500                                                                                                                                                           0.75


                                                                                                                                                        30N




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      30N
        1000                                                                                                                                                           0.50
         500                                                                                                                                                           0.25
           0                                                                                                                                                           0.00
               '06     '14'06         '14'06      '14'06     '14'06     '14'06         '14'06     '14'06     '14'06     '14'06         '14'06     '14                         '06         '14'06         '14'06         '14'06         '14'06         '14'06         '14'06         '14'06         '14'06         '14'06         '14'06         '14
                                                                              Year                                                                                                                                                                         Year

                                               Killed      Wounded          Dam/Dis/Destroyed              NA     Ineffective                                                                                     Killed          Wounded               Dam/Dis/Destroyed                    NA         Ineffective




        (a) Number of explosions with each outcome                                                                                                                                    (b) Outcome shares (sums to 100%)


           Figure SI-4 shows the numbers of IED attacks targetting coalition forces, supported
Afghan troops, and unsupported Afghan troops, respectively. For IED explosions targetting
coalition troops, there appears to be no change in casualty rates. For Afghan government
forces, casualty rates appear to be increasing in recent years.7
           Within the Afghan military, however, certain units are supported by coalition forces.
Coalition advisors in these units not only provide advice, but also bring with them sophis-
ticated technology. We thus might expect that Afghan military units that are supported by
coalition troops perform differently than those that are not. Figures SI-4e and SI-4f show
that this is indeed the case. The casualty rate for Afghan military units with coalition sup-
port is close to 50%, while the rate for unsupported units is closer to 75%. There is no clear
trend visible in Figures SI-4e or SI-4f.
           The sharp increase in casualty rates shown in Figures SI-2 and SI-3 thus appears to be
due to a compositional trend in the target of IED attacks. From 2010 onwards, the number
           7
               We provide a regression analysis of this claim in Tables A-5 and A-6.



                                                                                                                                                              18
of coalition troops targetted by IEDs declined. These coalition troops were first replaced by
Afghan troops supported by coalition forces, and then later by unsupported Afghan troops.
As these types of troops are more vulnerable to IED attacks, we see an increase in the overall
casualty rate. Within a given type of unit, there is little to no change in casualty rates. We
present a statistical analysis of these results below. This analysis shows that if anything
there are small increases in the casualty rate (conditional on IED explosion) across time.8
   The fact that casualty rates for coalition forces do not change or even increase slightly is a
surprising result. Armoured vehicles were becoming increasingly prevalent during this period,
and there were a wide variety of new anti-IED technologies being deployed by JIEDDO.
The lack of a trend in Figure SI-4a, then, is evidence that either this new equipment and
technology was actually useless, or that there was also substantial improvement in the quality
of IEDs during this period.


5.2       Regression-based evidence

We are interested in testing whether the visual evidence reviewed above is statistically robust.
   We begin with Figure 2. We examine whether Figure 2 has no substantial trend in
clearance rate (fraction of IEDs that are found before they explode) or if this trend is
significantly increasing or decreasing over time.
   We consider our unit of observation to be the individual IED. This IED could be emplaced
and explode, or it could be emplaced but then found and cleared, or it could be found and
cleared before it was emplaced (“cache found and cleared”). We will use a binary variable
“did IED explode?” as our outcome variable Y , coded as 0 if the IED was found and cleared.9
   8
       The sole exception is for coalition supported Afghan military units.
   9
    Some IEDs are missing from the dataset: those that explode when nobody is around to
notice, those that explode on civilian targets but happen to not be reported to the authorities,
those that have neither exploded nor been found and cleared yet. Our analysis assumes that
the nature of this missing data does not change across time. In general we would expect
the reporting process to improve over time, and thus the clearance rate should drop. Our
finding that it is does not drop is thus more surprising given the sign of the expected bias.


                                               19
A linear probability model will be used with the form


                          Pr(Yigm = exploded) = βTimeigm + αg + γm .

   Here the probability of observing a given outcome (exploded vs. found and cleared) for
IED i in lat-lon grid square g in month of year m is determined by the continuous variable
Time (coded as 0 for midnight on 1 January 2006 and around 8.83 at the end of our sample
period in November 2014).
   Results from this regression are shown in Table A-1. Importantly, positive coefficients
indicate that the detonation rate is increasing (and, conversely, that the clearance rate is
decreasing). Columns 1-4 show that there is no statistically significant trend in IED clearance
rates over time, and that this result is the same regardless of whether grid square and month
of year fixed effects are included. This result is also unchanged when only emplaced IEDs
are considered (that is, “cache found and cleared” observations are dropped).10
   Alternatively, if we instead employ a logit model specification and replicate Table A-1,
we find consistent evidence that the rate at which IEDs detonate is increasing throughout
the conflict. These results are displayed in Table A-2. In principle, this functional form
might be a better fit for our dichotomous outcome variable. Importantly, this increasing
detonation rate is robust across columns 1-4, which vary grid square and month of year fixed
effects. Although there is disagreement between Tables A-1 and A-2 over the statistical
significance of the time trend, we can squarely reject a significant increase in clearance rates
at the country level.11 That is, counterinsurgents were no better at clearing explosive threats
from the field in 2014 than they were in 2006.

There is no reason to believe that there is differential reporting issues in Panjwai.
  10
       Columns 2 and 4 do not have an intercept term because it is absorbed in the fixed effects.
  11
    Using the coefficient reported in column 1 of Table A-2, we see that from 2006 to 2014
the log odds ratio for an IED exploding increased by 0.016 × 8 = 0.128. This means that if
the odds of an IED exploding in 2006 were 37%, they rose to 40% in 2014. This is opposite
to the naive prediction that spending on IED defeat technologies should have reduced the
rate at which IEDs exploded.

                                                20
   We now consider what happens conditional on an IED exploding. The potential outcomes
in this case are “Ineffective”, “Dam/Dis/Destroyed”, “Wounded”, and “Killed”.12 We thus
have four discrete ordered outcomes: “Ineffective” < “Dam/Dis/Destroyed” < “Wounded”
< “Killed”. One option is to analyze this as is, using an ordered logit framework. Another
option is to collapse the outcome variable to a binary variable, and analyze using the same
sort of standard linear probability model used above.
   First, consider the ordered logit case. Here the observed discrete outcome Y is determined
by a latent continuous variable Y ∗ , and an additional parameter vector µ is estimated that
gives cutoff values that provide the mapping of the continuous variable Y ∗ into the discrete
variable Y . We suppose that the process determining Y ∗ is


          ∗
        Yigm = β1 Timeigm + β2 TYPEigm + β3 (Time x TYPE)igm + αg + γm + igm


   Here Time is the same continuous variable as was used above. TYPE is the type of
the unit encountering the IED: the options here are “Afghan Military, Supported”, “Afghan
Military, Unsupported”, “Afghan Police”, “Civilian”, “Coalition”, and “NA”, where a large
portion of the “NA” explosions were IEDs that were targetting an inanimate object, such
as a bridge or important building. The length of β2 and β3 would thus both be six, but a
normalization implied in the estimation of the cutoffs µ means that only five parameters in
β2 will actually be estimated.
   Table A-3 shows the results of this approach. We see that overall IEDs are more deadly
when employed against soft targets such as civilians, and less deadly when employed against
Coalition forces.13 The time trends estimated in Column 3 show that there is no statistically
  12
    Some outcomes are marked as “NA”. Qualitative evidence leads us to conclude that ex-
plosions classified as “NA” did not cause damage, and thus we group “NA” and “Ineffective”
together and label this group as “Ineffective”.
  13
    The base level here is “Afghan Military, Supported”, which makes the positive coefficient
on “Afghan Military, Unsupported” in Column 3 surprising, since one would expect that
supported troops would be a harder target than unsupported troops. This effect disappears,


                                             21
significant relationship for coalition outcomes over time. The (statistically insignificant)
estimated parameter of 0.015 for “Time x Coalition” implies that from 2006 to 2014, the log
odds ratio for coalition forces suffering a casualty (versus no casualties) increased by only
0.015 × 8 = 0.12. This means that if coalition forces suffered casualties 30% of the time in
2006, they would suffer casualties 32.5% of the time in 2014. The estimated trend over time
is thus not only statistically insignificant but also small, as well as being in the opposite
direction from what would be expected given the large investments made in armour and
various other IED countermeasures.14
   A potential concern at this point is that the ordered logit model considered above may rely
on assumptions that are violated in the data. For example, perhaps idiosyncratic shocks are
not distributed according to an extreme value distribution. To assess the robustness of our
results, we convert our ordered discrete outcome to a binary outcome: we classify explosions
that are “Ineffective” or result in “Dam/Dis/Destroyed” as not causing a casualty, and
explosions that result in “Wounded” or “Killed” as explosions that do cause a casualty. We
then consider a linear probability model of the form,


    Pr(Yigm = casualty) = β1 Timeigm + β2 TYPEigm + β3 (Time x TYPE)igm + αg + γm


   The results of this regression are shown in Table A-4. Results are generally very similar:
some of the time trends interactions reported in Table A-3 are not statistically significant in
Table A-4, although the coefficient estimates are in the same direction.15

however, in Column 4, and instead we see a time trend that makes supported Afghan troops
less likely to become casualties in later periods. One potential explanation is that initially
supported Afghan troops are deployed to particularly dangerous areas, and the average
danger of these areas decreases as the number of supported troops increases over time.
  14
    The very large time trend in “NA” type targets is probably due to a compositional trend
within these targets: if some targets in the early period did not have any people near them,
then casualties could not be recorded. This could result in large increases in the casualty
rate as time progressed.
  15
       The particular implementation of wild bootstrap clustered standard errors used to report


                                               22
   A final issue relates to Figure 3b. Careful inspection of this figure suggests that there
may be time trends in casualty rates for IEDs that potentially differ from grid square to grid
square. These effects appear to be due to compositional changes in targets across time. To
show this, we consider a regression following Table A-4. In particular, when we condition on
the type of target (Coalition, Civilian, Afghan Police, Afghan Military Supported, Afghan
Military Unsupported) we find that estimated time trends at the district level are nearly
indistinguishable from random noise based on an F test (p ' .1). For direct fire attacks, the
distribution of casualties (Figure SI-8b) is less even across districts than for IED attacks.
This could indicate greater planning in the very small number of attacks that are carried
out in the north, or under-reporting of unsuccessful attacks in that region.
   We conclude our examination with a within-week analysis of detonation and casualty
rates by district during the Afghan campaign. We continue to code these measures as
described above. We begin with detonation rates and then decompose harm from IEDs
that detonate into Coalition and Afghan casualty rates. These outcomes are only defined
for district-weeks with at least one explosives attack. These rate outcomes are continuous,
but bounded by zero and one. We begin with an ordinary least squares specification and
confirm robustness to a generalized least squares model with binomial family and logit link
functions. This latter specification is commonly used for rate outcomes. We estimate the
following equation,


                              Ydw = β1 Timedw + αw + γd + dw ,

   Where Ydw denotes the three outcomes of interest (detonation, Coalition casualty, and
Afghan casualty rates) and is defined for each district-week with positive levels of IED
activity. Week of year and district fixed effects are included in all models, with even numbered

results in Table A-4 gives coefficient estimates for the Time x TYPE coefficients in terms
of differences from the base level of “Time x Afghan Military, Supported”. The coefficent
estimate for this level is close to zero (as reported in the “Time” row), and thus interpretation
is mostly unaffected by this difference.

                                               23
columns including a year fixed effect. The coefficient of interest is β1 . If β1 is positive, this
indicates that the detonation rate or casualty rates are increasing during the campaign.
       These results are shown in tables A-5 and A-6. Recall, the even numbered columns
in each table introduce year fixed effects. With respect to detonation rates, these results
indicate that the likelihood of explosion is either flat or significantly increasing during the
campaign. Importantly, these results obtain even when conditioning out district-specific but
time-invariant characteristics. Regarding casualty rates for Afghan units, our results echo
the conclusions above. The casualty rate is significantly increasing in both specifications
(columns 3-4). However, we find no significant change in the casualty rates for coalition
forces, and in columns 5-6, Time flips signs across functional forms. For Afghan forces,
the likelihood of severe harm was steadily increasing throughout the campaign, whereas
Coalition forces appear to be no better protected from injury or death at the end of the
conflict versus the beginning.
       The collection of empirical evidence we have presented thus far can be reduced to two
points. First, the detonation rate of explosives in Afghanistan did not significantly decline
during the 9 years of our study. If anything, the likelihood an IED detonated in the field
increased over time. Second, casualty rates either remained flat or significantly increased
during the campaign. Host nation forces, especially those unsupported by Coalition actors,
were particularly vulnerable to harm. At the macro-scale, these two robust findings indicate
                             ACt
that insurgent success,    ACt +DFt
                                    ,   increased despite substantial counterinsurgent investment,
I G.
       Qualitative evidence strongly suggests that anti-IED equipment was not initially useless.
Instead, it was quickly countered by Taliban changes to their IED technology. For example,
Fowler [2016] reports that “Nyala” armoured vehicles deployed with Canadian troops were
initially considered to be resistant to IEDs. However, after observing this ineffectiveness,
the Taliban began stacking explosives together. A stack of anti-tank mines, or anti-tank
mines combined with artillery shells, was able to destroy a Nyala and kill its occupants,


                                                   24
while the traditional approach of a single anti-tank would have been useless. Our findings,
combined with the qualitative record, indicate that insurgents were able to quickly adapt to
counterinsurgent innovations and made substantial investments of their own.



6     Conclusion

We examine an important, yet understudied dynamic in internal wars: insurgent learning.
The historical record yields substantial qualitative evidence of learning by insurgents, es-
pecially regarding explosive devices. Rebels learn from one another—copying tactics and
techniques—and learn from their own mistakes. Insurgents also learn from their rivals, ad-
justing their bomb materials and trigger mechanisms to thwart counterinsurgent innovations.
Yet we know surprisingly little about how quickly and effectively insurgents respond to se-
curity force attempts to defeat their attacks. In this paper we provide evidence useful in
answering such questions.
    We model these strategic interactions as an investment-based learning game over multiple
periods. Insurgent and government actors independently invest in changes to the technology
they deploy against one another. These investments are observed, and adjustments are made
in subsequent periods. Our model yields important insights regarding the capital commit-
ments needed to continually increase attack effectiveness in the presence of counterinsurgent
innovations. Although we focus specifically on learning with respect to explosive devices,
the model is far more general and could enhance the microlevel study of rebellion broadly.
    Our model also yields novel insights that we do not examine and leave to future research.
In particular, Proposition 1 demonstrates that a fixed time horizon (e.g., a publicly an-
nounced security transition) may induce unexpected under and/or over investment by insur-
gents depending on how quickly they can adapt to observed government innovations between
periods. This insight of our model sheds light on another largely unexplored topic in political
science and economics: how states manage foreign-to-local security transitions at the end of



                                              25
a military intervention. We leave this exploration to future research.
   We test our model’s empirical implications using newly declassified microdata on IEDs
assembled and deployed during the ongoing Afghanistan conflict. These military records
enable us to track individual explosive ordnance from 2006 to 2014, and evaluate whether
they have detonated in the field, and, conditional on detonation, how much damage each
bomb generated. Although we lack comparable data on anti-IED technologies, we evaluate
insurgent effectiveness during a period of rapidly expanding government spending on techno-
logical responses to improvised threats. Our empirical investigation provides robust evidence
that bombs were just as likely, if not more, to detonate and cause harm to combatants at
the end of the conflict as they were at the beginning (and periods in between).
   Yet our results should not be taken as evidence that technological innovation by the
United States and allied partners never worked or was wasteful spending. To the contrary,
one of the implications of our model is that divestment by the United States and host
nation forces could have led to further growth in the detonation and casualty rates. We
lack sufficient evidence to fully demonstrate this point and future research should evaluate
how, in the course of an ongoing insurgency, we can evaluate the impact of acquisition and
installation of armor plating, body protection, signal jammers, and other defeat technologies.
   Although the aggregate evidence indicates insurgents learned quickly and innovated to
match counterinsurgent expenditures and equipment, the United States and host nation
partners did achieve local successes. Panjwai, in Kandahar province, is one these cases.
Our model and empirical investigation have primarily focused on insurgent adaptation to
innovations fielded by government rivals. In Panjwai, counterinsurgents paired technological
innovation with a “hearts and minds” approach to winning civilian support through foot
patrols, community engagement, and development aid. In Supporting Information Section
D, we introduce additional evidence from this micro case study. Although we observe no
change in the casualty rate for IEDs (consistent with learning by insurgents), we do find a
significant decrease in the detonation rate over time. That is, an IED remains deadly if it


                                             26
explodes, but IEDs are increasingly unlikely to actually explode, as they are instead found
and cleared by the Afghan government or Coalition forces. Security force success in Panjwai
might serve as a template for future warfighting and should motivate further investigation.



References

Abuza, Zachary (2007). “The Role of Foreign Trainers in Southern Thailand’s Insurgency”.
   Terrorism Monitor    5 (11):7.
Bahk, Byong-Hyong and Michael Gort (1993). “Decomposing Learning by Doing in New
   Plants”. Journal of Political Economy 101 (4):561–583.
Beath, Andrew, Fotini Christia, and Ruben Enikolopov (2016). Winning Hearts and Minds
   through Development: Evidence from a Field Experiment in Afghanistan. SSRN Scholarly
   Paper ID 1809677, 44 pp.
Berman, Eli, Jacob N. Shapiro, and Joseph H. Felter (2011). “Can Hearts and Minds Be
   Bought? The Economics of Counterinsurgency in Iraq”. Journal of Political Economy
   119 (4):766–819.
Bradley, Rusty and Kevin Maurer (2011). Lions of Kandahar. Bantam. 314 pp.
Bueno de Mesquita, Ethan (2016). “The Terrorist Endgame”. Journal of Conflict Resolution
    49 (2):237–258.
Bueno de Mesquita, Ethan and Eric S. Dickson (2007). “The Propaganda of the Deed:
   Terrorism, Counterterrorism, and Mobilization”. American Journal of Political Science
   51 (2):364–381.
Bueno de Mesquita, Ethan, Chris Price, and Andrew Shaver (2017). “Experience in Coun-
   terinsurgency”. Working paper.
Callander, Steven (2011). “Searching for Good Policies”. The American Political Science
   Review 105 (4):643–662.




                                            27
Callander, Steven and Tom S. Clark (2017). “Precedent and Doctrine in a Complicated
   World”. American Political Science Review 111 (1):184–203.
Carter, David B. (2016). “Provocation and the Strategy of Terrorist and Guerrilla Attacks”.
   International Organization 70:133–73.
Conley, Timothy G. and Christopher R. Udry (2010). “Learning about a New Technology:
   Pineapple in Ghana”. American Economic Review 100 (1):35–69.
Crost, Benjamin, Joseph Felter, and Patrick Johnston (2014). “Aid under Fire: Development
   Projects and Civil Conflict”. American Economic Review 104 (6):1833–1856.
Dorronsoro, Gilles (2009). The Taliban’s Winning Strategy in Afghanistan. Washington, DC:
   Carnegie Endowment for International Peace, 36 pp.
Ewing, Steve (2013). Thach Weave. OCLC: 831119049. Annopolis: Naval Institute Press.
Fey, Mark and Kristopher W. Ramsay (2007). “Mutual Optimism and War”. American
   Journal of Political Science 51 (4):738–754.
Forest, James J. F. (2009). “Knowledge Transfer and Shared Learning among Armed Groups.”
   Pirates, Terrorists, and Warlords. Ed. by Jeffrey H. Norwitz. Skyhorse Publishing Inc.
Foster, Andrew D. and Mark R. Rosenzweig (1995). “Learning by Doing and Learning from
   Others: Human Capital and Technical Change in Agriculture”. Journal of Political Econ-
   omy 103 (6):1176–1209.
Fowler, T. Robert (2016). Combat Mission Kandahar. Dundurn. 272 pp.
Gabbert, Richard D. and Gary B. Streets (1977). A Comparative Analysis of USAF Fixed-
   Wing Aircraft Losses in Southeast Asia Combat. AFFDL-TR-77-115. Defense Technical
   Information Center. 176 pp.
Galula, David (1965). Counter-Insurgency Warfare: The Theory and Practice. New York:
   Praeger.
Grolemund, Garrett and Hadley Wickham (2015). “Visualizing Complex Data With Embed-
   ded Plots”. Journal of Computational and Graphical Statistics 24 (1):26–43.




                                            28
Hayden, Nancy K. (2013). “Innovation and Learning in Terrorist Organizations: Towards
   Adaptive Capacity and Resiliency”. System Dynamics Society, 24 pp.
Jackson, Brian A. (2004). Organizational Learning and Terrorist Groups. WR-133-NIJ. Santa
   Monica: RAND Corporation, 27 pp.
Jackson, Brian A. et al. (2005). Aptitude for Destruction. Santa Monica, CA: RAND Cor-
   poration. 104 pp.
JIEDDO Report (2006). “Annual Report: Attack the Network, Defeat the Device, Train the
   Force”. Joint Improvised Explosive Device Defeat Organization Public Archive.
— (2007). “Annual Report: Attack the Network, Defeat the Device, Train the Force”. Joint
   Improvised Explosive Device Defeat Organization Public Archive.
— (2008). “Annual Report: Attack the Network, Defeat the Device, Train the Force”. Joint
   Improvised Explosive Device Defeat Organization Public Archive.
— (2009). “Annual Report: Attack the Network, Defeat the Device, Train the Force”. Joint
   Improvised Explosive Device Defeat Organization Public Archive.
— (2010). “Annual Report: Attack — Defeat — Train”. Joint Improvised Explosive Device
   Defeat Organization Public Archive.
Kalyvas, Stathis N (2011). The Logic of Violence in Civil War. Cambridge: Cambridge
   University Press.
Kalyvas, Stathis N. and Laia Balcells (2010). “International System and Technologies of Re-
   bellion: How the End of the Cold War Shaped Internal Conflict”. The American Political
   Science Review 104 (3):415–429.
Larson, Jennifer M. and Janet I. Lewis (2017). “Ethnic Networks”. American Journal of
   Political Science 61 (2):350–364.
Little, Andrew T. (2015). “Communication Technology and Protest”. The Journal of Politics
    78 (1):152–166.




                                            29
Lyall, Jason (2014). Bombing to Lose? Airpower and the Dynamics of Violence in Coun-
   terinsurgency Wars. SSRN Scholarly Paper ID 2422170. Rochester, NY: Social Science
   Research Network.
Makse, Todd and Craig Volden (2011). “The Role of Policy Attributes in the Diffusion of
   Innovations”. The Journal of Politics 73 (1):108–124.
Mebane, Walter R. and Jasjeet S. Sekhon (2002). “Coordination and Policy Moderation at
   Midterm”. American Political Science Review 96 (1):141–157.
Mersky, Peter B. (1993). Time of the Aces: Marine Pilots in the Solomons, 1942-1944.
   Washington, D.C. : History and Museums Division, Headquarters, U.S. Marine Corps :
   [Supt. of Docs., U.S. G.P.O., distributor]. 44 pp.
Sexton, Renard (2016). “Aid as a Tool against Insurgency: Evidence from Contested and
   Controlled Territory in Afghanistan”. American Political Science Review 110 (4):731–
   749.
Trebbi, Francesco and Eric Weese (2015). Insurgency and Small Wars: Estimation of Un-
   observed Coalition Structures. Working Paper 21202. National Bureau of Economic Re-
   search.
Tullock, Gordon (1980). “Efficient rent seeking”. Toward a Theory of the rent-seeking society.
   Ed. by James M Buchanan. College Station: Texas A et M Univ. Pr., pp. 269–282.
U.S. Congress Oversight Subcommittee (2008). “The Joint Improvised Explosive Device
   Defeat Organization: DOD’s Fight Against IEDs Today and Tomorrow”. United States
   Congressional Reports.
Valentino, Benjamin, Paul Huth, and Dylan Balch-Lindsay (2004). “Draining the Sea: Mass
   Killing and Guerrilla Warfare”. International Organization 58 (2):375–407.
Volden, Craig, Michael M. Ting, and Daniel P. Carpenter (2008). “A Formal Model of Learn-
   ing and Policy Diffusion”. The American Political Science Review 102 (3):319–332.
Weyland, Kurt (2016). “Crafting Counterrevolution: How Reactionaries Learned to Combat
   Change in 1848”. American Political Science Review 110 (2):215–231.


                                             30
Wilson, Clay (2008). “Improvised Explosive Devices (IEDs) in Iraq and Afghanistan: Effects
   and Countermeasures”. United States Congressional Research Service Reports.
Wright, Austin L. (2016). “Economic Shocks and Rebel Tactics”. HiCN WP 232.
Young, Alwyn (1993). “Invention and Bounded Learning by Doing”. Journal of Political
   Economy 101 (3):443–472.
Zahn, Randy R. (2003). Snake Pilot: Flying the Cobra Attack Helicopter in Vietnam. Po-
   tomac Books, Inc. 295 pp.




                                           31
                                                  APPENDIX
                          — For Publication with Main Text —


A       Proofs

Proof of Proposition 1. Consider

                                            T                    
                                            X       ACt
                                V   A
                                        =                   − cIt (1 + r)−(t−1) .
                                                                A

                                            t=1
                                                  ACt + DFt


for T = 2, maximized with respect to I1A , I2A subject to


                                              I2A (1 + r)−1 = Y A − I1A                             (2)

                                              I2G (1 + r)−1 = Y G − I1G

                                    
and taking G’s best response profile I1G , I2G as given. Once we set AC0 = DF0 = 0 and
we replace the budget constraints into V A , we obtain the unconstrained maximand:

                   I1A
                         
    A
V       =                   +                                                                         (3)
                I1A + I1G
            "                                                                          #
                                 αI1A + γI1G + Y A − I1A (1 + r)
                                                                                          (1 + r)−1 − cY A
                αI1A + γI1G + (Y A − I1A ) (1 + r) + αI1G + ρI1A + (Y G − I1G ) (1 + r)


The first order condition with respect to I1A is:
                                             "               #
                      ∂V A        I1G            (1 + r)−1
                           =             2 −                   ×
                      ∂I1A   (I1A + I1G )      (AC2 + DF2 )2
                             [(1 + r − α) (AC2 + DF2 ) − AC2 (1 + r − α − ρ)]

                                = 0




                                                          A-1
Repeating the exercise for G, we obtain the FOC:
                                       "               #
                ∂V G        I1A            (1 + r)−1
                     =             2 −                   ×
                ∂I1G   (I1A + I1G )      (AC2 + DF2 )2
                       [(1 + r − α) (AC2 + DF2 ) − DF2 (1 + r − α − γ)]

                       = 0


Define χ = 1 + r − α. Solving the system constituted of these two FOCs implies the unique
equilibrium investment levels for A and G:




                                I1A = ∆ × χY A + γY G
                                                     


                                I1G = ∆ × χY G + ρY A
                                                     



where


∆ =
                                             (1 + r)2 (Y A + Y G )2
         Y A2 ((2 + r3 − 2r2 (α − 2) + 2α2 + 2γ + γ 2 − 2α (2 + γ) − γρ + r(5 − 6α + α2 + 2γ − γρ))
          +2Y A Y G ((r3 − 2r2 (α − 2) + (α − 1) (2 (α − 1) − γ − ρ) + r(5 − 6α + α2 + γ + ρ − γρ))
        +Y G2 ((2 + r3 − 2r2 (α − 2) + 2α2 + 2ρ + ρ2 − 2α (2 + ρ) − γρ + r(5 − 6α + α2 + 2ρ − γρ))


and, through the budget constraints (2), we also have the unique equilibrium I2A and I2G .
This construction proves existence and uniqueness of the Nash equilibrium.
   Consider now the equilibrium insurgent effectiveness at periods 1 and 2 obtained by using
the players’ equilibrium investment strategies:

                           AC1             χY A + γY G
                                   =
                         AC1 + DF1   (χ + ρ) Y A + (χ + γ) Y G
                           AC2          YA
                                   =           .
                         AC2 + DF2   YA+YG

                                             A-2
Notice then that
                                 χY A + γY G             YA
                                                     =
                           (χ + ρ) Y A + (χ + γ) Y G   YA+YG

if it holds that                          2         2
                                   γ YG −ρ YA
                                                                   =0
                         (Y A + Y G ) ((χ + ρ) Y A + (χ + γ) Y G )

or
                                                          2
                                                     YG
                                                 
                                           ρ
                                             =                  .
                                           γ         YA

Notice further that

                                 AC1                        AC2
                                                 <
                               AC1 + DF1                  AC2 + DF2
                                                 ⇒
                                           G 2
                                           
                                          Y               ρ
                                                 <          .
                                          YA              γ

     This proves the proposition. 




                                                 A-3
Proof of Proposition 2. Consider that

                                                         2
                                        ρ/γ > Y G /Y A


implies                                 2        2
                                    ρ YA −γ YG
                                                     >0
                                      χY A + γY G

and notice that                   2        2
                              ρ YA −γ YG         I1G Y G
                                               =    −    .
                                χY A + γY G      I1A Y A

So from the argument above it holds that

                                         I1G Y G
                                            −    > 0,
                                         I1A Y A

then this implies that the difference

                                                   I2G I2A
                                                       −     =
                                                   I1G I1A
                                                    (1 + r)
                                 Y G I1A − Y A I1G           < 0.
                                                     Y AY G

This proves the proposition. 




                                              A-4
B          Main results and summary statistics

                            Table A-1: Trends in IED explosions (binary outcome)



                                          (1)         (2)        (3)        (4)        (5)          (6)
                                          All         All        All        All      Panjwai      Panjwai
  Time                                0.004          0.002      0.004      0.002     −0.032∗∗∗    −0.031∗∗∗
                                     (0.007)        (0.005)    (0.004)    (0.002)     (0.004)      (0.004)
  Grid square FE                       No             Yes        No         Yes         No           No
  Month of year FE                     No             Yes        No         Yes         No           Yes
  N                                  94,679         94,679     80,101     80,101       6,673        6,673
  R2                                 0.0002          0.407     0.0002      0.469       0.011        0.408
  Adjusted R2                        0.0002          0.406     0.0002      0.469       0.011        0.407
      ∗             ∗∗              ∗∗∗
          p < .1;        p < .05;         p < .01

Columns 1 and 2 consider only emplaced IEDs (coded 0 if the IED was then found and
cleared, and 1 if it exploded). Columns 3 and 4 also include caches that are found and
cleared (these are coded as zeros). Columns 5 and 6 are restricted to the Panjwai region.
Grid square fixed effects (FE) are not used because Panjwai is entirely contained in the 66E
32N grid square. Columns 1-4 use errors clustered at the grid square level. Columns 5-6 use
heteroskedasticity consistent covariance matrix estimates.


  Table A-2: Trends in IED explosions (binary outcome), using logit model specification



                                      (1)             (2)        (3)         (4)        (5)          (6)
                                      All             All        All         All      Panjwai      Panjwai
 Time                               0.016∗∗∗        0.009∗∗∗   0.015∗∗∗    0.008∗∗    −0.134∗∗∗    −0.133∗∗∗
                                    (0.003)         (0.004)    (0.004)     (0.004)     (0.015)      (0.016)
 Grid square FE                        No             Yes         No         Yes         No           No
 Month of year FE                      No             Yes         No         Yes         No           Yes
 N                                   94,679          94,679     80,101     80,101       6,673        6,673
  ∗             ∗∗              ∗∗∗
      p < .1;        p < .05;         p < .01

Logit model. Columns 1 and 2 consider only emplaced IEDs (coded 0 if the IED was then
found and cleared, and 1 if it exploded). Columns 3 and 4 also include caches that are found
and cleared (these are coded as zeros). Columns 5 and 6 are restricted to the Panjwai region.
Grid square fixed effects (FE) are not used because Panjwai is entirely contained in the 66E
32N grid square.


                                                               A-5
                                             Table A-3: Outcome conditional on IED Explosion


                                           (1)         (2)         (3)         (4)         (5)        (6)         (7)          (8)
                                           All         All         All         All       Panjwai    Panjwai     Panjwai      Panjwai
      Time                               0.157∗∗∗   0.154∗∗∗   0.114∗∗∗                  0.188∗∗∗   0.190∗∗∗   0.167∗∗∗
                                         (0.005)    (0.005)     (0.005)                  (0.022)    (0.023)     (0.023)
      Afghan Military, Unsupported                              0.534∗∗∗      0.027                             0.357∗∗     −1.281∗
                                                                (0.063)      (0.251)                            (0.175)      (0.735)
      Afghan Police                                             0.714∗∗∗     −0.019                             0.831∗∗∗      0.807
                                                                (0.064)      (0.246)                            (0.206)      (0.749)
      Civilian                                                  1.262∗∗∗     0.514∗∗                           1.025∗∗∗       0.719
                                                                (0.064)      (0.245)                            (0.180)      (0.737)
      Coalition                                                −0.194∗∗∗    −0.787∗∗∗                          −0.326∗∗      −0.774
                                                                (0.059)      (0.236)                            (0.150)      (0.665)
      NA                                                       −0.639∗∗∗    −4.385∗∗∗                          −1.423∗∗∗    −6.721∗∗∗
                                                                (0.064)      (0.255)                            (0.200)      (0.943)
      Time × Afg Military, Supported                                        −0.087∗∗                                          0.014
                                                                             (0.042)                                         (0.114)
      Time × Afg Military, Unsupp.                                           0.030∗∗                                        0.304∗∗∗
                                                                             (0.014)                                         (0.059)




A-6
      Time × Afg Police                                                      0.062∗∗∗                                         0.013
                                                                             (0.013)                                         (0.067)
      Time × Civilian                                                        0.060∗∗∗                                         0.069
                                                                             (0.013)                                         (0.064)
      Time × Coalition                                                        0.015                                          0.088∗∗∗
                                                                             (0.009)                                         (0.033)
      Time × NA                                                              0.554∗∗∗                                       0.948∗∗∗
                                                                             (0.016)                                         (0.109)
      Ineffective|Dam/Dis/Destroyed      0.203∗∗∗    −0.543    −1.591∗∗∗    −3.335∗∗     0.261∗∗    0.276∗∗     −0.011       −0.871
                                         (0.029)     (0.877)    (0.098)      (1.676)     (0.123)    (0.125)     (0.191)      (0.643)
      Dam/Dis/Destroyed|Wounded          0.951∗∗∗     0.212    −0.782∗∗∗     −2.509      0.936∗∗∗   0.954∗∗∗    0.725∗∗∗     −0.122
                                         (0.030)     (0.877)    (0.098)      (1.676)     (0.125)    (0.126)     (0.192)      (0.643)
      Wounded|Killed                     2.370∗∗∗    1.654∗     0.776∗∗∗     −0.933      2.712∗∗∗   2.738∗∗∗    2.656∗∗∗    1.830∗∗∗
                                         (0.032)     (0.877)    (0.099)      (1.676)     (0.135)    (0.137)     (0.199)      (0.644)
      Grid square FE                        No         Yes        Yes          Yes          No         No          No           No
      Month of year FE                      No         Yes        Yes          Yes          No        Yes         Yes          Yes
      N                                   36,690     36,690      36,690       36,690      2,594      2,594       2,594        2,594
       ∗p < .1; ∗∗ p < .05; ∗∗∗ p < .01
      Proportional-odds ordered logit regression with levels “Ineffective”, “Dam/Dis/Destroyed”, “Wounded”, “Killed”. Columns 5-8 use only
      data from Panjwai area. Grid square fixed effects are not used because Panjwai is contained in the 66E 32N square.
                                            Table A-4: Outcome conditional on IED Explosion


                                                (1)        (2)         (3)          (4)        (5)        (6)         (7)          (8)
                                                All        All         All          All      Panjwai    Panjwai     Panjwai      Panjwai
      Time                                    0.046∗∗∗   0.046∗∗∗    0.029∗∗∗     −0.014     0.051∗∗∗   0.051∗∗∗   0.044∗∗∗       0.010
                                              (0.008)    (0.008)     (0.003)      (0.019)    (0.006)    (0.006)     (0.006)      (0.028)
      Afghan Military, Unsupported                                   0.126∗∗∗      0.002                             0.069       −0.188
                                                                     (0.023)      (0.093)                           (0.045)      (0.186)
      Afghan Police                                                  0.150∗∗∗     −0.030                            0.176∗∗∗      0.109
                                                                     (0.019)      (0.088)                           (0.050)      (0.183)
      Civilian                                                       0.259∗∗∗      0.106                            0.234∗∗∗      0.050
                                                                     (0.023)      (0.114)                           (0.044)      (0.181)
      Coalition                                                     −0.136∗∗∗    −0.255∗∗                          −0.134∗∗∗     −0.231
                                                                     (0.026)      (0.118)                           (0.039)      (0.167)
      NA                                                            −0.114∗      −0.689∗∗∗                         −0.274∗∗∗    −0.851∗∗∗
                                                                     (0.062)      (0.075)                           (0.045)      (0.169)
      Time × Afghan Military, Unsupported                                         0.027∗                                          0.046
                                                                                  (0.016)                                        (0.032)




A-7
      Time × Afghan Police                                                        0.035∗∗                                         0.011
                                                                                  (0.016)                                        (0.032)
      Time × Civilian                                                              0.030                                          0.034
                                                                                  (0.020)                                        (0.032)
      Time × Coalition                                                             0.020                                          0.016
                                                                                  (0.020)                                        (0.030)
      Time × NA                                                                  0.103∗∗∗                                        0.110∗∗∗
                                                                                  (0.012)                                        (0.031)
      Grid square FE                             No         Yes        Yes          Yes        No         No          No            No
      Month of year FE                           No         Yes        Yes          Yes        No         Yes         Yes          Yes
      N                                        36,690     36,690      36,690      36,690      2,594      2,594       2,594        2,594
      R2                                       0.033       0.048      0.132        0.147      0.029      0.037       0.127        0.138
      Adjusted R2                              0.033       0.045      0.130        0.144      0.029      0.032       0.121        0.131
       ∗p  < .1; ∗∗ p < .05; ∗∗∗ p < .01
      Linear probability model with levels “Ineffective” and “Dam/Dis/Destroyed” coded as 0, and levels “Wounded” and “Killed” coded as
      1. Columns 5-8 use only data from Panjwai area. Grid square fixed effects (FE) are not used for Panjwai columns because Panjwai
      is contained in the 66E 32N square. Columns 1-4 use errors clustered at the grid square level. Columns 5-8 use heteroskedasticity
      consistent covariance matrix estimates.
                            Table A-5: IED Outcomes as Rates


                                               Casualty Rate               Casualty Rate
                 Detonation Rate                Afghan Units              Coalition Units
                 (1)            (2)           (3)          (4)            (5)           (6)
 Time        0.0000329 0.000291∗∗∗ 0.000551∗∗∗ 0.000564∗∗∗            0.0000252     -0.000127
            (0.0000417) (0.0000502) (0.0000785) (0.0000861)          (0.0000841) (0.000106)
 N             24603          24603          9578         9578           7730          7730
 Clusters        371            371           334          334           263            263
   2
 R             0.0111         0.0182        0.0216       0.0516        0.00543       0.00816
 Standard errors in parentheses
 γ
   p < 0.10, ∗ p < 0.05, ∗∗ p < 0.01, ∗∗∗ p < 0.001

All models include district and week-of-year fixed effects (FE). Standard errors are clustered
by district. Even numbered columns include a year fixed effect. Time is a linear trend. The
model is estimated using ordinary least squares.




                            Table A-6: IED Outcomes as Rates


                                              Casualty Rate            Casualty Rate
                  Detonation Rate             Afghan Units            Coalition Units
                  (1)           (2)          (3)         (4)          (5)         (6)
   Time        0.000186 0.00122∗∗∗ 0.00232∗∗∗ 0.00247∗∗∗          0.0000940 -0.000578
              (0.000163) (0.000199) (0.000311) (0.000352)         (0.000387) (0.000500)
   N             24603        24603         9578        9578         7730        7730
   Clusters       371          371           334         334          263         263
   Standard errors in parentheses
   γ
     p < 0.10, ∗ p < 0.05, ∗∗ p < 0.01, ∗∗∗ p < 0.001

All models include district and week-of-year fixed effects (FE). Standard errors are clustered
by district. Even numbered columns include a year fixed effect. Time is a linear trend. The
model is estimated using generalized least squares, with a binomial family and logit link
functions.




                                             A-8
                 Table A-7: Summary Statistics for Tables A-1 and A-2

             Statistic           N        Mean    St. Dev.      Min     Max
             IED Explosion     94,679     0.388     0.487        0       1
             Time              94,679     5.477     1.919      0.000   8.831



                 Table A-8: Summary Statistics for Tables A-3 and A-4

     Statistic                             N      Mean      St. Dev.   Min     Max
     Time                                36,690   5.510      1.945     0.000   8.828
     Ineffective                         36,690   0.346      0.476       0       1
     Dam/Dis/Destroyed                   36,690   0.178      0.382       0       1
     Wounded                             36,690   0.291      0.454       0       1
     Killed                              36,690   0.186      0.389       0       1
     Casualty                            36,690   0.477      0.499       0       1
     Afghan Military, Supported          36,690   0.030      0.172       0       1
     Afghan Military, Unsupported        36,690   0.139      0.346       0       1
     Afghan Police                       36,690   0.131      0.338       0       1
     Civilian                            36,690   0.127      0.332       0       1
     Coalition                           36,690   0.422      0.494       0       1
     NA                                  36,690   0.151      0.358       0       1

Each observation has an outcome that is one of “Ineffective”, “Dam/Dis/Destroyed”,
“Wounded”, and “Killed”. “Casualty” is coded as 1 when the outcome is either “Wounded”
or “Killed”. Each observation has a TYPE that is one of “Afghan Military, Supported”,
“Afghan Military, Unsupported”, “Afghan Police”, “Civilian”, “Coalition”, and “NA”.


                 Table A-9: Summary Statistics for Tables A-5 and A-6

       Variable                            Mean    St. Dev.     Min.   Max.   N
       IED detonation rate                 0.498    0.427         0     1   24702
       Casualty rate, Afghan forces        0.554    0.462         0     1    9638
       Casualty rate, Coalition forces      0.3     0.406        0      1    7788
       Time (weekly)                      2669.361 118.157      2392   2851 24702




                                            A-9
                          SUPPORTING INFORMATION
                              — For Online Publication Only —


A      Additional visual evidence: IED attacks

                          Figure SI-1: Target of IED Explosions (sums to 100%)


            1.00




            0.75
    count




            0.50




            0.25




            0.00

                   2006      2007     2008      2009       2010       2011       2012        2013     2014       2015
                                                               Date

                                    NA         Afghan Police          Afghan Military, Unsupported   Coalition
                          Target
                                    Civilian   Afghan Unspecified     Afghan Military, Supported




                                                           SI-1
                  Figure SI-2: Outcome of IED Explosions (sums to 100%)


        100%




        75%
count




        50%




        25%




         0%


               2006      2007    2008       2009      2010        2011   2012     2013     2014      2015
                                                           Date

                      IED Explosion     Ineffective   NA     Dam/Dis/Destroyed   Wounded    Killed




                                                      SI-2
                  Figure SI-3: Outcome of IED Explosions by Month (sums to 100%)

                      Jan               Feb               Mar               Apr
        1.00


        0.75


        0.50


        0.25


        0.00

                      May               Jun               Jul               Aug
        1.00
                                                                                          IED
        0.75                                                                                    Killed
                                                                                                Wounded
count




        0.50
                                                                                                Dam/Dis/Destroyed
                                                                                                NA
        0.25
                                                                                                Ineffective

        0.00

                      Sep               Oct               Nov               Dec
        1.00


        0.75


        0.50


        0.25


        0.00
               2006   2010   20142006   2010   20142006   2010   20142006   2010   2014
                                                Year




                                                          SI-3
                                                                                         Figure SI-4: Outcome of IED Explosions by Month and Security Actor
                             Jan               Feb               Mar               Apr                                                             Jan                  Feb                        Mar                  Apr                                                            Jan               Feb               Mar               Apr
               1.00                                                                                                                1.00                                                                                                                                  1.00


               0.75                                                                                                                0.75                                                                                                                                  0.75


               0.50                                                                                                                0.50                                                                                                                                  0.50


               0.25                                                                                                                0.25                                                                                                                                  0.25


               0.00                                                                                                                0.00                                                                                                                                  0.00

                             May               Jun               Jul               Aug                                                           May                    Jun                        Jul                  Aug                                                            May               Jun               Jul               Aug
               1.00                                                                                                                1.00                                                                                                                                  1.00
                                                                                                 IED                                                                                                                                   IED                                                                                                                 IED
               0.75                                                                                    Killed                      0.75                                                                                                      Killed                      0.75                                                                                    Killed
                                                                                                       Wounded                                                                                                                               Wounded                                                                                                             Wounded
               0.50                                                                                                                0.50                                                                                                                                  0.50
                                                                                                       Dam/Dis/Destroyed                                                                                                                     Dam/Dis/Destroyed                                                                                                   Dam/Dis/Destroyed




       count
                                                                                                                           count
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 count
                                                                                                       NA                                                                                                                                    NA                                                                                                                  NA
               0.25                                                                                                                0.25                                                                                                                                  0.25
                                                                                                       Ineffective                                                                                                                           Ineffective                                                                                                         Ineffective

               0.00                                                                                                                0.00                                                                                                                                  0.00

                             Sep               Oct               Nov               Dec                                                             Sep                  Oct                        Nov                  Dec                                                            Sep               Oct               Nov               Dec
               1.00                                                                                                                1.00                                                                                                                                  1.00


               0.75                                                                                                                0.75                                                                                                                                  0.75


               0.50                                                                                                                0.50                                                                                                                                  0.50


               0.25                                                                                                                0.25                                                                                                                                  0.25


               0.00                                                                                                                0.00                                                                                                                                  0.00
                      2006   2010   20142006   2010   20142006   2010   20142006   2010   2014                                            2006   2010      20142006   2010      20142006       2010        20142006   2010      2014                                            2006   2010   20142006   2010   20142006   2010   20142006   2010   2014
                                                       Year                                                                                                                          Year                                                                                                                        Year

                                                     (a) Coalition                                                                                                              (b) Afghan                                                                                                               (c) Afghan Police




SI-4
                             Jan               Feb               Mar               Apr                                                             Jan                  Feb                        Mar                  Apr                                                            Jan               Feb               Mar               Apr
               1.00                                                                                                                1.00                                                                                                                                  1.00


               0.75                                                                                                                0.75                                                                                                                                  0.75


               0.50                                                                                                                0.50                                                                                                                                  0.50


               0.25                                                                                                                0.25                                                                                                                                  0.25


               0.00                                                                                                                0.00                                                                                                                                  0.00

                             May               Jun               Jul               Aug                                                           May                    Jun                        Jul                  Aug                                                            May               Jun               Jul               Aug
               1.00                                                                                                                1.00                                                                                                                                  1.00
                                                                                                 IED                                                                                                                                   IED                                                                                                                 IED
               0.75                                                                                    Killed                      0.75                                                                                                      Killed                      0.75                                                                                    Killed
                                                                                                       Wounded                                                                                                                               Wounded                                                                                                             Wounded
               0.50                                                                                                                0.50                                                                                                                                  0.50
                                                                                                       Dam/Dis/Destroyed                                                                                                                     Dam/Dis/Destroyed                                                                                                   Dam/Dis/Destroyed




       count
                                                                                                                           count
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 count




                                                                                                       NA                                                                                                                                    NA                                                                                                                  NA
               0.25                                                                                                                0.25                                                                                                                                  0.25
                                                                                                       Ineffective                                                                                                                           Ineffective                                                                                                         Ineffective

               0.00                                                                                                                0.00                                                                                                                                  0.00

                             Sep               Oct               Nov               Dec                                                             Sep                  Oct                        Nov                  Dec                                                            Sep               Oct               Nov               Dec
               1.00                                                                                                                1.00                                                                                                                                  1.00


               0.75                                                                                                                0.75                                                                                                                                  0.75


               0.50                                                                                                                0.50                                                                                                                                  0.50


               0.25                                                                                                                0.25                                                                                                                                  0.25


               0.00                                                                                                                0.00                                                                                                                                  0.00
                      2006   2010   20142006   2010   20142006   2010   20142006   2010   2014                                              2008         2012    2008         2012          2008         2012    2008         2012                                              2006   2010   20142006   2010   20142006   2010   20142006   2010   2014
                                                       Year                                                                                                                          Year                                                                                                                        Year

                                         (d) Afghan Military                                                                                     (e) Afghan Military, Supported                                                                                                  (f) Afghan Military, Unsupported
B    Supplemental visual evidence: non-IED attacks




            750




            500
    count




            250




             0


                  2006    2007   2008           2009    2010      2011       2012    2013            2014   2015
                                                           Date

                            DF    Ineffective      NA    Dam/Dis/Destroyed     Wounded      Killed




                         Figure SI-5: Direct Fire attacks (all of Afghanistan)




                                                        SI-5
        300




        200
count




        100




         0


              2006    2007    2008           2009        2010      2011       2012    2013        2014   2015
                                                            Date

                        IDF    Ineffective          NA    Dam/Dis/Destroyed     Wounded      Killed




                     Figure SI-6: Indirect Fire attacks (all of Afghanistan)




                                                         SI-6
                                                                       Figure SI-7: Outcomes of violent events across Afghanistan campaign by Month
                            Jan               Feb               Mar               Apr                                                           Jan               Feb               Mar               Apr                                                         Jan               Feb               Mar               Apr
               800
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     600
               600
                                                                                                                                  2000
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     400
               400

                                                                                                                                  1000
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     200
               200


                0                                                                                                                    0                                                                                                                0

                            May               Jun               Jul               Aug                                                           May               Jun               Jul               Aug                                                         May               Jun               Jul               Aug
               800
                                                                                                IED                                                                                                                 DF                               600                                                                              IDF
               600                                                                                    Killed                                                                                                             Killed                                                                                                             Killed
                                                                                                                                  2000
                                                                                                      Wounded                                                                                                            Wounded                     400                                                                                    Wounded
               400
                                                                                                      Dam/Dis/Destroyed                                                                                                  Dam/Dis/Destroyed                                                                                                  Dam/Dis/Destroyed




       count
                                                                                                                          count
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             count




                                                                                                                                  1000
                                                                                                      NA                                                                                                                 NA                          200                                                                                    NA
               200




SI-7
                                                                                                      Ineffective                                                                                                        Ineffective                                                                                                        Ineffective

                0                                                                                                                    0                                                                                                                0

                            Sep               Oct               Nov               Dec                                                           Sep               Oct               Nov               Dec                                                         Sep               Oct               Nov               Dec
               800
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     600
               600
                                                                                                                                  2000
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     400
               400

                                                                                                                                  1000
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     200
               200


                0                                                                                                                    0                                                                                                                0
                     2006   2010   20142006   2010   20142006   2010   20142006   2010   2014                                            2006   2010   20142006   2010   20142006   2010   20142006   2010   2014                                          2006   2010   20142006   2010   20142006   2010   20142006   2010   2014
                                                      Year                                                                                                                Year                                                                                                              Year


                             (a) IED Explosions by Month                                                                                  (b) Direct Fire Attacks by Month                                                                                  (c) Indirect Fire Attacks by Month
                                                                                               Figure SI-8: Direct Fire attacks, by Lat-Lon grid square

                            62E        63E            64E         65E        66E        67E            68E        69E        70E        71E            72E                                62E            63E            64E            65E            66E            67E            68E            69E            70E            71E            72E
               6000                                                                                                                                                          1.00
               4000                                                                                                                                                          0.75
                                                                                                                                                                             0.50




                                                                                                                                                               37N
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            37N




               2000                                                                                                                                                          0.25
                  0                                                                                                                                                          0.00
               6000                                                                                                                                                          1.00
               4000                                                                                                                                                          0.75
                                                                                                                                                                             0.50




                                                                                                                                                               36N
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            36N




               2000                                                                                                                                                          0.25
                  0                                                                                                                                                          0.00
               6000                                                                                                                                                          1.00
               4000                                                                                                                                                          0.75
                                                                                                                                                                             0.50




                                                                                                                                                               35N
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            35N




               2000                                                                                                                                                          0.25
                  0                                                                                                                                                          0.00
               6000                                                                                                                                                          1.00
               4000                                                                                                                                                          0.75
                                                                                                                                                                             0.50




                                                                                                                                                               34N
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            34N




               2000                                                                                                                                                          0.25
                  0                                                                                                                                                          0.00
               6000                                                                                                                                                          1.00




       count
                                                                                                                                                                     count
               4000                                                                                                                                                          0.75
                                                                                                                                                                             0.50




                                                                                                                                                               33N
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            33N




               2000                                                                                                                                                          0.25




SI-8
                  0                                                                                                                                                          0.00
               6000                                                                                                                                                          1.00
               4000                                                                                                                                                          0.75
                                                                                                                                                                             0.50




                                                                                                                                                               32N
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            32N




               2000                                                                                                                                                          0.25
                  0                                                                                                                                                          0.00
               6000                                                                                                                                                          1.00
               4000                                                                                                                                                          0.75
                                                                                                                                                                             0.50




                                                                                                                                                               31N
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            31N




               2000                                                                                                                                                          0.25
                  0                                                                                                                                                          0.00
               6000                                                                                                                                                          1.00
               4000                                                                                                                                                          0.75
                                                                                                                                                                             0.50
                                                                                                                                                               30N
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            30N




               2000                                                                                                                                                          0.25
                 0                                                                                                                                                           0.00
                      '06     '14'06         '14'06      '14'06     '14'06     '14'06         '14'06     '14'06     '14'06     '14'06         '14'06     '14                        '06         '14'06         '14'06         '14'06         '14'06         '14'06         '14'06         '14'06         '14'06         '14'06         '14'06         '14
                                                                                     Year                                                                                                                                                                        Year

                                                      Killed      Wounded          Dam/Dis/Destroyed              NA     Ineffective                                                                                    Killed          Wounded               Dam/Dis/Destroyed                    NA         Ineffective




                                               (a) Number of attacks, by outcome                                                                                                                                 (b) Outcome shares (sums to 100%)
                                                                                                             Figure SI-9: Indirect Fire attacks, by Lat-Lon grid square

                           62E            63E            64E            65E            66E            67E            68E            69E            70E            71E            72E                                    62E            63E            64E            65E            66E            67E            68E            69E            70E            71E            72E
               800                                                                                                                                                                                         1.00
               600                                                                                                                                                                                         0.75
               400                                                                                                                                                                                         0.50




                                                                                                                                                                                             37N
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          37N




               200                                                                                                                                                                                         0.25
                 0                                                                                                                                                                                         0.00
               800                                                                                                                                                                                         1.00
               600                                                                                                                                                                                         0.75
               400                                                                                                                                                                                         0.50




                                                                                                                                                                                             36N
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          36N




               200                                                                                                                                                                                         0.25
                 0                                                                                                                                                                                         0.00
               800                                                                                                                                                                                         1.00
               600                                                                                                                                                                                         0.75
               400                                                                                                                                                                                         0.50




                                                                                                                                                                                             35N
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          35N




               200                                                                                                                                                                                         0.25
                 0                                                                                                                                                                                         0.00
               800                                                                                                                                                                                         1.00
               600                                                                                                                                                                                         0.75
               400                                                                                                                                                                                         0.50




                                                                                                                                                                                             34N
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          34N




               200                                                                                                                                                                                         0.25
                 0                                                                                                                                                                                         0.00
               800                                                                                                                                                                                         1.00




       count
                                                                                                                                                                                                   count
               600                                                                                                                                                                                         0.75
               400                                                                                                                                                                                         0.50




                                                                                                                                                                                             33N
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          33N




               200                                                                                                                                                                                         0.25




SI-9
                 0                                                                                                                                                                                         0.00
               800                                                                                                                                                                                         1.00
               600                                                                                                                                                                                         0.75
               400                                                                                                                                                                                         0.50




                                                                                                                                                                                             32N
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          32N




               200                                                                                                                                                                                         0.25
                 0                                                                                                                                                                                         0.00
               800                                                                                                                                                                                         1.00
               600                                                                                                                                                                                         0.75
               400                                                                                                                                                                                         0.50




                                                                                                                                                                                             31N
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          31N




               200                                                                                                                                                                                         0.25
                 0                                                                                                                                                                                         0.00
               800                                                                                                                                                                                         1.00
               600                                                                                                                                                                                         0.75
               400                                                                                                                                                                                         0.50
                                                                                                                                                                                             30N
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          30N




               200                                                                                                                                                                                         0.25
                 0                                                                                                                                                                                         0.00
                     '06         '14'06         '14'06         '14'06         '14'06         '14'06         '14'06         '14'06         '14'06         '14'06         '14'06         '14                        '06         '14'06         '14'06         '14'06         '14'06         '14'06         '14'06         '14'06         '14'06         '14'06         '14'06         '14
                                                                                                  Year                                                                                                                                                                                         Year

                                                         Killed          Wounded               Dam/Dis/Destroyed                    NA         Ineffective                                                                                            Killed          Wounded               Dam/Dis/Destroyed                    NA         Ineffective




                                                   (a) Number of attacks, by outcome                                                                                                                                                           (b) Outcome shares (sums to 100%)
      AFFDL-TR-77-115
C        Supplemental visual evidence: Vietnam losses

                Figure SI-10: Casualty rates in Vietnam [Gabbert and Streets 1977]
                                                                       (1)    North       Vietnam - All Threats
                                                                       (2)    North       Vietnam - Ground Fire Only
                                                                        3)    Total       Southeast Asia - All Threats
                                                                       (4)    South       Vietnam - Ground Fire
                                                                       (5)    Laos    -   Ground Fire
                                                                       (6)    Cimbodia         rrourd Fire.




VI




L&J



0
5J                                                          4)




         1965            1966           1967         1968           1969             19T0           1971        1972     1973
                                                                       YEAR




                        (C) Figure 2.     F-4 Cumulative Loss Rates per 1,000 Combat Sorties by Year
                                          and Country (i)*

                    *Reference Table A-13.




                                                                 15

                                                        WNRFMOM


                                                            SI-10
D      Additional evidence: Panjwai Success

In asymmetric warfare the insurgency generally wins not by defeating its opponents militarily,
but rather by inflicting sufficient casualties such that a political decision to withdraw is made.
The Vietnam war is the canonical example of this situation. A complete victory by the
government against the insurgency generally looks like the Malayan emergency: insurgent
attacks fall to zero, and the government controls all territory. It is obvious at the end of a
conflict which side has won. While the conflict is ongoing, however, it is more difficult to
assess who is “winning”.
    To determine what government success against the insurgency looks like in our data,
we examine insurgent activity in Panjwai, a well-known government success story. Panjwai,
located just west of Kandahar, is the birthplace of the Taliban and was a hotbed of in-
surgent activity during the early part of coalition operations in Afghanistan. Many of the
most intense battles in Afghanistan occurred in Panjwai, including for example Operation
Medusa in 2006, in which a few hundred Canadian soldiers attempted to advance into ter-
ritory occupied by several thousand Taliban militants [Bradley and Maurer 2011]. Combat
operations continued during the US troop surge, with a major American offensive in 2010
seizing control of the area but suffering continued attacks from insurgents blending in with
the civilian population. However, by 2014 the local population was exhausted by the conflict
and had turned against the Taliban. The Afghan military assumed control over the area,
and insurgent presence fell to near zero. This victory in Panjwai conforms to classic “hearts
and minds” counter-insurgency doctrine: peace was established only when the population
turned against the insurgents.


D.1     Visual evidence

As is the case in Afghanistan as a whole, the most deadly weapon used by the insurgents
in Panjwai was the IED. Figure SI-11b shows that IEDs remained deadly throughout the



                                              SI-11
                      Figure SI-11: IED events: detonate/clear and explosion impacts, Panjwai only

                                                                                                                           80

         25




                                                                                                                           60

          0
count




                                                                                                                   count
                                                                                                                           40
        −25




                                                                                                                           20
        −50




                                                                                                                            0
               2006     2007      2008        2009     2010       2011       2012      2013        2014     2015
                                                           Date
                                                                                                                                2006     2007     2008      2009       2010        2011    2012    2013     2014     2015
                                                                                                                                                                            Date
                          IED Explosion, Effective   IED Explosion, NA         IED Explosion, Ineffective

                          IED Found & Cleared        Cache Found & Cleared                                                             IED Explosion     Ineffective   NA     Dam/Dis/Destroyed   Wounded   Killed




              (a) Detonates (above) vs. Clears (below)                                                                                 (b) Outcomes of IED explosions


conflict, in the sense that an exploding IED continued to inflict casualties at about the same
(or even somewhat higher) rate. The major change in Panjwai appears to be the fraction
of IEDs that exploded. Figure SI-11a shows that in 2007 more than 50% of IEDs that were
emplaced exploded, whereas by 2012 or 2013 this fraction had fallen to 25%. The success
of an IED attack relies on the local population remaining silent: if tips are provided to the
government regarding the location of emplaced IEDs, then these can be rapidly found and
cleared.
              Figure SI-12 shows a dramatic improvement in the clearance rate, concurrent with quali-
tative reports of local towns and villages turning against the insurgents. This clearance rate
is improving even in years when total IED attacks are the highest ever.16 Looking at only
the number of attacks, the government victory in Panjwai is visible only after it has already
occurred. Looking at the clearance rate, however, we can see evidence that the government
is winning several years before attacks decline.
         16
              Figure SI-11b shows that attacks peaked around 2012.



                                                                                                            SI-12
 Figure SI-12: Neutralization rate of IEDs (sums to 100%) in Panjwai, from 2006 to 2014

                                 1.00




                                 0.75




                         count



                                 0.50




                                 0.25




                                 0.00


                                        2006   2007    2008       2009       2010       2011    2012       2013        2014   2015
                                                                                 Date

                                                      IED Explosion      IED Found & Cleared   Cache Found & Cleared




D.2        Regression-based evidence

The results below correspond to the estimating equations and functional form specifications
reported in the main text.
   In Table A-1, Columns 5 and 6 show that in Panjwai there is a positive time trend in the
clearance rate: that is, the percentage of IEDs that explode is decreasing over time. This
trend is the same when controlling for seasonality by adding month of year fixed effects.
   In Table A-3, Columns 5-8 consider only IED explosions in the Panjwai area. Results
in Columns 5-8 are the same as those in Columns 1-3. We see that over time, IEDs have
become deadlier; however, as discussed in the main text, this appears to be mainly due
to a compositional change away from coalition forces and towards more vulnerable Afghan
troops.
   Column 8 shows some differences between Panjwai and Afghanistan as a whole. In
particular, the positive trend in coalition casualty rates is larger and statistically significant.17
  17
       Note, however, that this effect is statistically insignificant in the alternate specification


                                                                          SI-13
That is, we observe increasing casualty rates in an environment that we know qualitatively
resulted in a coalition victory.18 This suggests that casualty rates would be an extremely
poor tool to use to assess whether an insurgency is winning or loosing a conflict. Figure
SI-10 suggests that this is true in other cases as well: historical data on casualty rates from
the Vietnam war does not show rising success rates against US sorties.19
   Several explanations are possible here. First, coalition forces might have been more care-
ful in a known battle zone than in an area that is generally regarded as secured. For example,
they may use lighter vehicles or may dismount from their vehicles more frequently. Second,
insurgents launching many IED attacks may have used IEDs at times or locations that are
not optimal, while a much smaller insurgent force could act only on the best opportunities.
Third, the incentives for insurgents may be very different in an area where they have lost
control, when compared to an area where there is a high intensity battle. For example, in a
battle with known front lines, pressure plate IEDs can be emplaced to discourage movement
in certain areas, and this tactic could be effective even when the casualty rate from these

presented in Table A-4.
  18
    Quantitatively, this trend is equivalent to an increase in casualty rates from 50% to
67%, which matches fairly well with Figure SI-13. We do not conduct a formal test of the
proportionality assumption of the ordered logit regression.
  19
     There is a notable contrast between flat casualty rates in asymmetric warfare such as
Afghanistan and Vietnam, and sharply changing kill ratios in air combat in world war II
[Mersky 1993]. Some of the change in kill ratios towards the American’s favour was due
to improved fighter technology. Tactical changes that were free to disseminate, however,
also resulted in substantial improved performance against the Japanese Mitsubishi Zero.
For example, the Thach Weave was extremely low cost to develop, effective in dogfights, and
almost impossible to counter [Ewing 2013]. This sort of development in tactics is reminiscent
of insurgent warfare because it originated in an asymmetry: the American wildcat fighters
were noticeably less maneuverable in combat than the Japanese zeros, and thus could not
take them on directly in a one-on-one dogfight.
   Another well known example of tactical development in conventional warfare concerns
grenades in urban combat. These are particularly useful for clearing buildings, and thus
defenders sometimes seek protection by covering windows with chicken wire to deflect thrown
grenades. The appropriate response, (re-)discovered repeatedly around the world from the
19th century onwards, is to attach fishhooks to the grenades. This approach was also used
during asymmetric warfare in Vietnam [Zahn 2003].


                                            SI-14
IEDs is relatively low. Such a tactic has little value in a much lower intensity conflict when
the government forces are clearly in control of the area.20




  20
     Additionally, damaging or disabling a vehicle may be valuable when fighting a battle
in which the absence of that vehicle on the battlefield in the following days could make a
difference; in contrast, damaging a vehicle during a very low intensity conflict may be of little
importance, because the vehicle will be repaired before any subsequent attacks are launched.

                                             SI-15
                                                                                                       Figure SI-13: Outcome of IED Explosions in Panjwai

                  1.00                                                                                                       1.00                                                                                                       1.00




                  0.75                                                                                                       0.75                                                                                                       0.75




                  0.50                                                                                                       0.50                                                                                                       0.50




          count
                                                                                                                     count
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                count




                  0.25                                                                                                       0.25                                                                                                       0.25




SI-16
                  0.00                                                                                                       0.00                                                                                                       0.00


                         2006     2007     2008       2009      2010        2011    2012    2013     2014     2015                  2006     2007     2008       2009      2010        2011    2012    2013     2014     2015                  2006     2007     2008       2009      2010        2011    2012    2013     2014     2015
                                                                     Date                                                                                                       Date                                                                                                       Date

                                IED Explosion     Ineffective   NA     Dam/Dis/Destroyed   Wounded   Killed                                IED Explosion     Ineffective   NA     Dam/Dis/Destroyed   Wounded   Killed                                IED Explosion     Ineffective   NA     Dam/Dis/Destroyed   Wounded   Killed




                                                  (a) Coalition                                                                       (b) Afghan Military, Supported                                                                           (c) Afghan Military, Unsupported


        Note: Afghan military results are shown annually rather than monthly due to lower number of attacks.
