NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

DID THE AFFORDABLE CARE ACT YOUNG ADULT PROVISION AFFECT LABOR
MARKET OUTCOMES? ANALYSIS USING TAX DATA
Bradley Heim
Ithai Lurie
Kosali Simon
Working Paper 23471
http://www.nber.org/papers/w23471

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
June 2017

The views expressed are those of the authors and are not necessarily those of the U.S. Department
of the Treasury (USDT) or the National Bureau of Economic Research. We thank Angshuman Gooptu
and Kate Yang for research assistance. This paper has undergone review at the USDT. We thank Jeff
Brown, Janet McCubbin, and participants of the 2014 Tax Policy and the Economy conference for
helpful comments. A preliminary investigation that did not include regression analysis, titled “The
Impact of the Affordable Care Act Young Adult Provision on Labor Market Outcomes: Evidence from
Tax Data,” was presented at the 2014 Tax Policy and the Economy conference, and is part of the conference
volume Tax Policy and the Economy, Volume 29.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peerreviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2017 by Bradley Heim, Ithai Lurie, and Kosali Simon. All rights reserved. Short sections of text,
not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.

Did the Affordable Care Act Young Adult Provision Affect Labor Market Outcomes? Analysis
Using Tax Data
Bradley Heim, Ithai Lurie, and Kosali Simon
NBER Working Paper No. 23471
June 2017
JEL No. I13,J01
ABSTRACT
We study the impact of the Affordable Care Act (ACA) young adult dependent coverage requirement
on labor market-related outcomes, including measures of employment status, job characteristics, and
post-secondary education, using a data set of U.S. tax records spanning 2008-2013. We find that the
ACA provision did not result in substantial changes in labor market outcomes. Our results show that
employment and self-employment were not statistically significantly affected. While we find some
evidence of increased likelihood of young adults earning lower wages, not receiving fringe benefits,
enrolling as full-time or graduate students, and young men being self-employed, the magnitudes imply
extremely small impacts on these outcomes in absolute terms and when compared to other estimates
in the literature. These results are consistent with health insurance being less salient to young adults
when making labor market decisions compared to other populations.

Bradley Heim
School of Public and Environmental Affairs
Indiana University
1315 E 10th St
Bloomington, IN 47405
heimb@indiana.edu
Ithai Lurie
Department of the Treasury
1500 Pennsylvania Avenue NW
Washington, DC 20220
Ithai.Lurie@treasury.gov

Kosali Simon
School of Public and Environmental Affairs
Indiana University
Rm 443
1315 East Tenth Street
Bloomington, IN 47405-1701
and NBER
simonkos@indiana.edu

A growing literature draws attention to the effects of health insurance expansions on
outcomes other than health insurance coverage and access to medical care, and important
questions concerning the labor market consequences of new health insurance mandates continue
to be debated. In this paper, we examine whether providing young adults with a source of health
insurance unconnected to their own employment (through their parents’ insurance plans) may
affect work attachment, affect job characteristics, or encourage educational enrollment.
As an early provision of the Affordable Care Act (ACA), insurers and sponsors of selfinsured plans were required to allow dependents up to age 26 to remain on their parents’ private
health insurance policies. Prior to the passage of this provision of the ACA, employer-sponsored
health insurance benefits for dependents were only excludable from federal income taxes if the
dependent was under age 19, or under age 24 and a full-time student, and so health insurance
policies often limited dependent coverage to young adults who satisfied these criteria. Those
who were not eligible for parental insurance could either purchase health insurance through their
own employer (or their spouse’s employer, if married), purchase insurance in the non-group
market, enroll in Medicare or Medicaid if disabled or if their income was sufficiently low, or be
uninsured.
Though several studies have found that this provision increased insurance coverage
among those under age 26, few studies have examined labor market outcomes, and all have
methodological weaknesses. Compared to the extant literature, our work examines new
outcomes that have not been studied to date, uses larger and better measured data than previously
available, and uses a method that explicitly estimates effects among young adults whose parents
have access to employer provided benefits.

2

By making parental health insurance an option for young adults up to the age of 26, the ACA
young adult provision may reduce the incentive to work in employment arrangements that offer
employer health insurance, and may also reduce labor supply through an income effect. In
addition, the availability of an alternative source of health insurance might make young adults
more likely to undertake activities that involve lower labor force attachment (such as enrollment
in post-secondary education). On the other hand, the YA provision might reduce the incentive to
be a full-time student among those age 19-23, as those individuals could now stay on their
parents’ plan even if they weren’t enrolled as a full-time student. However, young adults may
place little value on the availability of health insurance, either because they are in good health
and so face low insurance costs, or because they feel invincible and do not consider health
insurance to be necessary, which may mute any labor market effects of gaining insurance.
Longitudinally linked tax data spanning 2008-2013 provide a unique opportunity to study
labor market outcomes of the YA provision. Using data self-reported under penalty of law
among tax return filers (Form 1040) and data reported by third parties on wage statements (Form
W-2), miscellaneous income statements (Form 1099-MISC), and tuition statements from
colleges and universities (Form 1098-T), we are able to examine whether an individual works in
the formal sector or is self-employed, his or her total annual wages and receipt of employerprovided retirement and health benefits, and his or her educational enrollment. Our paper is also
the first to study any ACA labor market outcomes using tax data.
Using these data, we estimate reduced-form difference-in-differences (DD) specifications
that compare young adults of slightly different ages over time, as in the prior literature.
However, since DD effects may mute causal effects that occur only among those whose

3

parents have employer insurance benefits, we also estimate specifications that only include
young adults whose parents have access to employer-provided fringe benefits.
Studying the impact of the ACA young adult (YA) provision on labor market outcomes is
important because this provision affects individuals during a crucial period of human capital
formation, when those individuals are engaged in post-secondary education, attaining initial
employment, and embarking on careers. In addition, studying the YA provision may help us
understand the response of a key age group to the Health Insurance Marketplace and Medicaid
expansions that followed in 2014, as young adults were the age group least likely to carry health
insurance prior to the reforms.

Background and Literature Review

Several studies have documented the impact of the ACA young adult provision on insurance and
medical care access (e.g. Monheit et al., 2011; Sommers et al., 2013; Akosa Antwi et al., 2013;
Barbaresco et al., 2015; Akosa Antwi et al., 2015; Busch et al., 2014; Saloner and Cook., 2014;
Golberstein et al., in press). Further, a growing literature draws attention to the effects of health
insurance expansions on outcomes other than health insurance coverage and access to medical
care. In this section, we briefly survey the extensive literature on the effect of health insurance
on labor outcomes in general,1 and the much more limited literature focused on young adults.

1

See Dave et al. (2015) for a more detailed literature review. In addition to the papers noted here, Mulligan (2013),
Sommers et al. (2013) and Heim and Lurie (2015) all study the impact of recent health market reforms on labor
market outcomes.

4

A substantial amount of research in health economics investigates the connection
between health insurance and the labor market. One strand of this work focuses on the “job-lock”
effect of public and private insurance (Madrian, 1994; Cooper and Monheit, 1993; Yelowitz,
1995; Kapur, 1998; Ham and Shore Sheppard, 2005; Strumpf, 2011; Decker and Selck, 2012;
Pohl, 2014; Dave et al., 2015; Hamersma and Kim, 2009) and finds mixed evidence concerning
the impact of access to a non-employer source of health insurance on job outcomes and labor
supply. A small number of studies have also examined whether the availability of health
insurance affects the decision to be self-employed, with Madrian and Lefgren (1998) and
Wellington (2001) finding a significant effect, contrary to Holtz-Eakin et al.’s (1996) findings.
Another relevant strand of research examines the effect of health insurance benefits on
wages, as the possibility of a compensating differential suggests that workers would accept lower
wages in response to health insurance (e.g. Gruber, 1994; Kolstad and Kowalski, 2016; and
others). These studies have also produced mixed evidence, perhaps because workers may take
into account additional factors beyond wages or benefits when making employment choices. In
addition to labor supply, labor demand could also be affected by a health insurance expansion.
For example, employers may now find that young adults with access to parental insurance can be
hired less expensively, and these employers may increase their demand for young adult workers
in response. However, if workers bear the full incidence of employer-sponsored health insurance,
the cost to the employer would not change. In this case, we would expect young adult workers to
receive higher wages when the employer no longer has to provide this fringe benefit to
employees covered by a parent’s plan, resulting in unchanged labor demand.
The receipt of health insurance through a parent may affect labor market incentives
through similar mechanisms as the receipt of Medicaid; neither derives from an employer and
5

both are ostensibly “free.”2 On the other hand, Medicaid eligibility is contingent on low income,
and thus may have additional disincentives for labor supply that are absent in the receipt of
parental coverage. Several recent studies examine the effect of Medicaid expansions in Oregon,
Massachusetts, Tennessee, and Wisconsin (Baicker et al., 2014; Dague et al., 2014; Garthwaite
et al., 2014; Kowalski and Kolstad, 2016) to anticipate possible effects of the ACA. The study
with the most rigorous design, a random assignment experiment in Oregon that expanded
Medicaid to adults below the federal poverty level, shows very little effect on labor supply or
earnings as a result of receiving Medicaid (Baicker et al., 2014). Dague et al. (2014) find in
Wisconsin that those who were not enrolled in the program due to a cap worked more than those
who were able to enroll in Medicaid, but effect size ranged from modest to medium. Garthwaite
et al. (2014) use the case of Tennessee and find extremely large increases in labor supply
following loss of Medicaid coverage.
Though little work has been done on the impact of health insurance on educational
choices, the literature in education economics does find that young adult educational enrollment
is sensitive to outside options. Cascio and Narayan (2015) find that the low-skill biased
technological change represented by fracking caused an increase in the high school drop-out rate
among males, while Charles et al. (2015) find that the housing boom of the 2000s improved
labor market outcomes and reduced college enrollment by marginal workers. However,
improved job openings likely represent a more attractive reason to leave school relative to health
insurance available through parents being a reason to stay in school longer.

2

Of course, adding a child to a parent’s plan may necessitate switching from an individual or individual plus one
plan to a family plan, which likely increases health insurance costs for the parent. In addition, Depew and Bailey
(2015) find that the ACA young adult provision led to an increase in premiums of 2.5-2.8 percent among plans that
covered children relative to individual plans.

6

While the literature on health insurance and labor has looked at subgroups such as those
near retirement (Blau and Gilleskie, 2001; Strumpf, 2010; Kapur and Rogowski, 2007), those
who are unemployed (Gruber and Madrian, 1995), and married women who have health
insurance available through their husbands (Buchmueller and Valetta, 1999), no work prior to
the passage of the ACA focuses on young adults, despite the implications for future earnings
trajectories that would have resulted from such research. This omission can be explained by an
earlier lack of policy variation that could be used to design a causal study.
Economic intuition formalized in prior literature such as Madrian (1994) suggests that
providing access to health insurance through a parent would reduce the demand for health
insurance through employment and thus reduce labor supply on extensive and intensive margins.
Young adults would pursue alternatives to working full time for firms that offer benefits, such as
self-employment, education, or leisure, as the opportunity costs of such activities would
decrease. Those workers who no longer require employer-provided health insurance could
experience wage gains as a result of the compensating wage differential for employer-provided
benefits. Conversely, these workers may appear to have lower annual wages due to a reduction in
hours or a shift towards employment that maximizes utility in ways other than financial
remuneration. These effects would logically be present only for those whose parents have access
to employer-provided health insurance, and employment effects may be larger for young adults
who are past traditional college age and may otherwise pursue full-time employment. Recent
evidence, however, shows that many individuals place very low value on public health insurance
availability (Finkelstein et al 2015), and young adults are especially likely to have high myopia
(Gruber, 2001) so any such labor market effects of gaining insurance may be muted.

7

A few recent papers shed some light on the effect of insurance for young adults on a
limited set of labor market outcomes. A recent study by Akosa Antwi et al. (2013) that examines
the impact of the YA provision on health insurance also provides a cursory look at labor supply.
Three papers utilize variation from state laws prior to the ACA.3 Dillender (2014) examines the
long-term labor market consequences of insuring young adults through state dependent-coverage
laws, and finds an increase in wages. Depew (2014) and Hahn and Yang (2016) estimate the
impact of state laws on work outcomes. Depew’s findings suggest state mandates cause a
decrease only in the hours worked, not in the probability of employment, though Han and Yang
find that labor supply decreased on both the intensive and extensive margins from the state
mandates. Finally, two working papers examine the impact of the ACA provision on labor
market outcomes. Bailey (Forthcoming) finds that the ACA YA law increased entrepreneurial
activity, though the specifications generally did not pass placebo tests and so the estimates are
not likely to be reliable, while Bailey and Chorniy (2016) find that the law did not have any
impact on job lock.
In sum, there is a substantial literature on the connections between health insurance and
labor market outcomes, though only a budding literature devoted to studying the labor market
effects of extending health insurance coverage to young adults specifically. Compared to the
extant literature, this paper studies a wider variety of outcomes, including employment, job
characteristics, and educational attainment. Further, this study utilizes several methodological
improvements, including estimating difference-in-differences models while focusing on those
3

Although more than half the U.S. states had some young adult provision in place prior to the ACA, those laws have
weaker requirements than the ACA YA provision. The majority of employer-provided health insurance is selfinsured and thus exempt from state mandates. State mandates also do not affect Internal Revenue Service (IRS) tax
obligations, meaning that employers could not provide tax-exempt compensation when covering those over age 18
(unless disabled or under age 23 and a full-time student), a further constraint on state YA mandates’ effectiveness.
Many state laws contained other stipulations, such as requiring that covered dependents be full-time students or
unmarried.

8

whose parents are likely to have employer-sponsored insurance and thus potentially affected by
the YA provision.

Method

Since almost all previous studies of the ACA YA provision use a difference-in-difference
(DD) design comparing access outcomes after the law to outcomes before the law for those in the
affected age group (usually 19-25 year olds) vs. those outside it (usually 27-29 year olds), we
first estimate the impact of the YA provision by estimating a simple difference-in-differences
specification. Similar to those previous studies, we compare those in treatment age to those
outside treatment age (24-25 being treatment age and 27-29 being control age; 26 is excluded4)
before and after the law, and estimate an equation of the form
(1)
where

is one of the labor market outcomes of interest,

denotes the years 2011-13, and

denotes ages 24-25,

is a year fixed effect.5 The coefficient of interest is

.

We next conduct regression-adjusted versions of the DD calculations in which we
account for the national annual unemployment rate, age fixed effects, and an interaction of age

4

Ages are based upon the age at the end of the calendar year. We exclude 26 year olds, since such individuals could
be in the treatment group (under 26) in some months of the year and in the control group (26 and over) in the other
months. This problem is ameliorated somewhat by the fact that insurers are allowed to keep 26 year olds on parental
plans until the end of the plan year (so some 26 year olds would belong in the treatment group), but this problem still
exists for plans that do not end at the end of the calendar year. So, to keep such partially treated individuals out of
the treatment and control groups, we omit the 26 year olds.
5
Note that we do not include state fixed effects, as we cannot observe state of residence for those young adults who
do not file tax returns and do not receive W-2 form or 1098-T forms.

9

fixed effects and the national unemployment rate. The estimating equation for these
specifications is
(2)

However, such a DD design suffers from the fact that, absent general equilibrium effects,
the law should only impact those whose parents have employer-sponsored health insurance. As
such, since some untreated young adults are included in the treatment group, they are unable to
show in a convincing manner that the estimated impact of the YA provision arises among the
treated group. To correct for this concern, one could in theory cut the estimation sample to
include only those whose parents have employer-sponsored insurance to demonstrate that effects
are being driven by these individuals. However, most data sets that have been used in prior
studies do not contain information on non-co-resident parents, and so this distinction has not
been possible. In our tax data which contains longitudinal links, however, we are able to utilize
parental information on employer benefits to focus on the portion of those under 26 who are
likely to be treated by the ACA YA provision. Thus, in our preferred specification, we reestimate our DD model, focusing on those whose parents are likely to be covered by employerbased health insurance. 6 In addition to providing information on the impact of the YA provision

6

Even though we have panel data, a specification that includes individual fixed effects is problematic, since the
effect of the YA provision in such a specification would be identified solely off of the 1986 birth cohort. Note that
including individuals fixed effects essentially de-means the data, and so the coefficient on Young*Post is identified
only off of those for whom Young*Post is not always 0 or 1. Young*Post always equals zero for birth cohorts from
1979-1985 (1979-1982 birth cohorts never have Young = 1, and birth cohorts from 1983-1985 have Young = 1 only
in the pre-period), while Young*Post always equals 1 for birth cohorts from 1987-1989. Only for the 1986 cohort
does Young*Post equal in one year (2011) and 0 in another (2013).

10

on labor market outcomes, such a specification also offers information on the reliability of
estimates from DD designs that lack parental data.7
In all specifications, we exclude data from 2010 as a period of staggered implementation;
some insurers complied as early as spring 2010, but as most insurance plans renewed on January
1st 2011, we consider this the full implementation date. We conduct statistical checks to ascertain
that prior trends in labor markets are similar among the control and treatment ages, although, as
we explain in the following section, we have limited years of data prior to policy implementation
for these tests. Finally, because the identifying variation comes from a difference in policy by
age group and year, we cluster standard errors at the age*year level.

Data

In this study, we use a panel of U.S. tax return data spanning 2008-2013, which was drawn from
the population of U.S. income tax filers. Although such data have been used in prior tax and
labor research (for example, Chetty et al., 2013), research has been limited by severely restricted

7

An additional potential concern is that the period after the YA policy change coincides with a labor market
recovery, and so any differential recovery patterns by age could be incorrectly estimated as having been caused by
the YA provision, even if pre-trends tests did not signal concerns. Given that the law only affects young adults
whose parents have private insurance, young adults whose parents do not have employer benefits could form an
additional control group in a triple difference (DDD) specification. The use of this additional control group would
rest on the assumption that the law did not cause selection. There is evidence in the literature that the YA provision
did not cause parents to seek insurance or change parental labor supply (Akosa Antwi et al., 2013; Depew, 2014),
and a difference-in-differences specification similar to (2) in which the dependent variable was our proxy for
parental health insurance suggested that the YA provision did not affect parental insurance coverage. However, the
pre-trends tests failed in some of the triple difference specifications, suggesting that estimates of the effect of the YA
provision in these specifications may not be reliable. Nevertheless, we tried such specifications and summarize
these results below. Detailed results are available from the authors upon request.

11

access, and the present study advances the literature by using these data to examine the labor
market impacts of the ACA.
Since non-dependent children are not listed on their parents’ tax form(s), and vice versa,
it is not possible to link young adults and parents using only tax returns from recent years.
However, a dependent file from 1997 matches the Social Security Numbers (SSNs) of primary
and second filers to the SSNs of their dependent children, if any,8 which makes it possible to
match parents’ and children’s information if those children were claimed as dependents in 1997.
So, to create a dataset that links parents’ and children’s information, we gather filing and other
tax information reporting from 2008-2013 for the children represented in the 1997 file, as well as
information from their parents’ W-2 forms; we then merge each young adult’s information to
that of the individuals listed as their parents in 1997.
Because individuals who were older than 18 years or younger than 2 years old in 1997
were less likely to be claimed as dependents in 1997, we are only able to utilize information on
birth cohorts from 1979 through 1995 when utilizing information on parental insurance. This
structure means that we are limited in conducting pre-trends tests: we cannot go back farther than
tax year 2008 and still have the full set of control individuals aged 27-29, which limits our pretrends tests to 2008-2009 (see Appendix Table 1).
Ideally, we would know for each year of our data (2008-2013) whether parents had access to
employer-sponsored health insurance. Since 2012, employers with more than 250 W-2 forms
filed in the previous year have been required to report employer provision of health insurance on
W-2s. However, since this requirement started in 2012, we only have this information beginning
in that year. In addition, this ACA reporting requirement only applies to firms with more than
8

Empirically, most children 18 and younger are claimed on a parent’s tax returns, given the substantial tax benefits
of claiming dependents. The dependent file, which is based on claiming dependents on tax returns, is comprehensive
in tax year 1997 and from 2001 forward but is very limited in tax years 1996 and 1998-2000.

12

250 workers, while approximately 40% of the U.S. workforce is employed in firms with fewer
than 250 workers.9 By our (unreported) calculations using publicly available data from the
Medical Expenditure Survey (MEPS) Insurance Component, however, it does appear that
compliance with this requirement by large firms is high. We tried backfilling data on employer
provision of health insurance for years prior to 2012 using the following steps: from 2012 data,
we know whether an employer with a certain Employer Identification Number (EIN) offers
health insurance if any of the workers of that EIN have a W-2 form that reports health insurance.
From that, we create a data set of EINs known to offer health insurance in 2012. Under the
assumptions that these employers also offered health insurance during 2008-2011, and that they
offer insurance to all their workers when they offer to any, we have information on employer
health insurance offers for 2008-2013. However, when we examine these data, we found that the
rate of employer health insurance increases sharply over time, which might be expected because
our method of imputing works best for more recent data. Even though data missing at random
would not pose a large threat to identification, our use of an imputation method for years before
2012 implies caution would be advisable in using this measure.
As an alternative method of determining coverage, we use information on whether parents
have employer-sponsored retirement plans. Participation in an employer’s retirement plan is
recorded on W-2 forms in all years of our data (and is available for all employers). Further,
tabulations from the CPS and the MEPS suggest that more than 90% of families in which at least
one parent had an employer-sponsored retirement plan were also covered by employer-sponsored
insurance (ESI); accordingly, we use participation in a retirement plan as a proxy for parental

9

Author calculations using data at http://www.bls.gov/web/cewbd/table_f.txt
The calculation shows that in Q1 2013, 51.6M worked in private firms with fewer than 250 employees, out of a total
payroll number of 135.7M (from https://ycharts.com/indicators/total_nonfarm_payrolls).

13

availability of health insurance. Note that, in this specification, the retirement plan participation
proxy for health insurance coverage is used for all individuals, not just those who worked for
small firms. However, around 20% of families in the MEPS who do not have employersponsored retirement plans are also covered by ESI. For this reason, not contributing to a
retirement plan is a weaker proxy for lack of health insurance.10
The outcomes that we analyze fall into three groups: employment status (including whether
the individual received a W-2 form indicating receipt of wage and salary income, and whether
the individual received any amount of self-employment income reported either on Schedule SE
or on 1099-MISC forms);11 job characteristics from W-2 forms (including log annual wage
income, whether the individual’s primary12 employer offered health insurance, and whether the
individual had a retirement plan through his or her primary employer); and educational
enrollment from 1098-T forms13 (including whether the individual was a student at a postsecondary institution, whether he or she was a full-time student at such an institution, and
whether he or she was a graduate student at such an institution). A potential concern occurs if
individuals select into the sample due to a change in filing behavior in reaction to the policy

10

Another proxy would have been full-time employment in a large firm. However, tax data do not contain
information on hours of work.
11
It is well established self-employment income is underreported in tax data, and so this variable may miss some
individuals who are self-employed. However, Hurst, Li, and Pugsley (2014) find that misreporting of selfemployment income plagues survey data as well, and estimate that self-employment income is underreported by
about 25% in the Consumer Expenditure Survey and the Panel Study of Income Dynamics,
12
We define the primary employer (job) as the employer (job) from which the individual receives the most in wages
in a given year.
13
The instructions for Form 1098-T note that this form is required to be filed by any “college, university, vocational
school, or other postsecondary educational institution that is described in section 481 of the Higher Education Act of
1965 as in effect on August 5, 1997, and that is eligible to participate in the Department of Education's student aid
programs. This includes most accredited public, nonprofit, and private postsecondary institutions.” The educational
institution files this form for any students who are enrolled for credit and who pay a qualified tuition or related
expense. Educational institutions are not required to file the form for students whose expenses are entirely waived or
paid entirely with scholarships. As a result, if a student has a full scholarship, or if a student is a graduate student
whose tuition is waived, he or she might not have received a 1098-T, in which case we would wrongly assume that
the individual was not a student.

14

changes studied here. However, most of our outcome variables come from forms that are filed
regardless of whether the person filed an income tax return.14
For our analysis, we use a 1% sample of the population of 1997 parent-child matches,
consisting of 571,028 unique individuals who range in age from 13-29. When we limit to those
of ages 24-29, excluding 26 year olds, and use all data on 2008-2013 except 2010, we obtain
823,249 person-year observations, corresponding to about 361,179 unique individuals.15 We
examined the breakdown of our sample by year and age and observed that the number of
individuals does not change in any systematic way over time as we construct a balanced panel.
We do find, however, that the number of older young adults is consistently lower than the
number of younger individuals. This is likely due to the fact that in 1997 those who were 17 and
18 years old were more likely to be already living outside of the parental household and not
claimed as dependents. We conducted statistical tests to ensure that no systematic difference in
sample size aligns with our main identification method, and found no evidence of systematic
difference (for example, between treatment and control, before and after the policy, for the DD).
Table 1 presents sample statistics for three samples – 24-29 year olds, 24-29 year olds whose
parents contributed to a retirement plan, and 22-29 year olds whose parents contributed to a
retirement plan. In the sample of 24 to 29 year olds, 80.7 percent had some wage and salary
income and 10.0 percent had some self-employment income; the primary employer offered
health insurance for 46.2 percent and a retirement plan for 32.4 percent; and 19.4 percent were
enrolled as post-secondary students. When the sample is cut to those whose parents contributed
14

For example, job characteristic variables come from W-2 forms, which (in addition to being attached to income
tax returns) are filed by employers with the IRS; some self-employment income comes from 1099MISC forms
(which are also subject to third-party reporting); education variables come from1098-T forms (which are filed by
colleges and universities with the IRS indicating that tuition payments were received on behalf of a student).
15
See Appendix Table 2 for a breakdown of our sample by age and year. When the sample includes 22-29 year olds
whose parents are likely to have health insurance, we have 651,222 person-year observations.

15

to a retirement plan and so were likely to be covered by health insurance, the employment
outcomes are generally higher, as more of this subsample have wage and salary income, are
offered health insurance or a retirement plan, and are enrolled as post-secondary students. When
22-23 year olds are added to the sample of 24-29 year olds, the employment outcomes are
generally lower, but enrollment as a post-secondary student is higher, as would be expected.

Results

Full Sample Results
Table 2 presents the results from our main specification. In Column 1, we present results
from a simple difference-in-differences specification to examine the raw differences between the
treatment and control groups, pre- and post-reform. Across outcomes, only one of the
coefficients is statistically significant. The YA provision is estimated to have increased the
prevalence of young adults working at a primary employer that offered health insurance by a
marginally statistically significant 0.5 percentage points (or 1.1 percent). Note, however, that this
effect is contrary to expectations given the theory discussed above.
This significant result is robust to including additional controls in Column 2. However,
when controls are added, the YA provision is estimated to significantly impact a number of other
labor market outcomes. The YA provision is now estimated to lead to young adults earning 1.8
percent lower annual wages.16 Further, consistent with theoretical expectations, young adults are
16

Recall that this reduction in annual wages could be driven by some combination of lower hourly wages, lower
annual hours, or both.

16

estimated to be 0.5 percentage points (1.6 percent) less likely to work at an employer that offers
a retirement plan, and a marginally statistically significant 0.2 percentage points (3.6 percent)
more likely to attend graduate school. On the other hand, contrary to expectations, the fraction
not earning any wage and salary income is estimated to have declined by 0.4 percentage points
(2.3 percent), and the fraction attending post-secondary school of any type is estimated to have
declined by 0.2 percentage points (0.8 percent).
As noted above, however, the estimation samples in these specifications include a
number of individuals whose parents do not have employer-sponsored insurance, and so are not
actually impacted by the ACA provision. In Column 3, then, we cut the sample to those who are
likely to be “treated” by the YA provision by including only those whose parents have an
employer-based retirement plan. This specification is our preferred specification.
When this is done, the effects on all outcomes are generally either consistent with theory
or are statistically insignificant. In the top panel, the estimated impact on having any W-2 forms
and on reporting self-employment income are both statistically insignificant. In the second
panel, the YA provision is estimated to decrease annual wages by 0.9 percent and decrease the
fraction working at an employer that offers a retirement plan by 0.5 percentage points, while the
impact on working at an employer that offers health insurance is now statistically insignificant.
Finally, in the bottom panel, though the fraction of post-secondary students is estimated to have
decreased by 0.2 percentage points, (1.5 percent), the fraction of full-time students increased by
0.5 percentage points (2.3 percent), and the fraction of graduate students increased by 0.3
percentage points (4.3 percent).

17

Since full-time and graduate education are estimated to have increased, while overall
post-secondary education is estimated to have marginally significantly decreased, these results
imply that part-time schooling decreased. These results may indicate that the YA provision had
an income effect that enabled students to attend school full rather than part time. Further,
universities often mandate that full-time (but not part-time) students be covered by health
insurance. Thus, the YA provision may have made it less expensive for students to satisfy this
requirement and enroll full time.
Overall, these results suggest that the ACA YA provision did impact some of the labor
market outcomes, albeit by modest margins.17
Of course, these estimates could be driven by differential pre-existing trends between the
treatment and control groups. To examine whether this was the case, we test whether time trends
in the outcomes differed between the treatment and control groups in the years prior to the policy
change. These ‘parallel trends tests’ indicate whether there had been significantly divergent
trends in outcomes even before the policy change, which would signal unreliability in the
difference-in-difference estimates. Unfortunately, our data only contain two pre-reform years,
and so we are only able to test for differential pre-reform trends in these two years.
The results of these tests are presented in Table 3.18 Reassuringly, for all of the
specifications in Table 2, the differences in pre-policy trends are statistically insignificant.

17

As noted above, we also tried triple difference specifications using two different proxies for the presence (or
absence) of parental employer-sponsored insurance: the presence of a parental retirement plan in a given year, or the
parent working for an employer that reported offering health insurance to any employee in 2012. Since these
specifications measure the presence of parental ESI with error, the estimated effects may be downward biased.
These specifications generally found insignificant effects of the YA provision on the outcomes studied, though the
estimated effect on log annual wages, having an employer that offers a retirement plan, and being a graduate student
were statistically significant and similar in magnitude to our preferred specification when the 2012 health insurance
proxy was used. These results are available upon request from the authors.

18

Nevertheless, since our pre-treatment period only contains two years, one might be concerned
that pre-treatment trends differed in years prior to the start of our sample. However, Slusky
(Forthcoming) finds that across a variety of commonly used data sets, the pre-policy trends are
most similar for labor market outcomes when defining the treatment group as we do here, as
those aged 24-25, and the treatment group as 27-29 year olds. Caution should be exercised if
other age ranges are used in labor market analyses.
To examine the robustness of the results in our preferred specification to the choice of
ages included in the sample, in Table 4 we expand the estimation sample to 22-29 year olds.
When this is done, the results are generally similar to those when the 24-29 year old sample was
used, with the YA provision estimated to have led to a 1.1-percent decrease in annual wages, a
0.3-percentage-point decline in working for a primary employer with a retirement plan, and a
1.1-percentage-point (3.7 percent) increase in full-time student status. The one qualitative
difference in the two samples arises for being a post-secondary student, in which the coefficient
switches sign and is now statistically insignificant.

Results for Subsamples
To examine whether the impact of the YA provision differed according to the
demographic characteristics of the young adults it covered, in Table 5 we re-estimate our
preferred specification (from Column 3 in Table 2), but split the sample according to whether the

18

As noted above, since our data starts in 2008, the pre-treatment period contains only two years (2008-2009). In
these pre-trends tests, age indicator variables, and the interaction between age and unemployment rate, were
excluded due to multicollinearity in the limited pre-policy sample period.

19

young adult is male or female, while in Table 6 we split the sample according to the income of
the young adult’s parents in 1997.
In Table 5, several differences by gender are apparent. The YA provision is estimated to
have increased the likelihood that young men will earn self-employment income, which is
consistent with theory.19 The declines in annual wages and in working for an employer with a
retirement plan, on the other hand, are centered among women.20 Finally, both genders appear
more likely to enroll in full-time post-secondary and graduate education (though the impact on
graduate education is statistically insignificant for women). Thus, the ACA YA provision
appears to have led young men to increase their education and self-employment, while it led
women to increase their education while taking jobs with fewer fringe benefits and lower wages.
In Table 6, the sample is split according to whether the parents of the young adult had
income of less than 125% of the federal poverty line (FPL), between 125% and 250% of FPL,
between 250% and 400% of FPL, or in excess of 400% of FPL. Here, it appears that the impacts
on self-employment and working for an employer who offered a retirement plan were centered
among the highest income group, as was the decline in wages,21 though significant wrongly
signed effects are found for the first two of these outcomes among the lowest income group. The
impact of post-secondary enrollment overall is centered among the lowest income group,22

19

This result is also consistent with the fact that self-employment is more prevalent among men than women. For
example, see Pew Research Center (2015), which finds that 12% of male workers and 7% of female workers were
self-employed in 2014.
20
The larger effects for women may be driven by the fact that women tend to have higher health costs than men
(Alemayehu and Warner (2004)), and have been found to be more risk-averse (see, for example, the survey in
Croson and Gneezy (2009)), and so may value parental insurance more.
21
This may be driven by young adults from high income families having greater access to parental resources that
might be needed to start a new business or choose a lower-paying job.
22
The impact on the next highest income group, however, is wrongly signed. In addition, the wrongly signed effect
for primary-employer-sponsored health insurance is centered among the lowest two income groups.

20

though the impacts on full-time schooling and graduate school tend to be centered among higher
income groups.23

Discussion

Taken together, the results above suggest that the ACA YA provision did not significantly affect
wage and salary employment or self-employment overall. However, some statistically
significant effects that are consistent with predictions from theory were found, including a
decline in log annual wages, an increase in being a full-time student or graduate student (though
there was a marginally significant decline in being a post-secondary student), a decrease in wage
and salary employment (among the 19-29-year-old sample), and an increase in self-employment
(among men).
To gauge the size of our estimated impacts relative to other findings in the literature, in
Table 7 we compare the elasticity with respect to gaining insurance through an alternate source
implied by estimates from our preferred DD specification (using those whose parents had a
retirement plan) to the largest statistically significant estimates available in the literature. To
convert our reduced-form estimates into elasticities of the labor market outcome with respect to
gaining health insurance, we utilize an estimate from Akosa Antwi et al. (2013) that found a 30
percent increase in dependent coverage due to the YA provision.24 We perform this comparison

23

These results may be reflective of lower income young adults being more likely to be on the margin between
attending and not attending post-secondary education, with higher income young adults being more likely to be on
the margin between attending graduate school or not.
24
Since the Akosa Antwi et al. (2013) estimate comes from studying the same age groups that were affected by the
same policy during the same time period, their estimate should be applicable to our estimation sample. However,

21

for four outcomes for which we could find a relevant literature: No W-2 Forms (wage and salary
employment), Any Self-Employment Income (self-employed), Log Annual Wages, and FullTime Student.
Each of four literatures includes several studies (except for the Full-Time Student
outcome, where Jung et al. (2013) is the only study we were able to find), and in almost all cases
studies exist that find no statistically significant effects on relevant outcomes. Often the studies
cited did not explicitly state an elasticity, and, as mentioned, our research did not estimate an
insurance effect itself; thus these numbers should be viewed as back-of-the envelope
calculations. Nonetheless, Table 7 shows our implied elasticities compared to the largest
estimates available in the literature. In doing this comparison, it is important to note that two of
the papers (Dague et al., 2014 and Garthwaite et al., 2014) do not specifically estimate impacts
among young adults, so the differences in results could also be due to differences in the way
health insurance affects labor market behavior for different ages. Nevertheless, our implied
elasticity estimates are extremely small compared to the largest in the literature. Specifically,
our implied elasticity for whether an individual works is a statistically insignificant 0.05 among
24-25 year olds, whereas the largest estimate in the literature (Garthwaite et al., 2014) finds an
elasticity of 0.63. For self-employment, our estimate among 24-25-year-old men is 0.14, much
smaller than the largest estimate in the literature (0.8). Similarly, for log wages and for full-time
student status, our estimates for all 24-25 year olds are small compared to the largest existing
estimates (-0.03 vs -0.20 and 0.08 vs. 0.22). Thus, even when we do estimate statistically

note that the estimate from this study comes from a sample of all young adults, not those whose parents had access
to employer-sponsored insurance. Nevertheless, if we used estimates from the specification in Column 2 of Table 2,
which (like Akosa Antwi et al., 2013) includes all young adults, the elasticities would be very similar, because the
coefficients are very similar.

22

significant coefficients, the estimated effects are nowhere near the upper bounds on the responses
found elsewhere.
There are several caveats to our measures in the tax data. Most notably, we were unable
to examine dependent health insurance as an outcome. However, almost all prior papers on the
YA requirement have ascertained that the provision increased dependent coverage as intended,
and we take as given that were this information reported, our method would also show an
increase in dependent coverage. Estimates in Akosa Antwi et al. (2013, Table 2) show an
approximately 30-percent increase in employer-dependent coverage for 19-25 year olds in the
period after the law, compared to before the law. Nevertheless, having the outcome of dependent
coverage in our data could enable us to provide a definitive estimate on the insurance impact of
the law and ascertain an instrumental variable equivalent within the same data set.

Conclusion

There is very little evidence prior to the ACA regarding how access to health insurance affects
the labor market and socioeconomic outcomes of young adults. Tax data provide a unique
opportunity to estimate the impact of the ACA YA provision using a large sample of
administratively reported data, and focusing on those whose parents were likely to have
employer-sponsored insurance. Prior evidence on effects of the YA provision is limited, and
shows a reduction in hours but no effect on employment or job lock. The outcomes we
investigate are whether the individual worked in the formal sector, whether he or she was self-

23

employed, total annual wages, whether he or she had employer-provided health and retirement
benefits, and educational enrollment.
Taken as a whole, our results suggest that the YA provision did not substantially affect
labor market behavior. Our results show that employment and self-employment were not
statistically significantly affected in the sample overall. Further, though we find that the YA
provision likely influenced young adults to earn less annually (through some combination of
lower hours and/or lower wages), work for employers that were less likely to offer fringe
benefits, enroll as full-time or graduate students, and (for young men) to be self-employed, our
estimated impacts on all of these margins are relatively modest.
Although it is possible that labor market outcomes have changed in ways not captured by tax
data (e.g. hours of work may change even while total wages do not, and non-reported selfemployment may change), our evidence suggests that the extension of health insurance to young
adults has led to very modest impacts on labor market outcomes thus far.
Tax data have been used to study the labor market impacts of health insurance in the past
(e.g. Heim and Lurie, 2010); however, this study is the first to use tax data to examine the effect
of the ACA on labor market outcomes. Researchers will be able to analyze other features of the
ACA with respect to public finance consequences as more years of these tax data become
available. For example, this research can be extended to study health insurance changes and
labor market outcomes for young adults who do not have access to parental benefits in response
to Marketplace and Medicaid expansions that occurred in 2014.

24

References
Akosa Antwi, Yaa, Moriya, Asako S., and Simon, Kosali. 2013. “Effects of Federal Policy to
Insure Young Adults: Evidence from the 2010 Affordable Care Act Dependent Coverage
Mandate.” American Economic Journal: Economic Policy 4(4):1-28.
Akosa Antwi, Yaa, Moriya, Asako S., and Simon, Kosali. 2015. “Access to Health Insurance and
the Use of Inpatient Medical Care: Evidence from the Affordable Care Act Young Adult
Mandate.” Journal of Health Economics. 39(C):171-187.
Alemayehu, Berhanu, and Kenneth E. Warner. 2004. The lifetime distribution of health care
costs. Health Services Research. 39(3): 627–42.
Baicker, Katherine, Amy Finkelstein, Jae Song, and Sarah Taubman. 2014. “The Impact of
Medicaid on Labor Force Activity and Program Participation: Evidence from the Oregon Health
Insurance Experiment.” American Economic Review. 104(5): 322-28.
Bailey, James, and Anna Chorniy. 2016. “Employer Provided Health Insurance and Job
Mobility: Did the Affordable Care Act Reduce Job Lock?” Contemporary Economic Policy.
34(1): 173-183.
Bailey, James. Forthcoming. “Health Insurance and the Supply of Entrepreneurs: New Evidence
from the Affordable Care Act's Dependent Coverage Mandate.” Small Business Economics.
Barbaresco, Silvia, Charles J. Courtemanche, and Yanling Qi. 2015. "Impacts of the Affordable
Care Act Dependent Coverage Provision on Health-related Outcomes of Young Adults." Journal
of Health Economics. 40(C): 54-68
Blau, David M. and Donna B. Gilleskie. 2001. “Retiree Health Insurance and the Labor Force
Behavior of Older Men in the 1990s.” The Review of Economics and Statistics 83(1):64-80.
Buchmueller, Thomas C. and Robert G. Valletta. 1999. “The Effect of Health Insurance on
Married Female Labor Supply.” Journal of Human Resources 34(1): 42-70.
Busch, Susan H., Ezra Golberstein, and Ellen Meara. 2014. “ACA Dependent Care Coverage
Provision Reduced High Out-of-Pocket Health Care Spending.” Health Affairs 33(8):1361-1366.
Cantor, Joel C., Alan C. Monheit, Derek DeLia, and Kristen Lloyd. 2012. “Early Impact of the
Affordable Care Act on Health Insurance Coverage of Young Adults.” Health Services Research
47(5): 1773-1798.
Cascio, Elizabeth U. and Ayushi Narayan. 2015. “Who Needs a Fracking Education? The
Educational Response to Low-Skill Biased Technological Change.” NBER Working Paper
21359.
25

Charles, Kerwin Kofi, Erik Hurst, and Matthew J. Notowidigdo. 2015. “Housing Booms and
Busts, Labor Market Opportunities, and College Attendance.” NBER Working Paper 21587.
Chetty, Raj, John N. Friedman, and Emmanuel Saez. 2013. “Using Differences in Knowledge
across Neighborhoods to Uncover the Impacts of the EITC on Earnings.” American Economic
Review 103(7): 2683–2721.
Cooper, Philip F. and Alan C. Monheit. 1993. “Does Employment-Related Health Insurance
Inhibit Job Mobility?” Inquiry 30(4): 400-416
Croson, Rachel and Uri Gneezy. 2009. “Gender Differences in Preferences.” Journal of
Economic Literature. 47(2): 1–27.
Currie, Janet and Brigitte C. Madrian. 1999. “Health, Health Insurance and the Labor Market” in
O. Ashenfelter and D. Card (eds.), Handbook of Labor Economics: 3309-3416.
Dague, Laura, Thomas DeLeire, and Lindsey Leininger. 2014. “The Effect of Public Insurance
Eligibility for Childless Adults on their Labor Supply.” NBER Working Paper 20111.
Dave, Dhaval, Sandra L. Decker, Robert Kaestner, and Kosali I. Simon. 2015. "The Effect of
Medicaid Expansions in the Late 1980s and Early 1990s on the Labor Supply of Pregnant
Women." American Journal of Health Economics. 1(2): 165-193.
Decker, Sandra and Frederic W. Selck. 2012. “The Effect of the Original Introduction of
Medicaid on Welfare Participation and Female Labor Supply.” Review of Economics of the
Household 10(4): 541-556.
Depew, Briggs. 2015. “The Effect of State Dependent Mandate Laws on the Labor Supply
Decisions of Young Adults.” Journal of Health Economics. 39: 123-134.
Depew, Briggs and Bailey, James. 2015. “Did the Affordable Care Act’s Dependent Coverage
Mandate Increase Premiums?” Journal of Health Economics 41: 1-14.
Dillender, Marcus. 2014. “Do More Health Insurance Options Lead to Higher Wages? Evidence
from States Extending Dependent Coverage.” Journal of Health Economics 36: 84-97.
Finkelstein, Amy, Nathaniel Hendren and Ezro F.P. Luttmer. 2015. The Value of Medicaid:
Interpreting Results from the Oregon Health Insurance Experiment. NBER Working Paper
21308.
Garthwaite, Craig, Tal Gross, and Matthew J. Notowidigdo. “Public Health Insurance, Labor
Supply, and Employment Lock.” The Quarterly Journal of Economics 129(2): 653-696.
Golberstein, Ezra, Susan H. Busch, Rebecca Zaha, Shelly F. Greenfield, William R. Beardslee,
and Ellen Meara. 2014. “The Effect of the Affordable Care Act’s Young Adult Insurance
26

Expansions on Hospital-Based Behavioral Health Care.” American Journal of Psychiatry.
172(2): 182-9.
Gruber, Jonathan. 1994. “The incidence of Mandated Maternity Benefits.” The American
Economic Review 84(3): 622-641.
Gruber, Jonathan. (Editor) 2001. “Risky Behavior Among Youth”. University of Chicago Press.
Gruber, Jonathan and Brigitte C. Madrian. 1995. “Health-Insurance Availability and The
Retirement Decision.” American Economic Review 85(4): 938-948.
Gruber, Jonathan and Brigitte C. Madrian. 2004. “Health Insurance, Labor Supply, and Job
Mobility: A Critical Review of the Literature.” in McLaughlin, C. (ed.), Health Policy and the
Uninsured. Washington, D.C: Urban Institute Press. P..97-177.
Ham, John C. and Lara D. Shore-Sheppard. 2005. “Did Expanding Medicaid Affect Welfare
Participation?” Industrial and Labor Relations Review 58(3): 452-470.
Hamersma, Sarah and Matthew Kim. 2009. “The Effect of Parental Medicaid Expansion on Job
Mobility.” Journal of Health Economics 28 (4): 761-770.
Hahn, Youjin and Hee-Seung Yang. 2016. “Do Work Decisions among Young Adults Respond
to Extended Dependent Coverage?” Industrial and Labor Relations Review. 69(3): 737-771.
Heim, Bradley T. and Ithai Z. Lurie. 2010. “The Effect of Self-Employed Health Insurance
Subsidies on Self-Employment.” Journal of Public Economics 94(11-12): 995-1007.
Heim, Bradley T. and Ithai Z. Lurie. 2015. “Does Health Reform Lead to Increased Job
Mobility? Evidence from Massachusetts.” American Journal of Health Economics. 1(3): 374398.
Holtz-Eakin, Douglas, John R. Penrod, and Harvey S. Rosen. 1996. “Health Insurance and the
Supply of Entrepreneurs.” Journal of Public Economics 62(1-2): 209-235.
Hurst, Erik, Geng Li, and Benjamin Pugsley. 2014. “Are Household Surveys Like Tax Forms?
Evidence from Income Underreporting of the Self-Employed.” The Review of Economics and
Statistics. 96(1):19-33.
Jung, Juergen, Diane M. Hamek Hall, and Thomas Rhoads. 2013. “Does the Availability of
Parental Health Insurance Affect the College Enrollment Decision of Young Americans?”
Economics of Education Review 32: 49-65.
Kapur, Kanika and Jeannette Rogowski. 2007. “The Role of Health Insurance in Joint
Retirement among Married Couples.” Industrial and Labor Relations Review 60(3): 397-407.

27

Kolstad, Jonathan and Amanda E. Kowalski. 2016. “Mandate Based Health Reform and the
Labor Market: Evidence from the Massachusetts Reform.” Journal of Health Economics. 47: 81106.
Madrian, Brigitte C. 1994. “The Effect of Health Insurance on Retirement” Brookings Papers on
Economic Activity. 1: 181-232.
Madrian, Brigitte C. 2006. “The U.S. Healthcare System and Labor Markets.” NBER Working
Paper 11980.
Madrian, Brigitte C and Lars Lefgren. 1998. “The Effect of Health Insurance on Transitions to
Self Employment.” Working Paper.
Monheit, Alan C, Joel C. Cantor, Derek DeLia, and Dina Bello. 2011. “How have State Policies
to Expand Dependent Coverage Affected the Health Insurance Status of Young Adults?” Health
Services Research 46(1): 251-267.
Mulligan, Casey B. 2013. “Average Marginal Labor Income Tax Rates Under the Affordable
Care Act.” NBER Working Paper 19365.
Pew Research Center. 2015. “The Gender Gap in Self-Employment and Hiring.” Retrieved from
http://www.pewsocialtrends.org/2015/10/22/the-gender-gap-in-self-employment-and-hiring/
Pohl, R. Vincent. 2014. “Medicaid and the Labor Supply of Single Mothers: Implications for
Health Care Reform.” Upjohn Institute Working Paper No. 14-222.
Saloner Brendan and Benjamin LeCook. 2014. “An ACA provision increased treatment for
young adults with possible mental illnesses relative to comparison group.” Health Affairs.
33(8):1425-34.
Slusky, D. Forthcoming. “Significant Placebo Results in Difference-in-Differences Analysis: The
Case of the ACA’s Parental Mandate”. Eastern Economic Journal.
Sommers, Benjamin D., Thomas Buchmueller, Sandra L. Decker, Colleen Carey, and Richard
Kronick. 2013. “The Affordable Care Act Has Led to Significant Gains In Health Insurance And
Access To Care For Young Adults.” Health Affairs 32(1): 165-174.
Strumpf, Erin. 2010. “Employer-Sponsored Health Insurance for Early Retirees: Impacts on
Retirement, Health, and Health Care.” International Journal of Journal of Health Finance and
Economics 10(2): 105-147.
Strumpf, Erin. 2011. “Medicaid's Effect on Single Women’s Labor Supply: Evidence from the
Introduction of Medicaid.” Journal of Health Economics 30(3): 531-548.

28

Wellington, Alison J. 2001. “Health Insurance Coverage and Entrepreneurship.” Contemporary
Economic Policy. 19(4): 465-478.
Yelowitz, Aaron S. 1995. “The Medicaid Notch, Labor Supply, and Welfare Participation:
Evidence from Eligibility Expansions.” The Quarterly Journal of Economics 110(4): 909-939.

29

Table 1. Sample Statistics

Age 24-29

Employment Status
No W-2 Forms
Any Self-Employment Income
Job Characteristics
Log Annual Wages
Primary-Employer-Offered Health Insurance
Retirement Plan at Primary Employer
Educational Enrollment
Post-Secondary Student
Full-Time Student
Graduate Student
Age
19
20
21
22
23
24
25
26
27
28
29
Unemployment Rate
Year
2008
2009
2010
2011
2012
2013
N

Age 24-29 - Only
Those with
Retirement Plan

Age 22-29 - Only
Those with
Retirement Plan

Mean

St. Dev.

Mean

St. Dev.

Mean

St. Dev.

0.193
0.100

0.394
0.300

0.151
0.096

0.358
0.295

0.148
0.089

0.356
0.285

9.764
0.462
0.324

1.238
0.499
0.468

9.867
0.502
0.379

1.176
0.500
0.485

9.661
0.498
0.330

1.222
0.500
0.470

0.194
0.157
0.051

0.396
0.364
0.221

0.217
0.175
0.064

0.412
0.380
0.245

0.288
0.244
0.059

0.453
0.430
0.235

-----0.206
0.203
-0.200
0.198
0.192
7.915

-----0.405
0.402
-0.400
0.399
0.394
1.223

-----0.213
0.208
-0.199
0.194
0.185
7.901

-----0.409
0.406
-0.400
0.396
0.389
1.236

---0.153
0.151
0.148
0.145
-0.139
0.135
0.129
7.899

---0.360
0.358
0.355
0.352
-0.346
0.342
0.335
1.235

0.192
0.199
-0.201
0.203
0.205

0.394
0.399
-0.401
0.402
0.404

0.199
0.200
-0.200
0.200
0.201

0.399
0.400
-0.400
0.400
0.401

0.199
0.198
-0.200
0.201
0.202

0.399
0.399
-0.400
0.401
0.401

823,249

452,960

651,222

Notes: Data from 1% Sample of Internal Revenue Service (IRS) unedited population files.
30

Table 2. Estimation Results

DifferenceinDifferences
(1)
Employment Status
No W-2 Forms

N
Any Self-Employment Income

N
Job Characteristics
Log Annual Wages

N
Primary-Employer-Offered Health
Insurance

N
Retirement Plan at Primary Employer

N

DifferenceinDifferences
with Controls
- only those
whose
Parents have
Difference- an EmployerinBased
Differences
Retirement
with Controls
Plan
(2)
(3)

-0.004
(0.003)
0.177
823,249

-0.004**
(0.001)
0.177
823,249

-0.002
(0.002)
0.137
452,960

0.001
(0.003)
0.090
823,249

0.001
(0.001)
0.090
823,249

0.001
(0.001)
0.086
452,960

-0.022
(0.055)
9.571
664,242

-0.018***
(0.004)
9.657
664,242

-0.009**
(0.004)
9.657
384,484

0.005*
(0.003)
0.464
786,949

0.005**
(0.002)
0.464
786,949

0.004
(0.003)
0.502
433,320

-0.005
(0.013)
0.296
823,249

-0.005***
(0.002)
0.296
823,249

-0.005***
(0.002)
0.342
452,960

31

Educational Enrollment
Post-Secondary Student

N
Full-Time Student

N
Graduate Student

N

0.000
(0.014)
0.243
823,249

-0.002*
(0.001)
0.243
823,249

-0.002*
(0.001)
0.274
452,960

0.004
(0.013)
0.191
823,249

0.001
(0.001)
0.191
823,249

0.005***
(0.001)
0.213
452,960

0.002
(0.002)
0.056
823,249

0.002*
(0.001)
0.056
823,249

0.003**
(0.001)
0.070
452,960

Notes: Data from 1% Sample of Internal Revenue Service (IRS) unedited population files. Each
cell presents results from a separate regression. Standard errors are in parentheses, and the
means of the dependent variable among the treatment group in the pre-reform period is in italics.
Control variables include indicator variables for year, age, and gender; the unemployment rate;
and the interaction between age and the unemployment rate. Standard errors are clustered at the
age*year level. Sample includes young adults between the ages of 24 and 29.
*** indicates statistical significance at the 1% level; ** indicates the 5% level, and * indicates
significance at the 10% level

32

Table 3. Statistical Significance of Difference in Pre-Policy Trends
Difference-in(2) with
Differences
Controls
0.001

Difference-in-Differences
(3)- only those
with Controls
with Retirement
-0.002 Plan

(0.004)

(0.004)

-0.002
(0.005)

-0.002
(0.005)

-0.003
(0.005)

-0.015
(0.087)

-0.014
(0.086)

-0.028
(0.087)

Primary Employer Offered Health Insurance

0.001
(0.005)

0.001
(0.006)

0.004
(0.006)

Retirement Plan at Primary Employer

0.005
(0.021)

0.005
(0.021)

0.002
(0.023)

0.006
(0.023)

0.006
(0.023)

0.008
(0.027)

Full-Time Student

0.016
(0.019)

0.016
(0.019)

0.018
(0.023)

Graduate Student

0.004
(0.003)

0.004
(0.003)

0.005
(0.004)

Employment Status
No W-2 Forms
Any Self-Employment Income
Job Characteristics
Log Annual Wages

Educational Enrollment
Post-Secondary Student

Difference-in(1)
Differences
0.001
(0.004)

Notes: Data from 1% Sample of Internal Revenue Service (IRS) unedited population files.
Sample includes young adults between the ages of 24 and 29 during pre-treatment years (20082009). Each cell shows, for the dependent variable given by the row and the specification given
by the column, the coefficient and standard error, and whether the outcome in question showed
statistically significantly different pre-policy time trends when comparing the treatment group to
the control group (i.e. whether the Treatment*PlaceboPost interaction was statistically
significant); none of the estimates are statistically significantly different from zero at
conventional levels. Control variables include indicator variables for year and gender, and for the
unemployment rate. Age indicator variables, and the interaction between age and unemployment
rate, are excluded from these tests due to multicollinearity in the limited pre-policy sample
period.
*** indicates statistical significance at the 1% level; ** indicates the 5% level, and * indicates
significance at the 10% level (Note that none of the estimates are statistically significant in this
table.)

33

Table 4. Estimation Results - Robustness Check
Base
Specification
- Ages 24-29

Ages 22-29

(1)

(2)

-0.002
(0.002)
0.137
452,960

-0.002
(0.002)
0.138
651,222

0.001
(0.001)
0.086
452,960

-0.001
(0.001)
0.081
651,222

-0.009**
(0.004)
9.657
384,484

-0.011***
(0.004)
9.424
554,217

0.004
(0.003)
0.502
433,320

0.003
(0.002)
0.498
622,613

-0.005***
(0.002)
0.342
452,960

-0.003*
(0.002)
0.288
651,222

N

-0.002*
(0.001)
0.274
452,960

0.003
(0.002)
0.360
651,222

Full-Time Student

0.005***

0.011***

Employment Status
No W-2 Forms

N
Any Self-Employment Income

N
Job Characteristics
Log Annual Wages

N
Primary Employer Offered Health Insurance

N
Retirement Plan at Primary Employer

N
Educational Enrollment
Post-Secondary Student

34

N
Graduate Student

N

(0.001)
0.213
452,960

(0.003)
0.298
651,222

0.003**
(0.001)
0.07
452,960

0.002
(0.001)
0.057
651,222

Notes: Data from 1% Sample of Internal Revenue Service (IRS) unedited population files.
Model estimated is difference-in-differences with controls in which the sample includes those
whose parents had a retirement plan. Each cell presents results from a separate regression.
Control variables include indicator variables for year, age and gender, the unemployment rate,
and the interaction between age and the unemployment rate. Standard errors are in parentheses,
and the means of the dependent variable among the treatment group in the pre-reform period is in
italics. Standard errors are clustered at the age*year level.
*** indicates statistical significance at the 1% level; ** indicates the 5% level, and * indicates
significance at the 10% level

35

Table 5. Estimation Results - By Gender
Men
(1)

Women
(2)

-0.003
(0.003)
0.140
232,311

0.000
(0.002)
0.135
220,649

0.004*
(0.002)
0.093
232,311

-0.001
(0.002)
0.079
220,649

0.006
(0.007)
9.704
198,301

-0.025***
(0.004)
9.609
186,183

0.010**
(0.004)
0.473
221,786

0.002
(0.001)
0.532
220,649

-0.003
(0.002)
0.340
232,311

-0.007**
(0.003)
0.344
220,649

N

-0.002
(0.002)
0.238
232,311

-0.002
(0.002)
0.311
220,649

Full-Time Student

0.002**

0.007***

Employment Status
No W-2 Forms

N
Any Self-Employment Income

N
Job Characteristics
Log Annual Wages

N
Primary Employer Offered Health
Insurance

N
Retirement Plan at Primary
Employer

N
Educational Enrollment
Post-Secondary Student

36

N
Graduate Student

N

(0.001)
0.186
232,311

(0.002)
0.242
220,649

0.003***
(0.001)
0.052
232,311

0.004
(0.003)
0.089
220,649

Notes: Data from 1% Sample of Internal Revenue Service (IRS) unedited population files.
Model estimated is difference-in-differences with controls in which the sample includes those
whose parents had a retirement plan. Each cell presents results from a separate regression.
Control variables include indicator variables for year, age and gender, the unemployment rate,
and the interaction between age and the unemployment rate. Standard errors are in parentheses,
and the means of the dependent variable among the treatment group in the pre-reform period is in
italics. Standard errors are clustered at the age*year level. Sample includes young adults
between the ages of 24 and 29.
*** indicates statistical significance at the 1% level; ** indicates the 5% level, and * indicates
significance at the 10% level

37

Table 6. Estimation Results - By Income Level

Income <
125% FPL
(1)

125% FPL
< Income <
250% FPL
(2)

250% FPL
< Income <
400% FPL
(3)

Income >
400% FPL
(4)

-0.006
(0.006)
0.207
52,579

-0.005*
(0.003)
0.158
111,365

0.004
(0.002)
0.116
135,592

-0.001
(0.002)
0.117
153,424

-0.006**
(0.002)
0.085
52,579

0.002
(0.002)
0.077
111,365

0.000
(0.002)
0.084
135,592

0.005*
(0.003)
0.095
153,424

0.007
(0.017)
9.348
40,813

-0.011
(0.008)
9.548
92,002

-0.011
(0.010)
9.694
117,256

-0.026**
(0.010)
9.797
134,413

0.019***
(0.006)
0.448
50,300

0.007**
(0.003)
0.476
106,612

0.002
(0.004)
0.514
129,611

-0.004
(0.004)
0.527
146,797

0.009*
(0.005)
0.249
52,579

-0.005
(0.004)
0.303
111,365

-0.011**
(0.004)
0.362
135,592

-0.009***
(0.002)
0.384
153,424

N

0.007**
(0.003)
0.194
52,579

-0.012***
(0.002)
0.231
111,365

0.005
(0.003)
0.273
135,592

0.001
(0.001)
0.332
153,424

Full-Time Student

0.008***

-0.004

0.013***

0.007***

Employment Status
No W-2 Forms

N
Any Self-Employment Income

N
Job Characteristics
Log Annual Wages

N
Primary Employer Offered
Health Insurance

N
Retirement Plan at Primary
Employer

N
Educational Enrollment
Post-Secondary Student

38

N
Graduate Student

N

(0.003)
0.153
52,579

(0.002)
0.180
111,365

(0.003)
0.213
135,592

(0.002)
0.259
153,424

0.000
(0.002)
0.024
52,579

0.001
(0.001)
0.037
111,365

0.010***
(0.003)
0.061
135,592

0.003
(0.002)
0.118
153,424

Notes: Data from 1% Sample of Internal Revenue Service (IRS) unedited population files.
Model estimated is difference-in-differences with controls in which the sample includes those
whose parents had a retirement plan. Each cell presents results from a separate regression.
Control variables include indicator variables for year, age and gender, the unemployment rate,
and the interaction between age and the unemployment rate. Standard errors are in parentheses,
and the means of the dependent variable among the treatment group in the pre-reform period is in
italics. Standard errors are clustered at the age*year level. Sample includes young adults
between the ages of 24 and 29.
*** indicates statistical significance at the 1% level; ** indicates the 5% level, and * indicates
significance at the 10% level

39

Table 7: Comparisons to Largest Estimates in Literature

0.05

Largest
Estimate in
Literature
0.63

Garthwaite et al. (2014)

30

0.14

0.80

Bailey (Forthcoming)

-0.9

30

-0.03

-0.20

Dague et al. (2014)

2.3

30

0.08

0.22

Jung et al. (2013)

Labor Market
Oucome

Specification

Estimated
Impact Percent

Coverage
Percent

Implied
Elasticity

No W-2 Forms

Age 24-29

1.5*

30

Any SelfEmployment
Income

Age 24-29
Men

4.3

Log Annual
Wages

Age 24-29

Full-Time
Student

Age 24-29

Paper

Note: The 30 percent increase in dependent coverage estimate comes from Akosa Antwi et al. (2013). The estimate of 0.8 for Bailey
(2014) comes from taking the 24% upper end increase estimate in Bailey (Forthcoming) and dividing it by the 30% increase in
dependent coverage from Akosa Antwi et al. (2013).
* Not statistically different from 0 at conventional significance levels.

40

Appendix Table 1: Age of Birth Cohort by Year of Tax Data

Tax Year
2004
2005
2006
2007
2008
…
2012
2013

1995
9
10
11
12
13
17
18

Birth Cohort
…

1979
25
26
27
28
29
33
34

Note: Oldest age of dependent is assumed to be 18 in 1997, thus in the 1979 cohort. Italics show what
we would have if we expanded years of data to before 2005. The last year back in time for which we
would have 27-29 year olds represented is 2008. If we go back past 2006, we would not have any age in
the control age range.

41

Appendix Table 2: Sample Sizes by Age and Year

Age
22
23
24
25
26
27
28
29

2008
33,176
33,353
32,756
32,678
33,120
32,441
31,961
27,952

2009
33,981
33,176
33,353
32,756
32,678
33,120
32,441
31,961

Year
2010
34,323
33,981
33,176
33,353
32,756
32,678
33,120
32,441

2011
35,453
34,323
33,981
33,176
33,353
32,756
32,678
33,120

2012
36,457
35,453
34,323
33,981
33,176
33,353
32,756
32,678

Note: Data from 1% Sample of Internal Revenue Service (IRS) unedited population files. Data from 2010, and data for 26 year olds,
are not used in the differences calculations.

42

