                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




TAX ADVANTAGES AND IMPERFECT COMPETITION IN AUCTIONS FOR MUNICIPAL
                             BONDS

                                        Daniel Garrett
                                        Andrey Ordin
                                      James W. Roberts
                                  Juan Carlos Suárez Serrato

                                      Working Paper 23473
                              http://www.nber.org/papers/w23473


                    NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                             1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                               Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    June 2017




We are very grateful for comments from Manuel Adelino, Pat Bayer, Vivek Bhattacharya, Lysle
Boller, Javier Donna, Josh Gottlieb, Ali Hortaçsu, Kei Kawai, Lorenz Kueng, Tong Li, Matt
Panhans, Jim Poterba, Mar Reguant, Stephen Ryan, Xun Tang, Owen Zidar, and numerous
seminar participants. Suárez Serrato is grateful for funding from the Kauffman Foundation. All
errors remain our own. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily
reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2017 by Daniel Garrett, Andrey Ordin, James W. Roberts, and Juan Carlos Suárez Serrato. All
rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without
explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Tax Advantages and Imperfect Competition in Auctions for Municipal Bonds
Daniel Garrett, Andrey Ordin, James W. Roberts, and Juan Carlos Suárez Serrato
NBER Working Paper No. 23473
June 2017, Revised in October 2020
JEL No. D44,H71,L13

                                         ABSTRACT

We study the interaction between tax advantages for municipal bonds and the market structure of
auctions for these bonds. We show that this interaction can limit a bidder’s ability to extract
information rents and is a crucial determinant of state and local governments’ borrowing costs.
Reduced-form estimates show that increasing the tax advantage by 3 pp lowers mean borrowing
costs by 9-10%. We estimate a structural auction model to measure markups and to illustrate and
quantify how the interaction between tax policy and bidder strategic behavior determines the
impact of tax advantages on municipal borrowing costs. We use the estimated model to evaluate
the efficiency of Obama and Trump administration policies that limit the tax advantage for
municipal bonds. Because reductions in the tax advantage in ate bidder markups and depress
competition, the resulting increase in municipal borrowing costs more than o sets the tax savings
to the government. Finally, we use the model to analyze a recent non-tax regulation that affects
entry into municipal bond auctions.

Daniel Garrett                                  James W. Roberts
Suite 2328 Steinberg-Dietrich Hall              Duke University
3620 Locust Walk                                Department of Economics
Philadelphia, PA 19104                          213 Social Sciences Building
Danielgg@wharton.upenn.edu                      Durham, NC 27708
                                                and NBER
Andrey Ordin                                    j.roberts@duke.edu
Duke University
213 Social Sciences                             Juan Carlos Suárez Serrato
Durham, NC 27705                                Department of Economics
andrey.ordin@duke.edu                           Duke University
                                                213 Social Sciences Building
                                                Box 90097
                                                Durham, NC 27708
                                                and NBER
                                                jc@jcsuarez.com
1     Introduction
State and local governments finance multi-year expenditures by issuing municipal bonds. In 2017, outstand-
ing municipal debt totaled $3.7 trillion, and annual interest payments of $122 billion surpassed municipal
expenditures in other categories such as unemployment insurance, policing, and workers’ compensation.1
To reduce the borrowing costs of state and local governments, municipal bond income is excluded from
federal and, in most cases, state taxation. This tax advantage creates a tax expenditure for the federal and
state governments, which is forecast to cost the federal government alone more than $500 billion over the
coming decade, has been rising over time, and is mainly enjoyed by top-income individuals. Not surpris-
ingly, the tax advantage of municipal bonds has been the subject of a controversial policy debate. However,
in spite of the more than 120 proposals made since 1918 to eliminate or limit this tax advantage, including
in every budget proposal released by the Obama administration from 2012-2016, this favorable treatment
within the U.S. tax code has remained largely unchanged.2
    We contribute to this debate by showing that the interaction of the tax advantages with the structure of
the municipal bond issuance market plays a crucial role in determining the effect of these tax advantages on
borrowing rates as well as the efficiency of this subsidy. To do so, we analyze a novel dataset on over 14,000
new issuances of municipal bonds sold at auction between 2008 and 2015.3 In these auctions, underwriters
bid for municipal debt and the winning bid determines the issuer’s borrowing cost. We exploit within-state
changes in taxes over time to show that tax advantages have large effects on the borrowing costs of state
and local governments. We further find that auction participation decisions of potential underwriters are
also appreciably sensitive to changes in tax advantages.
    Our empirical findings motivate us to develop an auction model that clarifies the economic mechanisms
in this market. The model allows us to understand the link between the level of competition in the auctions
and the effect of the tax advantage on both the strategic decisions of underwriters and the borrowing
rates faced by bond issuers. Given the role of imperfect competition in setting borrowing rates, a model
with these features is essential to understanding the workings of this market and the effects of relevant
government policies. The model quantifies equilibrium markups and yields the valuable insight that the
impact of tax policy changes on these markups is a key driver of the overall effect on municipal borrowing
costs. We put the model to use by evaluating recent proposals by the Obama and Trump administrations
that affect the tax advantage of municipal bonds and by examining the effects of a recently enacted Internal
Revenue Service (IRS) regulation of bond auctions with few participants. By highlighting the interactions
between taxes and imperfect competition, our results suggest the need for a fundamental reassessment of
the mechanism through which tax subsidies reduce borrowing costs and provide new evidence that tax
subsidies may be more efficient at subsidizing local borrowing costs than previously thought.
   1
     See SIFMA (2020) for reports and data on the state of the market for municipal bonds and U.S. Census Bureau (2020) for
state and local government expenditures.
   2
     See U.S. Treasury (2016) for a fiscal year 2017 forecast of the cost of tax expenditures. See Zweig (2011), Tax Policy Center
(2015), and Greenberg (2016) for a summary of the debate surrounding tax advantages of municipal bonds.
   3
     Auctions make up an important part of the municipal bond issuance market. Roughly half the municipal bonds issued
in any year are sold to underwriters via auctions, in which underwriters submit bids in the form of the interest rate they are
willing to charge an issuer, with the low bidder winning and the issuer paying the winner’s bid (interest rate). The other half
are mainly sold through negotiations. See Section 2 for details. We concentrate on the auction side of the municipal bond
market as the well-defined nature of the auctions enables us to more cleanly analyze how market structure and tax policy
interface with one another to determine the borrowing costs of state and local governments.


                                                                1
    We begin our analysis by providing reduced-form evidence that a 1 percentage-point (pp) increase in
the personal income tax subsidy, or what we term the effective rate, leads to a decrease in borrowing
costs of 6.5-7 basis points. Given the mean borrowing rate is 2.14%, a 3 pp increase in the effective rate
would reduce borrowing costs by 9-10%. Our results imply a passthrough elasticity of the borrowing rate
to the tax advantage of 1.7-1.9.4 We also find that changes in the effective rate have sizable effects on
the competitiveness of these auctions. Specifically, a 4 pp increase in the tax advantage adds 2 additional
underwriters to the set of potential bidders who can potentially participate in the auction.5
    The causal interpretation of these results relies on the identifying assumption that changes in the
effective rate are not driven by other factors that may spuriously correlate with borrowing costs. This
assumption is supported by several facts. First, variation in the effective rate is driven by both federal and
state tax changes and the interaction of the two due to the federal state and local tax (SALT) deduction.
Second, the vast majority of the auctions are held by sub-state municipalities that have no influence
over the effective rate. Finally, this result is robust to controlling for a number of potential confounders
including determinants of borrowing rates and economic conditions of the municipal bond market. Our most
demanding specification identifies this effect using repeated bond auctions by the same issuer (municipality)
in time periods with different (federal and state) tax rates, which greatly limits concerns that our results
are driven by omitted factors that may be correlated with both tax changes and borrowing costs.6
    To better understand the economic mechanisms behind this reduced-form result, we estimate an empir-
ical auction model in the spirit of Li and Zheng (2009) that accounts for the effect of the tax advantage on
the distribution of bidders’ values for the bonds, as well as on their decision to participate in an auction.7
Owing to the imperfectly competitive nature of the setting, auction participants in this model submit bids
larger than the lowest interest rate they would be willing to accept for the bond. The difference between the
lowest acceptable interest rate and the bid is called the markup. The model recovers the latent distribution
of bidders’ willingness to pay for bonds and quantifies the equilibrium markups enjoyed by bidders. Our
model implies that the average markup is 17 basis points, or about 21% of borrowing costs, and that state
issuers enjoy smaller markups than do cities, counties, or school districts.
    The model helps us understand the relationship between bidder markups and the tax advantage. In
imperfectly competitive auctions, one way that changes in taxes can have large impacts on borrowing costs
is through their effect on equilibrium markups. An increase in the tax advantage leads bidders to decrease
their bid and further lowers the equilibrium borrowing rate as other participants respond to this incentive
by lowering their bids. We show that these forces affect equilibrium markups and are one reason that
we find greater-than-unity passthrough elasticities on borrowing costs.8 As foreshadowed by the reduced-
   4
     A 3 pp increase in the effective tax rate is less than a 1 standard deviation increase, and is equivalent to moving from
the 50th percentile to the 75th percentile as shown in Table 1. The ratio between yields on a taxable and tax-exempt asset is
(1 − τ ), where τ is the effective rate. For this reason, we calculate elasticities with respect to the net-of-tax rate. Given an
average τ of 40.87%, a 3 pp increase—which leads to a 9% decline in borrowing costs—implies an increase in the tax advantage
                                                                                   9%
of 5%. This calculation yields a passthrough elasticity at the mean of 1.8(≈ 5%       ). Appendix C.9 provides additional details,
including tax and net-of-tax elasticities for each state.
   5
     In Section 3.2, we show that this result is robust to using different definitions of potential bidders.
   6
     We perform a wide variety of analyses to demonstrate the robustness of this result. We also use an event study approach
to show that the timing of tax changes coincides with changes in borrowing costs and that future taxes, as a placebo, do not
predict changes in borrowing costs.
   7
     In Section 3.4, we demonstrate that there is no supply-side response to the change in the tax advantage. Based on this
evidence, our model focuses on the strategic behavior of underwriters in a given auction.
   8
     In addition to exploring these effects through the lens of our model, we also provide non-parametric evidence that this


                                                                2
form results, our approach also highlights the importance of accounting for the participation margin. The
model shows how additional competitive pressure from the extra participants reduces bidder markups and
increases the magnitude of the passthrough elasticities.
    Finally, we use the model estimates to evaluate the effects of a range of policies directly or indirectly
affecting the tax advantage of municipal bonds. The first set of policies includes a number of potential
reforms that affect the effective tax rate, including (i) increasing or decreasing the size of the federal
exemption, (ii) eliminating the state exemption altogether, and (iii) limiting SALT in concordance with
the Tax Cuts and Jobs Act of 2017 (TCJA17). We find that capping the excludability of municipal bond
interest income at 37%, as proposed by the Trump administration, would increase the average borrowing
rate by 5% and markups by 14% and that states with fewer bidders and lower state taxes would be more
affected by this policy. Removing the excludability of municipal bond interest income from state taxation
would increase borrowing costs by 22% and markups by 63%. Limiting the SALT deduction would increase
the tax advantage of municipal bonds at the federal level, and we predict that this tax change would lead
state and local government borrowing costs to fall by over 6%. Combined with personal income tax cuts in
the TCJA17, which would otherwise increase borrowing costs, we predict that the net effect of the recent
Trump tax cuts will be a decrease in borrowing costs of 1.6%. These simulations show that state and federal
tax policies can have significant impacts on the borrowing costs of state and local governments. We then
assess the effectiveness of the federal subsidy, and find that the increased borrowing costs from reducing
tax advantages are 3.2 times as large as the reduction in the cost of the tax expenditure. The effects
of tax advantages on auction competitiveness and equilibrium markups are key to this cost-effectiveness
calculation, as removing these impacts lowers this relative cost number to 1.07. This suggests that, while this
tax advantage is mostly enjoyed by top-income individuals, its effect on the market structure of municipal
bond offerings makes it a cost-effective way to lower the borrowing rates used to finance public goods.
    The second policy we study is a 2017 IRS regulation that determines the maximum tax-exempt yield
in auctions with fewer than three participants (Internal Revenue Service, 2016). We model this policy as
a reduction in the tax shield offered by bonds sold at such low-participation auctions. To understand the
impact of this policy, it is crucial to characterize participation decisions and bidding strategies of potential
bidders. Because the number of participants is unknown when underwriters place bids, the rule leads
bidders that value bonds at a high interest rate—and that are more likely to win in low-participation
auctions—to further inflate their bids. We find that this IRS rule creates a meaningful distortion in bidding
strategies, significantly inflating the markups of underwriters with large latent valuations for the bonds. In
most auctions, this distortion is mitigated by overall high levels of participation since underwriters with
distorted markups rarely win the auctions. Nonetheless, for auctions where the rule is likely to bind, the
regulation can lead to a significant increase in municipal borrowing costs, showcasing how this seemingly
well-intentioned policy can distort bidding behavior and increase borrowing costs.
    This paper contributes to several literatures. First, we contribute to the growing literature studying
market power in important and policy-relevant financial markets (e.g., Hortaçsu et al., 2018; Kang and
Puller, 2008). This work demonstrates that large financial markets are characterized by imperfect com-
petition and informational asymmetries and that even in markets for highly liquid assets, such as U.S.
mechanism is at play in the data.



                                                       3
treasury bills, auction winners may enjoy positive markups. Like previous studies, we too use methods
from the empirical auction literature to study market power in a key financial market. Our paper is set
apart from this literature not only by its focus on municipal bonds (e.g., Tang, 2011) but additionally, and
perhaps more importantly, by its concentration on the interaction between tax policy and market structure,
including bidders’ endogenous participation decisions.9 Recent work has shown the importance of allowing
for endogenous participation in auctions (e.g., Li and Zheng, 2009) for a variety of mechanism design and
policy-related questions in both theoretical and empirical settings.10 This paper contributes further evi-
dence to this literature by showing that endogenous participation influences the effect of taxes on municipal
borrowing costs.
       Second, we contribute to the literature on municipal bonds, which is important for three reasons. First,
interest payments on municipal bonds are a significant component of state and local governments’ budgets.
Second, the borrowing rate for specific projects (such as schools, airports, museums) directly determines
the scale of public good provision. The rationale for the tax advantage of municipal bonds is that local
governments may not internalize the value of public goods for the residents of nearby locations. By lowering
borrowing costs, the tax advantage may partially solve this problem.11 While most of this literature focuses
on arbitrage of existing issues of municipal bonds, our paper focuses on the primary market and particularly
on the impact of municipal bonds’ tax advantage on local government borrowing costs.12 Third, from the
point of view of federal and state governments, the tax advantages of municipal bond interest represent a
large tax expenditure; the federal government alone is forecast to face more than $500 billion in forgone
revenue over the next 10 years. Critics of the tax-excludability of interest from municipal bonds argue that
it allows top-income earners to lower their effective tax rates. Indeed, the push to cap the excludability
was part of a broader campaign during the Obama administration to close “loopholes” for top earners
that allowed them to avoid paying higher marginal taxes (Walsh, 2012). It is thus a first-order concern
to understand whether this expenditure serves a public purpose and whether it is efficient in reducing
borrowing costs, with the current conventional wisdom holding that it is not.13
   9
     Tang (2011) and Shneyerov (2006) study municipal bond auctions for the purposes of non-parametrically analyzing the
revenue implications of alternative mechanism designs. Brancaccio et al. (2017) examines municipal bond trading on secondary
markets and quantifies experimentation by traders in this relatively opaque market. None of these papers study the tax
incentives associated with such bonds.
  10
     See, for example, Sogo et al. (2016) or Roberts and Sweeting (2013).
  11
     See Saez (2004) for a broader rationale for tax expenditures. Gordon (1983) provides a model of fiscal federalism where
subsidies for public goods ameliorate the under-provision of public goods. Adelino et al. (2017) show that exogenous changes in
borrowing rates lead to additional spending by local governments. Cellini et al. (2010) show that investments in school facilities
through bond measures in California raise home prices by more than the cost of the bond, suggesting an under-provision of
bond-financed public goods.
  12
     A prominent strand of literature compares tax-exempt municipal bonds to bonds with different tax treatments (e.g.,
Poterba, 1986; Feenberg and Poterba, 1991; Green, 1993; Schultz, 2012; Ang et al., 2010b; Cestau et al., 2013; Liu and
Denison, 2014; Kueng, 2014). While previous papers address important interactions between tax advantages and the behavior
of financial markets, they do not directly measure the passthrough of tax advantages to the borrowing costs of state and
local governments, with the exception of Kidwell et al. (1984), which examines how preferential tax treatment of within-state
bond income lowers in-state bond yields. Relative to existing methods, our approach obviates the need to select a comparable
taxable security, allows us to decompose borrowing costs into values and markups, and, by focusing on the primary instead
of secondary market, directly ties the statutory tax rate to municipal outcomes. Nonetheless, the existence of markups in
our analysis is consistent with results in Green et al. (2007) showing that broker-dealers benefit from the losses of uninformed
investors in secondary markets.
  13
     Liu and Denison (2014) discuss potential rents that might be obtained by high-income individuals from the municipal
bond exemption. Some highlights of this literature include Poterba (1989, 1986) as well as more recent papers that compare
expenditures between tax-exempt bonds and Build America Bonds (Cestau et al., 2013; Ang et al., 2010a). We focus directly



                                                                4
    Finally, we contribute to the literature focused on the importance of competition for auction outcomes.
Despite the conventional wisdom in the literature that the level of competition is more important than
many parameters of auction design for maximizing sellers’ revenues, or in this case minimizing borrowing
costs, there are few real-world examples of policies designed to promote more competition in auctions.14,15
In contrast, our paper analyzes a real-world policy that subsidizes the value of the auctioned good, which
affects the set of all potential bidders as well as their entry and bidding decisions. In our study of the role
that imperfect competition plays in dictating passthrough, our paper complements other work investigating
related questions in different settings like electricity or import markets.16 Subsidizing good valuations may
be justified in other markets from a social welfare perspective and may be particularly important for the
efficient provision of public goods.
    The rest of the paper is organized as follows. We describe the institutional context and our data in
Section 2. Section 3 describes reduced-form relationships between tax advantages, borrowing costs, and
imperfect competition in auctions for municipal bonds. In Section 4, we develop an auction model for
municipal debt with tax advantages. Section 5 describes the estimation procedure and results of this
model. Section 6 explores the mechanisms through which taxes influence municipal borrowing costs. We
simulate the effects of changing effective tax rates in Section 7.1 and of policies that interact with auction
participation in Section 7.2. Section 8 concludes.


2     Institutional Details on Municipal Bond Auctions, Tax Advantages,
      and Data
In the U.S., municipal bonds are issued by state and local governments to fund various public projects
including the construction of schools, highway repairs, and capital improvements to water and sewage
facilities. These bonds are usually bought by underwriters, who subsequently resell them on the secondary
market to final consumers. The primary issuance market is comparable in size with the world’s largest
equity markets, with total outstanding debt currently surpassing $3.7 trillion and about $425 billion worth
of bonds having been issued in 2019 alone (SIFMA, 2020). The secondary market for municipal bonds is
characterized by low liquidity; often, purchasers in this market do not trade the bonds again.
on the efficacy of the tax exemption instead of on other mechanisms that may also lower municipal borrowing costs. Our paper
is also related to papers that study the implications of removing the tax subsidy for municipal debt for individual portfolio
substitution (Feenberg and Poterba, 1991; Poterba and Verdugo, 2011) and for changes in municipal spending (Gordon and
Slemrod, 1983; Galper et al., 2014).
   14
      See, for example, the influential arguments in Klemperer (2002) or Bulow and Klemperer (1996). It is worth noting that
avoiding bidder collusion could be just as important, if not more so. As we are not aware of any claims regarding collusion in
these municipal bond auctions, our focus is more on the role that tax policy plays in determining the number of potential and
actual bidders, as well as their submitted markups.
   15
      Key exceptions are bidder subsidies and training programs, some of which have been studied in the existing literature.
Some examples include Bhattacharya (2017), De Silva et al. (2017), Athey et al. (2013), and Krasnokutskaya and Seim (2011).
However, these subsidies are generally targeted at small or minority-owned bidders and thus may be driven more by a desire
to spread resources across a wider variety of firms than by hopes of increasing revenues or decreasing procurement costs.
Moreover, these subsidies usually take the form of prioritizing a particular class of bidders’ bids to treat them favorably relative
to a non-subsidized bidder as opposed to directly subsidizing the value of the auctioned good.
   16
      Fabra and Reguant (2014) analyze how emission costs pass through to electricity prices, and Goldberg and Hellerstein
(2008) study how changes in exchange rates pass through to import prices.




                                                                 5
2.1    Issuance of Municipal Debt through Auctions

There are three ways in which municipal bonds are issued: through negotiations, competitive auctions, or
private placements. Approximately 50% of bond issuances are sold via auction. When holding an auction,
the issuer first designs the bonds and puts up a notice of sale, and then participants place bids.17 In
practice, municipalities often sell a series of bonds in a single batch, and potential underwriters compete for
the whole series at the same time by placing true interest cost bids. These interest costs correspond to the
interest rate that they are willing to charge the municipality. The auctions are run as first-price sealed-bid
auctions, with the lowest bidder winning and being paid its bid. When bidders submit their bids, they do
not observe the number of other bidders or competing bids.18

2.2    Tax Advantages of Municipal Debt

Interest income from most municipal debt is exempt from both federal corporate tax and federal personal
income tax, as well as from many state-level taxes. The Revenue Act of 1913, which established a federal
income tax in the U.S., explicitly stated that interest paid on state and local government debt could not
be taxed by the federal government. This exemption was largely unchanged until the Tax Reform Act of
1986 limited the use of municipal debt to fund non-municipal projects—so-called private activity bonds.19
    The focus of this paper is on personal income taxes, which we refer to as τs,t for each state-year, but
we include controls for corporate tax rates in the empirical analysis.20 The effective tax advantage in state
s at time t depends on interactions between state and federal taxes and is given by:

                              τs,t = τtF ederal (1 − τs,t
                                                      State      State
                                                            ) + τs,t   × 1[T ax Exempt]State
                                                                                       s,t .                                   (1)

First, income from municipal bonds is exempt from personal income taxes at the federal level, τtF ederal ,
which shows up as the first term in Equation (1). The federal personal income tax allows for the deduction
of state income taxes paid in the last year, so the marginal federal income tax rate can be higher in states
                                                                                                 State ,
that do not have a personal income tax. Second, most states that collect a personal income tax, τs,t
exempt interest earned from municipal bonds sold within their borders and tax earnings from out-of-state
municipal bonds. Of the 43 states that levy a personal income tax, only five tax interest from municipal
bonds sold by municipalities within the state. However, none of the states with a personal income tax
exempt interest from municipal bonds sourced from other states. The tax benefit given to municipal bonds
  17
     When the issuer designs the bonds, it chooses, among other things, par amounts, coupon rates, maturity dates, and
refunding opportunities. Refunding is when a bond is issued to make payments on an existing issue.
  18
     In negotiated sales, the issuer finds a willing underwriter and together they discuss the conditions of the sale and design of
the bonds. Private placements involve selling bonds directly to final consumers. In Appendix C.5, we show that the mechanism
used to sell bonds is not affected by changes in tax advantages. We also show that we obtain similar estimates of the effects
of tax advantages on borrowing costs in states with the strongest restrictions on the use of negotiated sales.
  19
     See Fortune (1991) for more information on specifics about the history of private activity bonds and the history of municipal
bonds more generally. Today, municipalities can still sell private activity bonds, but the returns to bond owners can be taxable
in certain circumstances. Private activity bonds are generally sold as revenue bonds, which are paid back using income
associated with the project that the bond finances but without the backing of the full faith and credit of the municipality.
  20
     Almost all of the tax subsidies for municipal bonds stem from the exclusion of municipal bond interest from personal
income taxation. Most municipal bonds, particularly the relatively large issues of greater than $5 million in principal that
we focus on in this paper, are subject to corporate taxation. So-called bank-qualified bonds can have preferential corporate
tax treatment when owned by commercial banks in addition to yielding interest exempt from personal income taxation, but
such issues are restricted to issuers who issue no more than $10 million in bonds outside of 2009-10. Given such restrictions,
bank-qualified bonds only constitute 14.9% of the total debt issued in our sample.


                                                                6
by states is the second term, in which state tax rates are multiplied by an indicator for whether municipal
bond income is considered tax-exempt by the state.21
       Equation 1 contains two major sources of variation that we use to identify how tax rates affect borrowing
costs for municipal debt. First, the effective tax rate depends on state tax rates and on whether states
exclude interest income from taxation. From 2008 to 2015, many states increased their top marginal rates by
introducing a new tax bracket with higher marginal rates for top incomes.22 In addition, several states cut
the top state income tax between 2011 and 2013. Second, when federal rates change, as with the sunsetting
of the Bush tax cuts in 2012, states with relatively higher tax rates will have marginally smaller changes in
overall effective tax rates than states with no or low income taxes. This large variation in federal rates arose
at the end of 2012, when the federal top marginal rate increased from 35% to 39.6%. Overall, this time
period presents significant variation in both state and federal tax rates. This allows our identification to
be driven by within-state changes in the effective rate, avoiding cross-sectional comparisons of states with
different tax rates. Our analysis exploits changes in both state and federal taxes as sources of variation,
and we also show that our main result is robust to relying only on tax changes at the state level. Finally,
it is worth noting that most of the issuers in our data are sub-state municipalities that cannot directly
influence state or federal tax rates.
       As noted in the introduction, the favorable tax treatment of municipal bonds has been a controversial
policy issue for several years. Indeed, in the past few years there has been continued interest in changing
the tax status of these bonds. For example, the Simpson-Bowles Commission on Fiscal Responsibility
and Reform of 2010 sought, but failed, to eliminate the tax exemption on all interest from new municipal
bonds. Afterwards, in each of its last four years, the Obama administration proposed, but did not achieve,
a reduction in the tax advantage that these bonds receive. However, state treasurers warn that eliminating
or capping the exemption would “hurt taxpayers in every state, because municipalities will have to either
curtail infrastructure projects or raise taxes on sales, property or income” (Ackerman, 2016). The TCJA17
included policy changes that may increase the tax advantage of municipal bonds (by limiting the SALT
deduction)23 as well as measures that would decrease the tax advantage (by cutting top personal income
tax rates). We discuss proposed reforms in more detail in Appendix G, and we simulate the effects of some
of these proposals in Section 7.1.

2.3      Data

Data on bond auctions come from two sources. The first source is The Bond Buyer, the leading news
resource of the industry, which posts notices of upcoming sales as well as results of past sales. We obtain
  21
     Some states allow exemptions for federal income taxes. Currently, eight states allow federal taxes to be deducted from
state taxable income, but three of those have a cap on the deduction. This formula abstracts away from the possibility of state
deduction of federal taxes for simplicity. Our empirical analysis incorporates the effects of these policies.
  22
     Specifically, California, Connecticut, Hawaii, New York, New Jersey, North Carolina, Maryland, Oregon, and Wisconsin
increased the top personal tax rate between 2008 and 2009. Some of these new top marginal rates represent economically large
rate increases such as an additional 3% surtax on income over $150,000 in North Carolina and a 2.75% marginal rate increase
on income over $200,000 in Hawaii.
  23
     Limiting SALT deductions raises tax rates by limiting the ability of high-income individuals to deduct state and local
taxes paid from federal taxable income on the margin. If such individuals are able to deduct all state taxes paid from federal
income, they are only taxed on the remainder, or one minus the state tax rate, which lowers the effective rate. SALT is shown
in the first term of Equation 1, where federal personal income tax rates are multiplied by the remainder after state taxes paid
                                                        State
are taken out. Eliminating SALT gets rid of the (1 − τs,t     ) term, which is weakly less than 1, so effective tax rates increase.



                                                                7
data on all competitive bond sales as well as all bids submitted in each auction from this source. We
supplement these data with information from the SDC Platinum database, which includes detailed bond
characteristics such as refund status, funding source, and rating.
       Our analysis focuses on issuances of general obligation bonds, which are not associated with a particular
revenue source, that were issued between February 2008 and December 2015. Complete details of the
sample construction are given in Appendix B.24 Our final sample of 14,631 auctions for tax-exempt bonds
is summarized in Table 1. For each auction that takes place in the sample, we observe the winning bid and
up to the next 15 lowest bids, as well as the name of each bidder. The bids vary greatly across auctions,
with a mean winning bid of 213.9 basis points and a standard deviation of 135.5 basis points. However, the
variation in bids within auctions with more than one bidder is much smaller than the variation between
auctions, as the mean standard deviation of bids within an auction is only 24.8 basis points. The observed
number of bidders falls in the range of 1 to 16, and 50% of auctions in the sample have between 4 and 7
bidders.
       The data contain bonds from all fifty states, and Panel (a) in Figure 1 plots the geographic distribution
of bonds. While more than half of the bond issuances come from five states (Massachusetts, Minnesota,
New Jersey, New York, and Texas), the dollar value of the bonds is more spread out, with half of the value
coming from eight states (California, Florida, Maryland, Massachusetts, New Jersey, New York, Texas, and
Washington). Panel (b) of Figure 1 shows the variation in the average winning bid by state and reveals
considerable heterogeneity with some no-income-tax states, like Texas, Washington, and Nevada, featuring
higher borrowing costs.
       The data contain substantial detail regarding the auction participants, including the names of the firms
that submit bids in an auction. In addition to the number of actual bidders, which we denote as n, we
construct a measure of the set of bidders who potentially could have bid but did not.25 We define the
number of potential bidders in a given auction as the number of actual bidders in the auction plus the
number of other, unique bidders who bid in similar auctions held during the same month and in the same
state. Specifically, for each auction j in a given state-month combination G, the number of potential bidders
Nj is defined as follows:                                                                              
                                                                  1(a not in j)K               Xi −Xj
                                                 P        P
                                                    i∈G     a∈i                                 hX
                                   Nj = nj +                                                              ,
                                                              P               Xi −Xj
                                                                  i∈G K        hX

where i iterates over auctions in G and a iterates over agents in auction i. The second summand represents
  24
      Note that we focus exclusively on federally tax-exempt bonds, which are not subject to the alternative minimum tax
(AMT). In particular, we exclude private activity bonds, which may be subject to the AMT. Our sample does not include
municipal debt issued as auction rate securities, as these types of bonds were not issued during our sample period. We exclude
small issuances, as these bonds are overwhelmingly very short term and are commonly issued for the purpose of refunding as
opposed to supporting public improvement projects, and focus on bonds larger than $5 million, which make up over 90% of
all the debt issued through competitive placements. As we discuss below, our results are robust to size-weighted specifications
that include all bonds issued through competitive placement.
   25
      In the literature, there is typically no direct measure of the number of potential bidders, and such measures are constructed
in a variety of ways. In procurement contexts, the set of potential bidders is often set to be those firms holding plans for the
job for which the procurement is being conducted (e.g., Krasnokutskaya and Seim, 2011; Li and Zheng, 2009; Bhattacharya et
al., 2014). In other contexts, the set of potential bidders is defined as firms bidding in “similar” auctions, which is the spirit
of how we define potential bidders. For example, in Roberts and Sweeting (2016) and Athey et al. (2011), the set of potential
bidders in a timber auction is those bidders who bid in the auction plus those bidders who bid in nearby auctions within a
relatively short amount of time.



                                                                  8
the probability that agent a, who did not participate in j, was a potential
                                                                            bidder in j, based on how
                                                                    Xi −Xj
much auctions in which a participated differ from j. The function K  hX      measures similarity between
auctions i and j based on their observable characteristics. In practice, we use a triweight kernel for K(·), X
includes the size and maturity of the bonds, and we round up to the nearest integer.26 While this measure of
potential bidders is in line with the current literature, we also explore an alternative definition in Appendix
C.2 that includes all bidders in auctions held in the same state and month as observed bidders.27
    The primary tax policy of interest in this study is the top marginal personal income tax rate. To
measure state and federal personal income tax rates, we use data from the NBER TAXSIM on maximum
personal state income tax rates (Feenberg and Coutts, 1993).28 We construct the effective tax advantage
for municipal bonds in Equation 1 by combining the marginal state and federal rates from TAXSIM with
state-level determinants of the personal income tax base from State Tax Handbooks (CCH, 2008-2015). We
use indicators for the state exemption of income from municipal bonds sold in a given state, the exemption
of income from municipal bonds sold in other states, and the deductibility of federal taxes from state income
taxation.
    Table 1 describes the distributions of the marginal state and federal rates, as well as the effective
marginal income rate that would be applicable for municipal bond income. The average rate in our period
of analysis is 40.1%, and the difference between the 5th and the 95th percentiles of the distribution is
12 pp. For 2008, for example, τ ranges from 32.99% in Wisconsin, where municipal bond income is not
exempt from state taxes, to 42.45% in California, where municipal bond income is exempt and where state
taxes are relatively high. Panel (c) of Figure 1 describes the geographic distribution of the tax advantage
for municipal bonds in 2015. This map shows considerable cross-sectional variation. Our period of study
contains a significant number of policy changes that drive within-state variation in the tax advantage. Panel
(d) of Figure 1 shows that, between 2008 and 2015, most states experienced an increase in the effective rate
and that this increase varied between 3.7 pp and 7 pp. Our analysis leverages this variation to identify the
effects of the tax advantage on auctions for municipal bonds.
    We also gather information about other state characteristics and policies that could influence the yield
on municipal debt. The National Association of State Budget Officers (2008-2015) provides an annual report
detailing state-level fiscal policies including balanced budget amendments and taxation and expenditure
limitations. We use political party strength data from Caesar and Saldin (2006) as well as data on state
sales tax rates, corporate tax rates and rules, and property tax rates gathered by Suárez Serrato and Zidar
(2016). We collect data on overall financial market outcomes including the average short-term yield on
   26
      Throughout the paper, we follow others in the auction literature, e.g., Li et al. (2000), by using the triweight kernel
K(u/h) = 35/32(1 − [u/h]2 )3 1(|u/h| ≤ 1), where h is the bandwidth. For a given variable X, we set the bandwidth hX =
c · std(X) · (J)−1/5 , where J denotes the number of auctions, std(X) measures the standard deviation, and c ≈ 3 is the kernel-
specific constant. We obtain similar measures of potential bidders N when using alternative kernels (e.g., Epanechnikov), and
we show that our results are robust to an alternative definition of potential bidders that does not rely on the use of kernels in
Appendix C.2.
   27
      Arguably, our definition of potential bidders represents an advance over similar methods. For example, in Roberts and
Sweeting (2016) and Athey et al. (2011), who look at timber auctions, the similarity of the timber tracts sold is only indirectly
controlled for by geographic proximity of recent sales.
   28
      The exact number computed by the NBER is the simulated marginal tax rate, reported under the title “wages,” on
an additional $1,000 of income on top of a base income of $1,500,000 for a married couple filing jointly with several other
deductions. These simulated tax rates closely approximate the tax rates for top earners, who represent the bulk of individuals
investing in tax-exempt municipal bonds. We also calculate marginal tax rates at the 90th percentile of household income
using TAXSIM and use them in a robustness check.


                                                               9
high-quality, variable rate municipal debt from SIFMA (2020) and 1-year London Inter Bank Offering Rate
(LIBOR) swap rates from Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System (2018) to control for daily
market conditions and perceptions of interest rate risk.


3         Reduced-Form Effects of Tax Rates on Borrowing Costs and Imper-
          fect Competition
This section leverages the state-by-year variation in the tax advantages for municipal bonds to estimate
the causal effects of tax rates on borrowing costs and imperfect competition. Section 3.1 presents our
main estimates of the effects of taxes on borrowing costs. Section 3.2 discusses how taxes influence auction
competitiveness and how this affects borrowing costs for state and local governments. We explore the
robustness of these results in Section 3.3, where we use a variety of methods to argue that our estimated
effects are not driven by spurious factors and can therefore be interpreted as causal. Finally, Section 3.4
shows that tax advantages do not affect the supply of bonds or important bond characteristics.

3.1         The Effect of Tax Advantages on Borrowing Costs

We start by estimating regressions of the form:

                                              b1ist = βτst + αs + ηt + Xist Γ + εist ,                                          (2)

where the borrowing cost of the municipality is determined by the lowest bid in the auction, b1i . Our baseline
specification includes state and year fixed effects, and Xist includes measures of bond quality (including
the refund status and credit rating) as well as fixed effects for the maturity of the bond. The coefficient
β measures the degree to which higher tax advantages of municipal bonds are passed through to lower
borrowing costs for municipalities. Recall from Section 2.3 that the effective rate is determined by both
state and federal policies. The identifying variation for Equation 2 is then driven both by state changes in
personal tax rates and by the interaction of federal changes in personal income tax rates with state-level
policies.
         Column (1) in the first panel of Table 2 reports the results of this regression and shows that increasing
the effective rate by 1 pp leads to a decrease in the borrowing cost of 6.5 basis points. We reject the
hypothesis of a null effect with a p-value of 0.010. The exogeneity assumption behind Equation 2 is that
the effective rate is independent of other factors that may also affect the borrowing costs of municipalities.
Columns (2)-(5) explore the plausibility of this assumption by controlling for potential confounders. Column
(2) controls for measures of political climate in the state to assuage the concern that state tax changes are
the result of changes in political conditions that may have broader implications for borrowing costs. We
use data from Caesar and Saldin (2006) and include the fraction of state-level votes for the Republican
candidate in the most recent presidential, gubernatorial, and Senate elections. Columns (3) and (4) control
for personal tax base policies, corporate tax rate and base policies, property tax rates, and state sales tax
rates to allay the concern that changes in the effective rate are correlated with other tax policies that may
be the true drivers of borrowing costs.29 Column (5) controls for the size of the bond package and shows
    29
         Business and property tax policies include the state corporate tax rate, business tax apportionment rules, and a measure of



                                                                   10
that the inclusion of this control has a negligible effect on the estimated coefficient. Our estimate of β is
remarkably stable, with a range of 6.5-7.0 basis points.
    To gauge the magnitude of these coefficients, consider that at the mean borrowing rate of 2.14%, a 3 pp
increase in the effective rate would imply reductions in borrowing costs of between 9.2% and 9.8%. Since
state and municipal governments spent $122 billion on interest payments in 2017, these estimates would
imply cost reductions of $11.2-12.0 billion (U.S. Census Bureau, 2020). An additional way to appreciate
the magnitude of this effect is through the passthrough elasticities of the net-of-tax rate (i.e., 1 − τ ) on
borrowing costs.30 Given a median effective tax of 40.8% and a median winning bid of 221 basis points,
Table 2 reports median passthrough elasticities between 1.7 and 1.9. The estimated elasticities in Columns
(2)-(5) reject the hypothesis of a passthrough elasticity below unity at the 10% level.

3.2    The Effect of Tax Advantages on Auction Participation

We now explore the interaction between tax policy and participation in auctions. First, we estimate a
specification analogous to that in Equation 2 but where the dependent variable is the number of potential
bidders. The second panel in Table 2 presents the results from this estimation and shows that a higher
effective rate is associated with a larger number of potential bidders. Intuitively, as the value of the bonds
increases with the tax advantage, more bidders are likely to participate in a given auction. The estimates
imply that a 4 pp increase in the effective rate leads to an increase of close to 2 potential bidders. This is
a large effect, as it would move an auction from the median to the 75th percentile of the distribution of
potential bidders. These estimates are also stable across specifications, and Table A.10 shows that we find
a similar increase when using an alternative definition of potential bidders (see Appendix C.2 for additional
details).
    If the increase in competitive bidding also lowers the winning bid, then the total impact of τ on b1
includes the effects of τ on N .31 To test one possible way in which taxes affect the outcomes in these
auctions, we estimate additional specifications that directly control for N . Specifically, one possibility is
that τ only impacts b1 through N . If this were the case, then τ would have no impact on b1 after we control
for N . The third panel of Table 2 presents estimates of Equation 2 where we now partial out this mechanism
by adding fixed effects for the number of potential and actual bidders. Conditioning on auction competition
leads to smaller effects of the tax advantage on borrowing costs, confirming that one of the mechanisms
through which higher taxes lead to lower borrowing costs is through an indirect competitiveness effect.
However, the inclusion of controls for potential and actual auction participation fail to explain the whole
the average property tax rate in the state from Suárez Serrato and Zidar (2016). From State Tax Handbooks (CCH, 2008-2015),
we use digitized variables including whether a state has an alternative minimum tax, whether a state allows for deductibility of
federal taxes, and whether own- or other-state municipal bond income is excluded from taxation. We considered controlling for
other institutional variables such as budget balance amendments and debt limits as in Poterba and Rueben (2002). However,
no states changed these policies in our sample period, so these variables would be absorbed by the state fixed effects.
   30
      Our focus on this elasticity can be motivated by previous work that compares returns on municipal bonds to treasuries.
Assuming an equilibrium between after-tax returns on taxable and tax-exempt assets implies a net-of-tax rate elasticity of one.
Appendix C.9 discusses this result further, relates our focus on the net-of-tax rate elasticity to other areas of public finance,
where it is common to focus on this elasticity, and shows that we obtain similar results when we analyze tax elasticities.
   31
      Figure A.2 reports the coefficients on the fixed effects for the number of bidders relative to the median winning bid in the
sample, along with the distribution of this variable. This graph shows that moving from a single bidder to 8 bidders lowers
the winning bid by 30%, on average, but that further increases in the number of bidders do not affect the winning bid. Since a
significant number of bond auctions have less than 8 bidders, there is substantial scope for lowering municipal borrowing costs
by increasing competition in auctions.


                                                               11
effect of changing taxes. Comparing the results from the first and third panels of Table 2, we find that
between 23% and 31% of the coefficient in the first panel is due to auction competitiveness.32 By showing
that τ still impacts b1 conditional on N , this empirical result motivates our model, where τ directly impacts
bond valuations and the individual decision of each bidder to participate in a given auction. In addition, to
capture the observed effect of τ on N , our model and counterfactuals also allow the set of potential bidders
to expand with the tax benefit.

3.3      Robustness and Identification of Causal Effects

This section provides evidence that the reduced-form effects from Sections 3.1 and 3.2 are driven by state
tax changes that are plausibly exogenous from other drivers of municipal borrowing costs. We first discuss
how an omitted variable might affect our results. We show that potential confounders, such as budget or
rating shocks, would bias our estimates in the direction of finding a null effect. We then show in Section
3.3.1 that our estimates are robust to controlling for a battery of potential confounders and to differently
constructed samples. Finally, in Section 3.3.2, we exploit the panel nature of our data to show that the
timing of tax changes lines up with changes in borrowing costs, and we provide a placebo test that shows
that future tax changes are not predictive of borrowing costs.
       We begin by considering how an omitted variable could influence the estimates from Equation 2. While
the variation in effective rates comes from the interaction of federal and state tax policy, most of the variation
in the effective rates during our period stems from state tax changes. The exogeneity assumption is then
that state tax rate adjustments are uncorrelated with unobserved factors that may also influence borrowing
costs. For example, shocks to local economic conditions, municipal budgets, or the creditworthiness of the
locality could influence borrowing costs. If one of these factors, labeled Zst , is also correlated with state
tax rates, omitting this factor from the analysis would result in the following bias:
                                                    Cov(Z̃st , τ̃st ) Cov(Z̃st , b̃1ist |τ̃st )
                                          Bias =                                                ,
                                                     V ar(τ̃st )        V ar(Z̃st |τ̃st )
where the tildes note that the variables have been residualized by all other controls in the regression. Since
investors would demand a higher interest rate following a negative economic, budget, or rating shock, we
would expect Cov(Z̃st , b̃1ist |τ̃st ) > 0 if Zst is one of these events.
       For the omission of Zst to bias our estimates in any direction, states would need to respond to these
shocks by changing tax rates, i.e., Cov(Z̃st , τ̃st ) 6= 0. This is an unlikely source of bias since most of the
bonds in our dataset are issued by school districts, cities, and counties, which do not set state tax rates,
and it is unlikely that states would adjust state taxes in response to a shock to a local government.
       Moreover, the existing literature on how states respond to fiscal pressure shows that states generally
increase taxes when facing state budget shortfalls, so that, if anything, Cov(Z̃st , τ̃st ) > 0. For instance,
Poterba (1994) describes how many states have policies in place that forbid extended periods of deficit
spending, which can force states with unexpected negative fiscal shocks to raise taxes, in which case the
bias would be positive.33 This discussion shows that the most likely potential confounders would bias our
estimates toward 0 and against finding a negative effect of taxes on borrowing rates.
  32
     We compute standard errors for this quantity by jointly bootstrapping the estimates in the first and third panels and find
that, even in our most demanding specification in Column (5), we can reject the null of no difference with a p-value of 0.084.
  33
     Similarly, states are likely to increase tax rates to raise revenue to pay for higher interest rates following a negative credit-


                                                                   12
3.3.1    Controlling for Potential Confounders

Following the discussion in the previous section, we now show that our reduced-form results are robust to
controlling for a battery of potential confounders and to various sample constructions. Table 3 shows that
our estimates are robust to controlling for local economic conditions, state spending and intergovernmental
transfers and to including bidder and issuer fixed effects. Columns (2) and (3) use the identity of the winning
bidder and the issuing municipality to test whether unobserved factors at the issuer or buyer levels may
confound the role of effective tax rates. Columns (4)-(7) include additional state economic and spending
controls: unemployment rate, state GDP, government spending, and intergovernmental transfers. Column
(8) includes every control used in the robustness table. In this specification, β is identified by repeated
bond auctions by the same issuer (municipality) with the same bidder (underwriter) in time periods with
different (federal and state) tax rates. This strongly limits concerns that our results are driven by omitted
factors that may be correlated with both tax changes and borrowing costs.
    The estimated effects of tax rates on the winning bid after we control for the bidder, issuer, and
economic characteristics range between -6.1 and -7.2, with the lowest and highest estimates both coming
from specifications with issuer fixed effects. These results are remarkably robust across these specifications,
which suggests that the exogeneity assumption likely holds. We formalize this evidence of coefficient stability
by using the methods proposed by Altonji et al. (2005) and Oster (2017). Appendix C.7 discusses the results
in Table A.17, which suggest that it is extremely unlikely that our main effects are driven by selection on
unobservables. The effect on the number of potential bidders is also stable, with effects between 0.54 and
0.64 with the additional controls.
    In Online Appendix C.1, we continue exploring the robustness of the results with respect to measurement
and sample construction decisions. Table A.8 replicates the baseline results from Table 2 with different as-
sumptions regarding standard errors, with monthly (and even daily) fixed effects, with the sample restricted
to exclude bonds sold during 2008-09, and with an additional 20,237 bonds with less than $5 million in par
value. Similarly, Table A.9 includes additional controls for municipal market trends and financial provisions
and shows that the baseline results are similarly robust to redefining the effective tax rate for households in
the 90th income percentile in each state, dropping states and state agencies that may have control over their
effective tax rate, excluding all states that do not exempt interest on their own bonds from income taxes,
and restricting the variation from federal tax rates. All of these robustness checks show similar estimates
that are all statistically significant at the 5% level, which further suggests that the baseline estimates are
not influenced by spurious factors or by sample measurement decisions.

3.3.2    Panel Data and Event Study Analyses

We now exploit the panel dimension of our data to explore the identifying variation in the effective tax
rate. To clarify the source of variation, we collapse our data to the issuer-year level and estimate our main
specification in changes over time. This clarifies that our estimates are driven by bond auctions by the
same issuer observed across periods with different tax rates. We take the first difference of Equation 2 and
rating shock. We discuss negative shocks for illustration purposes, but a positive shock would also result in a positive bias
since both correlations would be negative in that case.




                                                             13
estimate the regression:
                                         ∆b1ist = β∆τst + ∆ηt + ∆Xist Γ + ∆εist ,

where the state fixed effects are absorbed in the difference. We restrict the sample of issuers to those
with issues in at least three sets of consecutive years in 2008-2015, which leaves us with 4,692 issuer-year
observations. Forty-eight percent of the issuer-years in this sample have an associated tax change. We
display estimates of the first differences regression using year fixed effects, quality controls, refund controls,
maturity controls, political controls, other state policy controls, and size controls in Panel (a) of Figure 2.
The estimate of β is -9.73 with a standard error of 2.59, which allows us to reject the hypothesis of a null
effect with a p-value of 0.001.
       We now show that the timing of the change in borrowing costs lines up with the change in taxes. In
Panel (b) of Figure 2, we present a placebo test that replaces ∆τst with ∆τst+1 so that the tax changes
happen in the future and should not be predictive of current borrowing costs. We estimate a placebo
coefficient equal to 1.07 with a standard error of 2.76 and fail to reject a null effect with a p-value of 0.701.
This shows that municipalities experience a reduction in borrowing costs immediately after the change in
taxes and that borrowing costs do not predict tax changes. We provide further evidence that municipalities
in states that changed taxes were not experiencing a secular decline in borrowing costs by estimating an
event study in Appendix C.1; Figure A.13 shows that the results of the event study match our baseline
results.34

3.4      Lack of Supply-Side Response

Our results so far show that increasing the effective rate reduces borrowing costs for municipalities and
increases the number of potential bidders in municipal bond auctions. To properly model how taxes impact
participation and bidding in municipal bond auctions, we have to consider whether municipalities adjust
their supply of bonds to changes in the effective tax rate. We investigate this possibility along a number
of dimensions. Table A.11 shows that the effective rate does not affect the total number of bonds that
are issued. Similarly, Table A.15 shows that the effective rate does not impact the size of bond issues or
other bond characteristics including the maturity, callability, rating, or bank-qualified status. Additionally,
Tables A.12–A.13 show that the effective rate does not impact the mechanism used to sell a given bond.
See Appendices C.4–C.5 for additional discussion. Overall, we find that municipalities do not respond to
changes in the effective rate by supplying more, larger, or differently structured bonds.35 Based on these
  34
     In Appendix C, we provide further evidence against the reverse causality hypothesis by showing that state tax rates are
unaffected by previous, current, and future state interest payments. We also show that most of the variation is driven by
sub-state agencies that cannot affect the tax advantage for their bonds. Column (5) of Table A.9 reproduces our preferred
reduced-form estimates but excludes all entities that have the ability to change tax rates (states and state agencies) from the
sample. The resulting estimates are nearly identical to those from the regression including entities that have control over their
own tax rates. This result shows that our main estimate is not driven by reverse causality, that is, by states changing their
tax rates to influence their borrowing costs.
  35
     These results are consistent with findings from the literature. For instance, Adelino et al. (2017) find that municipalities do
not react to rating changes by borrowing more often, and Gordon and Metcalf (1991) discuss that municipalities do not invest
more in the presence of lower interest rates caused by the tax exemption in part due to caps on tax-exempt borrowing. Cestau
et al. (2017) document how state and local regulations restrict the ability of many municipalities to choose their method of
sale. Recently, researchers have also found that the supply of bonds by municipalities is not responsive to changes in risk due
to climate change or to regulations that affect borrowing costs (e.g., Goldsmith-Pinkham et al., 2019; Garrett, 2020). These
results are also consistent with the institutional setting, since many of these bonds are authorized by popular referenda or
by public budgeting processes that limit municipalities’ ability to respond by changing the size of the issuance or by issuing


                                                                14
facts, our model in the next section focuses on how tax advantages impact the participation and bidding
strategies of potential underwriters.
    The reduced-form results presented in this section have some immediate implications. First, the results
on borrowing costs suggest that the tax advantage plays a major role in determining municipalities’ bor-
rowing costs and that removing the exclusion of municipal bond income from taxation may significantly
affect this market. Second, understanding how tax advantages interact with entry into auctions is crucial to
a full understanding of the passthrough of tax advantages into borrowing costs. Nonetheless, reduced-form
analyses are unable to address important issues in this market, including how markups impact municipal
borrowing costs, how changes in tax rates interact with imperfect competition in these auctions, and how
regulations that depend on the degree of auction competition impact auction outcomes.


4    Model of Participation and Bidding in Municipal Bond Auctions
In this section, we present a model of participation and bidding in municipal bond auctions. Motivated
by the reduced-form results in the previous section, the model is designed to capture how taxes affect the
valuations of bonds, how agents adjust their participation decisions, and how the resulting competitive
pressure affects the ability of bidders to extract information rents by shading their bids relative to their
valuations. Capturing these margins is important for measuring equilibrium markups in each auction
(Section 5), understanding how the effects of taxes on winning bids depend on changes in markups (Section
6), and analyzing counterfactual changes to tax policy (Sections 7.1 and 7.2). Our modeling approach most
closely resembles that of Li and Zheng (2009).36
    Consider an auction for a municipal bond by some municipality or state. There are N potential risk-
neutral bidders for this bond offering. The bond will be awarded to the bidder who submits the lowest
bid b. Each bidder i has a private value vi for the bond. The values have a linear structure of the form
vi = ṽi + u, where ṽi are independent components and u is the bond-specific unobservable. The components
ṽi are drawn independently from a twice continuously differentiable distribution F (·), with density f (·) that
is strictly positive over the support [v, v]. We interpret bidder’s value vi as the net value of selling the bond
in the secondary market, which may vary across bidders due to different bond-buying clientele networks
and costs of marketing. To participate in the auction, each bidder must pay a private entry cost di , which is
drawn from a twice continuously differentiable distribution H(·), with density h(·) that is strictly positive
                 
over the support d, d . We interpret these costs as including the cost of researching the bond for sale as
well as the potential for resale opportunities in the secondary market, which can reasonably vary across
bidders. Section 5 describes how we take this model to the data, where we allow the model primitives to
depend on bond characteristics, including τ . For simplicity, we omit this dependence in the description of
the model in this section.
    The informational assumptions of the model are as follows. First, the number of potential bidders N
is set possibly depending on the effective tax rate. At the entry stage, each of the N potential bidders
knows his own entry cost di , the number of potential bidders N , the bond-specific unobservable u, and the
distributions F (·) and H(·). If a bidder chooses to participate in the auction by paying di , the bidder learns
additional bonds.
  36
     Appendix D provides additional details on the model derivation.



                                                            15
his value vi but not the total number of actual entrants, which we denote n.37 As in other recent work on
auctions for financial products (e.g., Hortaçsu et al., 2018), under the structure that we assume, bidders
have conditionally independent private values.38
       We follow Li and Zheng (2009) in assuming that each potential bidder holds the belief that if he is the
only entrant in the auction, then the seller will also submit a competing bid based on its own draw from
the distribution F (·), and that if there is more than one entrant, then the seller will not submit a bid.39

Stage 3: Bidding

We begin with the bidding stage of the model. Upon entry, a participating bidder faces an uncertain number
of competing bidders. The bidder maximizes his expected profits by choosing his optimal bid bi according
to the strictly increasing equilibrium bidding strategy β(·), which depends on the bidder’s expectation of
the number of competitors he will face:
                  N
                  X
   π(vi |p∗ ) =         P r∗ [n = k] (bi − vi )P r(bi < bj , j = 1, ..., n, j 6= i) + P r∗ [n = 1] (bi − vi )P r(bi < bs ).   (3)
                  k=2

Here, P r∗ (n = k) is the equilibrium probability that k bidders participate in the auction in which i has
already decided to participate. It is given by:

                                          P r∗ [n = k] = CN
                                                          k−1    ∗ k−1
                                                            −1 (p )    (1 − p∗ )N −k ,                                        (4)
                                                                                 k−1
which depends on an equilibrium entry probability p∗ (defined below), and where CN −1 denote binomial
coefficients. In the event that there is only one active participant, i.e., n = 1, we assume that this participant
competes against the seller. In the equation for profits above, bid bs represents a virtual bid by the seller,
and it is assumed to have the same distribution as the bid of a randomly chosen participant.
       To derive the bidding strategy in the auction, it is useful to express the probability of winning P r(bi <
bj , j = 1, ..., n, j 6= i) in terms of the bidders’ valuations. In equilibrium with symmetric bidders, the
probability of winning coincides with the probability of having the lowest private valuation, so:

                  P r(bi < bj , j = 1, ..., n, j 6= i) = P r(ṽi < ṽj , j = 1, ..., n, j 6= i) = (1 − F (ṽi ))n−1 .         (5)
  37
      Because the bidding platform does not allow bidders to observe the number of other participants, we assume n is not
observed by bidders. However, the set of firms that bid in municipal bond auctions is relatively stable over time. For this
reason, we assume that bidders know the number of potential bidders, N.
   38
      When a bank wins an auction to be the underwriter of a municipal bond issue, it can hold some of the debt and sell the
rest of the bond package to other institutional and individual investors. Bidders’ values depend on their own demand for the
bond and on the demand of the clientele with whom they deal. The networks through which different underwriters place bonds
vary geographically and along other margins. For instance, Babina et al. (2015) show that tax exemptions for municipal debt
create ownership segmentation by state because the interest is exempt in the issuing state and not other states. Similarly,
Green et al. (2007) present evidence that individual investors have different levels of information, so different investors pay
different prices for the same bond. Green et al. (2007) also present an overview of the process by which municipal bonds reach
the secondary market and why underwriters may have idiosyncratic considerations. Given that banks do not have identical
clienteles, in geographical terms or otherwise, banks’ values would not be changed by knowing the values of other potential
bidders in a given auction. Tang (2011) and Shneyerov (2006) use a set of municipal bond auctions from before the start of our
sample to analyze questions of mechanism design without imposing informational assumptions on the bidders. Interestingly,
Tang (2011) shows that making incorrect assumptions about bidder values has negligible impacts on expected revenue.
   39
      This allows us to rationalize instances in our data where there is one participating bidder who submits a finite bid. Such
an assumption is necessary since there is no Bayesian-Nash equilibrium bidding strategy with finite bids in low-bid auctions
with an unknown number of competitors. This is due to the fact that, since there is always a chance that an entrant faces no
competition, there is always an incentive to bid infinity. As in Li and Zheng (2009), the model can be altered to incorporate
reserve prices, but like them, we focus on auctions without reserve prices to be consistent with the data.


                                                                  16
The first order condition for the profit maximization problem is:

                         ∂β −1 (bi ) N      ∗                               max(k−2,0)
                                    P
                  1                  k=1 P r [n = k] f (ṽi ) (1 − F (ṽi ))           max(k − 1, 1)
                       =                     PN                                 max(k−1,1)
                                                                                                     .                    (6)
               bi − vi      ∂bi                   P r∗ [n = k] (1 − F (ṽi ))
                                                     k=1

The equilibrium bidding function β(·, ·), where the two arguments correspond to the private component ṽ
and the unobservable u, is characterized by the solution to this first order condition, subject to the upper
boundary condition β(v, u) = v + u, and is given by:
                                       PN        ∗
                                                         Rv               max(k−1,1)
                                          k=1 P r [n = k] v−u (1 − F (q)))           dq
                  β(ṽ, u) = ṽ + u + PN                                   max(k−1,1)
                                                                                                                          (7)
                                                   ∗
                                            k=1 P r [n = k] (1 − F (v − u))
                           = ṽ + u + µ(v − u) = ṽ + u + µ(ṽ),

where µ(ṽ) is the bidder’s markup.

Stage 2: Entry

At the entry stage, bidders will decide to enter based on whether the expected payoff from participating
(and bidding optimally thereafter) exceeds their realized entry cost di . The Bayesian-Nash equilibrium
entry strategy is defined by a cutoff value d∗ , such that bidders will enter if and only if di < d∗ , which
implies that p∗ = H(d∗ ). Note that this cutoff is the same for all bidders, as, prior to entry, they have
no information about their values. The equilibrium cutoff is determined by a zero profit condition for the
potential entrant for whom di = d∗ :
                                                  Evi π(vi |p∗ (d∗ )) = d∗ ,                                              (8)

where the dependence of p∗ on d∗ is explicitly denoted and the expectation is taken over the value vi , which
is realized upon entry.

Stage 1: Potential Entrants

While we find no supply-side response to changes in τ (i.e., no change in bond characteristics or issuance
patterns; see Section 3.4), we document that shifts in effective tax rates can impact equilibrium outcomes
by expanding or contracting the set of potential bidders (Section 3.2). To account for this effect, we let the
counterfactual number of potential bidders be set according to:

                                                Nj (τ ) = Nj + φ(τ − τj ),                                                (9)

where Nj and τj are the number of potential bidders and effective rate corresponding to auction j in the
data. Nj (τ ) represents the number of potential bidders that we would have observed in auction j had the
effective rate been τ instead of τj .40 When φ is not 0, changes in the tax advantage affect the number
of potential competitors for each auction, which in turn affects the equilibrium markups, the equilibrium
entry level, and, ultimately, the equilibrium auction-clearing bid. All of these effects arise in addition to
the immediate impact of τ on the values described above.
    Throughout the paper, we distinguish between two cases. First, in the case of φ = 0, the number of
potential bidders does not change in response to tax shifts. When φ = 0, we refer to the effects of changes
  40
     In practice, we round up the right-hand side of Equation 9 to the nearest integer, and we set Nj (τ ) to 2 whenever it is
predicted to be less than 2.


                                                             17
in τ on the outcomes of interest as partial effects. On the other hand, when φ is not zero, we refer to these
results as full effects.

Tax Advantage Elasticity

In our empirical application, the distribution of values and, consequently, markups and bids depends on
the tax rate τ . Noting the dependence on τ and assuming all other features of the bond and the auction
to be fixed, Equation 7 then becomes:
                                             b(τ ) = v(τ ) + µ(τ ).                                       (10)

For instance, a change in the tax advantage (1 − τ ) could signal to a bank that individual investors’ demand
for the bond will change, so that v(τ ) may be affected. Moreover, the strategic considerations in the optimal
bidding function and zero profit conditions (Equations 7 and 8) may also impact equilibrium information
rents, leading to a change in µ(τ ) and v(τ ).
    The expression above provides a simple way to decompose the change in a bidder’s bid with respect to
the tax advantage, 1 − τ . Suppose the effective rates change from their original level τ to some level τ 0 and
denote ∆y the corresponding change in the equilibrium outcome y. We have:

                             ∆b      (1 − τ )     ∆v      (1 − τ )     ∆µ (1 − τ )
                                              =                    +               .                      (11)
                           ∆(1 − τ )    b       ∆(1 − τ )    b       ∆(1 − τ ) b

Taking the limit ∆(1 − τ ) → 0, we can rewrite this as

                                        εb1−τ = (1 − m)εv1−τ + mεµ1−τ ,                                   (12)

where m is the markup rate µ/b and ε are elasticities of the model variables in 1 − τ . This expression
allows us to relate the model to the reduced-form results in Section 3 and to decompose the tax advantage
elasticity of bids into the effects on values and markups, which we do in Section 6. In these calculations,
we refer to εb1−τ as the partial elasticity when φ = 0, such that there is no impact of τ on N , and as the
full elasticity when we account for the effect of tax changes on the set of potential bidders.


5     Structural Estimation and Implied Markups
We now outline the estimation of the model, discuss the estimation results, and describe the estimated
equilibrium markups.

5.1    Parameterization

Consider an auction for municipal bond j with characteristics (Xj , Zj ) that are observable to the econome-
trician as well as the bidders. We parameterize the model as follows:

                                     Value Distribution :    f (ṽ)   =   N (Xj β + Zj δ, eXj γ )
                               Entry Cost Distribution :     h(dj )   = lnN (κ1 , κ2 )
              Unobservable Heterogeneity Distribution :      fU (u) =     N (0, σU )




                                                      18
where N (µ, σ) is a normal distribution with mean µ and standard deviation σ and lnN (c, d) is a log-normal
distribution with location parameter c and scale parameter d.41 Under our assumptions, the bidders’ private
valuations are independent conditionally on Xj , Zj , and uj .

5.2      Estimation: First Step

We first note that the value of φ from Equation 9 is set to the estimate derived in our reduced-form
regression in Column (4) for Panel B of Table 2. Under our parameterization, bond characteristics in Xj
impact the mean and variance of the value distribution. Xj includes bond maturities as well as the effective
tax rate, as these are main features of our analysis. In contrast, we assume that factors Zj only shift the
mean of the value distribution and do not affect markups. As we describe below, Zj includes state and year
fixed effects as well as other controls used in our reduced-form analysis. For computational tractability, we
follow Shneyerov (2006) by parameterizing bids as follows:

                                                     bij = δZj + βXj + γNj + εij ,                                                 (13)

where bij is the bid of the ith bidder in auction j. We first estimate this regression using all bids in all
auctions, which yields estimates of the δ coefficients. This approach greatly reduces the complexity of the
model for entry and bidding, which we estimate below.42

5.3      Estimation: Second Step

Having fixed δ in the first step above, we then estimate the rest of the parameters θ = {β, γ, κ1 , κ2 , σU }
using maximum likelihood. For a candidate θ, the likelihood of observing the set of entry and bidding
decisions in auction j is:
                       J
                             n
                       Y
           L(θ) =          CNjj p̂j (θ)nj (1 − p̂j (θ))Nj −nj g(b1 , . . . , bnj ; θ)
                    j=1
                       J                                         Z∞                                                                (14)
                       Y    n                           Nj −nj        fU (u)f (β −1 (b1 − u, 0), . . . , β −1 (bn − u, 0); θ)
                =          CNjj p̂j (θ)nj (1   − p̂j (θ))                                                                     du
                                                                               β 0 (b1 − u, 0) . . . β 0 (bn − u, 0)
                    j=1                                          −∞
                s.t.   Evi π(vi |p̂j ) = H (p̂j ; θ) ∀ j = 1, . . . , J
                                               −1


where g(b1 , . . . , bnj ; θ) is the joint density of bids in auction j, p̂j (θ) is the equilibrium entry probability
associated with parameters θ, β 0 is the derivative of the bidding function in the first argument, and H −1
is the inverse of the cumulative distribution function of the entry costs. Given a guess of parameters, we
derive the probability of entry along with the bidding function so as to simultaneously satisfy Equation 8
and Equation 7. The estimates θb are then recovered by maximizing the right-hand side in Equation 14.
       We note that our model is nested within the framework of Gentry and Li (2014), who study non-
parametric identification in auction models where potential bidders can observe a noisy and potentially
  41
     We model the unobservable heterogeneity as having unconstrained support, which is convenient for MLE. While this choice
does allow the possibility of negative bids, our estimates suggest that they are very unlikely (with about a 0.04 probability that
the winning bid, which is the lowest bid in each auction, is negative across our sample). For this reason, we are comfortable
with this parameterization, since it is unlikely that truncating fU (·) would materially impact our results.
  42
     We also consider richer functional forms for the right-hand side of Equation 13, introducing, in particular, interactions of
Xj with levels of N . We find that the estimates for δ are robust to these changes, as we discuss in Appendix E.


                                                                       19
independent signal of their value prior to entry. They show that with sufficient exogenous variation in
signal thresholds the model is non-parametrically identified even in the presence of unobserved auction-
level heterogeneity. In our case, the variation in the signal thresholds stems from the variation in the
number of potential bidders, as illustrated in Figure A.1. To credibly study the impact of the effective rate
and other policy tools (like the excludability of interest income from state taxation) on the issuer’s total
borrowing costs, we adopt a parametric estimation approach, which allows us to include an extensive set
of covariates in the model.

5.4      Estimation Results

Estimation results for the baseline model are reported in Table 4. The baseline model includes the same set
of controls as our reduced-form analysis, specifically Column (4) in Table 2.43 The estimate for the effect
of τ on the mean of the parameterized distribution of values, β̂, implies that a 1 pp increase in τ leads to
a 4.1 basis point decrease in values. We also find that τ has a negative effect on the standard deviation of
the parameterized distribution of values, γ̂. This implies that the dispersion in values decreases as the tax
advantage increases, which tends to reduce equilibrium markups. To show that this result is not driven by
our parametric assumptions, in Section 6, we follow a non-parametric approach and show that the variance
of values within an auction is lower when the effective rates are high.
       The estimated model fits the data well. Figure 3 shows that the model fits the entire distribution of
winner’s bids across the sample.44 Entry rates, n/N , are also well matched. For example, the average
(median) probability of entry in the data is 0.701, and our model predicts it to be 0.724. Our estimate
of the entry cost distribution implies that the average threshold entry cost in our data d∗ is 0.03%. At
the average bond size offering, this translates into an entry cost of about $7,700, which may be reasonably
commensurate with the costs of engaging in pre-sale marketing activities, as well as performing due diligence
on the particular bond offering.
       Appendix E shows that our results are robust to a number of alternative specifications of the structural
model. First, we show that we obtain similar estimates with different specifications of Equation 13. Second,
we extend our model by allowing the distribution of entry costs to depend on bond maturity and the
effective tax rate, and we find similar results. Third, we show that we obtain similar results when we use
an alternative definition of potential bidders, N, that includes all bidders in auctions held in the same state
and month as potential bidders. Fourth, we obtain similar results when we follow Athey et al. (2011) by
parameterizing bids rather than values. Finally, we also find similar estimates from a model that allows for
heterogeneous bidder types that discriminate the top 10 most frequent bidders in the data from the rest
of the bidders. Table A.20 shows that these alternative specifications yield similarly good model fits. As
we show below, our estimates of markups and of the effects of policy changes are quite stable across these
model specifications.
  43
     To be exact, mean-shifters Z include state and year fixed effects along with sales, corporate, and property tax rates,
political party measurements for Senate, president, and governor support, and, finally, the major party index. The estimation
excludes auctions from the state of Nebraska (18 auctions) due to missing data. Table A.7 confirms that our reduced-form
results are robust to using other sets of controls. X include effective rates and maturities.
  44
     The bi-modal distribution of winning bids evident in the figure stems from differing maturities, with the first hump being
largely associated with maturities equal to one year. Thus, including maturities in our model proves crucial to matching these
patterns in the data.



                                                              20
5.5        Estimated Markups

We now use the model estimates to construct equilibrium markups. For a given auction, our markup
estimate is given by:
                                       b 1 , . . . , bn = µ(β −1 (b1 − E[u|b1 , . . . , bn ], 0)),
                                       m|b

where µ is the function defined in Equation 7. To implement this equation, we compute the expected value
of the unobserved bond characteristics,             E[u|b1 , . . . , bn ], using observed bids and the following expression:
                                                   Z∞            fU (u) f (β
                                                                               −1 (b
                                                                                     1 −u,0),...,β
                                                                                                   −1 (b −u,0);θ)
                                                                                                         n
                                                                                β 0 (b1 −u,0)...β 0 (bn −u,0)
                         E[u|b1 , . . . , bn ] =        u
                                                            R∞
                                                                                                                    du,       (15)
                                                                            −1                  −1 (b −w,0);θ)
                                                                                  1 −w,0),...,β
                                                   −∞            fU (w) f (β β(b                     n
                                                                               0 (b −w,0)...β 0 (b −w,0)
                                                                                   1              n
                                                                                                               dw
                                                            −∞

where we omit the dependence observables for clarity.
         Table 5 presents our model’s estimates of bidder markups. The first row in Table 5 shows that markups
are 16.8 basis points, on average. The average markup rate over the winning bid, m1 /b1 , is 21.5%. Table
5 also reports the dollar value of the markup over the life of the bond, m1 st, with an average value of
$248,728.45
         Our model predicts rich patterns of heterogeneity in markups. The remaining rows in Table 5 show
that auctions for state bonds result in smaller markups, both in levels and as a percent of borrowing costs.
However, since state bonds are larger and have longer maturities, the dollar value over the life of the bond
is greater than average. We also find that bonds for school districts and smaller jurisdictions, such as
cities and counties, have significantly larger markups. In particular, bonds issued by local governments
are hurt in part by lower participation. On average, about five bidders submit bids for bonds issued by
cities, towns, and villages, whereas more than eight typically submit bids for bonds issued by states. This
suggests that there is substantial scope for lowering municipalities’ borrowing costs by targeting auctions
with high markup rates or with low participation.


6         Tax Incidence in Auctions
In this section, we explore in more depth the mechanisms by which the tax exemption for municipal debt
affects bidder behavior and, consequently, borrowing costs. Our analysis characterizes the within-auction
incidence. Based on the evidence in Section 3.4, we assume that the supply of bonds is not affected by
changes in tax advantages. Equation 12 shows the basic intuition behind the effects that tax rates have on
the borrowing costs. First, if there is perfect competition, m = 0 and εb1−τ = εv1−τ . Second, when m > 0,
εb1−τ may be greater than or less than one depending on the effect of changing taxes on markups and bidder
values. For example, if εv1−τ = 1 and εb1−τ > 1, it must be the case that εµ1−τ > 1.46 This insight highlights
the central role played by the responsiveness of markups to changes in taxes in determining how taxes pass
through to borrowing costs.
    45
     The markups we find are in line with estimates of ex post surplus for winners calculated in Hortaçsu et al. (2018) in treasury
auctions. They estimate surpluses between 0.7 and 22 basis points for primary dealers on maturities ranging from 52 weeks to
10 years.
  46
     The case of εv1−τ = 1 can occur if one assumes that v = ṽ(1 − τ ), where ṽ is the pre-tax value of a bond. However, we do
not impose this restriction in our model.



                                                                        21
    The following example, shown in Table 6, decomposes this passthrough using our model and a represen-
tative auction from our data. Consider an auction with six potential bidders, τ = 0.35, other observables
set to their median realizations, and a bidder whose value is such that, according to our estimated model,
he would submit a bid equal to the median bid in our data for auctions with these characteristics. At the
original tax rate, the bidder has a value of 1.566 and an optimal bid of 1.896, which implies a markup rate of
17%. If τ increases from 0.35 to 0.39, his bid will change for a combination of reasons. First, his value will
change, which will lead him to submit a lower bid, even when holding constant his probability of winning
and the number of potential entrants in the auction. This is illustrated in the second row of the table, which
shows that the optimal bid decreases from 1.896 to 1.858 (εb1−τ = 0.326), when the value drops from 1.566
to 1.500 (εv1−τ = 1.007). Second, because other bidders’ values change, the bidder’s probability of winning
changes, which forces him to further lower his bid. This is shown in the third row of the table, where we
adjust the probability of winning to reflect the model-estimated winning probability at the new tax rate
and original number of potential bidders. The optimal bid falls to 1.772, which implies a bid elasticity of
1.060. Finally, the four percentage point effective tax rate increase is associated with two more underwriters
joining the pool of potential bidders (see Table 2). To capture the increased competition for the bond, we
further adjust the probability of winning to reflect the model-estimated winning probability at the new tax
rate and the new number of potential bidders. The last row shows that the increased competition further
depresses the bidder’s bid to 1.713, for a bid elasticity of 1.564.
    The example in Table 6 also illustrates that as the tax rate increases, bidder markups decrease, from
0.33 in row one to 0.21 in row four. The large decline in these markups contributes to the greater-than-one
passthrough elasticities on borrowing rates. In row three, when all but the effect of τ on N is allowed
for, εµ1−τ = 3.886. Once N is allowed to increase in τ , εµ1−τ = 6.557.47 This calculation highlights the
importance of accounting for the impact of tax changes on markups as a contributing force to the overall
effect on borrowing costs.
    We now further explore how taxes impact markups and provide non-parametric evidence that these
mechanisms are at play in the data. As made clear in Equation 7, a bidder trades off the benefit of
increasing his bid and enjoying a greater markup over his value in the event that he wins the auction
against the possibility that he loses the auction with this higher bid. Denoting the dependence of values—
and thus the probability of winning an auction—on the tax rate, it follows that:

                                                              Pr(v; τ )
                                                  b=v+        ∂
                                                                           ,
                                                            − ∂b Pr(v; τ )
                                                            |     {z     }
                                                                Markup

where Pr(v; τ ) is the equilibrium probability of winning the auction when a bidder’s value is v and the
tax rate is τ . The markup, or difference between a bidder’s bid and the value, depends on the expected
                                                                           ∂
market share, given by Pr, and the slope of the inverse supply, given by − ∂b Pr. In a perfectly competitive
auction, characterized by many bidders or by a lack of heterogeneity in bidder valuations, the expected
market share for a given bidder who bids above his valuation is 0, and the inverse supply is vertical at
  47
     This example is broadly representative of the rest of our data. For instance, the average markup rate is 17% (relative to
17% in the example). Similarly, the bid elasticity in row four of Table 6 equals 1.56, which is similar to our reduced-form
estimates in Table 2 and to the average model-based elasticity of 2.1. Finally, similar to our example, we find large markup
elasticities with respect to the take-home rate.


                                                             22
this valuation. These forces eliminate the possibility for markups. As in monopsonistic settings, bidders
in auctions with imperfect competition may shade their bids to manipulate the expected market share.48
The fundamental expression of market power in this case is the ability of bidders to improve their expected
surplus by shading their bid, which is controlled by the slope of the inverse supply.
       Therefore, the question of how taxes affect markups—and, consequently, the cost of borrowing via
Equation 12—hinges on how taxes affect the probability associated with a bidder winning an auction at
any particular submitted bid. Specifically, the elasticity of markups with respect to taxes can be decomposed
as follows:
                                                                                         ∂
                                                                                   −1/
                             εµ1−τ =
                                                                                             Pr
                                                   εPr
                                                    1−τ             +            ε ∂b                    .              (16)
                                                   |{z}                          |1−τ{z }
                                       change in own market share       change in inverse supply slope

An increase in the tax advantage may decrease markups (and borrowing rates) by decreasing the market
share for a given bidder and by increasing the slope of the inverse supply. Intuitively, if greater tax
advantages increase the number of actual bidders, the expected market share will decrease. To interpret
        ∂
 −1/        Pr
ε1−τ ∂b , consider that the slope in the inverse supply is driven by heterogeneity in the valuations for bonds.
If larger tax advantages lead to a selection of bidders with less heterogeneous valuations for the bond, this
                                          ∂
                                    −1/       Pr
will lead to a positive value of ε1−τ ∂b . This is consistent with results from Babina et al. (2015), who show
that there is a higher degree of tax-induced ownership segmentation in states with a larger tax advantage
for municipal bonds. Intuitively, since only residents of the issuing state receive the full tax benefit, as the
state tax rate increases, it is more likely that residents of the state own the bonds and that the distribution
of their valuations is more compressed. This is also consistent with our structural estimates in Section 5.4,
where we find that an increase in τ is associated with a smaller variance of the distribution of bids.
       While the model imposes a parametric structure to incorporate a rich set of observables, we now show
that the key interactions between taxes and the probability of winning an auction are evident in the raw
data. Specifically, we show how changes in τ affect non-parametric estimates of the probability of winning.
We begin by estimating the probability of winning an auction using the kernel estimator:
                                                                            
                                                       1               Xj −X
                                                P 1
                                                   j n   (b j > b)K     hX
                            Pr[b−i\> b|N, X] =                               ,
                                                       P         Xj −X
                                                          j  K    hX

where j is an indicator for each auction and 1(bj > b) is an indicator that b is below all bids in auction j.
K(·) is a kernel that assigns weights to the auctions based on observable characteristics Xj . Following Li et
al. (2000), we use triweight kernels with bandwidth hX = c · std(X) · (J)−1/5 , where J denotes the number
of auctions, std(X) measures the standard deviation of X, and c ≈ 3 is the kernel-specific constant. We
condition on the number of potential bidders N , on the effective tax rate τ , and on maturities between 2
and 17 years, corresponding to the middle tercile of the maturity distribution.
       Figure 4 plots this estimated probability for different values of N and τ . The fundamental expression
of market power in our setting is the ability of bidders to trade off higher surplus for a smaller expected
market share. The data reveal whether bidders may profit from such strategic bidding by showing that
the probability of winning has a finite slope around the winning bid. The blue solid lines correspond to
  48
    We use the phrase “shade” as it is common in the literature on first-price auctions, even though in this low-bid setting,
bidders seek to inflate their bid above their value.



                                                              23
estimated probabilities of winning for the mean value of τ = 0.35 and for N = 4, 6, 8, 10. These lines show
that auctions for municipal bonds are far from the ideal of perfect competition, as the finite slope allows
bidders to strategically shade their bids. As one would expect, the probability of winning has a steeper
slope when bonds have a larger number of potential bidders.
         The green dotted and red dashed lines in Figure 4 show that the intuition from the example in Table 6 is
apparent in the raw bidding data. For each value of N , the red dashed line plots the estimated probability
of winning with a higher τ = 0.39. These plots show that auctions with larger tax advantages have reduced
scope for markups since both the probability of winning decreases and the slope of this probability becomes
steeper along most of its domain. As discussed above, higher effective rates also lead to increases in N . In
particular, a reform that increases τ from 0.35 to 0.39 would also lead the average N to increase by about
two additional potential bidders. The green dotted lines plot the probability of winning with a higher rate
and the accompanying increase in N . Highlighting the intuition from the representative bidder above, these
graphs show that the scope for markups is further reduced by the indirect effect of the tax advantage on
the level of competition.49
         The results from this section highlight the value of measuring markups with our auction model, as this
allows us to show that the effect of the tax advantage on the winning bids is driven by a large effect on
equilibrium markups. Moreover, this mechanism is not dependent on the parametric structure that we use
in the estimation, as the non-parametric estimates of the probability of winning show that the interaction
between taxes and imperfect competition is visible in the raw data.


7         Counterfactual Policy Analysis
We now use our structural model to improve our understanding of the effects of tax policies and regulations
on municipal bond auctions. Section 7.1 highlights the benefits of our structural model by quantifying how
different policies that impact the tax advantage—e.g., state taxes, federal taxes, the SALT deduction—help
determine borrowing rates and markups in municipal bond auctions. Section 7.2 further showcases the
value of our model by studying the effects of regulations that condition the value of the tax advantage on
the number of bidders in municipal bond auctions.

7.1        Tax Policies and Borrowing Rates

The tax advantages enjoyed by the holders of municipal bonds are the subject of intense debate. Several
federal reforms have been proposed that directly or indirectly deal with the growing tax expenditure from
the exemption of municipal bond interest. We provide a survey of the proposed reforms in Appendix G. In
this section, we evaluate reforms that modify the tax advantage by changing the effective rate used in our
analysis. Examples of reforms include the repeated proposals by the Obama administration to limit the
exemption to 28% and the Tax Cut and Jobs Act of 2017 (TCJA17), which lowered the top federal rate to
37% and limited the state and local tax (SALT) deduction. We fit these reforms into a general approach
    49
    The non-parametric approach that we follow in this exercise has a number of limitations, the principal one being related to
the problem of the curse of dimensionality. Indeed, unlike our structural model, the non-parametric approach does not allow
us to control for most of the observables X. Nonetheless, we stress that the key feature of the data that the distribution of
bids in the auction tends to shrink when τ increases is confirmed by our structural model results, by this exercise, and by all
the robustness checks that we perform as described in Appendix E.


                                                              24
that evaluates the consequences of a change in federal tax rates by parameterizing the effective tax rate as
follows:50
                                 τ (αtf , ts ) = αtf (1 − ts ) + ts × 1(T ax Exempt)State .

Relative to the average federal rate from 2011 to 2015, the Obama proposal corresponds to α = 0.73 ≈
0.28/0.386, and the TCJA17 sets α = 0.96 ≈ 0.37/0.386. We can also consider the effect of a super-
exemption of municipal bond interest by evaluating reforms that set α > 1. Additionally, we use the model
to evaluate the impact of other policies such as removing the exemption of municipal bond interest income
from state taxation (for those states that currently have such an exemption) and to consider the elimination
of the SALT deduction. Finally, we study the total effect of the TCJA17, as the decrease in marginal rates
and limiting of SALT affect borrowing costs in opposite directions.
       We begin by focusing on changes to the federal tax code that limit or expand the exemption of municipal
bond interest income from federal taxation. Specifically, we vary α and simulate auction outcomes for two
different cases: when shifts in τ are assumed to have no impact on N and when they are assumed to affect
N . We simulate the effect of this policy change on every auction from 2013 to 2015 and present the average
of the simulated effects in Figure 5.
       In this graph, values of α < 1 correspond to decreases in the tax advantage and values of α > 1 to
increases in the tax advantage through increases in the tax rate or through a form of super-exemption. As
the tax advantage is decreased from α = 1, we see an increase in both the winning bids and the markups,
with larger effects corresponding to a full reform that allows for changes in N . While the effects on the
winning bid are close to being linear in α, the full effects on markups (dashed purple line) are convex in α.
       Table 7 presents average effects of the proposals from the Obama and Trump administrations. Cutting
taxes according to the Trump proposal would lead to an increase in borrowing costs of 5.24%. Close to half
of this effect would be driven by the effect of the tax change on the number of potential bidders, N. One
advantage of our structural model over our reduced-form analysis is that it allows us to go beyond studying
the effects on average bids to consider impacts on equilibrium markups, which are not observed in the data.
Our simulations show that, if we hold the number of potential bidders constant, the Trump proposal would
increase markups by 7.31%. Allowing taxes to impact the number of potential bidders would lead to an
increase in markups of 13.81%.
       One way to assess the effectiveness of the tax advantage of municipal bonds is to compare the change
in borrowing costs for municipalities to the fiscal cost of the subsidy. Given the annual municipal interest
payments in the amount of $122 billion (U.S. Census Bureau, 2020), the Trump reform would imply an
additional $6.4 billion in interest payments by state and local governments.51 Without further behavioral
responses, the reduction in the tax expenditure over the next decade would be close to $20 billion (≈
                                                                                                       6.4
(1 − 0.96) × $500 billion). On a yearly basis, this subsidy represents a gain of $3.2 (≈                2 )   in state and local
funds for every dollar of federal funds. This subsidy would thus improve welfare as long as the marginal
cost of public funds for the federal government is not 3.2 times greater than the marginal value of providing
  50
     This formula is exact whenever states do not allow for the deductibility of federal taxes from state taxes. We modify
the formula accordingly for the few states that allow this deduction. Note that state taxes are always deducted from federal
taxation.
  51
     We assume here that an effective tax reduction would have the same effect on borrowing costs for bonds sold via negotiations
as it would for bonds sold via auctions.



                                                               25
public goods from municipal bonds.52
       Our model elucidates the different economic mechanisms that contribute to this cost-effectiveness. Con-
sider first the effect of the Trump proposal on auction competitiveness. If we remove this effect (by focusing
on the partial increase in borrowing costs of 2.52%), our cost-effectiveness number decreases from $3.2 to
           2.52%×122
$1.5 (≈        2     ).   Consider now the effect of the Trump proposal on markups. Continuing with the partial
case, Table 7 shows that markups increase 7.31%. Suppose, for illustrative purposes, that markups were not
affected by the Trump proposal. Borrowing costs would then only increase by 1.76%, such that every dollar
                                                                                               1.76%×122
of tax savings would only increase municipal borrowing costs by $1.07 (≈                           2     ).   These calculations
show that the effects of changes to tax advantages on both auction competitiveness and markups are crucial
determinants of the cost-effectiveness of these policies.53
       We now explore how these proposals would affect different states. Figure 6 plots the effects of setting
α = 0.73, as in the Obama proposal.54 Panel (a) plots the observed average winning bids by state, and
Panel (b) presents the simulated average winning bid by state after the excludability is capped but without
the possibility of additional entry. Panel (c) simulates the effects of the reform allowing for an effect on
potential entry. Panel (d) shows that the increase in winning bids ranges from 55 to 100 basis points.
Overall, the Obama proposal implies larger increases in borrowing costs. To understand why effects vary
across states, consider two important factors. First, since state taxes are deducted from federal taxes,
changes in federal taxes have larger effects in states with low or no state income taxes. Indeed, we see
large increases in states like South Dakota, Florida, New Hampshire, and Wyoming. Second, the effects of
this reform would depend on the level of auction competition across the states, with low-competition states
such as New York and New Jersey seeing larger increases in borrowing costs. Figure 7 presents a similar
analysis for the markups across states. While average markups are about 17 basis points, the reform leads
to substantial increases in markups between 15 to 35 basis points, particularly due to the entry margin.
       We perform two additional tax policy analyses. First, we consider the effects of eliminating the exclud-
ability of municipal bond interest income at the state level. As shown in Table 7, if this policy were enacted,
average borrowing costs would rise by about 22% and markups by about 63%. Figures A.6-A.7 showcase
the heterogeneous effects of this policy. While eliminating the state exemption leads to an increase in the
importance of the federal subsidy, this potential reform results in an overall decrease in the subsidy. As
expected, we find that states with higher taxes would see larger increases in borrowing costs.
       Lastly, we investigate the effects of policy changes motivated by the TCJA17. We find that eliminating
the SALT deduction results in higher effective rates, which are then accompanied by lower markups and
borrowing rates. Table 7 shows that, on average, our model predicts that borrowing costs would fall by
about 6%. Figures A.8-A.9 show that this decrease would be concentrated in states with higher taxes, as
these states are the biggest beneficiaries of the SALT deduction. While the lower tax rates in the TCJA17
  52
     This calculation assumes that the increase in borrowing costs does not also increase the federal tax expenditure and ignores
the externality on state governments, which would also see an increased tax expenditure. Further, the federal government is
not likely to recoup the full reduction in tax expenditure because of behavioral substitution away from municipal bonds toward
other investment instruments, as described by Poterba and Verdugo (2011), so $20 billion is an upper bound on the revenue
cost of the tax expenditure. These forces imply that the efficiency ratio of 3.2 is a lower bound. We also assume the total value
of issuances to be fixed, which is in line with the results from Section 3.4.
  53
     This calculation is in line with a linear extrapolation of the results of Table 2 that imply a ratio of 3.2. Appendix H provides
further details on these types of calculations including the impact of varying α.
  54
     Note that Montana and Nebraska had no auctions in the sample from 2013 to 2015 and are excluded from the simulations.



                                                                 26
would increase borrowing costs for municipalities, changes to the SALT deduction would dominate this
effect. Overall, our model estimates suggest that the TCJA17 will lead to a 1.6% reduction in borrowing
costs and a 3.6% reduction in markups.
       In Tables A.26-A.29, we show that all of these counterfactual policy analyses are robust across different
versions of our structural model.

7.2      Competition in Municipal Bond Auctions

We now use our structural model to study the effects of a real-word regulation that limits the value of
the tax advantage depending on the degree of competition in bond auctions. While the tax advantage for
municipal bonds depends on both state and local tax policies, the majority of the cost of the subsidy is
borne by the federal government. The IRS therefore has an interest to regulate the maximum tax-exempt
yield of municipal bonds. Historically, this maximum tax-exempt yield was set by underwriters based on
their “reasonable expectations” of the price at which they believed they would be able to sell bonds to
investors. In 2017, the IRS restricted the flexibility of underwriters to determine the maximum tax-exempt
yield for bonds sold through auctions with fewer than three bidders.55 The new regulation therefore limits
the tax advantage of bonds sold in auctions with fewer than three bidders.
       Our model provides an ideal framework to evaluate the effects of this type of regulation. First, our model
captures the institutional feature of auction participants not knowing the number of other competitors when
they submit their bids. Consequently, under the three-bidder rule, they will not know their exact valuations
for the bond until just after the auction. Second, our model accounts for the fact that auction participants
consider the profits they earn in the eventuality that they win the auction when deciding how to bid and
whether to participate in the auction.
       We model the effects of this regulation by letting the bond valuations vary with the number of active
bidders n. When n is less than 3, the extent of the tax shield provided by the bond is reduced. We represent
this change as a shift in the effective rate from τ to rτ , and we vary the reduced tax shield for values of
r ∈ [0, 1], which affects how the bond is valued by underwriters. Specifically, we define the bidder’s ex ante
valuation as:
                                          v = I(n < 3)ṽn<3 + I(n ≥ 3)ṽn≥3 + u,

where I(n < 3) denotes the event that n < 3. While ṽn≥3 ∼ F (ṽn≥3 ; τ ), the cumulative distribution function
of its low-competition counterpart, F (ṽn<3 ; rτ ), depends on the reduced tax advantage rτ . This extended
version of our model captures the dependence of the tax advantage on the ex post level of competition as
well as the impact of the regulation on bidding and participation strategies.56
  55
      Internal Revenue Service (2016) states that “the public bidding process for pricing municipal bonds in competitive sales
itself provides a sufficient basis to achieve the best pricing for issuers.” The choice of 3 bidders as the threshold to determine
which sales are sufficiently competitive to be eligible for the continued use of reasonable expectation prices is derived from
other regulations governing guaranteed investment contracts. The rules governing the determination of issue prices are related
to the arbitrage restriction for tax-exempt bonds described in Section 148 of the Internal Revenue Code. We provide further
details in Appendix F.
   56
      Upon entry, the agent learns his own v, which involves learning both ṽn<3 and ṽn≥3 . We assume that bidders have
the same competitiveness relative to other bidders in both cases, i.e., the quantiles of the two valuations are the same:
F −1 (ṽn<3 ; rτ ) = F −1 (ṽn≥3 ; τ ). The derivation of the equilibrium bidding strategy as well as the equilibrium probability of
entry follows the same argument as in Section 4 with the distinction that the winner’s valuation is a function of n. Appendix F
provides additional details.



                                                                27
      Consider first how this regulation impacts bidding strategies. Figure 8 shows the bidding strategies
β(v) in a representative auction for a bond with characteristics set to sample medians and N = 4 potential
bidders. We illustrate how the equilibrium bidding strategy changes relative to our baseline model for
the two values of r = 0.5, 0.9. The figure shows that, for all values, the strategy in the three-bidder rule
case always lies above the baseline function, which reflects how the change in the tax advantage impacts
a bidder’s value for the bond. This figure also allows us to infer the impact of the regulation on bidder
markups. For sufficiently small—i.e., competitive—values, the bidding function under the three-bidder rule
is very close to the baseline bidding function where values do not depend on the number of participants. As
valuations increase, however, so does the difference between the two functions. Starting from approximately
v = 3.5pp, the bids under the three-bidder rule are appreciably larger than the regular bids, and this increase
is driven by a rise in markups.
      To clarify why the regulation can impact bidder markups, it is convenient to represent the expected
equilibrium profit for a bidder with valuation v as:

                                   π(v) = (β(v) − vn<3 )w1 (v) + (β(v) − vn≥3 )w2 (v)

where w1 and w2 are positive weights related to the probability of winning under low and high competition,
respectively. When the agent has a relatively low valuation, w2 (v) is relatively large compared to w1 (v), so
the agent behaves as if he is competing against a high number of participants. Conversely, the first term
matters more when the agent has a high valuation, as his chance of winning decreases quickly in the number
of competitors n. For this reason, agents with high valuations behave as if the auction is guaranteed to
have a very low n, which leads them to submit high markups.
      The logic behind Figure 8 suggests that this regulation can significantly raise borrowing costs for mu-
nicipalities. However, this only happens when the auction winner has a particularly high valuation for the
bond. To understand how frequently this would happen and to quantify the overall impact of the policy, we
simulate counterfactual outcomes for all bond auctions held in 2015.57 We consider three scenarios: the tax
advantage is τ exactly as in the data, the tax advantage is permanently reduced to rτ for different r ≤ 1,
and, finally, the tax advantage is reduced when there are fewer than three bidders. Table 8 reports the
results. The average winning bid under the three-bidder rule always lies between the other two extremes,
though this case is much closer to the baseline scenario. The same can be said about the average markups
as well as average entry probabilities. In the case where r = 0.5, the three-bidder rule raises borrowing costs
by 1.25%, and this increase is driven by a 5.5% increase in bidder markups. As suggested by Figure 8, the
three-bidder rule would have the strongest impact in auctions with low numbers of potential participants.
Because only 7% of auctions have fewer than three bidders, this is a relatively rare occurrence. Nonetheless,
while average costs are not severely affected by the policy, we find that in 5.5% of the cases, borrowing costs
increase by more than 10%. The regulation therefore introduces a significant risk of increased borrowing
costs for municipalities where the three-bidder rule has a high likelihood of binding.
 57
      As the three-bidder rule was implemented in June 2017, the closest year to the policy change in our sample is 2015.




                                                              28
8    Conclusion
The excludability of municipal interest income from taxation is one of the largest tax expenditures faced
by the U.S. Treasury. Advocates of this policy argue that the tax advantage of municipal bonds is crucial
to lowering the borrowing rates of municipal governments, which use these funds to finance public goods,
services, and infrastructure. Critics of this policy argue that top-income individuals are its largest benefi-
ciaries, that the cost to the U.S. Treasury is large and continues to grow, and that these subsidies do not
lower borrowing costs for governments.
    This paper sheds light on this important debate by analyzing municipal bond auctions and by pointing
to the role of imperfect competition in determining the effects of tax subsidies on borrowing costs. Contra-
dicting critics of the policy, our reduced-form estimates show that changes to tax policy have large effects on
governments’ borrowing costs, which are summarized by an average passthrough elasticity that is greater
than unity.
    We use an empirical auction model to provide three insights into how taxes affect auctions for municipal
bonds. First, we use the model to quantify equilibrium markups. The estimated markups are larger for
smaller jurisdictions and school districts and in auctions with few bidders, which suggests that there is
substantial scope for reducing the borrowing costs of municipalities by targeting those with high markups.
Second, we show that the passthrough of taxes to borrowing costs is driven by the interaction between
tax policy and imperfect competition and, in particular, by the effects of taxes on markups. We provide
non-parametric evidence that, as the tax advantage for municipal bonds increases, bidders are less able
to extract information rents in the form of markups. This effect is responsible for the greater-than-unity
passthrough elasticity that we find in our reduced-form analysis.
    Finally, we use the model to simulate the effects of a number of policies, both proposed and implemented.
First, we study the policies proposed by the Obama and Trump administrations and evaluate how different
components of the Tax Cuts and Jobs Act of 2017 will affect municipal borrowing costs. We find that
reductions in the tax advantage for municipal bonds translate to substantial increases in both borrowing
rates and markups. The increase in borrowing costs is 3.2 times as large as the reduction in the federal tax
expenditure, suggesting that the tax advantage for municipal bonds is an efficient mechanism to subsidize
public good provision at the local level. While different provisions in the Tax Cuts and Jobs Act of 2017
may serve to raise or lower borrowing costs, we find that, overall, the legislation may result in small
reductions in borrowing costs. Second, we investigate how a recently implemented IRS rule that reduces
the tax advantage of municipal bonds sold in auctions with fewer than three bidders affects the strategies
of the bidders and the borrowing rates of the municipalities. We find that the rule introduces significant
distortions to the bids submitted by underwriters with relatively large valuations for the bonds. While the
level of competition in the auctions tends to be high enough that such underwriters rarely win, the rule
can lead to significant increases in borrowing costs for municipalities where the rule is likely to bind.
    Our analysis contributes to the economics literature by pointing out an important case where taxation
and imperfect competition interact to generate large policy responses and by estimating a structural model
linking equilibrium bidding behavior and tax policy to analyze an economically important market. Overall,
this paper provides a reassessment of the reason why tax advantages for municipal bonds lower borrowing
costs for state and local governments: they encourage the participation of bidders in municipal bond auctions


                                                      29
and stimulate more competitive bidding by existing bidders, with both of these dynamics serving to lower
markups and borrowing rates. This implies that, in addition to reconsidering the role of tax incentives,
future policies that aim to improve the functioning of the market for municipal bonds may consider other
instruments that directly deal with the limited competition for these bonds in the primary market.




                                                   30
References
Ackerman, Andrew, “Hundreds of Local Officials Defend Municipal-Bond Tax Exemp-
 tion,” The Wall Street Journal, 2016.      Available at:  http://www.wsj.com/articles/
 hundreds-of-local-officials-defend-municipal-bond-tax-exemption-1456830002   (Accessed:
 March 24, 2017).
Adelino, Manuel, Igor Cunha, and Miguel A Ferreira, “The Economic Effects of Public Financing:
 Evidence from Municipal Bond Ratings Recalibration,” Review of Financial Studies, 2017, 9 (30), 3223–
 3268.
Alan, Cole, “Details and Analysis of Donald Trump’s Tax Plan, September 2016,” Tax Foundation 2016.
 Available at: https://taxfoundation.org/details-analysis-donald-trump-tax-plan-2016/ (Ac-
 cessed: March 26, 2017).
Altonji, Joseph G., Todd E. Elder, and Christopher R. Taber, “Selection on Observed and Unob-
 served Variables: Assessing the Effectiveness of Catholic Schools,” Journal of Political Economy, 2005,
 113 (1), 151–184.
Anderson,     Tom,    “How     Trump’s    proposals  may    affect  every   income   tax
 bracket,”   CNBC,    2017.         Available    at:     http://www.cnbc.com/2017/01/22/
 how-trumps-proposals-may-affect-every-income-tax-bracket.html (Accessed:      March 25,
 2017).
Ang, Andrew, Richard C. Green, and Yuhang Xing, “Advance Refundings of Municipal Bonds,”
 Working Paper 19459, National Bureau of Economic Research September 2013.
  , Vineer Bhansali, and Yuhang Xing, “Build America Bonds,” Working Paper 16008, National
  Bureau of Economic Research May 2010.
  ,   , and   , “Taxes on Tax-Exempt Bonds,” The Journal of Finance, 2010, 65 (2), 565–601.
Athey, Susan, Dominic Coey, and Jonathan Levin, “Set-Asides and Subsides in Auctions,” AEJ
 Microeconomics, 2013, 5 (1), 1–27.
  , Jonathan Levin, and Enrique Seira, “Comparing Open and Sealed Bid Auctions: Theory and
  Evidence from Timber Auctions,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 2011, 126 (1), 207–257.
Auerbach, Alan J. and James R. Hines, “Perfect Taxation with Imperfect Competition,” Working
 Paper 8138, National Bureau of Economic Research February 2011.
Babina, Tania, Chotibhak Jotikasthira, Christian T. Lundblad, and Tarun Ramadorai, “Het-
 erogenous Taxes and Limited Risk Sharing: Evidence from Municipal Bonds,” Technical Report 2015.
 CEPR Discussion Paper No. DP10971. Available at SSRN: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2701245 (Ac-
 cessed: April 4, 2017).
Bhattacharya, Vivek, “An Empirical Model of R&D Procurement Contests: An Analysis of the DOD
 SBIR Program,” Working Paper, 2017.
  , James W. Roberts, and Andrew Sweeting, “Regulating Bidder Participation in Auctions,” RAND
  Journal of Economics, 2014, 45 (4), 675–704.
Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, “1-Year Swap Rate (DISCONTINUED)
 [DSWP1],” FRED, Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis 2018. Available at: https://fred.stlouisfed.
 org/series/DSWP1 (Accessed: April 18, 2018).
Brancaccio, Giulia, Dan Li, and Norman Schürhoff, “Learning by Trading: The Case of the U.S.
 Market for Municipal Bonds,” Working Paper 2017.
Bulow, Jeremy and Paul Klemperer, “Auctions Versus Negotiations,” American Economic Review,
 1996, 86 (1), 180–194.
Bureau of Economic Analysis, “Annual Gross Domestic Product (GDP) by State,” 2017. Available at:
 https://www.bea.gov/regional/downloadzip.cfm (Data Accessed: April 26, 2017).


                                                  31
Bureau of Labor Statistics, “Local Area Unemployment Statistics,” 2017. Available at: https://www.
 bls.gov/lau/ (Data Accessed: April 26, 2017).
Butler, Alexander R, “Distance Still Matters: Evidence from Municipal Bond Underwriting,” Review of
 Financial Studies, 2008, 21 (2), 763–784.
Caesar, James W and Robert P. Saldin, “A New Measure of Party Strength,” Political Research
 Quarterly, 2006, 58 (2), 245–256.
Cassola, Nuno, Ali Hortaçsu, and Jakub Kastl, “The 2007 Subprime Market Crisis Through the Lens
 of European Central Bank Auctions for Short-Term Funds,” Econometrica, 2013, 81 (4), 1309–1345.
CCH, State Tax Handbook 2008-2015. CCH Incorporated State Tax Handbook, Toolkit Media Group,
 2008-2015.
Cellini, Stephanie Riegg, Fernando Ferreira, and Jesse Rothstein, “The Value of School Facility
 Investments: Evidence from a Dynamic Regression Discontinuity Design,” Quarterly Journal of Eco-
 nomics, 2010, 125 (1), 215–261.
Census Bureau, “State and Local Government Finance Historical Data,” 1994-2014. Available at: https:
 //www.census.gov/govs/local/historical_data.html (Data Accessed: April 26, 2017).
Cestau, Dario, Richard C. Green, and Norman Schürhoff, “Tax–Subsidized Underpricing: the
 Market for Build America Bonds,” Journal of Monetary Economics, 2013, 60 (5), 593–608.
  , , Burton Hollified, and Norman Schürhoff, “The Cost Burden of Negotiated Sales Restrictions:
  A Natural Experiment Using Heterogeneous State Laws,” Working Paper 2017.
Conlon, Christopher T. and Nirupama Rao, “The Price of Liquor is Too Damn High: Alcohol Taxa-
 tion and Market Structure,” Technical Report 2015. Available at SSRN: https://ssrn.com/abstract=
 2610118 or http://dx.doi.org/10.2139/ssrn.2610118 (Accessed: March 24, 2017).
   and , “Discrete Prices and the Incidence and Efficiency of Excise Taxes,” Technical Report 2016. Avail-
  able at SSRN: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2813016 or http://dx.doi.org/10.2139/ssrn.2813016
  (Accessed: March 23, 2017).
Crowder, William J. and Mark E. Wohar, “Are Tax Effects Important in the Long–Run Fisher
 Relationship? Evidence from the Municipal Bond Market,” The Journal of Finance, 1999, 54 (1), 307–
 317.
De Silva, Dakshina, Timothy P. Hubbard, and Georgia Kosmopoulou, “An Evaluation of a Bidder
 Training Program,” Working Paper, 2017.
Fabinger, Michal and Glen Weyl, “Pass-Through as an Economic Tool: Principles of Incidence under
  Imperfect Competition,” Journal of Political Economy, 2013, 121 (3), 528–583.
Fabra, Natalia and Mar Reguant, “Pass-Through of Emissions Costs in Electricity Markets,” American
  Economic Review, 2014, 104 (9), 2872–2899.
Fama, E., “A Pricing Model for the Municipal Bond Market,” Unpublished Manuscript 1977.
Feenberg, Daniel and James M. Poterba, “Which Households Own Municipal Bonds? Evidence from
  Tax Returns,” National Tax Journal, 1991, 44 (4), 93–103.
Feenberg, Daniel Richard and Elizabeth Coutts, “An Introduction to the TAXSIM Model,” Jour-
  nal of Policy Analysis and Management, 1993, 12 (1), 189–194. http://users.nber.org/~taxsim/
  state-rates/ (Data Accessed: March 21, 2017).
Feldstein, Martin, “The Effect of Marginal Tax Rates on Taxable Income: A Panel Study of the 1986
  Tax Reform Act,” Journal of Political Economy, 1995, 103 (3), 551–572.
Fortune, Peter, “The Municipal Bond Market, Part 1: Politics, Taxes, and Yields,” New England Eco-
  nomic Review, September 1991, pp. 13–36.
Gallardo, Larry and Susan M. Redford, “2019 Public Finance Handbook for Texas Counties,” Texas
 Association of Counties 2019. Available at: https://www.county.org/TAC/media/TACMedia/Legal/
 Legal%20Publications%20Documents/2019-Public-Finance.pdf (Accessed: Sept. 10, 2020).

                                                   32
Galper, Harvey, Kim S. Rueben, Richard Auxier, and Amanda Eng, “Municipal Debt: What
 does it Buy and Who Benefits?,” National Tax Journal, 2014, 67 (4), 901–924.
Garrett, Daniel, Andrey Ordin, James W. Roberts, and Juan Carlos Suárez Serrato, “Measur-
 ing Markups for Muni Bonds: Shedding Light on an Opaque Market,” Working Paper, Duke University
 2018.
Garrett, Daniel G, “Conflicts of Interest in Municipal Bond Advising and Underwriting,” 2020.
Gentry, Matthew and Tong Li, “Identification in Auctions with Selective Entry,” Econometrica, 2014,
 82 (1), 315–344.
Gibbons, Charles E., Juan Carlos Suárez Serrato, and Michael B. Urbancic, “Broken or Fixed
 Effects?,” Working Paper 20342, National Bureau of Economic Research July 2014.
Giroud, Xavier and Joshua Rauh, “State Taxation and the Reallocation of Business Activity: Evidence
 from Establishment-Level Data,” Journal of Political Economy, 2019, 127 (3), 1262–1316.
Goldberg, Pinelopi Koujianou and Rebecca Hellerstein, “A Structural Approach to Explaining
 Incomplete Exchange-Rate Pass-Through and Pricing-to-Market,” American Economic Review, 2008, 98
 (2), 423–429.
Goldsmith-Pinkham, Paul S, Matthew Gustafson, Ryan Lewis, and Michael Schwert, “Sea
 Level Rise and Municipal Bond Yields,” Available at SSRN, 2019.
Gordon, Roger H., “An Optimal Taxation Approach to Fiscal Federalism,” The Quarterly Journal of
 Economics, 1983, 98 (4), 567–586.
   and Gilbert E. Metcalf, “Do Tax-Exempt Bonds Really Subsidize Municipal Capital?,” National Tax
  Journal, 1991, 44 (4), 71–79.
   and Joel Slemrod, “A General Equilibrium Simulation Study of Subsidies to Municipal Expenditures,”
  Journal of Finance, 1983, 38 (2), 585–594.
Gordon,    Tracy,   “Buy and Hold (on Tight):        The Recent Muni Bond Roller-
 coaster   and    What  It    Means    for Cities,”  Washington,   DC:    Urabn    Insti-
 tute    2011.          Available   at:      http://www.urban.org/research/publication/
 buy-and-hold-tight-recent-muni-bond-rollercoaster-and-what-it-means-cities   (Accessed:
 May 8, 2017).
Government Finance Officers Association, “Tax-Exempt Financing: A Primer,” Public Finance
 Network 2000. Available at: http://www.gfoa.org/sites/default/files/Tax-ExemptFinancing_
 APrimer.pdf (Accessed: March 26, 2017).
Graham, John. R., “Do Personal Taxes Affect Corporate Financing Decisions?,” Journal of Public Eco-
 nomics, 1999, 73 (2), 147–185.
Green, Richard C., “A Simple Model of the Taxable and Tax-Exempt Yield Curves,” The Review of
 Financial Studies, 1993, 6 (2), 233–264.
  , Burton Hollifield, and Norman Schurhoff, “Dealer Intermediation and Price Behavior in the
  Aftermarket for New Bond Issues,” Journal of Financial Economics, 2007, 86 (3), 233–264.
Greenberg,    Scott,   “Reexamining   the  Tax    Exemption    of   Municipal   Bond   In-
 terest,”  Technical  Report  2016.       Available   at:      https://taxfoundation.org/
 reexamining-tax-exemption-municipal-bond-interest/ (Accessed: March 24, 2017).
Guerre, E., Isabelle Perrigne, and Quang Vuong, “Optimal Nonparametric Estimation of First Price
 Auctions,” Econometrica, 2000, 68, 525–574.
Hendricks, Ken and Robert H. Porter, “An Empirical Perspective on Auctions,” in M. Armstrong
 and R. Porter, eds., Handbook of Industrial Organization, Vol. 3 2007, chapter 32, pp. 2073–2143.
Hortaçsu, Ali and Jakub Kastl, “Valuing Dealers’ Informational Advantage: A Study of Canadian
 Treasury Auctions,” Econometrica, 2012, 80 (6), 2511–2542.


                                                 33
  , , and Allen Zhang, “Bid Shading and Bidder Surplus in the U.S. Treasury Auction,” American
  Economic Review, 2018, 108 (1), 147–169.
Internal Revenue Service, “Issue Price Definition for Tax-Exempt Bonds,” Federal Register 2016. FR
  81: 88,999-89,004.
Ivković, Zoran, James M. Poterba, and Scott Weisbenner, “Tax–Motivated Trading by Individual
  Investors,” American Economic Review, 2005, 95 (5), 1605–1630.
Kang, Boo-Sung and Steven L. Puller, “The Effect of Auction Format on Efficiency and Revenue in
 Divisible Goods Auctions: A Test Using Korean Treasury Auctions,” Journal of Industrial Economics,
 2008, 56 (2), 290–332.
Kidwell, David S., Timothy W. Koch, and Duane R. Stock, “The Impact of State Income Taxes
 on Municipal Borrowing Costs,” National Tax Journal, 1984, 37 (4), 551–561.
Klemperer, Paul, “What Really Matters in Auction Design,” Journal of Economic Perspectives, 2002,
 16 (1), 169–189.
Krasnokutskaya, E. and K. Seim, “Bid Preference Programs and Participation in Highway Procurement
 Auctions,” American Economic Review, 2011, 101 (6), 2653–2686.
Kueng, Lorenz, “Tax News: The Response of Household Spending to Changes in Expected Taxes,”
 Working Paper 20437, National Bureau of Economic Research 2014.
Laffont, Jean-Jacques and Quang Vuong, “Structural Analysis of Auction Data,” American Economic
  Review, 1996, 86 (2), 414–420.
Levine, Helisse, “The Impact of Debt Management Policies on Borrowing Costs Incurred by U.S. State
  Governments,” Public Finance and Management, 2011, 11 (1), 1–27.
Li, Tong and Xiaoyong Zheng, “Entry and Competition Effects in First-Price Auctions: Theory and
  Evidence from Procurement Auctions,” Review of Economic Studies, 2009, 76 (4), 1397–1429.
  , Isabelle Perrigne, and Quang Vuong, “Conditionally Independent Private Information in OCS
  Wildcat Auctions,” Journal of Econometrics, 2000, 98 (1), 129–161.
Liu, Gao and Dwight V. Denison, “Indirect and Direct Subsidies for the Cost of Government Capital:
  Comparing Tax–Exempt Bonds and Build American Bonds,” National Tax Journal, 2014, 67 (3), 569–
  594.
Marion, Justin, “Are Bid Preferences Benign? The Effect of Small Business Subsidies in Highway Pro-
 curement Auctions,” Journal of Public Economics, 2007, 91 (7-8), 1591–1624.
   and Erich Muehlegger, “Fuel Tax Incidence and Supply Conditions,” Journal of Public Economics,
  2011, 95 (9), 1202–1212.
Miller, Merton H., “Debt and Taxes,” The Journal of Finance, 1977, 32 (2), 261–275.
Moretti, Enrico and Daniel J. Wilson, “The Effect of State Taxes on the Geographic Location of Top
 Earners: Evidence from Star Scientists,” American Economic Review, 2017, 107 (7), 1858–1903.
National Association of State Budget Officers, “Budget Processes in the States,” 2008-2015.
National Governors Association, “Concerns with Capping the Exemption of Muni Bond Inter-
 est at 28 Percent,” 2012. Available at: https://www.nga.org/files/live/sites/NGA/files/pdf/
 1212EDCGFOA.pdf (Accessed: March 26, 2017).
Oster, Emily, “Unobservable Selection and Coefficient Stability: Theory and Evidence,” Journal of Busi-
 ness Economics and Statistics, 2017, pp. 1–17.
Pomerleau,   Kyle, “Details and Analysis of the 2016 House Republican Tax Re-
 form Plan,”    Tax Foundation 2016.        Available at:    https://taxfoundation.org/
 details-and-analysis-2016-house-republican-tax-reform-plan/ (Accessed: March 26, 2017).



                                                  34
Poterba, James M., “Explaining the Yield Spread between Taxable and Tax–exempt Bonds: The Role
 of Expected Tax Policy,” in Harvey S. Rosen, ed., Studies in State and Pocal Public Finance, 1986,
 chapter 2, pp. 5–52.
  , “Tax Reform and the Market for Tax–Exempt Debt,” Regional Science and Urban Economics, 1989, 19
  (3), 537–562.
  , “State Responses to Fiscal Crises: The Effects of Budgetary Institutions and Politics,” Journal of
  Political Economy, 1994, 102 (4), 799–821.
  , “Taxation, Risk-Taking, and Household Portfolio Behavior,” in Alan J. Auerbach, Raj Chetty, Martin
  Feldstein, and Emmanuel Saez, eds., Handbook of Public Economics, Vol. 3 2002, chapter 17, pp. 1109–
  1171.
  , “Municipal bonds,” The New Palgrave Dictionary of Economics, 2008.
   and Andrew A. Samwick, “Taxation and Household Portfolio Composition: US Evidence from the
  1980s and 1990s,” Journal of Public Economics, 2003, 87 (1), 5–38.
   and Arturo Ramı́rez Verdugo, “Portfolio Substitution and the Revenue Cost of the Federal Income
  Tax Exemption for State and Local Government Bonds,” National Tax Journal, 2011, 64 (2), 591–614.
   and Kim S. Rueben, “Fiscal News, State Budget Rules, and Tax–Exempt Bond Yields,” Journal of
  Urban Economics, 2001, 50 (3), 537–562.
   and     , “State Fiscal Insitutions and the U.S. Municipal Bond Market,” in James M. Poterba and
  Jürgen Von Hagen, eds., Fiscal Institutions and Fiscal Performance, 2002, chapter 8, pp. 1109–1171.
Puentes, Robert, Patrick Sabol, and Joseph Kane, “Revive Build America Bonds (BABs) to Support
 State and Local Investments,” Brookings Institution 2013. Available at: https://www.brookings.edu/
 wp-content/uploads/2016/06/Fed-Series-Babs-82813.pdf (Accessed: March 26, 2017).
Roberts, James W. and Andrew Sweeting, “When Should Sellers Use Auctions?,” American Eco-
 nomic Review, 2013, 103 (5), 1830–1861.
   and   , “Bailouts and the Preservation of Competition: The Case of the Federal Timber Contract
  Payment Modification Act,” AEJ Microeconomics, 2016, 8 (3), 257–288.
Rubin,      Richard,     “How    Long     Will   the    Tax    Break     on    Municipal
 Bonds     Last?,”   2017.          Available   at:       https://www.wsj.com/articles/
 mnuchin-says-trump-will-offer-biggest-tax-cut-in-u-s-history-1493213275      (Accessed:
 May 24, 2017).
Saez, Emmanuel, “The Optimal Treatment of Tax Expenditures,” Journal of Public Economics, 2004,
  88 (12), 2657–2684.
  , Joel Slemrod, and Seth H. Giertz, “The Elasticity of Taxable Income with Respect to Marginal
  Tax Rates: A Critical Review,” Journal of Economic Literature, 2012, 50 (1), 3–50.
Schultz, Paul, “The Market for New Issues of Municipal Bonds: the Roles of Transparency and Limited
  Access to Retail Investors,” Journal of Financial Economics, 2012, 106 (3), 492–512.
Schwert, Michael, “Municipal bond liquidity and default risk,” The Journal of Finance, 2017, 72 (4),
  1683–1722.
SDC Platinum, “SDC Platinum Global Public Finance,” Thomson SDC Platinum Database 2016. Avail-
 able at: Subscription Service (Data Accessed: March 21, 2017).
Shneyerov, Artyom, “An Empirical Study of Auction Revenue Rankings: the Case of Municipal Bonds,”
  RAND Journal of Economics, 2006, 37 (4), 1005–1022.
SIFMA, “Statistics,” Securities Industry and Financial Markets Association 2020. Available at: https:
  //www.sifma.org/resources/archive/research/statistics/ (Accessed: August 12, 2020).
Skelton, Jeffrey L., “Banks, Firms and the Relative Pricing of Tax–Exempt and Taxable Bonds,” Journal
  of Financial Economics, 1983, 12 (3), 343–355.

                                                 35
Snider, Conan and Thomas Youle, “The Fix is In: Detecting Portfolio Driven Manipulation of the
  Libor,” Working Paper, 2014.
Sogo, Takeharu, Dan Bernhardt, and Tingjun Liu, “Endogenous Entry to Security-Bid Auctions,”
  American Economic Review, 2016, 106 (11), 3577–3589.
Suárez Serrato, Juan Carlos and Owen Zidar, “Who Benefits from State Corporate Tax Cuts? A
  Local Labor Markets Approach with Heterogeneous Firms,” American Economic Review, 2016, 106 (9),
  2582–2624.
Swearingen, Joel, “Lawmakers Target the Tax-exemption for Municipal Bonds Again,”
 The National Law Review, 2016.     Available at:  http://www.natlawreview.com/article/
 lawmakers-target-tax-exemption-municipal-bonds-again (Accessed: March 24, 2017).
Tang, Xun, “Bounds on Revenue Distributions in Counterfactual Auctions with Reserve Prices,” RAND
  Journal of Economics, 2011, 42 (1), 175–203.
Tax Policy Center, “What are Municipal Bonds and How are they Used?,” Urban Institute
  and Brookings Institution 2015. Available at: http://www.taxpolicycenter.org/briefing-book/
  what-are-municipal-bonds-and-how-are-they-used (Accessed: March 23, 2017).
The Bond Buyer, “Competitive Sales Results,” The Bond Buyer 2016. Available at: Subscription Service
 http://www.bondbuyer.com/ (Data Accessed: March 21, 2017).
Trzcinka, Charles, “The Pricing of Tax-Exempt Bonds and the Miller Hypothesis,” The Journal of
  Finance, 1982, 37 (4), 907–923.
U.S. Census Bureau, “State and Local Government Finances by Level of Government and by State:
 2014,” American Fact Finder 2017. Available at: https://factfinder.census.gov/bkmk/table/1.0/
 en/SLF/2014/00A1 (Accessed: March 24, 2017).
  , “State and Local Government Finances by Level of Government and by State: 2017,” Census of
  Governments 2020. Available at: https://www.census.gov/data/tables/2017/econ/gov-finances/
  summary-tables.html (Accessed: August 12, 2020).
U.S. Securities and Exchange Commission, “Report on the Municipal Securities Market,” 2012.
 Available at: https://www.sec.gov/news/studies/2012/munireport073112.pdf (Accessed: March
 23, 2017).
U.S. Treasury, “Tax Expenditures FY2017,” 2016. Available at: https://www.treasury.gov/
 resource-center/tax-policy/Documents/Tax-Expenditures-FY2017.pdf (Accessed: March 23,
 2017).
Walsh, Mary Williams, “Municipalities Fight a Proposal to Tax Muni Bond Interest,” New York Times,
 Dec. 19 2012.
Youle, Thomas, “How Much Did Manipulation Distort the Libor,” Working Paper, 2014.
Zweig, Jason, “Trump Unveils Broad Tax-Cut Plan,” 2011. Available at: https://www.wsj.com/
 articles/SB10001424052748704810504576307233579693982 (Accessed: March 26, 2017).




                                                36
                                                              Figure 1: Maps of Summary Statistics

                              (a) Number of Auctions                                                       (b) Average Winning Bid
37




                             (c) Effective Rate in 2015                                            (d) Change in Effective Rate 2008-2015




      Notes: These maps show the spatial distribution of several important variables. Panel (a) shows the number of auctions in the estimation sample from each
     state, and Panel (b) shows the average winning bid or interest rate paid by the locality in percentage points. Panels (c) and (d) show the distribution of
     effective tax rates in percentage points and how those rates change over the sample period, respectively. The data are discussed in Section 2.3 and Appendix
     A. Additional descriptive statistics are listed in Table 1.
       Figure 2: Binscatter of Change in Annual Average Borrowing Costs on Change in Tax Rate
                (a) Change in Winning Bid as a Function of Current Change in Tax Rate



                 Residualized Change in Bids (Basis Points)
                 -20       -10      0         10       20




                                                              -1                    -.5               0                  .5                         1
                                                                                   Residualized Change in Effective Tax Rate

                                                                                        Binned Data by Ventiles
                                                                                        Linear Fit                                      90% CI
                                                              The slope of the regression line is -9.73 with standard error 2.59 and p-value .001


             (b) Placebo: Change in Winning Bid as a Function of Future Change in Tax Rate
                 Residualized Change in Bids (Basis Points)
                 -10       -5      0        5        10




                                                              -1                  -.5                0                  .5                          1
                                                                          Residualized Change in Effective Tax Rate in Future Year

                                                                                        Binned Data by Ventiles
                                                                                        Linear Fit                                      90% CI
                                                              The slope of the regression line is 1.06 with standard error 2.77 and p-value .704


 Notes: These figures show the results of the first differences regression of the winning bid, in basis points, on the
change in effective tax rates, in percentage points, for a current tax change and a future tax change. Panel (a) shows
the results of a regression of the change in bid on the change in the current tax rate for tax rate changes from 2008
to 2015. This regression finds a coefficient of -9.73 with a standard error of 2.59, which is close to the preferred
regression estimates of -6.8. Panel (b) shows the results of a regression of the change in bid on the change in the tax
rate in the following year ranging from 2009 to 2016. This placebo test finds a coefficient equal to 1.066, which is
statistically indistinguishable from 0. The controls included in these regressions are the same as those used in Column
(5) of Table 2. See Section 3 for more information.
                                                                                                         38
                                Figure 3: Simulated and Observed Winning Bids
                                 0.35
                                                                            Data
                                                                            Prediction
                                  0.3


                                 0.25


                                  0.2


                                 0.15


                                  0.1


                                 0.05


                                   0
                                    -2     0       2       4         6     8             10
                                                       Winning bid

Notes: This figure visually displays the goodness of fit of the model relative to the observed data in the distribution
of bids. See Section 4 for the discussion of the model and Table 4 for the associated parameter estimates.




                                                          39
                     Figure 4: Non-Parametric Estimates of the Probability of Winning




Notes: These figures show the non-parametric estimates of the winning probability for a given bid conditional on a
bond maturity of between 2 and 17 years, which is the middle third of the maturity distribution. The non-parametric
estimates here are also used to estimate optimal bids and elasticities for a given value. Figure A.15 shows that these
estimates are robust to regressing out all controls from column (4) of Table 2. See Section 6 for more information
about these estimates and the discussion of optimal bid responses.




                                                         40
                       Figure 5: α-Policy Outcomes for Borrowing Rates and Markups
                                                    4
                                                                                       Bid, partial effect
                                                                                       Bid, full effect
                                                   3.5
                                                                                       Markup, partial effect
                                                                                       Markup, full effect
                                                    3
                               Percentage points




                                                   2.5


                                                    2


                                                   1.5


                                                    1


                                                   0.5


                                                    0
                                                     0.4   0.6   0.8   1   1.2   1.4    1.6        1.8          2


 Notes: This figure shows counterfactual bids for different ratios of the current federal exemption. α = 0.5 is
equivalent to cutting the exemption in half, and α = 2 would double the exemption by subsidizing municipal bond
interest income by an amount equal to the federal tax rate in addition to the exemption. See Section 7.1 for additional
discussion and Figures 6 and 7 for the spatial distribution of counterfactual changes associated with α = 0.73.




                                                                           41
                                          Figure 6: Effect of Capping Federal Excludability at 28% on Winning Bids

                              (a) Actual Average Winning Bid                            (b) Simulated Average Bid with Capped Excludability
                                                                                                        (No Entry Margin)
42




                  (c) Simulated Average Bid with Capped Excludability                               (d) Change between (a) and (c)
                                 (With Entry Margin)                                                     (With Entry Margin)




      Notes: This figure shows spatial heterogeneity in the counterfactual estimates of the winning bids if the federal exclusion were capped at 28%. See Section
     7.1 for additional discussion about the counterfactual analysis and Figure 7 for the corresponding markups. The comparable estimates of the winning bids if
     the state exemption were eliminated are shown in Figure A.6. The average effects of the policy reforms are shown in Table 7, the parameter estimates are
     displayed in Table 4, and α-policy outcomes for borrowing rates and markups are shown in Figure 5.
                                            Figure 7: Effect on Markups of Capping Federal Excludability at 28%

                                    (a) Average Markup                               (b) Simulated Average Markup with Capped Excludability
                                                                                                        (No Entry Margin)
43




                (c) Simulated Average Markup with Capped Excludability                             (d) Change between (a) and (c)
                                  (With Entry Margin)                                                   (With Entry Margin)




     Notes: This figure shows spatial heterogeneity in the counterfactual estimates of markups if the federal exclusion were capped at 28%. See Section 7.1 for
     additional discussion about the counterfactual analysis and Figure 6 for the corresponding bids. The comparable estimates of markups if the state exemption
     were eliminated are shown in Figure A.7. The average effects of the policy reforms are shown in Table 7, the parameter estimates are displayed in Table 4,
     and α-policy outcomes for borrowing rates and markups are shown in Figure 5.
                                           Figure 8: Bidding Functions under the Three-Bidder Rule

                     (a) Tax-Shield Reduction: r = 0.9                                       (b) Tax-Shield Reduction: r = 0.5
           6.5                                                                        11
                       Regular                                                                   Regular
                       Three Bidder Rule                                                         Three Bidder Rule
            6                                                                         10


                                                                                      9
           5.5

                                                                                      8
            5
    Bids




                                                                               Bids
                                                                                      7
           4.5
                                                                                      6

            4
                                                                                      5

           3.5                                                                        4


            3                                                                         3
                 2   2.5       3       3.5      4      4.5   5   5.5   6               1.5   2        2.5      3     3.5   4   4.5   5   5.5   6
                                              Values                                                                  Values

Notes: These figures show the bidding strategies in auctions with full tax advantage and auctions where the tax
advantage changes from τ to rτ if the number of participants is less than 3. The left figure corresponds to r = 0.9,
and the right figure corresponds to r = 0.5. See Section 7.2 for details.




                                                                       44
                                        Table 1: Descriptive Statistics

                                                 Mean            SD       5th    25th     50th     75th     95th
    Bond Characteristics
      Refund Issue                                0.767         0.423    0.00    1.00     1.00     1.00     1.00
      Moody’s or S&P Information                  0.657        0.475     0.00    0.00     1.00     1.00     1.00
      Maturity                                   11.186        9.062     1.00    1.00    11.00    20.00    25.00
      Size of Auction (Million Nominal USD)      25.824        54.954    5.25    7.16    10.00    20.36    90.00
    Auction Characteristics
      Observed Bidders                            5.907         2.667    2.00    4.00     5.00    7.00     11.00
      Potential Bidders                           8.192         2.651    5.00    6.00     8.00    10.00    13.00
    Auction Outcomes
      Winning Bid (in Basis Points)             213.882        135.450   23.82   78.30   220.10   317.90   430.54
      Standard Deviation of Bids in Auction     15.428         16.547    2.72    6.37    10.65    18.21    45.06
    State Characteristics
      Sales Tax Rate                             5.664         1.328     4.00    4.50    6.00      6.50     7.00
      Corporate Income Tax Rate                  7.108         2.709     0.00    6.50    7.50      9.00     9.99
      Sales Tax Apportionment Weight             77.839        24.598    33.34   50.00   93.00    100.00   100.00
      Property Tax Rate                          1.619          0.511    0.74     1.20    1.79     2.03     2.27
      Alternative Minimum Tax (Dummy)            0.429          0.495    0.00    0.00    0.00      1.00     1.00
      Federal Taxes Deductible                   0.038         0.190     0.00    0.00    0.00      0.00     0.00
      Muni Interest Exempt                       0.804         0.397     0.00    1.00    1.00      1.00     1.00
      Governor Vote (R)                          0.477         0.102     0.31     0.39    0.50     0.54     0.66
      Senate Vote (R)                            0.433         0.112     0.28    0.32     0.44     0.51     0.65
      Presidential Vote (R)                       0.442         0.079     0.37    0.37    0.43     0.48     0.59
    Tax Characteristics
      State Personal Income Tax Rate              6.160         3.069     0.00    5.00    6.85     8.97    10.44
      Federal Personal Income Tax Rate           35.293         2.959    31.86   32.61   34.30    38.06    40.79
      Effective Marginal Income Tax Rate         40.872         3.638    34.30   38.74   40.79    43.96    46.21
Notes: More information regarding the definitions of variables included in this table is provided in Appendix A.




                                                          45
Table 2: Reduced-Form Effects of the Effective Rate on the Winning Bid and Number of Potential Bidders


                                                      (1)                 (2)        (3)        (4)       (5)
        Unconditional Effect of Effective Rate on Bid
          Effective Rate                            -6.531               -6.994    -6.819     -6.813     -6.806
                                                   (2.527)              (2.349)   (2.273)    (2.248)    (2.244)
                                                     0.010                0.003    0.003       0.003      0.003
        Effect of Effective Rate on N
          Effective Rate                             0.581               0.571     0.559      0.559      0.547
                                                   (0.118)              (0.122)   (0.131)    (0.131)    (0.133)
                                                     0.000               0.000     0.000      0.000      0.000
        Conditional Effect of Effective Rate on Bid
          Effective Rate                            -4.525               -5.082    -5.102     -5.100     -5.222
                                                   (2.514)              (2.359)   (2.313)    (2.283)    (2.282)
                                                     0.073                0.032    0.028       0.026      0.023
        Observations                               14,631               14,631    14,631     14,631     14,631
        Median Bid                                   221.2               221.2     221.2       221.2     221.2
        Median Effective Rate                       40.79                40.79     40.79      40.79      40.79
        Elasticity (Median)                          1.748                1.872     1.825      1.824      1.822
                                                   (0.677)              (0.629)   (0.609)    (0.602)    (0.601)
                                                     0.010                0.003    0.003       0.002      0.002
        Year Fixed Effects                             Y                    Y         Y          Y          Y
        State Fixed Effects                            Y                    Y         Y          Y          Y
        Maturity, Quality, and Refund Controls         Y                    Y         Y          Y          Y
        Political Party Controls                                            Y         Y          Y          Y
        Personal, Business, and Prop. Tax Controls                                    Y          Y          Y
        Sales Tax Controls                                                                       Y          Y
        Size of Bond Package Controls                                                                       Y
 Notes: This table reports regression estimates of the effect of effective marginal tax rates, in percentage points,
on the winning bids, in basis points, in municipal bond auctions between 2008 and 2015. See Section 3 for further
details and Appendix A for a discussion of the data. Additional robustness checks are discussed in Appendix C, while
more specifications building from this table are presented in Table 3, with other measurement approaches shown in
Table A.9. The first panel showcases estimates of the effect of effective marginal tax rates on the winning bid without
controls for the effect of competition. The second panel shows the effect that effective tax rates have on the number
of potential bidders. Results with flexible controls for competition through the number of bidders and the number
of potential bidders are shown in the third panel. All specifications include fixed effects for the state and year as
well as controls for maturity, credit rating, and refund status. Political party controls include the proportion of votes
cast for the Republican candidate in the most recent Senate, gubernatorial, and presidential elections in the state.
Personal, business, and property tax controls include indicators for alternative minimum taxes, exemption of in-state
and out-of-state federally tax-exempt debt, deductibility of federal income taxes, corporate tax rates, property tax
rates, and sales apportionment rules. Sales tax controls include state sales tax rates. The natural logarithm of size
of the bond package in millions of USD is included in Column (5). Standard errors clustered at the state-year level
are shown in parentheses, and p-values for each estimate are displayed below the standard errors.




                                                           46
  Table 3: Reduced-Form Effects of the Effective Rate on the Winning Bid and Number of Potential Bidders:
  Extended Controls
                                      (1)       (2)      (3)      (4)      (5)    (6)       (7)       (8)
Unconditional Effect of Effective Rate on Bid
   Effective Rate                   -6.531    -6.686   -6.169   -6.572   -6.709 -6.708    -6.531    -7.159
                                   (2.527) (2.361) (2.440) (2.484) (2.560) (2.577) (2.574) (2.249)
                                     0.010     0.005   0.012     0.009    0.009 0.010      0.012     0.002
Effect of Effective Rate on N
   Effective Rate                    0.581     0.557   0.642     0.581   0.574  0.583      0.566    0.545
                                   (0.118) (0.107) (0.156) (0.118) (0.103) (0.117) (0.107) (0.125)
                                     0.000     0.000   0.000     0.000    0.000 0.000      0.000     0.000
Conditional Effect of Effective Rate on Bid
   Effective Rate                   -4.525    -4.813   -4.417   -4.553   -4.684 -4.663    -4.575    -5.901
                                   (2.514) (2.350) (2.425) (2.474) (2.464) (2.565) (2.548) (2.315)
                                     0.073     0.041   0.069     0.066    0.058 0.070      0.073     0.011
Observations                        14,631 14,631 14,631 14,631 14,631 14,631 14,631 14,631
Median Bid                           221.2    221.2    221.2     221.2   221.2  221.2      221.2     221.2
Median Effective Tax                 40.79    40.79    40.79     40.79   40.79  40.79      40.79    40.79
Elasticity (Median)                  1.748    1.790     1.651    1.759   1.796   1.796    1.748     1.916
                                   (0.677) (0.632) (0.653) (0.665) (0.685) (0.690) (0.689) (0.602)
                                     0.010     0.005   0.011     0.008    0.009 0.009      0.011     0.001
Base Controls                          Y         Y        Y        Y        Y      Y         Y         Y
Bidder Fixed Effects                             Y                                                     Y
Issuer Fixed Effects                                      Y                                            Y
Unemployment Rate                                                  Y                                   Y
Gross Domestic Product (log)                                                Y                          Y
State Government Spending (log)                                                    Y                   Y
State Intergov Spending (log)                                                                Y         Y
Political Party Controls                                                                               Y
Personal, Business, and Prop Tax                                                                       Y
Sales Tax Controls                                                                                     Y
Size of Bond Package Controls                                                                          Y
  Notes: This table presents more estimates corresponding to Table 2 with regressions showing the effect of effective
  marginal tax rates, in percentage points, on the winning bids, in basis points. The base controls include state,
  year, maturity, quality, and refund status fixed effects in addition to the effective rate, as in Column (1) in Table
  2. See Section 3.3.1 and Appendix C for details and Appendix A for variable definitions. Standard errors clustered
  at the state-year level are shown in parentheses, and p-values for each estimate are displayed below the standard errors.




                                                             47
Table 4: MLE Coefficients for the Distributions of Values ṽ, Entry Costs, and Unobservable Heterogeneity

                                           Values (θṽ )      Entry Costs (θd )     Unobs. Hetero. (θU )
                                         (1)         (2)        (3)      (4)                (5)
                                          β
                                          b            γ
                                                       b        κb1      κ
                                                                         b2                 σ
                                                                                            bU
              Variable                 Mean        StDev       Mean    StDev              StDev
              Const                     3.485       1.406     -15.597 20.321               0.434
                                      (0.014)     (0.015)     (0.310) (0.451)             (0.002)
              Maturity                  0.125      -0.031
                                     (0.0004) (0.0002)
              Effective Rate: τ        -4.115      -4.870
                                      (0.029)     (0.037)
 Notes: This table presents estimates from the baseline model for bidder valuations in percentage points and effective
tax rates measured as fractions as described in Section 5. The additional controls are the same as those in Column
(4) of Table 2. Standard errors are in parentheses.




                       Table 5: Summary of Average Estimated Markups by Issuer Type

                                                   Markup (BP)        Markup Rate (%)         Markup Value ($)
          Total                                      16.837               21.452                  248,728
          States and State Authorities               12.682               11.950                 2,586,363
          Counties, Parishes, and Colleges           15.562               18.708                  321,019
          School and Utility Districts               17.123               20.401                  172,738
          Cities, Towns, and Villages                16.927               23.740                  133,859
 Notes: This table showcases the average markups estimated in the structural model by issuer type. The row titled
“Total” includes all issuers, including those for which an issuer type is not listed by SDC Platinum, while the other
rows take the average of a subset of issuers by type. The markup is estimated directly from the model, the markup
rate is the markup divided by the winning bid, and the markup value is the markup multiplied by size and maturity.
The average bond issue has an estimated markup up of 16.8 basis points, which is 21.5% percent of their interest
cost and adds up to $248,728 over the lifetime of the bond. The issuer types are organized from higher to more local
levels of government. States and state authorities have lower markups on average that are a smaller percent of the
total interest costs. The total value of the markups for these issuers is larger because their average issue size is larger.
See Section 5 for more information.




                                                            48
                    Table 6: Elasticity Decomposition Illustration (Tax from 35% to 39%)

                                                 N     Value v      Optimal b      εb1−τ   εµ1−τ
                    1. Baseline                  6    v0 = 1.566       1.896
                    2. Own-value Changes         6    v1 = 1.500       1.858      0.326
                    No Change to P r[win]
                    3. All-values Change         6        v1           1.772      1.060    3.886
                    P r[win] reflects τ1 , N0
                    4. All-values + Entry        8        v1           1.713      1.564    6.557
 Notes: This table shows an example using the case of the median winning bidder in auctions with six potential
bidders. An unobservable is chosen so as to match the median bid in simulation to the median bid in the data.
The columns show the number of potential bidders, the value of the bidder, the optimal bid given the value, the
intermediate elasticity of the bid, and the intermediate elasticity of the markups. The rows of the table decompose
the change in the optimal bid for the median winning bidder. The first row shows the optimal bid for a value of
1.566, and the second row shows how the optimal bid changes if the tax rate increases by 4 percentage points but
the probability of winning is held constant. The third row allows the bidder’s own value as well as other bidders’
values to change. The fourth row allows own and other bidder values to change and also allows other bidders to enter
into the auction where the full elasticity of the bid is 1.564 and the full elasticity of the markup is 6.557. For more
information, see Section 6.




                                                          49
                                                   Table 7: Average Effects of Counterfactual Policy Reforms

                                             (a) Bids and markups simulated on sample data for different policies
                                                          (1)        (2)               (3)               (4)      (5)                    (6)
                                                               Trump Proposal Obama Proposal No State No SALT                          TCJA17
                                                                                                     Exclusion
                                                        α=1        α = 0.96          α = 0.73                                          α = 0.96
                     Winning Bid
                      Partial (No Potential Entry)         1.91           1.96                 2.21             2.08         1.84         1.89
                      Full                                 1.91           2.01                 2.76             2.34         1.80         1.88

                     Markups
                      Partial (No Potential Entry)         0.20           0.21                 0.32             0.26         0.18         0.19
                      Full                                 0.20           0.23                 0.46             0.33         0.17         0.19

                                                                (b) Percentage change from α = 1
50




                                                                     (1)               (2)                 (3)            (4)         (5)
                                                               Trump Proposal Obama Proposal            No State       No SALT      TCJA17
                                                                                                        Exclusion
                                                                   α = 0.96             α = 0.73                                    α = 0.96
                          Winning Bid
                           Partial (No Potential Entry)             2.52%               15.67%             8.67%        -3.82%      -1.07%
                           Full                                     5.24%               44.33%            22.26%        -6.09%      -1.60%

                          Markups
                           Partial (No Potential Entry)              7.31%               61.57%           29.46%        -9.27%      -2.28%
                           Full                                     13.81%              132.26%           63.25%       -14.04%      -3.64%
      Notes: This table shows counterfactual bids and markups under two policy proposals: one limiting the federal exemption to 73% and the other to 96% of
     its current level. The last three columns represent simulations under which the state tax exemption for municipal bonds is lifted, the SALT deduction is
     repealed, or the SALT deduction is repealed and the exemption is limited to 96% of its current level. The linear model refers to the predictions based on
     the estimated reduced-form effect of tax rates on the winning bids. Section 4 discusses the setup of the model, while Section 7.1 discusses the counterfactual
     simulations. Robustness checks for four additional specifications are discussed in Appendix E, with the results presented in Tables A.26 to A.29.
               Table 8: Effects of the Three-Bidder Rule on Bids, Markups, and Entry Rates

                                             Mean bid     Mean markup        Mean Pr(entry)
                                         Tax advantage shift: τ → 0.9τ
                     Regular                    1.835          0.183              0.765
                     Three bidder rule          1.840          0.185              0.766
                     Reduced advantage          1.962          0.224              0.779
                                         Tax advantage shift: τ → 0.5τ
                     Regular                    1.835          0.183              0.765
                     Three bidder rule          1.858          0.193              0.769
                     Reduced advantage          2.293          0.510              0.831
 Notes: This table shows counterfactual bids, markups, and entry rates for two policies: a tax shield reduction for
low-competition auctions and a universal tax shield reduction. The effective tax rate τ changes to the level of rτ
whenever the number of bidders is less than 3 in the first case, and it changes to rτ permanently in the second case.
The regular case where the tax rate remains fixed at the level observed in the data is also included. The simulations
are based on the municipal bond auctions held in 2015. For details, see Section 7.2.




                                                         51
                         Online Appendix: Not For Publication

    This appendix includes several sections of supplemental information. Appendix A contains variable
definitions for all variables used in any part of the analysis and also has a precise derivation of useful
formulas using TAXSIM variables. Appendix B describes the sample selection process. Robustness checks
of the primary reduced-form results are presented in Appendix C. The derivation of the full model is shown
in Appendix D, and robustness checks for alternative model specifications are presented in Appendix E.
Appendix F provides additional details behind the three-bidder rule and of our simulations in Section 7.2.
Appendix G lists several potential policy reforms that motivate our counterfactual simulations. Finally,
Appendix H provides additional details underlying our cost-benefit calculations.


A      Data Appendix
A.1     Variable Definitions
A.1.1    Tax Variables

    1. State personal income tax rate. Effective top marginal personal income tax rate in each state derived
      from simulated tax returns with variation across states and years. This variable is already corrected
      for deductibility of federal taxes where applicable. Data from TAXSIM (Feenberg and Coutts, 1993).

    2. Federal personal income tax rate. Effective top marginal personal income tax rate at the federal
      level derived from simulated tax returns. This variable is already corrected for the deductibility of
      state taxes, so there is variation across states and years. Data comes from column labeled “wages”
      in TAXSIM (Feenberg and Coutts, 1993).

    3. Effective personal income tax rate. The sum of state and federal personal income tax rates. Data
      from TAXSIM (Feenberg and Coutts, 1993).

A.1.2    Auction-Specific Variables

    1. Bid. An interest rate stated in either TIC or NIC submitted by a bidder to an auction. Data from
      The Bond Buyer (2016); SDC Platinum (2016). This is scaled to be in basis points in Tables 1 and 2.

    2. Number of bidders. The number of bidders who submit bids in an auction. Data from The Bond
      Buyer (2016).

    3. Number of potential bidders. The number of bidders who could have submitted bids in each auc-
      tion. Data from The Bond Buyer (2016) and authors’ calculation. See Section 2.3 for the explicit
      mathematical formulation.

    4. Bidder and buyer. The names of banks submitting bids in each auction. The buyer is the bidder who
      submits the lowest bid. Data from The Bond Buyer (2016).



                                                     52
  5. Issuer. The name and state of the municipality selling the bond package. Data from The Bond Buyer
    (2016); SDC Platinum (2016).

  6. Years (2008-2015). Indicator for the year in which the auction takes place. Data from The Bond
    Buyer (2016); SDC Platinum (2016).

A.1.3   Maturity, Size, Quality, and Refund Controls

  1. Maturity. The number of years between the auction and the maturity of the longest-maturity bond
    in the bond package. Data from The Bond Buyer (2016).

  2. Size. The size in millions of USD of the bond package. Data from The Bond Buyer (2016); SDC
    Platinum (2016). In Tables 2 and A.7, the natural log of size is included instead of the level.

  3. Refund. Indicators for different refund statuses including advance refunded, current refunded, or not
    refunded. Data from SDC Platinum (2016).

  4. Quality. Indicators for bins of bond ratings assigned by either Moody’s or S&P. Data from SDC
    Platinum (2016).

A.1.4   Political Party Controls

  1. Governor. Percent of votes going to the Republican party in the most recent state election for governor
    without counting third-party votes. Data from Caesar and Saldin (2006) updated through 2010 and
    imputed for future years.

  2. Senate. Percent of votes going to the Republican party in the most recent senate election in each
    state without counting third-party votes. Data from Caesar and Saldin (2006) updated through 2010
    and imputed for future years.

  3. President. Percent of votes going to the Republican party in the most recent presidential election in
    each state without counting third-party votes. Data from Caesar and Saldin (2006) updated through
    2010 and imputed for future years.

  4. Major Party Index (MPI). The average percent of votes over 50% going to the dominant political party
    across six major elections in each state, as calculated by Caesar and Saldin (2006). Data updated
    through 2010 and imputed for future years. MPI is not used in Table 2 but is part of the structural
    model controls used in Table A.7.

A.1.5   Other Tax Policy Controls

  1. Sales tax rate. Percent sales tax rate charged by the state. Data collected by Suárez Serrato and
    Zidar (2016).




                                                    53
  2. Corporate income tax rate. Percent corporate income tax rate charged by the state. Data collected
    by Suárez Serrato and Zidar (2016).

  3. Sales tax apportionment weight. Sales apportionment factor for multi-state companies, which assigns
    a certain amount of a company’s income to each state for corporate income tax purposes based on
    sales in that state. Data collected by Suárez Serrato and Zidar (2016).

  4. Alternative minimum tax. Indicator for an alternative minimum tax in the state personal income tax
    code. Data from CCH (2008-2015).

  5. Federal tax deductibility. Indicator for deductability of federal taxes paid from state tax liability.
    Data from CCH (2008-2015).

  6. Own bond interest exempt. Indicator for personal income tax exemption of municipal bond income
    from bonds that originate in the same state. Data from CCH (2008-2015).

  7. Other bond interest exempt. Indicator for personal income tax exemption of municipal bond income
    from bonds that originate in other states. Data from CCH (2008-2015).

A.1.6   Government Spending and Economic Variables

  1. Unemployment rate. The annual average percent of individuals currently looking for work in each
    state who do not have active employment. Data from Bureau of Labor Statistics (2017). The first
    difference of the unemployment rate is included in Table A.7.

  2. Gross domestic product (GDP). The total economic activity in each state-year. Data from Bureau of
    Economic Analysis (2017). The first difference of the log of GDP is included in Table A.7.

  3. State government spending. Total annual expenditures by the state government. Data from Census
    Bureau (1994-2014) with 2015 entries imputed.

  4. State intergovernmental transfers. Total annual transfers from state to local governments. Data from
    Census Bureau (1994-2014) with 2015 entries imputed.

  5. State interest payments. Total annual interest payments for all local governments and state agencies
    within a state. Data from Census Bureau (1994-2014).

  6. 1-year LIBOR swap rate. The fixed rate paid on a 1-year interest rate swap. Data from Board of
    Governors of the Federal Reserve System (2018).

  7. 7-day municipal VRDO yield. Variable rate demand obligation yields from the Securities Industry
    and Financial Markets Association (SIFMA). An index of yields on a sample of large, AAA-rated
    municipal bonds with variable rates. Data from SIFMA (2020).




                                                   54
A.2    Effective Rate Calculations

From TAXSIM, we obtain the variables for top marginal state and federal personal income tax rates, t̃s and
t̃f , respectively. Each of these variables is already defined such that after tax income (ATI) can be describe
as AT I = Income(1 − t̃f − t̃s ). The effective tax rate is simply τ ≡ 1 − AT I/Income = t̃f + t̃s . However,
the variables from TAXSIM already account for interactions of state and federal rates so they cannot be
used directly for counterfactual simulations of changes in one rate or the other.
   Let Tf be the total federal tax liability and Ts be the total state tax liability. State taxes are always
deductible from federal tax liability so Tf = tf (Income − Ts ). For all but eight states, federal taxes are not
deductible from state tax liability so that Ts = ts Income, which further implies Tf + Ts = Income(tf (1 −
ts ) + ts ). In this case, ATI/Income is characterized as the following:

                        AT I/Income = 1 − (Tf + Ts )/Income = 1 − (tf (1 − ts ) + ts )

   The effective rate for states that do not allow deduction of federal taxes is defined as τ = tf (1 − ts ) + ts .
For states that do allow federal deduction, federal tax liability follows the same formula Tf = tf (Income −
Ts ), but state taxes are now Ts = ts (Income − Tf ).

                                       Ts = ts (Income − tf (Income − Ts ))
                                       Ts = ts Income(1 − tf )/(1 − ts tf )

   This also complicates the federal tax burden.

                                Tf = tf (Income − T s)
                                Tf = tf (Income − ts Income(1 − tf )/(1 − ts tf ))
                                Tf = tf Income(1 − ts (1 − tf )/(1 − ts tf ))

   Finding 1 − AT I/Income for these states with federal deductibility yields τ = tf (1 − ts (1 − tf )/(1 −
ts tf )) + ts (1 − tf )/(1 − ts tf ). The remaining complication is finding ts and tf from t̃s and t̃f as presented by
TAXSIM. tf can be found by two equivalent methods: first, for states with no state-level personal income
tax, tf = t̃f ; and second, for states without federal deductibility, tf = t̃f /(1 − t̃s ). For states without
federal deductibility, the actual tax rate is trivially equivalent to the TAXSIM reported rate. For states
with federal deductibility:

                                                t̃s = ts (1 − tf )/(1 − ts tf )
                                                t̃s = ts − ts tf + t̃s ts tf
                                          =⇒ ts = t̃s /(1 − tf + t̃s tf )

   The underlying tax rates and the counterfactual effective rates can be calculated directly from ts and
tf . If a state does not exempt interest on its own bonds, then state taxes are still paid on interest and the


                                                           55
effective rate of the exemption is equal to the federal rate corrected for the state tax deduction.


B        Sample
B.1       Construction

The combined Bond Buyer and SDC data represent 41,918 bonds issued in competitive auctions between
February 2008 and June 2016 and worth a total of $589.9 billion. There is significant variation in the
structure of the bond packages on several different dimensions. Most notably, the size of the bonds varies
from $10,000 to $950 million with a median value of $4.05 million. A total of 91.8% of the market value
comes from issuances of more than $5 million. The interest rates paid by municipalities range from 0.005%
to 8.5% with a median rate of 2.16%. Maturities range from less than one year to 40 years with a median
maturity of 10 years.
       Bonds can be funded by either general obligation (GO) or revenue (RV). GO bonds are paid back using
any financing capacity of the municipality. GO bonds are more commonly used to finance roads, public
schools, and low-income housing units that beneficiaries do not pay fees to utilize. Among the bonds in the
combined data, 4,220 (10.07%) are RV bonds, and the remaining 37,698 (89.93%) are GO bonds.
       From the total set of municipal bond auctions in our data, we create the sample that we analyze by
dropping the following: RV bonds, bonds for which we lack important information (like maturity or size),
bonds with a total size of less than $5 million, taxable municipal bonds, and Build America Bonds (BABs).58
The step-by-step outcomes of our sample construction are shown in Tables A.1 and A.2.
       After merging the SDC Platinum and Bond Buyer data, we are left with 15,354 auctions. Of those, 433
are dropped because they were issued in 2016, a year for which we do not have corresponding TAXSIM
data, and 290 are dropped because the winning bid is missing. The final analysis sample is made up of
14,631 auctions from 2008 to 2015.

B.2       Bidders

The agents placing bids in the auctions that we study are registered and licensed municipal securities
representatives working for investment banks. Following guidance by the MSRB, we treat all divisions
within the same bank as a single bidder.59 To participate in these auctions, a bank and the underwriting
agents must meet several regulatory thresholds. The following is a list of several of the most prominent
barriers to entry in this market.

       • Rule G-3 says that any underwriter or other “municipal securities representative” must take and pass
         both the Securities Industry Essentials (SIE) Examination and the Municipal Securities Represen-
  58
     The American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009 created an additional class of taxable municipal debt: BABs. The
return to the investor in BABs is taxable, but the federal government partially reimburses municipalities for the interest cost
incurred. These bonds show up in the data from 2009-2011, but we exclude them from our analysis as demand for these bonds
would not have been directly influenced by tax policy.
  59
     When defining the relevant regulatory unit for municipal bond underwriters, MSRB Rule G-1 states that “All such
geographic, organizational or operational units of the bank shall be considered in the aggregate as the separately identifiable
department or division of the bank for purposes of this rule.”


                                                              56
      tative Qualification Examination (Series 52). Further, the principal of each group must also take
      and pass the Municipal Securities Principal Qualification Examination (Series 53). These credentials
      expire after two years of disuse.

    • Rule A-12 requires that all brokers, dealers, and advisors register with the MSRB, paying a $1,000
      one-time fee and a $1,000 annual fee.

    • All underwriters are subject to examination every 4 years to make sure they are in compliance with
      all relevant MSRB rules according to Rule G-16.

    Table A.4 describes the bidding frequency among 10 most frequent auction participants. Together, they
account for about 50% of all bids submitted in our sample.


C     Robustness of Reduced-Form Results
C.1    Additional Specifications Detailing Effect of Taxes on Winning Bid

Table A.7 builds on the main specifications presented in Table 2 with additional controls. Column (1) is
the same across tables for comparison, with base controls including state and year fixed effects, maturity
fixed effects, size controls, quality fixed effects, and refund status fixed effects. Column (2) presents a new
specification that uses controls for state and year fixed effects, maturity fixed effects, corporate tax rates,
property tax rates, sales tax rates, the major party index, and presidential, gubernatorial, and Senate voting
records. Nebraska is missing MPI data so its 18 auctions are dropped from specifications with structural
model controls. These are the same controls as those used in Section 5.4. Column (3) uses every control in
the robustness table plus every control in Table 3. The estimated coefficients are very stable at between 6.5
and 6.7 basis points across all specifications without controls for the number of actual or potential bidders.
With controls for actual and potential bidders shown in the third panel, the estimates still only vary from
4.5 to 5.4 basis points.
    Table A.8 shows additional specifications of the regression equation estimated in Table 2. Columns (1)
to (4) show different versions of the choice of standard errors. We use standard errors clustered at the
state-year level in the main specifications, which are more conservative than standard errors clustered at
the state-month level and robust standard errors. Columns (5) and (6) show the robustness of the results to
monthly and daily fixed effects, respectively. The specification in Column (7) expands the sample universe
to include all bonds sold at auction, including those sold for less than $5 million. The specification including
small bonds is weighted by size bins.
    We show further results that explore additional potential threats to identification as well as potential
biases due to variable measurement in Table A.9. One potential concern is that changes in the top marginal
tax rate coincide with market trends in borrowing costs that are not captured by year fixed effects. Columns
(2) and (3) of Table A.9 expand our baseline specification by including controls for interest rate risk and
bond callability. Column (2) includes the swap rate between the 3-month and 1-year LIBOR, which is a
strong proxy for bond market uncertainty (Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, 2018), as well

                                                      57
as the SIFMA 7-day variable rate demand obligation yield for municipal debt (SIFMA, 2020), which proxies
for market conditions in the municipal bond market. Both of these measures track market conditions at a
high frequency, given that bond market conditions may vary widely within a given year. In Column (2),
we estimate an effect of -6.347, which is very close to the result in our baseline specification from Table 2
in Column (1). In addition, in Column (3), we add a dummy variable for bond callability as well as fixed
effects for the number of years until the first call date. These additional controls result in a coefficient equal
to -6.721, which also lies in the range of the estimates in Table 2.
   We also provide additional evidence that municipalities in states that changed taxes were not expe-
riencing a secular decline in borrowing costs before a tax increase by estimating an event study of the
form:
                                            X
                             ∆b1ist =                   β t−j ∆τst−j + ∆Xist Γ + ∆εist .
                                        j=−2,−1,0,1,2

Figure A.13 displays the estimates from this regression using tax changes from 2005 to 2016 and the average
winning bids at the issuer-year level from 2008 to 2014. The limitation of the sample to issuers who issue
in 5 consecutive years reduces the number of observations to 3,923 issuer-years, which severely hampers
statistical power although the point estimates are nearly identical. The blue line with circle markers plots
the result of this estimation when we include all of the leads and lags of the tax change variable. This
line shows that there are no significant trends in borrowing costs prior to the tax change and that the
greatest change in borrowing costs occurs after the tax change. Since the coefficients for the years before
the tax change are not statistically significant (p-value 0.76), we focus on the orange line with diamond
markers, which does not include pre-trends. The estimated effect is stable over time and centers around
the coefficient from our main specification in levels, which equals -6.75 and which is depicted by the green
lines with square markers. While this specification further restricts our data to those municipalities with
many bond offerings, it clarifies that the reduced-form effect is identified by municipalities that issue bonds
in periods with different tax rates, and the timing of the changes in tax rates and borrowing costs provides
further evidence that our estimates are not driven by a spurious relation and can be interpreted as causal.

C.2     Assessing Definitions of Potential and Actual Bidders

Panel B in Table 2 shows that, using our preferred definition, the number of potential bidders is responsive
to changes in the tax advantage. The primary definition of potential bidders is detailed in Section 2.3.
   We now explore whether the main results hold for the number of actual bidders as well as for alternative
definition of the number of potential bidders. “Actual bidders” refers to the number of unique entities that
are observed bidding in a given auction. The alternative specification, referred to as “Definition 2,” is the
number of unique entities that participate in auctions held in the same state and month. This definition
yields, on average, a much larger number than the baseline, Definition 1. Table A.10 shows that actual
and potential participation is increasing consistently across both definitions. The effects on these panels
are stable across specifications and are statistically significant at the 1% level in all cases. As expected,
the values of the coefficient vary across definitions of potential bidders, as some definitions are broader and


                                                           58
include bidders that may have very little chance of responding to the change in taxes.

C.3    Auction Participation by Bidder Type

Panel B in Table 2 shows that, using our preferred definition, the number of potential bidders is responsive
to changes in the tax advantage. Here, we assign types for each underwriter depending on the geography,
the timing, and the frequency of the bids it submitted in our sample. We the study which types of the
bidders drive our results for the effect of taxes on the participation decisions of the agents.
   Recall our baseline definition for the number of potential bidders.

                                                            1(a not in j)K(Xi − Xj )
                                          P         P
                                              i∈G    a∈i
                              Nj = nj +                 P
                                                            i∈G K(Xi   − Xj )

Let t denote the type of the agent a participating in auction j. Now define the number of type t potential
bidders as
                                                1(a is of type t)1(a not in j)K(Xi − Xj )
                                   P     P
                                   i∈G    a∈i
                   Nj,t = nj,t +                        P                                   .
                                                           i∈G K(Xi    − Xj )
   This representation is helpful in understanding how different bidder types response to a change in the
effective tax rate. Below, we estimate regressions analogous to Panel B in Table 2 for Nj,t rather than Nj .
We perform this analysis for several types of bidders, namely:

  1. all bidders. This is the baseline definition of N in Panel B of Table 2.

  2. State-incumbents. Bidder a in auction j we call an incumbent if a participated in at least one of the
      auctions in the same state as j that was held prior to j.

  3. Incumbents. Bidder a is an incumbent in auction j if a participated in at least one auction that was
      held prior to j.

  4. Low frequency. This includes all agents that have submitted fewer than 10 bids over the entire sample.

  5. One state. This includes agents that only ever bid within one state.

  6. Top 10. This includes 10 of the most frequent bidders in the data, as summarized in Table A.4.

The prevalence of the different bidder types is reported in Table A.5. We find that it is common to see state-
incumbent bidders in the data, as approximately 88% of an average set of potential bidders is comprised of
bidders with such types. One-state bidders, on the other hand, are rare, suggesting that the most common
bidder is one who participates in multiple auctions across multiple states.
   Table A.6 summarizes our results for the regression analysis. We find that it is the state-incumbent
bidders who drive our baseline results. When effective rates go up by 2 pp, the number of potential bidders
increases approximately by 1 and the number of state-incumbent bidders also increases approximately by
1 on average, other things being equal. These state incumbents also represent the majority of the sample,
as discussed above. At the same time, our results do not appear to hinge on, say, participation responses


                                                            59
of the top 10 most frequent bidders, whose bids collectively account for roughly half our sample. These
observations lend further credibility to the i.i.d. entry cost assumption we make for the structural model.
We also deepen our analysis of bidder heterogeneity by setting up and estimating a model where the top 10
most frequent bidders have their own distributions of bond valuations and entry costs. This model, partly
based on the results of this section, is discussed in Section E.

C.4    Effect of Taxes on Supply of Municipal Debt

We explore whether changes in the effective rate affect the supply of municipal bonds. Adelino et al. (2017)
find that the supply of municipal debt increases at the local level when the cost of debt decreases on the
intensive margin but not the extensive margin. Since we control for the size of the bond, we are primarily
concerned with any supply response on the extensive margin, although we do not find any supply response
on the extensive or intensive margins with the shock to borrowing costs induced by tax changes.
   Table A.11 shows that the supply of municipal debt is not responsive to changes in effective tax rates.
This table displays estimates from a series of regressions of the natural log of the number of bond offerings in
each state-month on the effective tax rates as well as other state-level policy controls. The estimates suggest
a 1 pp increase in the effective tax rate would lower issuance by 1.3 log points in the first specification or
raise issuance by 0.7 log points in the final specification, but all coefficients are statistically insignificant.
We find no evidence of a change in the supply of bonds.

C.5    Effect of Taxes on Issue Characteristics and Sale Method

We have shown that total borrowing is not changing in response to effective tax rates in Appendix C.4.
However, it could still be the case that the type of bond that is sold is responsive to tax rates. We examine
6 different characteristics of bonds that could be changing in response to tax rates. First, the decision
of whether to hold an auction or to negotiate a sale with an underwriter could potentially be influenced
by the tax rate since competitive forces in the competitive sales are a function of tax rates. The share
of bonds at the state level is not responsive to changes in personal income taxes, as we show in Tables
A.12 and A.13 for share of issue count and par value, respectively. Cestau et al. (2017) document how
state and local regulations restrict the ability of many municipalities to choose their method of sale. As an
additional test of whether the method of sale is a margin that may be responsive to tax rates, we extend
our baseline results from Table 2 by including an interaction for 17 states that have restrictions on more
than 80% of their issues as determined by Figure 1 in Cestau et al. (2017). The results are shown in Table
A.14. The states with restrictions on more than 80% of their bond issues display the same effect of taxes
on borrowing as states with fewer restrictions on the method of sale, where one would be most concerned
that municipalities or underwriters are able to adjust this margin.
   We also look at the design of the bond issues to see whether the tax advantage impacts the term
structure or financial controls that could affect the true interest cost. We test the years to maturity, a call
provision indicator, a refund indicator, a rating indicator, and an indicator for whether a bond is bank



                                                       60
qualified. We fail to find any response in the bond structure in response to changes in taxes, as shown in
Table A.15.

C.6    Heterogeneous Effects by Bond maturity

The main reduced-form results in Table 2 assume that the coefficient of the effective rate on the borrowing
cost is homogeneous across characteristics of the bonds. We explore whether this is a good assumption
by allowing for the effect to vary by bond maturity. Figure A.4 shows the empirical distribution of bond
maturity. If the effect of the tax advantage varies by bond maturity, the estimates in Table 2 may be biased.
Figure A.5 shows the estimated coefficients of the effective rate on the winning bid by the maturity of the
bond. This specification incorporates all of our main controls including bidder fixed effects and corresponds
to Column (4) of Table 2. This figure shows that there is some variance in the effects, with larger effects in
the first two years and more variable effects in later years. Table A.16 estimates the average partial effect
and the effect from the fixed effect model using a weighting estimator in Gibbons et al. (2014). While the
effects in Figure A.5 vary a great deal, the interactions between the maturity indicators and the effective
rate are not statistically significant, according to the score test p-value. The APE and FE estimates are
also not statistically different, according to the Hausman test p-value. The fraction due to competition
is slightly smaller in the APE, 25%, versus 30% in the FE. These results suggest that the assumption of
homogeneous coefficients is not biasing our main results.

C.7    Coefficient Stability Robustness Tests

In Tables 2 and A.7, we provide evidence of coefficient stability across several specifications with different
sequentially added controls. However, Altonji et al. (2005) and Oster (2017) have pointed out that coefficient
stability is not sufficient to show that omitted variable bias, or selection on unobservables, is not present.
These papers introduce a new way to think about coefficient stability and several ways to test for the
robustness of results.
   The intuition is that the relative changes in the estimated coefficients when more regressors are added
can be used to correct for omitted variable bias. Changes in the R2 should be used to scale changes in
the estimates of β when additional regressors are added sequentially. To test the validity of our coefficient
stability as a signal of mitigated omitted variable bias, we implement one of the estimators from Oster
(2017). The following is helpful notation used to define the estimator:

   • β̇ and Ṙ. The estimates of β and R2 from a regression with base controls.

   • β̃ and R̃. The estimates of β and R2 from a regression with additional controls.

   • β ∗ . The bias-adjusted estimate of β.

   • δ. “Coefficient of proportionality” or proportion of variation in the coefficient of the main variable
      of interest explainable by unobservables given the constraints on the data. If the estimate of β
      attenuates toward 0 as more controls are added, δ describes the ratio of the rate at which β approaches

                                                     61
      0 relative to the change in variance explained. If the estimates of β grow in magnitude when more
      estimates are added, this coefficient will be less than 0 because there is no amount of importance that
      unobservables could have relative to observables to make the coefficient move backwards to 0 assuming
      that all potential controls that are actually unobservable would continue affecting the coefficient in a
      constant way as they are added up until all variation is explained. δ = 1 implies that observable and
      unobservable variables have the same explanatory power over the outcome.

   • Rmax . The maximum R2 attainable with perfect controls.

   The parameters δ and Rmax are not observable, so we assume that both are equal to one following
the guidance of Oster (2017) while calculating bias-adjusted estimates. There are two primary ways to
implement the estimator: 1) estimate β ∗ for a given δ and Rmax , which we assume to both be equal to 1, or
2) estimate the δ that sets β ∗ = 0 given Rmax . The former gives an unbiased estimate of the causal effect
of the variable of interest on the dependent variable under the assumption that future controls that are
currently unobservable affect the coefficient of interest in the same way as the most recently added controls,
which is a remarkably strong assumption. The latter exercise of estimating δ such that β ∗ = 0 allows us to
gauge the relative importance of unobservables that would be needed to negate the observed effect entirely.
The following is the estimator from which corrected estimates can be calculated given δ or from which δ
can be calculated for a given β ∗ :
                                                              max − R̃
                                                   h        iR
                                       β ∗ ≈ β̃ − δ β̇ − β̃
                                                               R̃ − Ṙ
We include calculations of both the δ that would be needed to set β ∗ = 0 and the β ∗ implied by the
assumption that δ = 1 in Table A.17. We set Rmax = 1 for all specifications. The second to last row of
the table is the estimate of δ, the relative importance of remaining unobservables to negate the estimated
effect, and the final row is a bias-adjusted estimate of β ∗ assuming that additional unobservables would
change the estimated coefficient by the same magnitude as the last variable added and that we could add
enough variables to explain all of the variation in the winning bids.
   For Columns (1) and (2), the estimates of δ are negative, implying that adding more variables will
continue to increase the magnitude of the estimates, and the corrected estimates for δ = 1 are greater
than the original estimates. These results arise from the increase in the magnitude of the estimate when
more controls are added while the R2 has a very modest increase. In Column (3), the estimate attenuates
toward 0 slightly with additional controls, which implies an estimate of δ > 0. The estimate of δ is 113.9,
which is much larger than the cutoff threshold of 1 suggested in Oster (2017). The interpretation of this
estimate is that selection on unobservables would need to be 113.9 times more important than selection on
observables for our results to be negated under the assumptions of the test. The results of this test highlight
that selection on unobservables would need to be very large to negate the results presented in Tables 2
and A.7. However, this exercise also highlights how sensitive this type of proportionality test is to changes
in coefficients with small changes in the R2 , and we do not propose that the bias-adjusted estimates in
Column (1) are the true effect of taxes on borrowing costs since the estimator relies on strong assumptions.



                                                      62
C.8    Effect of Interest Costs on Tax Rates (Reverse Causality)

As discussed in Section 3, there is a potential that states could adjust their tax rates to deal with changes
in local borrowing costs, e.g., to raise revenue to cover past or future increases in interest rates. To
investigate this possibility, we gather data from Census Bureau (1994-2014) on total interest payments
made by governments in each state from 1994 to 2004 and regress tax rates on these interest payments as
well as leads and lags of the interest payments. Tables A.18 and A.19 show that interest payments are not
associated with changes in tax rates.

C.9    Elasticity Calculation Motivation and Robustness

The Fama (1977) model, referred to as the bank arbitrage hypothesis in Poterba (1986), provides the
primary motivation for why we calculate elasticities with respect to the net-of-tax rate. Let b be the rate of
return for municipal bonds that are tax exempt, and let r be the prevailing return on comparable taxable
assets. A tax rate, τ , is paid out of returns on taxable assets, so the after-tax return is (1 − τ )r. In
equilibrium, the after-tax returns on both asset classes must be equivalent:

                                               b = (1 − τ )r
                                           ln(b) = ln(1 − τ ) + ln(r).

Taking a total derivative and assuming that r is invariant implies:

                                                               db
                                   db   d(1 − τ )
                                      =           =⇒            b
                                                            d(1−τ )
                                                                      = εb1−τ = 1.
                                    b   (1 − τ )
                                                             (1−τ )

This simple notion of equilibrium provides us with a benchmark by which to judge the magnitudes of our
estimates. In a market where changes in taxes are perfectly reflected in municipal borrowing costs, we
would expect the elasticity of borrowing costs with respect to take-home rates to be equal to one.
   Elasticities with respect to net-of-tax rates are common in other branches of public finance, notably
in research on personal income taxes and labor (Feldstein, 1995; Saez et al., 2012) and corporate income
taxation (Suárez Serrato and Zidar, 2016; Moretti and Wilson, 2017; Giroud and Rauh, 2019). While to our
knowledge this specific elasticity has not been calculated before in an examination of municipal borrowing
costs, this is a moment that is helpful for contextualizing the magnitude of the change in borrowing costs
relative to benchmarks implied by classic models and for relations to other literatures. In Section 6, we
illuminate the central economic mechanisms in our context by decomposing εb1−τ into the equilibrium
markup rate, m, the value elasticity, εv1−τ , and the markup elasticity, εµ1−τ .
   We now discuss sensitivity to how we calculate passthrough elasticities. Figure A.12 shows the distri-
bution of elasticities across states normalized by the tax rates and net-of-tax rates in 2015. In both cases,
almost all states have elasticities greater than unity. In the primary definition with net-of-tax rates, no
states have elasticities of less than 1. When calculating elasticities with respect to tax rates, we find that
only 7 states have elasticities just below 1, and all elasticities are above 0.88. These results show that our


                                                       63
conclusion that borrowing costs have large elasticities with respect to tax advantages is not sensitive to
focusing on the average tax rate or on the net-of-tax elasticity.


D       Detailed Model Derivation

In this section, we consider an auction with N potential bidders. As with most standard results in the
auctions literature, we assume here that the valuations of bidders are distributed over some compact support
[v, v], that they are jointly affiliated, and that their density f (v) is continuously differentiable.
      First, we assume the existence of a differentiable monotone equilibrium bidding strategy β(v). Suppose
some agent i decides to enter the auction. At the bidding stage, i solves the maximization problem:

                                                max
                                                 0
                                                    (β(v 0 ) − vi )Pr[v−i > v 0 ]
                                                 v


where v−i denotes all values among the potential competitors. This problem essentially suggests that i
optimally chooses to bid as if he had value v 0 , while all other agents bid according to the strategy β(·). In
the Nash equilibrium, it must be that v 0 = vi .
      This maximization problem generates the first order condition:

                                                                          ∂Pr[v−i > v]
                                     β 0 (v)Pr[v−i > v] + (β(v) − v)                   =0
                                                                              ∂v

where v 0 = v = vi when β(·) solves for equilibrium. This is a first order differential equation for β(·). A
slight complication arises due to the lack of a border condition that would allow us to solve the equation.
We pick a specific equilibrium in which the participant with the highest valuation bids precisely his own
valuation. In this case, the unique solution to the maximization problem can be represented as:

                                                               Rv
                                                                    Pr[v−i > s]ds
                                                               v
                                               β(v) = v +                           .
                                                                    Pr[v−i > v]

This equation represents the unique monotone smooth equilibrium bidding strategy under our assumption
β(v) = v.60 We denote the corresponding profits as:

                                               π(v) = (β(v) − v)Pr[v−i > v].

Note that these profits implicitly depend on the probability with which agents enter the auction through
the right-hand side expression Pr[v−i > v].
      At the participation stage of the game, agent i facing costs di enters iff:

                                                     Zv
                                                          π(v)f (v)dv ≥ di .
                                                     v

 60
      In fact, other equilibria with smooth bidding strategies are not as natural because they feature β(v) = +∞.



                                                                   64
We assume that di are i.i.d., which allows us to define:

                                                                Zv
                                                                                       v           
                                                                                         Z
              p∗ = Pr (i enters the auction) = Pr di ≤               π(v)f (v)dv  = H  π(v)f (v)dv  ,
                                                                  v                          v


where H(·) is the CDF of entry costs. With p∗ defined, we impose the equilibrium restriction on the whole
entry-bidding game in the form of:

                                                                  N −1
                                                                          j
                                                                  X
                           0
            Pr[v−i > v] = CN          ∗ N −1
                             −1 (1 − p )     (1 − F (v)) +               CN          ∗ N −1−j
                                                                            −1 (1 − p )       (p∗ )j (1 − F (v))j ,
                                                                  j=1


which is a result of the assumption that in the absence of other entrants, the sole auction participant
competes with the seller.


E       Robustness of Structural Estimates
E.1      Factor Reduction

Here we discuss the robustness of our results to the first-stage procedure of regressing factors Z out of the
bids.61 As a reminder, we divide our controls into two categories: maturities and effective rates contained
in X along with other variables, which include the controls used in Column (4) of our main regression 2,
contained in Z. Our goal is to remove the shifts in the mean of bids due to Z out of the bids. The challenge
is to control flexibly enough for X and the competitive pressure as expressed by the number of potential
bidders N . Indeed, being shifters of the mean, Z affect the bids the same way regardless of how many
bidders there are in the auction. On the other hand, X may be important for the dispersion of the bidder
valuations, which would mean X could affect the markup parts of the bids, and the extent of this effect
would be different depending on the level of N .62
      Under the baseline approach, we set up the regression described in Equation 13. Alternatively, we may
consider a model fully saturated in N . Specifically, we have estimated:

                                                   N                  R
                                                         1(N = k)
                                                   X                  X
                                       b = δZj +                            Xi,j βi,k + ε                               (17)
                                                   k=2                i=1


where Xi,j is regressor i in auction j, R is the total number of regressors, N is the largest number of potential
bidders in the data, and (δ, βi,k ) are the coefficients to be estimated.63 To compare the results from this
regression with our baseline approach, consider Figure A.14. If we had precisely the same estimates for δ
across both specifications, all the points would lie exactly on the diagonal. The figure shows that, indeed,
the coefficient estimates are very close to identical.
 61
    Here, we are talking about all bids in the data, not just the winning ones.
 62
    In fact, as our results in Section 5.4 suggest, X does matter for the variance of the valuations and the markups.
 63
    To be precise, δ here is a vector with 63 coordinates.




                                                             65
E.2    Alternative Model Specifications

We now show that our implications for passthrough elasticities, markups, and counterfactual policies are
robust to different model specifications. The model fit and markups are presented in Table A.20 for all the
robustness checks to the structural model. We estimate the following models:

 S1 Baseline with more flexible P r(Entry). Here, we let the entry costs of the potential bidders depend
      on the maturity and effective rate. Our baseline parameterization thus extends to

                       Entry Cost Distribution :    h(dj ; θd ) =   lnN (κ1 + κ2 M + κ3 τ, κ4 )           (18)


 S2 Baseline with a different definition of N . Our original definition asserts that agents tend to bid for
      bonds with similar characteristics. The alternative we consider here is

                              Nj = # of unique bidders in state s(j) in month m(j)                        (19)

      where j is auction j held in state s in month m. The parameterization of the model primitives is
      otherwise the same as in the baseline.

 S3 A model where we parameterize the distribution of bids rather than values. Under our baseline
      approach, the response of the winning bids to changes in τ is restricted by the equilibrium bidding
      function that maps the valuations of the agents to their bids. An alternative approach from the
      auctions literature (rooted in Guerre et al. (2000)) allows us to estimate the dependence of bids on
      variables of interest directly and then recover estimates for the implied markups using the equilibrium
      first order conditions. The details of the model are provided below.

 S4 A model with two heterogeneous bidder groups. The top 10 most frequent bidders, whose activity
      represents about half of all bids submitted in our sample, are gathered together in one group, while
      the rest of the bidders represent the second group. We let the entry costs and the distribution of
      agents’ valuations vary by group. With this approach, we have more flexibility in predicting how the
      winning bid responds to changes in τ . In particular, when we study the full effects of tax rate changes,
      we let the number of potential bidders for each group to respond differently to shifts in τ . This model
      is based on the approach where we parameterize the bids in the style of Athey et al. (2011). The
      details are provided below.

   The estimation results are available in Tables A.21 through A.25. Across the tables, we observe that a)
the response of the average bid to changes in τ is approximately the same and b) for higher τ , the variance
of valuations/bids tends to get lower, which is suggestive of markups decreasing in τ .
   Including the baseline model, the results for the main counterfactual simulations of interest are reported
in Tables A.26 through A.29. We note that, both qualitatively and quantitatively, our results are robust
to a number of natural extensions of our baseline approach as well as to radically different methods of
estimation.

                                                      66
E.2.1   Alternative Model S3: Parameterization of bids

Here we describe a model with an alternative parameterization. The information structure and the order
of actions of the agents are the same as in the baseline. Omitting the dependence on the observables, let us
denote as g(b̃) and G(b̃), respectively, the density and the cumulative distribution function of the private
components of bids defined as b̃ = b − u. First, we note that:

                                                          ∂β −1 (b̃, 0)
                                            f β −1 (b̃, 0)                = g(b̃).                                  (20)
                                                                ∂ b̃

Plugging this expression into the first order condition delivered by Equation 6, we obtain:

                                PN                                   max(k−2,0)
                                       P r ∗ [n = k] g(b̃ ) 1 − G(b̃ )            max(k − 1, 1)
                      1            k=1                   i          i
                           =                                               max(k−1,1)          .                   (21)
                   bi − vi                 PN         ∗
                                                               
                                               k=1 P r [n = k] 1 − G(b̃i )


Note that this allows us to define the markup as a function of b̃ according to:

                                           PN                         max(k−1,1)
                                               P r ∗ [n = k] 1 − G(b̃ )
                                           k=1                       i
                      µ(b̃) =                                    max(k−2,0)               .                       (22)
                              PN       ∗ [n = k] g(b̃ ) 1 − G(b̃ )
                               k=1 P r                i         i             max(k − 1, 1)

   The idea of the approach is to estimate g(b̃) and G(b̃), then obtain estimates for b̃i given the observed
bids, i.e., b̃i +u, and thus construct estimates for the markups corresponding to the observed bids. Similarly
to how we do it for the baseline in Equation 15, we compute:

                                                  Z∞
                                                             fU (u)g(b1 − u, . . . , bn − u; θ)du
                        E[u|b1 , . . . , bn ] =        u
                                                           R∞
                                                                                                   du               (23)
                                                  −∞          fU (w)g(b1 − w, . . . , bn − w; θ)dw
                                                           −∞

Our estimate for the winners’ markups is then constructed as:

                                       m̂|b1 , . . . , bn = µ (b1 − E[u|b1 , . . . , bn ]) .                        (24)

This way, we can compare the predictions of our baseline model to the predictions of this model with
parameterized bids.
   To estimate the model, we assume:

                                           Bid Distribution:              g(b̃; θb̃ ) = N (Xj β, eXj γ , Xj δ, ∞)
                                 Entry Cost Distribution:               h(dj ; θd ) = lnN (κ1 , κ2 )
            Unobservable Heterogeneity Distribution:                   fU (u; θU ) = N (Zj Γ, σU )

where N (µ, σ, a, b) is a truncated normal distribution with mean µ, standard deviation σ, lower truncation




                                                                 67
point a and upper truncation point b,64 lnN (c, d) is a log-normal distribution with location parameter c
and scale parameter d, and N (e, f ) is a normal distribution with mean e and standard deviation f .65
       In the expression above, covariates Xj and Zj are the same as in our baseline. In particular, Xj include
potential bidders, maturities, and the effective rates, while Zj include state and year fixed effects along with
sales, corporate, and property tax rates, political party measurements for Senate, president, and governor
support, and, finally, the major party index. The unobservable u is assumed to be independent of Xj
conditional on Zj .
       We estimate the model using maximum likelihood. For a candidate θ = {θb̃ , θd , θU }, the likelihood of
observing the set of entry and bidding decisions in auction j is:

                                    J                                           Z∞
                                          n
                                    Y
                                                                      Nj −nj
                         L(θ) =          CNjj p̂j (θ)nj (1   − p̂j (θ))              fU (u)g(b1 − u, . . . , bnj − u; θ)du
                                   j=1                                         −∞
                                                                                                                                            (25)

                             s.t.   Eṽi π(ṽi |p̂j ) = H −1 (p̂j ; θ) ∀ j = 1, . . . , J.

       To evaluate the likelihood, we need to compute the expected profits of a potential entrant as a function
of entry probability. This is done according to:

                     Zb                                                   Zb                    N                             max(k−1,1)
  Eṽi π(ṽi |p) =
                                                                                                X
                          µ(b̃i )g(b̃i )P r(b̃i < bj ∀ j 6= i)db̃i =           µ(b̃i )g(b̃i )         P r∗ [n = k] 1 − G(b̃i )             db̃i
                     b                                                    b                     k=1
                                  
                                   PN                              max(k−1,1) 2
                     Zb                     P r ∗ [n = k] 1 − G(b̃ )
                                        k=1                       i
                =                                                 max(k−2,0)                           db̃i
                          PN
                     b       k=1    P r∗ [n   = k] 1 − G(b̃i )                     max(k − 1, 1)
                                                                                                                                            (26)
where the dependence on the entry probability p is contained in the probabilities of observing k active
bidders P r∗ [n = k].

E.2.2      Alternative Model S4: Heterogeneous bidders

As one of our counterfactuals, we split the bidders from our sample into two groups: the top 10 most frequent
bidders and the rest. Should we find differences in both bidding and participation behavior across the two
groups, our out-of-sample predictions about the average winning bid as well as the average markup could
potentially be very different from the baseline results. The challenging part of this exercise is to estimate
the two-stage model of auction participation and bidding with heterogeneous agents. We therefore follow
  64
     Note that the observables in our model are b rather than b̃ and that their distribution is not truncated. Consequently,
the standard MLE asymptotic results are valid for our parameter estimates. In practice, the variance of bids is typically low
enough that Xβ − b̃, where b̃ is the lower truncation point of bids, is so large that having or not having the lower truncation
threshold has virtually no impact on simulated bids. However, it is important to have truncation to ensure the existence of
equilibrium in the model. Furthermore, the model itself predicts that, given some distribution of values, bids in equilibrium
will naturally have some lower cutoff level.
  65
     We model the unobservable heterogeneity as having unconstrained support, which is convenient for MLE. While this choice
does allow the possibility of negative bids, our estimates suggest that this is very unlikely (with about a 0.02 probability that
the winning bid is negative across our sample). For this reason, we are comfortable with this parameterization, since it is
unlikely that truncating fU (·) would materially impact our results.


                                                                          68
the approach developed in Athey et al. (2011), where the authors rely on parameterizing the distribution
of bids and the probabilities of entry for two types of agents.
      Consider an auction with N1 potential bidders of type 1 and N2 potential bidders of type 2. Denoting
as gi (b̃) and Gi (b̃), respectively, the density and the cumulative distribution function of bids for group i,
consider the bidding problem of a type 1 agent with private valuation v:

             k1 ≤N   2 ≤N2
                X1 ,kX
max(b−v)                     P r(n1 = k1 , n2 = k2 )(1−G1 (b))k1 −1 (1−G2 (b))k2 +(b−v)P r(n1 = 1, n2 = 0)(1−G1 (b))
  b
               k1 +k2 ≥1
                                                                                                                            (27)
where the second summand once again corresponds to the possibility of having no competitors; we assume
that, in such a case, the bidder competes against the seller’s virtual bid, distributed according to G1 . This
problem leads to the first order condition similar to the one expressed in Equation 21:
              P Pk1 ≤N1 ,k2 ≤N2
 1                   k1 +k2 ≥1   P r∗ [n1 = k1 , n2 = k2 ] (k1 − 1)g1 (b)(1 − G1 (b))k1 −2 (1 − G2 (b))k2
    = P Pk1 ≤N1 ,k2 ≤N2
b−v                     P r(n1 = k1 , n2 = k2 )(1 − G1 (b))k1 −1 (1 − G2 (b))k2 + P r(n1 = 1, n2 = 0)(1 − G1 (b))
         k1 +k2 ≥1
                 P Pk1 ≤N1 ,k2 ≤N2
                       k +k ≥1     P r∗ [n1 = k1 , n2 = k2 ] k2 g2 (b)(1 − G1 (b))k1 −1 (1 − G2 (b))k2 −1
    + P Pk1 ≤N1 ,k2 ≤N2 1 2
         k1 +k2 ≥1      P r(n1 = k1 , n2 = k2 )(1 − G1 (b))k1 −1 (1 − G2 (b))k2 + P r(n1 = 1, n2 = 0)(1 − G1 (b))
                                                             P r(n1 = 1, n2 = 0)g1 (b)
        + P Pk1 ≤N1 ,k2 ≤N2
                k1 +k2 ≥1       P r(n1 = k1 , n2 = k2 )(1 − G1 (b))k1 −1 (1 − G2 (b))k2 + P r(n1 = 1, n2 = 0)(1 − G1 (b))
                                                                                                                  (28)
A similar expression can be written down for a type 2 bidder. The right-hand side of the equation above is
the reciprocal of the markup function similar to the one defined in Equation 22. We compute the estimates
for the unobservable according to Equation 24.
      Our estimation strategy involves parameterizing the distributions of bids. Additionally, instead of
imposing parametric restrictions on the costs of entry for the two bidder types, we directly parameterize
the probabilities of entry as in Athey et al. (2011). Specifically, we assume:

                                           Bid Distribution:             gi (b̃; θb̃,i ) = N (Xj βi , eXj γi , Xj δi , ∞)
                            Entry Probability Distribution:             λi (dj ; θd,i ) = Logit(κi Xj )
             Unobservable Heterogeneity Distribution:                   fU (u; θU ) = N (Zj Γ, σU )

where i = 1, 2 indexes the two bidder groups. As before, covariates Xj include potential bidders of both
types, maturities, and effective rates, while Zj include state and year fixed effects along with sales, corporate,
and property tax rates, political party measurements for Senate, president, and governor support, and,
finally, the major party index. As usual, the unobservable is assumed to be independent of Xj conditional
on Zj . We estimate the model in two stages. First, we construct the likelihood of the probability of entry
to recover θd,i as:
                                                 J Y
                                                   2
                                                             n
                                                                 Λ(κi Xj )ni,j (1 − Λ(κi Xj ))Ni,j −ni,j
                                                 Y
                              Lentry (θd,i ) =             CNi,j
                                                             i,j
                                                                                                                            (29)
                                                 j=1 i=1




                                                                   69
where Λ(·) is the logit cumulative distribution function and ni,j denotes the number of actual bidders of
type i in auction j.
    The second stage involves computing the likelihood for the bids.

                           J Z∞
                           Y
             Lbids (θ) =           fU (u)g1 (b1,j − u, . . . , bn1 ,j − u; θ)g2 (bn1 +1,j − u, . . . , bn,j − u)du.   (30)
                           j=1−∞


Here, we denote as b1,j , . . . , bn1 ,j the bids observed in auction j corresponding to type 1 bidders; conse-
quently, bids bn1 +1,j through bn,j correspond to type 2 bidders. At this stage, we also assume for simplicity
that the estimates for Γ are the same as the ones that we derive under the assumption of homogeneous
bidders. Thus, we only need to estimate βi , γi , δi , and σU for i = 1, 2.
    Estimation results are reported in Tables A.24 and A.25. Once the model is estimated, we proceed
to the counterfactuals. Our simulations are performed in a way analogous to the approach we follow in
the baseline as described in Section 7.1. As with the baseline, we also consider partial and full effects of
taxes. In the model presented above, partial effects account for changes in the probabilities of entry and
the distributions of bids for both bidder types. Full effects additionally account for changes in the number
of potential bidders by type. The impact of effective tax rate shifts on the number of potential bidders we
derive from our results discussed in Section C.3.
    To compare the predictions of this model with heterogeneous bidder types against the baseline model, we
evaluate the effects of changing the top marginal federal tax rate on the borrowing costs of the municipalities.
The results for this model are reported in Table A.29, while the corresponding baseline results are reported
in Table 7. We find that, relative to the baseline, the model discussed above tends to somewhat understate
the markups; predictions about the changes in the winning bid, however, are very close for the two models.


F    The Three-Bidder Rule

In this section, we provide additional details on the three-bidder rule analyzed in Section 7.2.
    Section 148 of the Internal Revenue Code establishes an “arbitrage restriction” for tax-exempt municipal
bonds sold by communities in the United States. The arbitrage restriction is intended to stop investors from
using municipal bond interest to acquire “higher yielding investments,” which in the case of municipal bonds
means that the tax exemption does not apply to yields that are above the original yield on a municipal
bond. The new IRS regulation comes into play in the municipal bond market through “issue prices” where
the tax exemption for municipal bonds only applies to the yield of a bond if the yield is lower than it was at
the original price—the price at which municipal bonds are sold, or expected to be sold, by final investors. If
the issue price is high and the original yield is low relative to where the bond winds up trading in secondary
markets, then the tax advantage of municipal bonds has relatively less value to investors.
    Determining the issue price—and thus the yield that is tax exempt—is subject to regulation that can
drive some bonds to trade with large portions of the yield being taxable despite the bond itself being
tax exempt. Having some control over the initial price of a municipal bond is valuable because the issue


                                                              70
price affects the maximum tax-exempt yield from a bond.66 This variation in taxable yield on otherwise
tax-exempt assets provides the basis for recent research about how taxes affect asset prices (Ang et al.,
2010b) because many municipal bonds transition between taxable and tax-exempt price ranges on secondary
markets. Bonds that are trading at a discount relative to their initial price have tax liabilities for the relative
market discount while the initial yield is tax exempt. Since 1993, this tax on market discounts for municipal
bonds has also included a de minimis threshold where the first portion of taxable income from otherwise
tax-exempt assets is taxed as capital gains but returns due to further discounts are taxed as personal
income.
    Ang et al. (2010b) show that these tax considerations matter for how investors value bonds in secondary
markets. However, the regulations that determine the initial price have been changing over time. Before
2017, the underwriter of a municipal bond would determine the initial price on the first date in which a
binding contract was created for the sale of the bonds based on reasonable expectations of what the price
would be for the sale of the first 10% of the principal value to investors, not including other broker-dealers.
The existing regulations during our sample are written such that the bonds do not actually have to be sold
at that price as long as the underwriter has a reasonable expectation that would be the price, so the initial
price and maximum tax-exempt yield can be set before any bonds are sold.
    In December of 2016, the IRS issued new rules about how initial prices are determined; these rules were
implemented in June 2017 (Internal Revenue Service, 2016). For most municipal bonds underwriters are
no longer allowed to set initial prices based on reasonable expectations but instead must follow one of three
rules. The first rule is that the initial price is the price at which 10% of a bond is sold to the public. The
second rule allows underwriters to “hold the offering price” by formally promising to sell a bond at a certain
price to any willing buyer at the same price for at least five days or until at least 10% of the bond has been
sold. The third rule allows issuers and underwriters to follow the old guidelines under which they can set a
reasonable expectation of the price on the sale date as long as three potential underwriters submitted bids
in a competitive auction.
    In our setting, auction participants do not know the level of competition in advance. Consequently,
under the three-bidder rule, they will not know their exact valuations for the bond until just after the
auction. Here, we perform a series of counterfactuals showing how the rule affects the bidding strategies
of the agents and, as a result, how their participation decisions change. We model the effects of the rule
by tuning the valuation that the bidder has for the bond depending on the number of active auction
participants. When the number of active bidders n is less than three, the effective rate changes from τ
to rτ for various r ∈ [0, 1], which, in turn, changes how the bond is valued by the bidders. This way we
capture the idea that the three-bidder rule reduces the advantage associated with the bond.
    Given that the change from τ to rτ happens after the bids are submitted and n is realized, we need
to describe how the valuations of the bond are defined for the bidders. We define the bidder’s ex ante
   66
      During our sample period, there are also other considerations for which issue prices are very important, particularly with
respect to advanced refunding issues. We abstract away from those issues for the following discussion because they affect only
a very small portion of our sample. Flexibility in determining the issue price is valuable to both the issuer and underwriter, as
it determines the tax shield.



                                                               71
valuation as:                                                 
                                                              ṽ           if n < 3,
                                                                  n<3
                                          v = ṽ + u,    ṽ =                                                       (31)
                                                              ṽ
                                                                     n≥3    if n ≥ 3.

While ṽn≥3 has the cumulative distribution function F (ṽn≥3 ; τ ), its low-competition counterpart has the
cumulative distribution function F (ṽn<3 ; rτ ). To model the effects of the three-bidder rule, we assume that
the respective quantiles of the two valuations are the same, that is:

                                              F −1 (ṽn<3 ; rτ ) = F −1 (ṽn≥3 ; τ ).                               (32)

Upon entry, the agent is assumed to learn his own v, which involves learning both ṽn<3 and ṽn≥3 . The
derivation of the equilibrium bidding strategy as well as the equilibrium probability of entry follows the
same argument as in Section 4 with the distinction that the winner’s valuation is a function of n. Writing
β(ṽ, u) = β̃(ṽ) + u, we have:
                                              P2     ∗                    max(k−2,0) f (ṽ) max(k − 1, 1)
                 ∂            (β̃ − ṽn<3 )   k=1 P r [n = k](1 − F (ṽ))
                     β̃(ṽ) =                   PN
                 ∂ṽ                                      ∗
                                                  k=1 P r [n = k](1 − F (ṽ))
                                                                              max(k−1,1)
                                             PN                                                                     (33)
                              (β̃ −   ṽn≥3 ) k=3 P r∗ [n = k](1 − F (ṽ))max(k−1,1) f (ṽ) max(k − 1, 1)
                          +                    PN         ∗                  max(k−1,1)
                                                  k=1 P r [n = k](1 − F (ṽ))


This equation together with the border condition β̃(v) = v n<3 P r(n < 3|n ≥ 1) + v n≥3 P r(n ≥ 3|n ≥ 1)
delivers the bidding strategy.
      Finally, we note that the expected profits of an auction participant with valuation v can be represented
as:
                                                                  N
                                                                  X −1
           π(v) = P r(n ≤ 2)(β(v) − vn<3 )(1 − F (v)) +                  P r(n = k + 1)(β(v) − vn≥3 )(1 − F (v))k
                                                                  k=2                                               (34)
                = (β(v) − vn<3 )w1 (v) + (β(v) − vn≥3 )w2 (v).
In Section 7.2, we discuss how this representation relates to the shape of the equilibrium bidding function
under the three-bidder rule.


G       Proposed Reforms

There are several recent and current tax reform proposals at the federal level that would change the
borrowing cost of municipalities and demand for municipal debt. Broadly speaking, the proposed reforms
fit into 3 categories: changing the federal tax rate of the exemption, permanently introducing other types
of subsidized municipal debt like Build America Bonds, and changing the scope of projects that are allowed
to be tax exempt. The first of these categories is the primary focus of this paper and captures most of the
reforms that have been proposed.
      Both Democrats and Republicans have proposed plans in recent years to decrease the size of the tax
exemption received by municipal bonds. In the Tax Cuts and Jobs Act of 2017, the top marginal rate was
cut from 39.6% to 37%. Former President Obama proposed a larger cut to the municipal bond interest

                                                                72
exemption in particular without necessarily adjusting the top statutory federal income tax rate. The Obama
White House proposed a cap on the municipal bond exemption at 28% first in the American Jobs Act of 2011
and then in budget proposals in subsequent years (National Governors Association, 2012). These specific
policy proposals provide the motivation for the choices of federal income tax rates in the counterfactual
                     0.28                     0.37
simulations at α =   0.386   ≈ 0.73 and α =   0.386   ≈ 0.96, where 0.386 is the average top marginal rate in the
subsample for the years 2011-2015.
    Other reforms to the supply of municipal bonds based on extending the availability of Build America
Bond subsidies or tightening tax-exempt eligibility have been discussed by scholars and think-tanks but
have not been formally proposed, to our knowledge. The suggestion of Puentes et al. (2013) that BABs are
superior to traditional municipal bonds on several margins is echoed in some of the academic literature,
including Liu and Denison (2014). Government Finance Officers Association (2000) discusses the potential
effects of legislation in the spirit of the Tax Reform Act of 1986, which excluded many bond issues from
qualifying for tax exemption.


H     Costs and Benefits of Tax Reforms

As we discuss in Section 7.1, the effects stemming from the tax advantage associated with municipal bonds
can be evaluated by comparing the fiscal cost of a tax subsidy with the change in the borrowing costs of
municipalities. Our analysis starts from two key numbers: the expected tax expenditure over the next 10
years, namely $500 billion, and the annual payments made by municipalities on their outstanding debt,
which total $122 billion. Recall that, in Section 7.1, we consider tax reforms that reduce the top marginal
federal tax rates so that the effective tax rate is set to:

                               τ (αtf , ts ) = αtf (1 − ts ) + ts × 1(Tax Exempt)State

for different α. Note that, for a given value of α, the annual tax expenditure is reduced by (1 − α) · $50
billion, while the annual interest payments on the municipal debt go up by (b(α)/b(1) − 1)·$122 billion, b(α)
denoting the average borrowing rate as a function of α. We use our model to evaluate b(α) and compute
the increase in the interest payments from reduced effective tax rates. Finally, we compute the ratio:
                                                               
                                                      b(α)
                                                      b(1)   − 1 · 122
                                                      (1 − α) · 50

representing the effectiveness of the municipal bond tax advantage. We perform this computation using
both the linear regression predictions for b(α) and the structural model. The regression prediction is based
on our results in Column 4 of Table 2. The structural model is used to predict b(α) under both partial and
full effects, as discussed in Section 4.
    Figure A.16 describes our results. We can see that both the structural model and the regression make
similar predictions for a wide range of α values. While the regression predicts a constant ratio of about 3.2,
the structural model that accounts for the effect of taxes on the set of potential bidders forecasts a slightly


                                                             73
higher effectiveness, with the ratio being closer to 4 for most values of α.
    To understand the cost-efficiency implied by the regression model, note that, for a given α, the change
in borrowing costs per dollar of debt payment is given by b(α) − b(1) = βtf (1 − ts )(1 − α), where β is our
estimate from Table 2. Relative to the reduction in the tax expenditure of (1 − α) · 50, the effectiveness
ratio is:                                 
                                 b(α)
                                 b(1)   − 1 · 122       βtf (1 − ts ) · 122  εb tf (1 − ts ) · 122
                                                    =                       = 1−τ                  ,
                                 (1 − α) · 50                b(1) · 50           (1 − τ ) · 50
where the last equality shows that we can write the effectiveness ratio in terms of the net-of-tax elastic-
               β(1−τ )
ity, εb1−τ =    b(1) .   From this expression, it follows that our reduced-form estimate implies a cost-benefit
calculation greater than one whenever:

                                                            (1 − τ ) · 50
                                                εb1−τ >                      ≈ 0.73.
                                                          tf (1 − ts ) · 122




                                                                 74
Appendix Graphs


                               Figure A.1: Frequency of Auctions by (N, τ ) Pairs




 Notes: This figure shows the frequency of observations by number of potential bidders (N) and effective tax rate
bins. We observe significant variation in the number of potential bidders even conditional on the level of effective tax
rate. See Section 2 for more information about the data and variables.




                                                          75
            Figure A.2: Number-of-Bidder Fixed Effects and Distribution of Number of Bidders
                % Discount on Bid 1 Relative to Median
                   -50 -40 -30 -20 -10 0




                                                         2       3       4       5       6   7    8     9      10       11        12    13    14   15   16
                                                                                                 Number of Bidders
                                    20
                Fraction of Auctions
                 5      10     15   0




                                                             1       2       3       4   5   6    7   8      9     10        11    12    13   14   15   16
                                                                                                 Number of Bidders


 Notes: This figure shows the number-of-bidder fixed effect estimates from specification (4) of Table 2 normalized to
the median bid in addition to the empirical distribution of the number of bidders in our sample. The reduced-form
analysis is discussed in Section 3, and robustness checks are presented in Appendix C.




                                                                                                     76
 Figure A.3: Number-of-Potential-Bidder Fixed Effects and Distribution of Number of Potential Bidders
               % Discount on Bid 1 Relative to Median
                  -30 -20 -10 0 10 20 30




                                                        2       3       4       5       6       7   8     9  10 11 12 13 14                15    16   17   18   19   20
                                                                                                        Number of Potential Bidders
                                    15
               Fraction of Auctions
                  5        10      0




                                                            1       2       3       4       5   6   7     8  9 10 11 12 13            14    15   16   17   18   19   20
                                                                                                        Number of Potential Bidders


 Notes: This figure shows the frequency of observations by the number of potential bidders (N) and the associated
fixed effect estimates from Table 2, Column (4). See Section 3 for a discussion of the reduced-form model.




                                                                                                                77
                            Figure A.4: Empirical Distribution of Bond Maturities




                                            30
                            Fraction of Auctions
                           10               020




                                                               0    3    6     9   12   15 18 21 24         27   30   33   36   39
                                                                                         Length of Bond


Notes: This figure shows the frequency of observations by bond maturity. We test for heterogeneity of the effect by
bond maturity in the reduced-form model in Appendix C.




              Figure A.5: Effect of the Effective Rate on the Winning Bid by Bond Maturity
                                            10
                                            5             0
                                 Effective Rate by Length
                           -30 -25 -20 -15 -10 -5




                                                              1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 1011121314151617181920212223242526272829303132333435
                                                                                              Length


Notes: This figure shows the estimated coefficients of the effect of the effective rate on the winning bid. See
Appendix C for more information and Table A.16 for the associated statistical tests.




                                                                                            78
                                             Figure A.6: Effect of Removing State Excludability on Winning Bids

                              (a) Actual Average Winning Bid                          (b) Simulated Average Bid with Excludability Removed
                                                                                                       (No Entry Margin)
79




                 (c) Simulated Average Bid with Excludability Removed                              (d) Change between (a) and (c)
                                 (With Entry Margin)                                                    (With Entry Margin)




     Notes: This figure shows spatial heterogeneity in the counterfactual estimates of the winning bids if state excludability were removed. See Section 7.1 for
     additional discussion of the counterfactual analysis and Figure A.7 for the corresponding markups. The comparable estimates of the winning bids in the case
     of elimination of the state exemption are shown in Figure A.6. The average effects of the policy reforms are shown in Table 7, the parameter estimates are
     displayed in Table 4, and α-policy outcomes for borrowing rates and markups are shown in Figure 5.
                                                Figure A.7: Effect of Removing State Excludability on Markups

                                     (a) Average Markup                               (b) Simulated Average Markup with Excludability Removed
                                                                                                         (No Entry Margin)
80




               (c) Simulated Average Markup with Excludability Removed                               (d) Change between (a) and (c)
                                 (With Entry Margin)                                                      (With Entry Margin)




      Notes: This figure shows spatial heterogeneity in the counterfactual estimates of markups if state excludability were removed. See Section 7.1 for additional
     discussion on the counterfactual analysis and Figure A.6 for the corresponding bids. The comparable estimates of markups in the case of the elimination of
     the state exemption are shown in Figure A.7. The average effects of the policy reforms are shown in Table 7, the parameter estimates are displayed in Table
     4, and α-policy outcomes for borrowing rates and markups are shown in Figure 5.
                                             Figure A.8: Effect of Repealing the SALT Deduction on Winning Bids

                              (a) Actual Average Winning Bid                                (b) Simulated Average Bid with SALT Repealed
                                                                                                          (No Entry Margin)
81




                      (c) Simulated Average Bid with SALT Repealed                                   (d) Change between (a) and (c)
                                   (With Entry Margin)                                                    (With Entry Margin)




     Notes: This figure shows spatial heterogeneity in counterfactual estimates of the winning bids if the SALT deduction were removed. See Section 7.1 for
     additional discussion on the counterfactual analysis and Figure A.9 for the corresponding markups. The comparable estimates for the case of the elimination
     of the state exemption are shown in Figure A.6. The average effects of the policy reforms are shown in Table 7, the parameter estimates are displayed in Table
     4, and α-policy outcomes for borrowing rates and markups are shown in Figure 5.
                                               Figure A.9: Effect of Repealing the SALT Deduction on Markups

                                     (a) Average Markup                                  (b) Simulated Average Markup with SALT Repealed
                                                                                                         (No Entry Margin)
82




                   (c) Simulated Average Markup with SALT Repealed                                   (d) Change between (a) and (c)
                                  (With Entry Margin)                                                     (With Entry Margin)




      Notes: This figure shows spatial heterogeneity in the counterfactual estimates of markups if the SALT deduction were removed. See Section 7.1 for additional
     discussion on the counterfactual analysis and Figure A.8 for the corresponding bids. The comparable estimates of markups for the case of the elimination of
     the state exemption are shown in Figure A.7. The average effects of the policy reforms are shown in Table 7, the parameter estimates are displayed in Table
     4, and α-policy outcomes for borrowing rates and markups are shown in Figure 5.
                    Figure A.10: Effect of Repealing the SALT Deduction and Capping Federal Excludability at 37% on Winning Bids

                              (a) Actual Average Winning Bid                                (b) Simulated Average Bid with SALT Repealed and Excludability Capped
                                                                                                                      (No Entry Margin)
83




      (c) Simulated Average Bid with SALT Repealed and Excludability Capped                                          (d) Change between (a) and (c)
                               (With Entry Margin)                                                                        (With Entry Margin)




      Notes: This figure shows spatial heterogeneity in the counterfactual estimates of the winning bids if the SALT deduction were removed and federal excludability
     were capped at 37%. See Section 7.1 for additional discussion on the counterfactual analysis and Figure A.11 for the corresponding markups. The comparable
     estimates of winning bids for the case of the elimination of the state exemption are shown in Figure A.6. The average effects from the policy reforms are shown
     in Table 7, the parameter estimates are displayed in Table 4, and α-policy outcomes for borrowing rates and markups are shown in Figure 5.
                               Figure A.11: Effect of Repealing SALT and Capping Federal Excludability at 37% on Markups

                                     (a) Average Markup                              (b) Simulated Average Markup with Excludability Capped
                                                                                                        (No Entry Margin)
84




                (c) Simulated Average Markup with Excludability Capped                              (d) Change between (a) and (c)
                                  (With Entry Margin)                                                    (With Entry Margin)




     Notes: This figure shows spatial heterogeneity in the counterfactual estimates of markups if the SALT deduction were removed and federal excludability
     were capped at 37%. See Section 7.1 for additional discussion on the counterfactual analysis and Figure A.10 for the corresponding bids. The comparable
     estimates of markups in the case of the elimination of the state exemption are shown in Figure A.7. The average effects from the policy reforms are shown in
     Table 7, the parameter estimates are displayed in Table 4, and α-policy outcomes for borrowing rates and markups are shown in Figure 5.
                                            Figure A.12: Winning Bid Elasticity Heterogeneity by State, 2015
                                           .2
                                           .15
                Fraction of States, 2015

                                           .1
                                           .05
                                           0




                                                 0              1               2                3               4
                                                                            Elasticity

                                                             wrt Net-of-Tax Rate            wrt Effective Rate


 Notes: This figure shows winning bid elasticities with respect to takehome rates, one minus the tax rate, and
effective tax rates in 2015. The elasticities with respect to takehome rates are all greater than 1. The elasticities with
respect to effective rates are all greater than 1 except for 7 states with elasticities between 0.88 and 1. We prefer the
elasticities with respect to takehome rates since they have an interpretation relative to a model of market equilibrium
with taxable and tax-exempt assets, but note that both definitions are very similar quantitatively and qualitatively.
See Section C.9 for more information.




                                                                          85
                                                            Figure A.13: Cumulative Effect of a Tax Change at Year t = 0
                                                  10
               Change in Winning Bid (Basis Points)
             -30     -20      -10        0




                                                       -2                 -1                   0              1            2
                                                                                    Years from Tax Change

                                                                               Cumulative Effect                  90% CI
                                                                               Effect with no Pretrends           90% CI
                                                                               Estimate from Levels               90% CI


 Notes: This figure shows the results of the event study regression of a change in bid on several leads and lags of a
change in the effective tax rate. The first line shows the total cumulative effect of a tax change event on the average
winning bid in each year surrounding the event. In the period of the tax change, the borrowing cost is 13.85 basis
points lower on average for each percentage point of the effective rate tax increase, and the long-run effect is -11.35
basis points. The second line shows the cumulative effect of the tax change without pretrends. The effect in the year
of the tax change is 9.62 basis points, while the long-run effect is 6.75 basis points. The controls included in these
regressions are the same as those used in Column (5) of Table 2. Figure 2 shows the results of a regression of changes
without the inclusion of leads and lags of tax changes. See Section 3 for more information.




                                                                                            86
                       Figure A.14: Factor Coefficients in Two Regressions for All Bids

                                                         1



                                                       0.5
                           FE of the rich regression




                                                         0



                                                       -0.5



                                                        -1



                                                       -1.5



                                                        -2
                                                          -2   -1.5    -1        -0.5        0     0.5   1
                                                                      FE of the basic regression

 Notes: Coefficients δ̂ under the baseline approach and in the robustness check in the regression of bids on factors Z
with controls X: see Equations 13 and 17, respectively. The figure suggests that the coefficients are approximately
the same in the two regressions. See Appendix E for details.




                                                                               87
Figure A.15: Non-Parametric Estimates of the Probability of Winning: Robustness to Additional Controls
                               1                                                                                                      1
                                                                                      =0.35                                                                                                      =0.35
                                                                                      =0.39                                                                                                      =0.39
                              0.9                                                                                                    0.9
                                                                                      =0.39, N=6                                                                                                 =0.39, N=8


                              0.8                                                                                                    0.8


                              0.7                                                                                                    0.7
     Probability of Winning




                                                                                                            Probability of Winning
                              0.6                                                                                                    0.6


                              0.5                                                                                                    0.5


                              0.4                                                                                                    0.4


                              0.3                                                                                                    0.3


                              0.2                                                                                                    0.2


                              0.1                                                                                                    0.1


                               0                                                                                                      0
                                        3.5         4       4.5         5       5.5                6                                       3         3.5         4         4.5       5         5.5            6
                                                            Bid                                                                                                            Bid




                               1                                                                                                      1
                                                                                 =0.35                                                                                                          =0.35
                                                                                 =0.39                                                                                                          =0.39
                              0.9                                                                                                    0.9
                                                                                 =0.39, N=10                                                                                                    =0.39, N=12


                              0.8                                                                                                    0.8


                              0.7                                                                                                    0.7
     Probability of Winning




                                                                                                            Probability of Winning




                              0.6                                                                                                    0.6


                              0.5                                                                                                    0.5


                              0.4                                                                                                    0.4


                              0.3                                                                                                    0.3


                              0.2                                                                                                    0.2


                              0.1                                                                                                    0.1


                               0                                                                                                      0
                                    3         3.5       4         4.5       5    5.5               6                                       1.5   2         2.5   3   3.5         4   4.5   5         5.5      6
                                                            Bid                                                                                                            Bid



Notes: These figures show the non-parametric estimates of the winning probability for a given bid conditional on a
bond maturity of between 2 and 17 years, which is the middle third of the maturity distribution. In the first stage,
various factors including state and year fixed effects are regressed out of the bids. Next, these plots are generated
using the winning bid after the first stage. The controls included in the first stage are discussed in detail in Sections
5.1 and 5.2.




                                                                                                       88
                     Figure A.16: Effectiveness of the Municipal Bond Tax Advantage

                                                      4.5
                                                                                       Partial effects
                                                                                       Full effects
                                                       4                               Reduced form


                                                      3.5
                           Cost-effectiveness ratio




                                                       3


                                                      2.5


                                                       2


                                                      1.5


                                                       1
                                                        0.4   0.5   0.6    0.7   0.8    0.9              1


Notes: The figure illustrates the ratio of the increase in interest payments on municipal debt and the federal tax
expenditure reduction. For more details, see Appendix H.




                                                                          89
Appendix Tables


                                 Table A.1: Waterfall Table for SDC Data

                                                               SDC
                                                             Dropped      Total
                             SDC Platinum total                  .       264,671
                             Dropping negotiated             157,758     106,913
                             Dropping <5 million              59,889      47,024
                             Dropping revenue                 7,486       39,538
                             Dropping taxable and BABs        1,694       37,844
                             Dropping pre-2008                18,726      19,118
                             Dropping duplicates               124       18,994
Notes: This table shows observations that were dropped in each step of the data cleaning procedure for the SDC
Platinum data. See Appendix B for details.



                             Table A.2: Waterfall Table for Bond Buyer Data

                                                               BB
                                                             Dropped     Total
                              Bond Buyer total                   .      109,327
                              Dropping missing sale date         1      109,326
                              Dropping <5 million             46,728     62,598
                              Dropping negotiated             40,692     21,906
                              Dropping duplicates              278      21,628
Notes: This table shows observations that were dropped in each step of the data cleaning procedure for the Bond
Buyer data. See Appendix B for details.



                                 Table A.3: Waterfall Table for Data Merge

                                                           Merged
                                                           Dropped     Total
                                 Merged bond packages         .        15,354
                                 Dropping 2016               433       14,921
                                 Dropping missing bids       290       14,631
Notes: This table shows the merge between the SDC Platinum and Bond Buyer data. See Appendix B for details.




                                                      90
                                            Table A.4: Top 10 Bidders

                Name                               NumBids         Share in total, %         Cumulative, %
                ROBERT W BAIRD                       6,791                   7.98                 7.98
                JPMORGAN                             5,006                   5.88                 13.86
                JEFFERIES                            4,758                   5.59                 19.44
                JANNEY MONTGOMERY                    4,632                   5.44                 24.88
                TD BANK                              4,060                   4.77                 29.65
                OPPENHEIMER                          3,795                   4.46                 34.11
                PIPER JAFFRAY                        3,774                   4.43                 38.54
                HUTCHINSON SHOCKEY                   3,663                   4.30                 42.84
                MORGAN STANLEY                       3,527                   4.14                 46.99
                BA MERRILL LYNCH                     2,743                   3.22                 50.21
Notes: This table shows the top 10 bidders in the final sample. For more details on the sample construction, see
Section B.




                                   Table A.5: Composition of Potential Bidders

                                                    Mean         SD     Q25     Q50         Q75
                                N                    8.13        2.67    6          8       10
                                State-incumbent      7.14        3.59    5          7        9
                                Incumbent            7.42        3.65    6          7        9
                                Low-freq              .31         .50    0          0        1
                                One-state             .53        .70     0          0       1
                                Top 10               3.27        1.46    2          3        4
 Notes: This table shows the prevalence of different bidder types within the set of potential bidders. For a discussion,
see Section C.3.




              Table A.6: Effect of Changes in Tax Rates on Potential Bidders by Bidder Type

                          (1)             (2)               (3)                   (4)               (5)        (6)
                          N        State incumbent      Incumbent            Low frequency        One State   Top 10
    Effective Rate    0.556***         0.550***             0.418***           0.128***           0.180***    0.149***
                       (0.137)          (0.169)              (0.147)           (0.0339)           (0.0406)    (0.0560)
    N                   14613            14613               14613                  14613          14613       14613
    R2                  0.323            0.541               0.539                  0.324          0.523       0.376
 Notes: This table shows how different bidder types respond to shifts in effective tax rates. Controls include the same
variables as in column 4 of Table 2, namely maturity, quality, refund indicator, political party, personal, business,
sales, and property taxes. The effect on the state-incumbent bidders is on par with the baseline effects in Panel B of
Table 2. For a discussion, see Section C.3.




                                                            91
        Table A.7: Reduced-Form Effects of the Effective Rate on the Winning Bid and Number of                   Potential Bidders: Robustness Checks Part 1
                                                                                 (1)     (2)                       (3)
                                            Unconditional Effect of Effective Rate on Bid
                                               Effective Rate                  -6.531  -6.659                     -6.738
                                                                              (2.527) (2.182)                    (2.218)
                                                                                0.010   0.002                      0.003
                                            Effect of Effective Rate on N
                                               Effective Rate                   0.581   0.523                     0.519
                                                                              (0.118) (0.121)                    (0.127)
                                                                                0.000   0.000                     0.000
                                            Conditional Effect of Effective Rate on Bid
                                               Effective Rate                  -4.525  -4.704                     -5.475
                                                                              (2.514) (2.248)                    (2.285)
                                                                                0.073   0.037                      0.017
                                            Observations                       14,631 14,613                     14,613
                                            Median Bid                          221.2   221.0                      221.0
                                            Median Effective Tax                40.79   40.79                      40.79
                                            Elasticity (Median)                 1.748   1.784                      1.805
                                                                              (0.677) (0.585)                    (0.594)
92




                                                                                0.010   0.002                      0.002
                                            Base Controls                         Y                                  Y
                                            Structural Model Controls                     Y                          Y
                                            Bidder Fixed Effects                                                     Y
                                            Issuer Fixed Effects                                                     Y
                                            Unemployment Rate                                                        Y
                                            Gross Domestic Product (log)                                             Y
                                            State Government Spending (log)                                          Y
                                            State Intergov Spending (log)                                            Y
                                            Political Party Controls                                                 Y
                                            Personal, Business, and Prop Tax                                         Y
                                            Sales Tax Controls                                                       Y
                                            Size of Bond Package Controls                                            Y
      Notes: This table presents more estimates corresponding to Table 2 with regressions of winning bid, in basis points, on the effective tax rate, in percentage
     points. The base controls include state, year, maturity, quality, and refund status fixed effects in addition to effective rate, which is the same as in Column (1)
     in Table 2. See Appendix C for details and Appendix A for variable definitions. Standard errors clustered at the state-year level are shown in parentheses,
     and p-values for each estimate are displayed below the standard errors.
        Table A.8: Reduced-Form Effects of the Effective Rate on the Winning Bid and Number of                  Potential Bidders: Robustness Checks Part 2
                                                       (1)      (2)     (3)      (4)     (5)                      (6)       (7)      (8)
                         Unconditional Effect of Effective Rate on Bid
                           Effective Rate            -6.806   -6.806  -6.806   -6.806  -5.381                     -5.323    -5.459     -6.456
                                                    (1.048) (2.187) (2.244) (2.879) (2.123)                      (2.127)   (2.414)    (0.664)
                                                      0.000    0.002  0.003     0.022   0.012                     0.013      0.024      0.000
                         Effect of Effective Rate on N
                           Effective Rate             0.547    0.547  0.547     0.547   0.499                     0.503     0.564      0.436
                                                    (0.050) (0.119) (0.133) (0.128) (0.122)                      (0.109)   (0.151)    (0.031)
                                                      0.000    0.000  0.000     0.000   0.000                     0.000     0.000      0.000
                         Conditional Effect of Effective Rate on Bid
                           Effective Rate            -5.222   -5.222  -5.222   -5.222  -4.299                     -4.251    -3.617     -5.047
                                                    (0.999) (1.980) (2.282) (2.836) (2.215)                      (2.190)   (2.480)    (0.633)
                                                      0.000    0.008  0.023     0.072   0.053                     0.053      0.146      0.000
                         Observations               14,631 14,631 14,631 14,631 14,631                           14,631    11,745     34,868
                         Median Bid                   221.2    221.2  221.2     221.2   221.2                      221.2     203.0      193.8
                         Median Effective Tax         40.79    40.79  40.79     40.79   40.79                     40.79      40.83     40.79
                         Elasticity (Median)         1.822     1.822   1.822   1.822    1.440                      1.425    1.591       1.971
93




                                                    (0.280) (0.585) (0.601) (0.771) (0.568)                      (0.569)   (0.704)    (0.203)
                                                      0.000    0.002  0.002     0.018   0.011                     0.012      0.024      0.000
                         Robust Standard Errors         Y
                         SE Cluster State-Month                  Y
                         SE Cluster State-Year                           Y                Y                         Y         Y          Y
                         SE Cluster State                                         Y
                         Monthly Fixed Effects                                            Y
                         Daily Fixed Effects                                                                        Y
                         Dropping 2008-09                                                                                     Y
                         Including Small Bonds                                                                                           Y
      Notes: This table presents more estimates corresponding to Table 2 with regressions of winning bid, in basis points, on the effective tax rate, in percentage
     points. All specifications in this table include state, year, maturity, quality, and refund status fixed effects and size, which are the same controls as in Table
     2, Column (5). Columns (1) to (4) show the results with different calculations of standard errors–robust, state-month clusters, state-year clusters, and state
     clusters. Columns (5) and (6) use month and day fixed effects instead of year fixed effects. The years 2008 and 2009 are omitted from the sample in Column
     (7). Column (8) includes the whole universe of competitive bonds including those smaller than $5 million and weights bonds according to size bins. See
     Appendix C for details and Appendix A for variable definitions. Standard errors clustered at the state-year level are shown in parentheses, and p-values for
     each estimate are displayed below the standard errors.
Table A.9: Reduced-Form Effects of the Effective Rate on the Winning Bid and Number of Potential
Bidders: Robustness Checks Part 3
                                            (1)      (2)      (3)     (4)     (5)    (6)      (7)
 Unconditional Effect of Effective Rate on Bid
   Effective Rate                         -6.531   -6.347   -6.664  -6.394  -6.599 -6.388   -5.486
                                         (2.527) (2.445) (2.531) (2.849) (2.564) (2.496) (2.442)
                                           0.010    0.010    0.009   0.025   0.010  0.011   0.025
 Effect of Effective Rate on N
   Effective Rate                          0.581    0.578   0.582    0.393   0.594 0.615    0.548
                                         (0.118) (0.116) (0.117) (0.216) (0.120) (0.111) (0.114)
                                           0.000    0.000    0.000   0.070   0.000  0.000   0.000
 Conditional Effect of Effective Rate on Bid
   Effective Rate                         -4.525   -4.400   -4.663  -4.357  -4.664 -4.173   -3.624
                                         (2.514) (2.454) (2.515) (2.588) (2.542) (2.483) (2.394)
                                           0.073    0.074    0.064   0.093   0.067  0.094   0.131
 Observations                             14,631 14,631 14,631 14,631 14,168 13,184 14,631
 Median Bid                                221.2   221.2     221.2   221.2  217.9   215.0   221.2
 Median Effective Rate                    40.79    40.79    40.79   29.15   40.79  40.83    39.62
 Elasticity (Median)                       1.748    1.699    1.784   2.048   1.793  1.758    1.497
                                         (0.677) (0.654) (0.677) (0.912) (0.697) (0.687) (0.667)
                                           0.010    0.009    0.008   0.025   0.010  0.010   0.025
 Primary Controls                            Y        Y        Y       Y       Y      Y        Y
 Muni Market and Swap Price Controls                  Y
 Callable Controls                                             Y
 90th Percentile Income Tax Rate                                       Y
 States and State Agencies Excluded                                            Y
 States Without Tax Exemption Excluded                                                Y
 Federal Tax Rate Held Constant                                                                Y
 Notes: This table presents more estimates corresponding to Table 2 with regressions of winning bid, in basis points,
on the effective tax rate, in percentage points. The base controls include state, year, maturity, quality, and refund
status fixed effects in addition to the effective rate, which is the same as in Column (1) in Table 2. See Appendix
C for details and Appendix A for variable definitions. Standard errors clustered at the state-year level are shown in
parentheses, and p-values for each estimate are displayed below the standard errors.




                                                         94
     Table A.10: Robustness of Regression of the Number of Potential Bidders on the Effective Rate

                                                (1)     (2)                  (3)        (4)       (5)
           Effect of Effective Rate on Number of Bidders
             Effective Rate                    0.363   0.345                0.335      0.340     0.315
                                              (0.093) (0.095)              (0.099)    (0.101)   (0.098)
                                               0.000   0.000                0.001      0.001     0.002
           Effect of Effective Rate on N (Definition 1)
             Effective Rate                    0.561   0.554                0.542      0.550     0.547
                                              (0.120) (0.124)              (0.131)    (0.132)   (0.133)
                                               0.000   0.000                0.000      0.000     0.000
           Effect of Effective Rate on N (Definition 2)
             Effective Rate                    1.373   1.413                1.411      1.467     1.345
                                              (0.333) (0.337)              (0.347)    (0.346)   (0.343)
                                               0.000   0.000                0.000      0.000     0.000
           Year Fixed Effects                    Y       Y                    Y          Y         Y
           State Fixed Effects                   Y       Y                    Y          Y         Y
           Maturity and Size Controls            Y       Y                    Y          Y         Y
           Quality and Refund Controls           Y       Y                    Y          Y         Y
           Political Party Controls                      Y                    Y          Y         Y
           Personal Income Tax Base Controls                                  Y          Y         Y
           Sales Tax Controls                                                            Y         Y
           Business and Property Tax Controls                                                      Y
 Notes: Section 2 discusses the data and the primary definition of potential bidders. The second definition of N
is the total unique bidders in the state-month for each auction. A version of the structural model using the second
definition of N is discussed in Appendix E. Standard errors clustered at the state-year level are in parentheses, and
p-values are listed below the standard errors.




                                                         95
                   Table A.11: Effect of the Effective Rate on the Supply of Bond Auctions

                                                                     (1)        (2)      (3)        (4)
             Effective Rate                                        -0.013     -0.011    0.006      0.007
                                                                  (0.037)    (0.039)   (0.042)    (0.041)
                                                                    0.736      0.782    0.880      0.868
             Observations                                           2,905     2,905     2,905      2,905
             ln(Bonds) Median                                       1.386     1.386     1.386      1.386
             Effective Rate Median                                39.190     39.190    39.190     39.190
             Monthly Fixed Effects                                    Y          Y        Y          Y
             State Fixed Effects                                      Y          Y        Y          Y
             Political Party Controls                                            Y        Y          Y
             Personal, Business, and Prop. Tax Controls                                   Y          Y
             Sales Tax Controls                                                                      Y
 Notes: This table shows regressions of the supply of municipal debt as measured by the natural log of the number
of bond offerings on effective tax rates in percentage points. The specifications mirror the specifications used in Table
2 except only state-level variables are used. The dependent variable is the natural log of the number of bond issues in
a given state-month so zeros are not included. However, the failure to reject the zero effect is robust to OLS in levels,
Poisson, and defining the dependent variable as the natural log of the count plus one. Column (1) controls for state
and month fixed effects. Column (2) adds controls for political parties, while Column (3) additionally adds personal
income tax bases, corporate tax rate and base controls, and average property tax rates. All of the controls mentioned
above and sales tax rates are included in Column (4). See Section 3 and Appendix C for more information. Standard
errors clustered at the state-year level are shown in parentheses, with p-values listed below the standard errors.




              Table A.12: Effect of the Effective Rate on the Share of Issues Sold via Auction

                                                                     (1)        (2)       (3)        (4)
             Effective Rate                                        -0.005     -0.002    -0.003     -0.003
                                                                  (0.015)    (0.017)   (0.018)    (0.018)
                                                                    0.739      0.922    0.870       0.874
             Observations                                            400        400       400        400
             R2                                                     0.918      0.918    0.919       0.919
             Dependent Var. Mean                                    0.339      0.339     0.339      0.339
             Effective Rate Mean                                  39.962     39.962    39.962     39.962
             Year Fixed Effects                                       Y          Y         Y          Y
             State Fixed Effects                                      Y          Y         Y          Y
             Political Party Controls                                            Y         Y          Y
             Personal, Business, and Prop. Tax Controls                                    Y          Y
             Sales Tax Controls                                                                       Y
 Notes: This table shows estimates of regressions with the dependent variable equal to the share of issues sold in
a state-year via auction. The independent variable is the effective tax rate in percentage points. The goal of this
exercise is to test whether state shares of bonds sold via auction are responsive to tax rates given that tax rates
change auction participation. We fail to find evidence that the share of bonds sold via auction is responsive to tax
rates in any specification. See Section 3 and Appendix C for more information. Standard errors clustered at the
state-year level are shown in parentheses, with p-values listed below the standard errors.




                                                           96
            Table A.13: Effect of the Effective Rate on the Share of Par Value Sold via Auction

                                                                   (1)        (2)       (3)        (4)
             Effective Rate                                      -0.006     -0.005    -0.004     -0.004
                                                                (0.019)    (0.019)   (0.019)    (0.019)
                                                                  0.765      0.801    0.836       0.828
             Observations                                          400        400       400        400
             R2                                                   0.796      0.796    0.799       0.800
             Dependent Var. Mean                                  0.253      0.253     0.253      0.253
             Effective Rate Mean                                39.962     39.962    39.962     39.962
             Year Fixed Effects                                     Y          Y         Y          Y
             State Fixed Effects                                    Y          Y         Y          Y
             Political Party Controls                                          Y         Y          Y
             Personal, Business, and Prop. Tax Controls                                  Y          Y
             Sales Tax Controls                                                                     Y
 Notes: This table shows estimates of regressions with the dependent variable equal to the share of par value of
bonds sold in a state-year via auction. The independent variable is the effective tax rate in percentage points. The
goal of this exercise is to test whether state shares of total debt sold via auction are responsive to tax rates given
that tax rates change auction participation. We fail to find evidence that the share of par value of municipal bonds
sold via auction is responsive to tax rates in any specification. See Section 3 and Appendix C for more information.
Standard errors clustered at the state-year level are shown in parentheses, with p-values listed below the standard
errors.



 Table A.14: Regressions of Borrowing Costs on Taxes, Heterogeneity by Restrictions on Method of Sale

                                                              (1)       (2)        (3)       (4)        (5)
          Effective Rate                                    -6.660    -7.007     -7.114    -7.097     -7.089
                                                           (2.518)   (2.409)    (2.323)   (2.307)    (2.300)
                                                             0.009     0.004     0.002      0.002      0.002
          Effective Rate X Restricted Sales                  0.130    0.014      0.377      0.362     0.360
                                                           (0.871)   (0.843)    (0.811)   (0.808)    (0.807)
                                                             0.882     0.987     0.642      0.654      0.656
       Observations                                        14,631    14,631     14,631    14,631     14,631
       Mean Winning Bid                                     215.2     215.2       215.2     215.2     215.2
       Mean Effective Rate                                  40.86     40.86      40.86     40.86      40.86
       Year Fixed Effects                                      Y         Y          Y         Y          Y
       State Fixed Effects                                     Y         Y          Y         Y          Y
       Maturity, Quality, and Refund Controls                  Y         Y          Y         Y          Y
       Political Party Controls                                          Y          Y         Y          Y
       Personal, Business, and Prop. Tax Controls                                   Y         Y          Y
       Sales Tax Controls                                                                     Y          Y
       Size of Bond Package Controls                                                                     Y
 Notes: This table shows estimates of regressions with the dependent variable equal to the winning bid, replicating
Table 2. The independent variable is the effective tax rate in percentage points. The difference in this table is that
the effective rates are also interacted with an indicator equal to one if states have some method of sale restrictions
on more than 80% of their issues according to Cestau et al. (2017) during our sample. See Section 3 and Appendix C
for more information. Standard errors clustered at the state-year level are shown in parentheses, with p-values listed
below the standard errors.



                                                         97
                  Table A.15: Effect of the Effective Rate on Bond Package Characteristics

                                                         (1)           (2)       (3)         (4)         (5)
                                                       Maturity     ln(Size)   Callable     Rated     Qualified
         Effective Rate                                 0.071         0.014     0.010       0.002       0.028
                                                       (0.101)       (0.011)   (0.009)     (0.007)     (0.018)
                                                        0.484         0.211     0.279       0.771       0.119
      Observations                                      14,631       14,631     14,631     14,631      14,631
      Mean Outcome                                       11.2          2.6       0.6         0.7         0.4
      Mean Effective Rate                               40.86         40.86     40.86       40.86       40.86
      Year and Issuer Fixed Effects                       Y             Y         Y           Y           Y
      Political Party Controls                            Y             Y         Y           Y           Y
      Personal, Business, Prop., and Sales Tax            Y             Y         Y           Y           Y
      Maturity Control                                                  Y         Y           Y           Y
      Size Control                                         Y                      Y           Y           Y
      Credit Rating Controls                               Y           Y          Y                       Y
 Notes: This table shows estimates of regressions for different bond characteristics as a function of effective personal
income tax rates in percentage points. The outcomes are maturity (years), natural log of par value, an indicator
for a call provision, an indicator for credit rating and an indicator for bank-qualified bonds in Columns (1) through
(5), respectively. We fail to find any statistically significant affect of taxes on any observable bond characteristics.
See Section 3 and Appendix C for more information. Standard errors clustered at the state-year level are shown in
parentheses, with p-values listed below the standard errors.




                                                          98
                                          Table A.16: Effect of the Effective Rate on the Winning Bid: APE and FE

                                                                                   (1)                                    (2)
                                                                   No Controls for Number of Bidders        Controls for Number of Bidders
                      Average Partial Effect
                      Effective Rate                                               -6.417                                 -4.786
                                                                                  (2.425)                                (2.411)
                                                                                    0.008                                  0.047
                      Fixed Effect Estimate
                      Effective Rate                                               -6.531                                 -4.525
                                                                                  (2.517)                                (2.501)
                                                                                    0.009                                  0.070
                      Observations                                                14,631                                 14,631
                      Score p-value (Interactions)                                  0.000                                  0.000
                      Hausman p-value (APE=FE)                                      0.846                                  0.613
                      Percentage diff (APE-FE)/FE                                   0.017                                 -0.058
                                                                                  (0.088)                                (0.126)
                                                                                    0.843                                  0.649
99




                      Percentage Due to Competition (APE)                                                                  0.254
                      Percentage Due to Competition (FE)                                                                   0.307
     Notes: Standard errors are shown in parentheses, with p-values below the standard errors. See Appendix C for information about testing for heterogeneous
     effects in length. This table presents the estimates that correspond to Figure A.5 and shows the Hausman test p-value for the difference between the average
     partial effect and fixed effect estimates, which is nonsignificant at conventional levels.
                                 Table A.17: Oster Coefficient Stability Tests

                                                 (1)                (2)              (3)
                                            Table 2, (1)       Table 2, (1)     Table 2, (5)
                     Effective Rate            -6.531             -6.531           -6.806
                                              (2.527)            (2.527)          (2.244)
                                                0.010             0.010             0.003
                     R2                         0.898             0.898             0.899
                                            Table 2, (5)      Table A.7, (3)   Table A.7, (3)
                     Effective Rate            -6.806             -6.738           -6.738
                                              (2.244)            (2.218)          (2.218)
                                                0.003             0.003             0.003
                     R2                         0.899             0.953             0.953
                     Observations             14,631             14,613           14,613
                     δ such that β ∗ = 0        [< 0]              [< 0]          113.424
                     Corrected β ∗            -34.614             -6.915           -6.679
 Notes: Standard errors clustered at the state level are shown in parentheses, and p-values are below the standard
errors. This table uses an estimator from Oster (2017) to test how much selection on unobservables is needed to
negate the results in Tables 2 and A.7. Each cell represents the results of a previously estimated model. Following
Oster (2017), this table performs 2 calculations for each comparison across specifications. First, we estimate the δ
that sets β ∗ = 0 given Rmax = 1. Columns (1) and (2) show that no amount of unobserved heterogeneity would
negate the observed coefficients. The δ shown in Column (3) implies that selection on unobservables would need to
be 113.4 times more important than selection on observables for our results to be negated. Second, we estimate β ∗
assuming that δ = 1 and Rmax = 1 and show the coefficients in the last row. These estimates show the coefficients
are largely increasing as more controls are added. For more information, see Appendix C.7.




                                                        100
                 Table A.18: Effect of Interest Payments on the Effective Rate, Lags
                                                          (1)      (2)       (3)       (4)                    (5)
     Percent Change in Interest Payments, Period t      -0.055   0.014     -0.000    -0.057                 -0.076
                                                       (0.111) (0.110) (0.115) (0.127)                     (0.126)
                                                         0.624   0.899     0.999      0.658                  0.548
     Percent Change in Interest Payments, Period t − 1                               -0.057                 -0.072
                                                                                    (0.125)                (0.133)
                                                                                      0.649                  0.594
     Percent Change in Interest Payments, Period t − 2                                                       0.108
                                                                                                           (0.097)
                                                                                                            0.270
   N                                                              1100      1100       1100      1050        1000
   Year Fixed Effects                                                        Y          Y         Y            Y
   State Fixed Effects                                                                  Y         Y            Y
 Notes: Standard errors clustered at the state level are shown in parentheses, and p-values are below the standard
errors. This table regresses tax rates in percentage points on the percent change in government interest payments
from 1994 to 2014 at the state level. This test of potential reverse causality fails to find evidence of any impact of
previous and current interest costs on borrowing rates. For more information, see Appendix C.8.




                 Table A.19: Effect of Interest Payments on the Effective Rate, Leads
                                                           (1)      (2)      (3)       (4)                    (5)
     Percent Change in Interest Payments, Period t       -0.055   0.014    -0.000    -0.052                 0.018
                                                        (0.111) (0.110) (0.115) (0.125)                    (0.121)
                                                          0.624   0.899     0.999     0.681                  0.880
     Percent Change in Interest Payments, Period t + 1                               -0.165                 -0.136
                                                                                    (0.125)                (0.120)
                                                                                      0.194                  0.262
     Percent Change in Interest Payments, Period t + 2                                                       0.049
                                                                                                           (0.111)
                                                                                                             0.662
   N                                                              1100      1100       1100      1050        1000
   Year Fixed Effects                                                        Y          Y         Y            Y
   State Fixed Effects                                                                  Y         Y            Y
 Notes: Standard errors clustered at the state level are shown in parentheses, and p-values are below the standard
errors. This table regresses tax rates in percentage points on the percent change in government interest payments
from 1994 to 2014 at the state level. This test of potential reverse causality fails to find evidence of any impact of
current and future interest costs on borrowing rates. For more information, see Appendix C.8.




                                                         101
    Table A.20: Simulations on In-Sample Observables, Average Moments from Models S1 through S4

                    Statistic                                    S0      S1     S2     S3      S4
                    Model Fit
                      Winning Bid in Data: b1                    2.15   2.15    2.15   2.15   2.15
                      Simulated Winning Bid: b1                  1.98   1.97    1.93   2.07   2.08
                      Entry Probability in Data: n/N             0.70   0.70    0.34   0.70   0.70
                      Simulated Entry Probability: n/N           0.72   0.74    0.33   0.72   0.70
                    Simulation Results
                      Markup: m1                                 0.17   0.17    0.17   0.17   0.19
                      Markup Rate: m1 /b1                        0.21   0.21    0.19   0.20   0.25
                      Entry Cost Threshold: d∗                   0.03   0.03    0.03   0.49
 Notes: This table shows model fit and simulation results for in-sample observations from each of the variants of
the baseline model. The simulation results regarding markups from the baseline model are displayed in Table 5. The
model fit is still very similar to the baseline specification, and markups are close. The first robustness specification
allows for more flexible entry costs. The second specification uses the definition of a potential bidder as all unique
bidders in a state in a given month. The third specification is based on parameterizing the bids directly. The
fourth specification allows for a heterogeneous distribution of valuations and entry costs across the bidders. Section
4 discusses the setup of the model, while Appendix E contains information about the specification of and reasoning
behind each of the model robustness checks.

             Table A.21: Maximum Likelihood Estimates: Model with Flexible Entry Costs S1.
                                          Values (θṽ )     Entry Costs (θd )     Unobs. Hetero. (θU )
                                        (1)         (2)        (3)     (4)                (5)
                                         β
                                         b            γ
                                                      b        κ
                                                               b1      κ
                                                                       b2                 σ
                                                                                          bU
              Variable                Mean        StDev      Mean    StDev              StDev
              Const                    3.579       1.424    -13.117 24.093               0.445
                                     (0.010)     (0.016)    (0.883) (1.967)             (0.002)
              Maturity                 0.125      -0.031     -0.030
                                    (0.0004) (0.0002)       (0.080)
              Effective Rate: τ       -4.178      -4.915     -9.918
                                     (0.020)     (0.038)    (2.091)
Notes: The additional controls are the same as in Column (4) of Table 2. This table presents estimates from model
S1 with flexible entry costs as described in Section E. Standard errors are in parentheses.


Table A.22: Maximum Likelihood Estimates: Model with Alternative Definition of Potential Bidders N S2.
                                    Values (θṽ )  Entry Costs (θd ) Unobs. Hetero. (θU )
                                  (1)         (2)     (3)     (4)             (5)
                                   β
                                   b            γ
                                                b     κ
                                                      b1      κ
                                                              b2              σ
                                                                              bU
            Variable            Mean        StDev   Mean    StDev           StDev
            Const                3.501       1.416  -0.384  7.852           0.448
                               (0.004)     (0.016) (0.064) (0.146)         (0.002)
            Maturity             0.125      -0.031
                              (0.0003) (0.0002)
            Effective Rate: τ   -4.049      -4.904
                               (0.008)     (0.038)
Notes: The additional controls are the same as in Column (4) of Table 2. This table presents estimates from model
S2 where potential bidders for each auction are defined as all bidders active in the same state in the same month.
The model is described in Section E. Standard errors are in parentheses.


                                                           102
            Table A.23: Maximum Likelihood Estimates: Model with Parameterized Bids S3.
                                  Bids (θb̃ )            Entry Costs (θd ) Unobs. Hetero. (θU )
                            (1)      (2)          (3)      (4)      (5)            (6)
                             β
                             b        γ
                                      b            δ
                                                   b       κ
                                                           b1        κ
                                                                     b2            σ
                                                                                   bU
     Variable             Mean     StDev      Threshold   Mean    StDev          StDev
     Const                3.8372   0.7043       1.0379  -10.7578 15.8368         0.4679
                        (0.0222) (0.0119)      (0.0032) (0.0066) (0.0055)       (0.0095)
     N                   -0.0310  -0.0743       0.0249
                        (0.0057) (0.0015)      (0.0084)
     Maturity             0.1255  -0.0402       0.1232
                        (0.0017) (0.0005)      (0.0025)
     Effective Rate: τ -4.2345    -3.3020       -2.7152
                        (0.0336) (0.0037)      (0.0003)
Notes: The additional controls are the same as in Column (4) of Table 2. This table presents estimates from model
S3 where bids are parameterized directly. The model is described in Section E. Standard errors are in parentheses.




  Table A.24: Maximum Likelihood Estimates. Model with Heterogeneous Bidders S4. Bidder Group 1.
                                                   Bids (θb̃ )             Unobs. Hetero. (θU )
                                         (1)          (2)          (3)             (4)
                                          βb           γ
                                                       b            δb             σ
                                                                                   bU
                 Variable               Mean       StDev       Threshold         StDev
                 Const                  3.285        0.842        1.227           0.471
                                       (0.046)     (0.021)       (4.213)        (0.0001)
                 N                                  -0.069
                                                  (0.0004)
                 1/N                     2.569                    4.992
                                       (0.117)                  (15.812)
                 1/(N1 + 1)              0.065
                                       (0.034)
                 Maturity                0.125      -0.037       0.113
                                      (0.0004)    (0.0002)      (1.138)
                 Effective Rate: τ      -4.231      -4.052       -4.934
                                       (0.108)     (0.047)     (11.539)
 Notes: The additional controls are the same as in Column (4) of Table 2. This table presents estimates from model
S4, which allows for heterogeneity among bidders, breaking all auction participants into two groups: the top 10 most
frequent bidders and the rest. These estimates describe the bidders from the first group. The model is described in
Section E. Standard errors are in parentheses.




                                                        103
  Table A.25: Maximum Likelihood Estimates. Model with Heterogeneous Bidders S4. Bidder Group 2.
                                                   Bids (θb̃ )             Unobs. Hetero. (θU )
                                         (1)          (2)         (3)              (4)
                                          βb           γ
                                                       b           δb              σ
                                                                                   bU
                 Variable               Mean       StDev       Threshold         StDev
                 Const                  3.295        0.536       0.042            0.471
                                       (0.046)     (0.016)      (5.613)         (0.0001)
                 N                                  -0.077
                                                  (0.0003)
                 1/N                     1.840                   1.780
                                       (0.120)                  (6.510)
                 1/(N1 + 1)              0.071
                                       (0.031)
                 Maturity                0.125      -0.041       0.072
                                      (0.0004)    (0.0001)      (0.665)
                 Effective Rate: τ      -4.126      -2.730       0.000
                                       (0.109)     (0.036)     (11.889)
 Notes: The additional controls are the same as in Column (4) of Table 2. This table presents estimates from model
S4, which allows for heterogeneity among bidders, breaking all auction participants into two groups: the top 10 most
frequent bidders and the rest. These estimates describe the bidders from the second group. The model is described
in Section E. Standard errors are in parentheses.




                                                        104
                            Table A.26: Average Effects from Counterfactual Policy Reform: Model with Flexible Entry Costs S1.

                                              (a) Bids and markups simulated on sample data for different policies
                                                           (1)        (2)               (3)               (4)      (5)                    (6)
                                                                Trump Proposal Obama Proposal No State No SALT                          TCJA17
                                                                                                      Exclusion
                                                         α=1        α = 0.96          α = 0.73                                          α = 0.96
                      Winning Bid
                       Partial (No Potential Entry)         1.91           1.96                 2.22             2.08         1.84         1.89
                       Full                                 1.91           2.01                 2.77             2.34         1.79         1.88

                      Markups
                       Partial (No Potential Entry)         0.20           0.21                 0.32             0.26         0.18         0.20
                       Full                                 0.20           0.23                 0.47             0.33         0.17         0.19
105




                                                                 (b) Percentage change from α = 1
                                                                      (1)               (2)                 (3)            (4)         (5)
                                                                Trump Proposal Obama Proposal            No State       No SALT      TCJA17
                                                                                                         Exclusion
                                                                    α = 0.96             α = 0.73                                    α = 0.96
                           Winning Bid
                            Partial (No Potential Entry)             2.57%               15.99%             8.83%        -3.89%      -1.09%
                            Full                                     5.31%               44.85%            22.50%        -6.17%      -1.61%

                           Markups
                            Partial (No Potential Entry)              7.38%               62.30%           29.73%        -9.32%      -2.27%
                            Full                                     13.88%              132.69%           63.33%       -14.04%      -3.60%
      Notes: This table shows counterfactual bids and markups under two policy proposals–one limiting the federal exemption to 73% and the other to 96% of its
      current level. The last three columns represent simulations under which the state tax exemption for municipal bonds is lifted, the SALT deduction is repealed,
      or the SALT deductino is repealed and the exemption is limited to 96% of its current level. Section 4 discusses the setup of the model, while Section 7.1
      discusses the counterfactual simulations. Robustness checks for four additional specifications are discussed in Appendix E, with results presented in Tables
      A.26 to A.29.
               Table A.27: Average Effects from Counterfactual Policy Reform: Model with Alternative Definition of Potential Bidders N S2.

                                              (a) Bids and markups simulated on sample data for different policies
                                                           (1)        (2)               (3)               (4)      (5)                    (6)
                                                                Trump Proposal Obama Proposal No State No SALT                          TCJA17
                                                                                                      Exclusion
                                                         α=1        α = 0.96          α = 0.73                                          α = 0.96
                      Winning Bid
                       Partial (No Potential Entry)         1.91           1.96                 2.16             2.04         1.85         1.90
                       Full                                 1.91           1.99                 2.68             2.25         1.82         1.89

                      Markups
                       Partial (No Potential Entry)         0.19           0.20                 0.30             0.24         0.17         0.18
                       Full                                 0.19           0.21                 0.41             0.28         0.17         0.18
106




                                                                 (b) Percentage change from α = 1
                                                                      (1)               (2)                 (3)            (4)         (5)
                                                                Trump Proposal Obama Proposal            No State       No SALT      TCJA17
                                                                                                         Exclusion
                                                                    α = 0.96             α = 0.73                                    α = 0.96
                           Winning Bid
                            Partial (No Potential Entry)             2.21%               12.88%             6.86%        -3.28%      -0.83%
                            Full                                     3.95%               39.99%            17.55%        -4.83%      -1.11%

                           Markups
                            Partial (No Potential Entry)              7.17%               59.95%           27.43%        -8.72%      -1.83%
                            Full                                     10.78%              119.57%           51.08%       -11.56%      -2.14%
      Notes: This table shows counterfactual bids and markups under two policy proposals–one limiting the federal exemption to 73% and the other to 96% of its
      current level. The last three columns represent simulations under which the state tax exemption for municipal bonds is lifted, the SALT deduction is repealed,
      or the SALT deduction is repealed and the exemption is limited to 96% of its current level. Section 4 discusses the setup of the model, while Section 7.1
      discusses the counterfactual simulations. Robustness checks for four additional specifications are discussed in Appendix E, with results presented in Tables
      A.26 to A.29.
                             Table A.28: Average Effects from Counterfactual Policy Reform: Model with Parameterized Bids S3.

                                              (a) Bids and markups simulated on sample data for different policies
                                                           (1)        (2)               (3)               (4)      (5)                    (6)
                                                                Trump Proposal Obama Proposal No State No SALT                          TCJA17
                                                                                                      Exclusion
                                                         α=1        α = 0.96          α = 0.73                                          α = 0.96
                      Winning Bid
                       Partial (No Potential Entry)         1.91           1.96                 2.27             2.10         1.83         1.88
                       Full                                 1.91           2.00                 2.50             2.21         1.79         1.86

                      Markups
                       Partial (No Potential Entry)         0.18           0.19                 0.26             0.22         0.17         0.18
                       Full                                 0.18           0.22                 0.52             0.35         0.15         0.17
107




                                                                 (b) Percentage change from α = 1
                                                                      (1)               (2)                 (3)            (4)         (5)
                                                                Trump Proposal Obama Proposal            No State       No SALT      TCJA17
                                                                                                         Exclusion
                                                                    α = 0.96             α = 0.73                                    α = 0.96
                           Winning Bid
                            Partial (No Potential Entry)             2.56%               18.56%             9.61%        -4.57%      -1.81%
                            Full                                     4.32%               30.65%            15.76%        -6.36%      -2.54%

                           Markups
                            Partial (No Potential Entry)              4.65%               40.67%           21.30%        -8.07%      -3.50%
                            Full                                     20.34%              185.28%           92.00%       -20.47%      -9.49%
      Notes: This table shows counterfactual bids and markups under two policy proposals–one limiting the federal exemption to 73% and the other to 96% of its
      current level. The last three columns represent simulations under which the state tax exemption for municipal bonds is lifted, the SALT deduction is repealed,
      or the SALT deduction is repealed and the exemption is limited to 96% of its current level. Section 4 discusses the setup of the model, while Section 7.1
      discusses the counterfactual simulations. Robustness checks for four additional specifications are discussed in Appendix E, with results presented in Tables
      A.26 to A.29.
                           Table A.29: Average Effects from Counterfactual Policy Reform: Model with Heterogeneous Bidders S4.

                                              (a) Bids and markups simulated on sample data for different policies
                                                           (1)        (2)               (3)               (4)      (5)                    (6)
                                                                Trump Proposal Obama Proposal No State No SALT                          TCJA17
                                                                                                      Exclusion
                                                         α=1        α = 0.96          α = 0.73                                          α = 0.96
                      Winning Bid
                       Partial (No Potential Entry)         1.91           1.97                 2.28             2.10         1.83         1.89
                       Full                                 1.91           2.02                 2.78             2.39         1.79         1.88

                      Markups
                       Partial (No Potential Entry)         0.17           0.18                 0.23             0.20         0.16         0.17
                       Full                                 0.17           0.19                 0.28             0.22         0.14         0.16
108




                                                                 (b) Percentage change from α = 1
                                                                      (1)               (2)                 (3)            (4)         (5)
                                                                Trump Proposal Obama Proposal            No State       No SALT      TCJA17
                                                                                                         Exclusion
                                                                    α = 0.96             α = 0.73                                    α = 0.96
                           Winning Bid
                            Partial (No Potential Entry)             2.84%               19.44%            10.00%        -4.14%      -1.05%
                            Full                                     5.60%               45.08%            24.77%        -6.39%      -1.77%

                           Markups
                            Partial (No Potential Entry)              4.61%              34.82%            18.31%        -6.27%      -1.88%
                            Full                                     10.29%              66.21%            27.82%       -15.65%      -3.33%
      Notes: This table shows counterfactual bids and markups under two policy proposals–one limiting the federal exemption to 73% and the other to 96% of its
      current level. The last three columns represent simulations under which the state tax exemption for municipal bonds is lifted, the SALT deduction is repealed,
      or the SALT deduction is repealed and the exemption is limited to 96% of its current level. Section 4 discusses the setup of the model, while Section 7.1
      discusses the counterfactual simulations. Robustness checks for four additional specifications are discussed in Appendix E, with results presented in Tables
      A.26 to A.29.
