NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

TAPER TANTRUMS: QE, ITS AFTERMATH AND EMERGING MARKET CAPITAL
FLOWS
Anusha Chari
Karlye Dilts Stedman
Christian Lundblad
Working Paper 23474
http://www.nber.org/papers/w23474

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
June 2017

We thank seminar participants at the 14th NIPFP-DEA conference, Kesroli, Rajasthan, UNCChapel Hill, ISB’s Summer Research Conference, 2016, the IMF, the 2017 AEA meetings, the
Darden School at UVA, the NBER’s IFM meeting, and the XX IEF Workshop, UTDT, Buenos
Aires. We also thank Frank Warnock, Prachi Mishra, Jay Shambaugh, Joshua Aizenman, Linda
Goldberg, Lars Hansen, Guillermo Mondino and VV Chari for many helpful comments and
suggestions. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect
the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.
© 2017 by Anusha Chari, Karlye Dilts Stedman, and Christian Lundblad. All rights reserved.
Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission
provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Taper Tantrums: QE, its Aftermath and Emerging Market Capital Flows
Anusha Chari, Karlye Dilts Stedman, and Christian Lundblad
NBER Working Paper No. 23474
June 2017
JEL No. E5,E52,E58,E65,F3,F32,F42,G11,G12,G13
ABSTRACT
This paper provides a novel perspective on the impact of U.S. unconventional monetary policy
(UMP) on emerging market capital flows and asset prices. Using high-frequency Treasury futures
data to identify U.S. monetary policy shocks, we find, through the lens of an affine term structure
model, that these shocks represent revisions to both the expected path of short-term interest rates
and required risk compensation. The risk compensation component is especially important during
the UMP periods. Further, we find that these high-frequency policy shocks do exhibit sizable
effects on U.S. holdings of emerging market assets and their valuations. We also document that
the relative effects of U.S. monetary policy shocks are larger for emerging asset returns relative to
physical capital flows, and they are largest for emerging equity markets relative to fixed income
markets. Last, these effects are largest when the Federal Reserve is engaged in “tapering” its
large-scale asset purchase program.
Anusha Chari
301 Gardner Hall
CB#3305, Department of Economics
University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill
Chapel Hill, NC 27599
and NBER
achari@unc.edu
Karlye Dilts Stedman
CB #3305, Department of Economics
University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill
Chapel Hill NC 27599
kdilts@email.unc.edu

Christian Lundblad
Department of Finance
University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill
Chapel Hill, NC 27599-3490
Christian_Lundblad@unc.edu

1. Introduction
The massive surge of foreign capital to emerging markets in the aftermath of the
global financial crisis (GFC) of 2008–2009 has led to a contentious debate about the
international spillover effects of developed-market monetary policy with particular
emphasis on the United States (Fratzscher, Lo Duca, and Straub 2013, Rey 2014). The
monetary policy decisions of the U.S. Federal Reserve during the crisis had a primarily
domestic focus to stimulate growth in its aftermath. However, these policy actions led to
substantial spillover effects for emerging-market economies (Fratzscher, Lo Duca, and
Straub 2013). As interest rates in developed economies remained low, investors were
attracted to the higher rates in many emerging economies (Fratzscher 2012).
The surge in foreign capital led Brazilian President Dilma Rousseff to evocatively
claim that advanced economy monetary policy had unleashed a “monetary tsunami” in
the developing world.2 The governor of Taiwan’s central bank, Perng Fai-Nan echoed
this sentiment, “The U.S. printed a lot of money, so there’s a lot of hot money flowing
around. We see hot money in Taiwan and elsewhere in Asia. . . . These short-term capital
flows are disturbing emerging economies.” Later, announcements by the Fed suggesting
that an unwinding of quantitative easing was imminent appeared to trigger a selloff in
emerging markets; “taper talk” may have signaled looming increases in borrowing costs
and other market disruptions in emerging countries.
Using a relatively recently developed technique to identify U.S. monetary policy
shocks, we ask examine the effects of (unconventional) U.S. monetary policy on
emerging market capital flows and asset prices. We exploit the development of a
budding literature on the use of high-frequency data to identify monetary policy shocks to
the more precisely address the magnitude of any attendant spillover effects. With this
technology in hand, we can further decompose and quantify these effects. This paper
answers these questions using a dataset on global capital flows and positions from the
U.S. Department of Treasury, capturing U.S. investment positions in emerging market
asset markets and their valuations. While previous studies use these data in other

2

http://articles.economictimes.indiatimes.com/2012-03-28/news/31249809_1_india-and-brazil-braziltoday-brazilian-president-dilma-rousseff

2

contexts,3 we shed new light on the link between U.S. monetary policy shocks, net
capital flows, and emerging market equity and bond market returns.
Our first step is to identify monetary policy shocks at the zero lower bound (ZLB)
— and the task is not straightforward. For example, as Christiano, Eichenbaum, and
Evans (1999) make clear; the literature has not converged on a unifying set of
assumptions to identify exogenous shocks to monetary policy (even for the pre-crisis
period). The primary methods of identifying monetary policy shocks in the literature fall
into three general categories. They are (i) panel estimation with announcement dummies
(Fratzscher, Lo Duca and Straub 2013; Ahmed and Zlate 2014;), (ii) structural VARs
(Zha 1997, Dedola, Rivolta, and Stracca, 2015), and (iii) high-frequency identification
(HFI) schemes (Gilchrist, Yue and Zakrajsek 2014; Neely 2010; Mishra, Moriyama,
N'Diaye and Nguyen 2014). Although the particular details vary, the benefits of each
methodology lie in the data used for monetary policy shock identification and usually
depend on the frequency of the chosen data.
As mentioned above, we follow the rapidly growing set of papers that employ
high-frequency identification of monetary policy shocks by extracting the unexpected
component from Treasury futures contracts. While expectations of Fed policy actions are
not directly observable, futures prices are associated with a traded derivative contract,
providing a “market-based proxy” for these expectations (Kuttner 2001). Given that
actual rate changes were largely absent during most of the crisis and post-crisis periods,
the Fed has relied heavily on forward guidance to manage expectations about future Fed
policy. During the QE period, FOMC statements, for the most part, worked to manage
expectations that the policy rate would continue near the ZLB and had an explicit goal of
influencing longer-term interest rates. Changes in the price of derivatives contracts such
as Treasury futures can therefore reflect changes in the perceived probability of future
Fed policy. In this setting, we follow Rogers, Scotti, and Wright (2014) to measure
monetary surprises at the ZLB as the change in futures-implied yields bracketing FOMC
announcements. With these observed policy shocks in hand, we then regress measures of
net capital flows and asset returns on the extracted shocks in a panel setting to more
precisely gauge the degree to which emerging markets are affected by U.S. monetary
(especially, unconventional) policy.
3

Examples include Curcuru et al (2010) and Bertaut, Griever and Tryon (2006).

3

Before proceeding, it is important to recognize that during ordinary times,
monetary policy can generate spillovers to emerging markets through conventional
channels (Kim 2001; Obstfeld and Rogoff 1995). However, additional transmission
channels are possible because the period of unconventional monetary policy has involved
heavier management of expectations and efforts to exert direct control further along the
yield curve.4 A unifying question is the degree to which monetary shocks represent
revisions in market participants’ expectations about the path of short-term interest rates
and / or changes in their required risk compensation. To interpret the nature of the
shocks extracted from the Treasury bond futures market, we use a common affine term
structure model (see Kim and Wright 2005). We find that our monetary policy shocks, in
part, represent revisions in expectations about short-term interest rates, but even more
significantly, they capture changes in required risk compensation. The important role for
time-varying risk compensation is particularly true during the periods of unconventional
monetary policy.
Using panel data and high-frequency identification, we then turn to our main
contribution. We examine the impact of measured, high-frequency U.S. monetary policy
surprises around FOMC meetings on capital flows from the United States to a range of
emerging markets as well as the associated emerging market valuations. The benchmark
specification estimates the impact of monetary surprises for both equity and debt
instruments as a percent of annual GDP for: (i) total positions, (ii) valuation changes
(e.g., returns) and (iii) capital flows, as well as an examination of any attendant exchange
rate effects.
Our results reveal heterogeneity along three principal lines: flows versus prices,
debt versus equity, and quantitative easing versus tapering. Among these, the most robust
finding is that valuation changes for both debt and equity played a key role in the change
in overall positions observed between sub-periods. That is, in nearly every specification,
the effect of monetary policy shocks on asset returns is larger than that for physical
flows. This finding is consistent with the notion that our shocks may capture a revision in
required risk compensation across financial markets. We also find that (scaled) equity
positions and valuations are more sensitive to monetary policy shocks—across three subperiods, equity valuation effects are an order of magnitude larger than debt valuation
4

See Fratzscher et al 2014 for a comprehensive summary.

4

effects. During the QE period, for instance, the coefficient on equity valuations in
response to a monetary policy shock is ten times higher than the coefficient on debt
valuations.
While we detect some significant effects of monetary policy on flows and
valuations during the QE period, the effects are not consistent over all dependent
variables. However, during the period following the first mention of asset purchase
tapering, we find a consistent and large effect of monetary policy shocks on nearly all
variables of interest. In particular, we find that the effects of monetary policy on debt
flows during the taper period are much higher and statistically significant than during the
QE period. Further, the effects on debt and equity positions, flows, and valuations during
the taper period are an order-of-magnitude larger compared to the pre-crisis period in
nearly every specification.
The coefficient estimates on the monetary surprise measures during the taper
period suggest that the market interpreted the unwinding of unconditional monetary
policy as a signal that normalcy was being restored to the U.S. economy and, consistent
with both the signaling and portfolio balance channels, expected monetary tightening in
the U.S. both in the near-term and ongoing in the future led to a massive retrenchment
from emerging markets.
A significant advantage of extracting the magnitude of the monetary surprises
directly from futures data is that we can estimate a dollar amount in terms of the changes
in U.S. investor positions and flows into emerging markets, controlling for a variety of
push and pull factors. Previous studies that use period indicator variables or alternative
approaches to examine U.S. monetary policy spillovers are only able to make qualitative
statements about the direction of impact. In contrast, using derivatives price changes we
can quantify the impact of U.S. monetary policy on emerging market capital flows
depending on the magnitudes, signs, and dispersion of the extracted monetary policy
shocks. A richer picture emerges from our approach, whereby we can make distributional
predictions that are more in line with emerging markets’ varied experience across both
markets and time periods.
Our paper is related to previous studies that examine the effect of unconventional
monetary policy on capital flows using panel data on emerging markets by including
indicators for the dates of FOMC meetings and speeches by the Fed Chair, along with a
number of fundamental control variables (Fratzscher, Lo Duca and Straub 2013; Ahmed

5

and Zlate 2014; Aizenman, Binici and Hutchison 2014). The main findings are that
quantitative easing in the U.S. was an important driver of capital flows into emerging
economies (Ahmed and Zlate 2014), although the effects varied across episodes and
importantly, the impact of QE on asset prices was greater than that on flows (Fratzscher,
Lo Duca and Straub 2013).
Event studies that use high-frequency identification suggest that U.S.
unconventional monetary policy had a significant effect on interest rates in both
advanced and emerging economies. Focusing on both the QE and taper periods, Mishra,
Moriyama, N'Diaye and Nguyen (2014) find that taper talk had a significant effect on
bond yields, exchange rates, and equity prices, but that better country fundamentals and
stronger trade ties with China mitigated the effect. Karolyi and McLaren (2016) show
that the initial tapering announcement in 2013 had negative valuation impacts overall, but
that emerging market stocks with larger positive cumulative abnormal returns around
earlier LSAP purchase announcements were particularly hard hit in 2013. Our nearest
neighbor in this literature uses factor analysis to separate market and signal factors from
changes in bond yields around FOMC events, finding that unconventional monetary
policy surprises had larger effects on equity prices, exchange rates, bond yields and
mutual fund flows than those during conventional periods, finding additionally that
“signal” shocks—those that portend the path of future interest rates—generate larger and
more ubiquitous spillovers (Chen et al. 2014).
The paper proceeds as follows. Section 2 briefly describes the related literature on
U.S. monetary policy and capital flows to emerging markets with an emphasis on
identifying monetary policy shocks and measuring spillovers at the zero lower bound.
Section 3 presents our methodology for extracting monetary policy surprise measures
using high-frequency identification and explores their relationship to revisions in
expectation about future short rates and term premia. Section 4 describes the data and
methodology for measuring capital flows and presents summary statistics. Section 5
presents the benchmark specification and the regression results. Section 6 concludes.

2. Related Literature
The literature on the pattern of international capital flows separates determinants
into push factors which are common, global factors associated with external shocks, and
pull factors, which are country-specific. Push factors alter the relative attractiveness of

6

investing in developed countries. Global volatility (the VIX an often employed proxy),
global liquidity, global interest rates and global growth are considered push factors—
their variation is thought to drive phenomena such as search for yield or flight to safety
which may affect developed market flows to or from emerging economies (Calvo et al
1993). There is strong evidence in the literature for the impact of global risk aversion and
developed-economy interest rates, and there is some evidence for the effect of advancedeconomy output growth (Fratzscher 2012; Fratzscher et al 2014; Passari and Rey 2015;
Milesi Ferretti and Tille 2011; Broner et al 2013; Forbes and Warnock 2012).
Pull factors, on the other hand, change the risk-return characteristics of emergingmarket assets. These include country characteristics such as financial sector development,
domestic interest rates and asset returns, integration with global financial markets, fiscal
position and domestic growth shocks. While the balance of evidence suggests that push
factors are a more powerful determinant of capital flows, there is some evidence that
domestic output growth, domestic interest rates or asset returns and country risk
indicators have an impact on capital flows, as well (Ahmed and Zlate 2013; Fratzscher
2012).5
A third set of factors that fall partially under each of the previous two are related
to contagion, trade linkages, financial linkages and location, which may also play a role
in driving portfolio and banking flows. These are addressed in a separate literature on
financial contagion. Although we do not focus on contagion directly, by measuring the
impact of U.S. monetary policy on flows to and from a broad set of emerging markets,
we are attempting to identify the size of flows induced by a global financial shock.

2.1 U.S. Monetary Policy and Capital Flows to Emerging Markets: Spillovers at the
Zero Lower Bound
The period of unconventional monetary policy has involved a heavier
management of expectations and efforts to exert direct control further along the yield
curve. Additional channels of monetary policy transmission in operation include the
portfolio balance, signaling, confidence, and liquidity (Krishnamurthy and VissingJorgensen 2011; Neely 2010; Fratzscher 2012; Fratzscher et al 2014; Lim et al 2014).

5

Capital flows driven by pull factors may be more desirable when the intrinsic quality of these assets
attracts foreign investors, as they may be more committed to these positions and less likely to unwind them
quickly.

7

Based on the usual decomposition of yields on safe long-term government bonds, there
are two potential elements of the yield curve that central bank bond purchases can affect:
the average level of short-term interest rates over the maturity of the bond and the term
premium. Specifically, consider the yield on an n-year bond as decomposed in the asset
pricing literature: as the average of expected overnight rates over the life of the bond and
a term premium:
EH
Yt;t+n = Yt:t+n
+YTPt;n

(1)

EH
where Yt:t+n
is the average short term rate expected over the period t to t+n (that is, the

component of the yield that would drive yield variation if the expectations hypothesis
were to hold), and YTPt;n is a maturity-specific term premium. We next address each
potential channel’s relationship to this yield decomposition in turn.
First, the portfolio balance channel results from a confluence of forces.
Quantitative easing involves the purchase of longer-duration assets, which reduces the
effective supply of such assets to private investors, thereby raising their price and
lowering yields. As investors rebalance their portfolios in response to quantitative easing,
the prices of the assets they buy should rise as well, decreasing their respective yields.6
Thus, we can expect that, if the portfolio balance channel dominates, a loosening of
monetary policy via quantitative easing will result in increased flows to emerging
markets as investors substitute toward emerging-market assets in search of higher yields.
Likewise, we would expect that a contractionary monetary policy incentivizes investors
to rebalance in favor of U.S. Treasuries. Thus, if the portfolio channel is in operation we
expect that monetary policy shocks will be inversely correlated with emerging market
flows and valuations.
Additionally, if investors demand a premium for holding longer-term bonds, then
the term premium (YTPt;n above) will also be influenced by the relative supply of long
term assets. If the Fed removes long-term securities from the market, i.e. duration risk,
investors should require a smaller premium to hold the reduced quantity of long-term
securities. Overall yields can fall once again prompting a rebalancing toward higher yield
emerging market assets.

6

http://www.federalreserve.gov/newsevents/speech/bernanke20120831a.htm

8

Although quantitative easing does not directly affect short-term interest rates, it
may serve as a signal to markets regarding the future path of interest rate policy. This
signaling channel operates as follows. If taken as a commitment by the Fed to keep future
policy rates lower than previously expected, the signaling channel would suggest lower
EH
yields associated with a lower the average expected short-rate, Yt:t+n
in equation (1)

(Fratzscher et al 2014; Neely 2010; Lim et al 2014).
In the context of emerging market capital flows, the ongoing large scale asset
purchases (LSAPs) can signal that large interest rate differentials between advanced
economy yields with respect to emerging markets are expected to persist. In the literature
on capital flows, the interest rate differential may trigger a carry trade, resulting in
sizeable capital flows into emerging markets (Galati, Heath and McGuire 2007). As in
the case of the portfolio balance channel, we would expect the coefficient on a monetary
policy shock dominated by the signaling channel to be negative.
The confidence channel of unconventional monetary policy, which is closely
related to the signaling channel, can influence portfolio decisions and asset prices by
altering the risk appetite of investors; for example, an announcement of tapering might
serve as a signal that the FOMC is feeling sanguine about global economic prospects,
lowering relative risk aversion and, consistent with predictions from the literature on
capital flow determinants, increasing capital flows to emerging markets. Reduced
confidence, in contrast, can lead to capital outflows from emerging markets or a flight to
safety. We would thus expect a loosening monetary policy shock dominated by the
confidence channel to drive capital outflows from emerging markets.
Quantitative easing can also affect portfolio decisions and asset prices by altering
the liquidity premium (Krishnamurthy and Vissing-Jorgensen 2011; Neely 2010), and
thus the efficiency of markets. In practice, LSAPs are credited in the form of increased
reserves on private bank balance sheets (Krishnamurthy and Vissing-Jorgensen 2011).
Since such reserves are more easily traded in secondary markets than are long-term
securities, the liquidity premium decreases. Thus, liquidity-constrained banks can extend
credit to borrowers, resulting in decreased borrowing costs and elevated lending levels.
However, before we can identify the various channels through which unconventional
monetary policy operates, we must first identify it.

9

3. Extracting Monetary Policy Surprise Measures Using High-Frequency
Identification
Using high frequency identification allows us to make several unique
contributions to the literature on the spillover effects of U.S. monetary policy on
emerging market capital flows. For example, panel estimation using dummies only for
event dates thought to contain a surprise Treasury rate change may fail to include dates
that are not widely-recognized as surprises or may miss dates that contain a surprise
insofar as rates did not change. Similarly, studies that use simple changes in the Treasury
yields may lead to an attenuated estimated monetary policy effect if the lack of any
change is itself a surprise. Finally, using dummies to identify a monetary policy shock
obscures the magnitude of the shock. Using high-frequency identification and
conditioning on the magnitudes of the monetary surprises we are able to quantify the
impact on capital flows to emerging markets.
The abundance of short-term interest rates that potentially measure federal funds
rate expectations has led to a proliferation of asset price-based monetary policy
expectation measures emanating from Kuttner (2001). Among the short-term variables
found in use in this literature are the current-month federal funds futures contract price,
the month-ahead federal funds futures contract price, the one-month Eurodollar deposit
rate, the three-month Treasury bill rate, and the three-month Eurodollar futures rate.
Gürkaynak, Sack and Swanson (2005, 2007) and Gürkaynak (2005) propose
alternative shock measures that capture changes in market expectations of the policy rate
over slightly longer horizons. Since December 2008, however, there have been almost no
changes in the target federal funds rate, and, until recently, FOMC statements for the
most part worked to maintain the perception that the policy rate would continue near
zero. In this setting, and in light of QE`s explicit goal of influencing longer-term interest
rates, we use a measure of monetary policy shocks at the ZLB as in Rogers, Scotti and
Wright (2014). Following their methodology, we measure U.S. monetary policy surprises
as the change in futures-implied yields bracketing FOMC announcements. Specifically,
the surprise is the daily change in five-year Treasury futures on the date of FOMC
announcements.
To construct our baseline monetary policy shocks, we used the daily difference in
the implied yield of the five-year Treasury bond futures contract on potential dates for
monetary policy surprises. The majority of our dates are FOMC meetings and conference

10

calls from the Federal Reserve Board website,
https://www.federalreserve.gov/monetarypolicy/fomccalendars.htm. The remaining
events are taken from Gagnon et al (2011). Finally, we include the “Taper Tantrum”
episode of May 22, 2013. Table 1 displays summary statistics for our main monetary
policy shock measure and for three additional robustness measures, including correlations
among the various measures. The data underlying our monetary policy shock measures
are expressed in percentage points. Thus, for example, the average daily change in the
implied yield on five-year Treasury Futures during the QE (Taper) period is a decrease
(increase) of 2.0 (1.6) basis points, in contrast to a -0.6 basis point average daily change
in the contract over the full sample and a -0.5 basis point change in the pre-GFC period.7
Table 1 also includes the significance levels from a simple test of means between
periods; hence, the differences in period averages between our dates of interest are
statistically significant. Figure 1 shows the five-year Treasury Futures yield changes on
FOMC event dates.
3.1 Understanding the Monetary Surprise Measures
In order to understand the manner in which our monetary policy shocks affect
global flows and valuations, we first need to better understand the nature of the revisions
in expectations housed in our variable. As mentioned, monetary policy potentially
influences both the expected path of short-term interest rates and the term premium.
However, from mid-2008 until as recently as mid-2015, the Fed was not expected to
deviate from zero short-term interest rates; it is not unreasonable, therefore, to suspect
that monetary policy is qualitatively different in the periods of QE and of LSAP tapering
in the sense that the relationship between monetary policy and the term structure of
interest rates is altered. In this section of the paper, we explore the relationship between
our monetary policy surprise measure and the decomposition of the yield curve into a
component associated with the expected path of the short interest rate and that associated
with the term premium. This disaggregation permits an evaluation of the role for
monetary policy surprises across the conventional and unconventional periods.

7

The robustness section examines a variety of monetary policy shocks extracted from different futures
instruments such as the one- and two-month Fed Funds futures contracts as well as the changes in the twoyear Treasury bond yields.

11

We appeal to a well-established affine term structure methodology from Kim and
Wright (2005) that permits the decomposition of various government bond yields into
information about future short rates and term premia. Kim and Wright estimate a
standard latent three-factor Gaussian term structure model using zero-coupon Treasury
yields from the Gurkaynak, Sack, and Wright (GSW, 2007) database. To facilitate
empirical implementation, forecast data on the three-month T-bill yield from Blue Chip
Financial Forecasts are incorporated into the model estimation. Their model yields a
point-in-time daily estimate of the expected short rate over the life of any longer dated
bond as well as the risk compensation market participants require for holding that bond.8
With these various components in hand, we separately regress changes (1) in
bond yields, (2) in the expected path of the short rate, and (3) in the term premium onto
our monetary policy shock to assess its importance on each. We conduct these separate
regressions for one, five and ten year maturity bonds, separating the MP shock effects of
interest (those arising on relevant FOMC or policy announcement days) across three
periods (pre-crisis, March 1994 – August 2008, QE, December 2008 – April 2013, and
tapering, May 2013 – June 2016) 9:

ΔY(n),t = α 0 + β1dummy pre MPt + β2 dummyQE MPt + β3dummytaper MPt + εt

(5)

Where the left-hand side variable Y(n),t is either the zero coupon bond yield on an n year
bond, the expectations hypothesis-implied average short rate component of an n year
bond, or the term premium on an n year bond. We consider two event windows for the
changes in the dependent variables – a daily change for event days perfectly coinciding
with the day of the MP shock, and a two-day change that includes the event day plus the

8

The Kim and Wright yield curve decomposition data are made available at
http://www.federalreserve.gov/pubs/feds/2005/200533/200533abs.html
9
The pre-crisis dummy is equal to one in the period March 1994 to July 2008 and zero otherwise. The QE
dummy is equal to one from the period December 2008 (when the U.S. interest rate reached the ZLB) to
April 2013. The Taper dummy is equal to one for the period after May 2013 (wherein Ben Bernanke first
mentioned the possibility of tapering LSAP purchases). We elect December 2008 as the beginning of the
QE period precisely because it is at this point that the Fed can no longer undertake conventional simulative
monetary policy by lowering the interest rate (except to offer a negative interest rate in the vein of Bank of
Japan and the European Central Bank). The period between the collapse of Lehman Brothers and the
beginning of QE was marked by global “flight to safety” and its inclusion in either neighboring sub-period
muddles the analysis in the sense both that it is a period of extraordinary uncertainty and that it truly
belongs to neither classification.

12

following to capture any relevant slow moving market effects.10 We provide
White standard errors to correct for heteroskedasticity (in parentheses). Finally, we allow
the monetary policy shock coefficients to vary across the three periods.
Table 2 (Panel A) shows the daily regressions for the overall yield change, the
change in the path of the expected short rate, and the change in the term premium, and
Panel B shows two-day yield change regressions for the same event dates. First, focusing
on the coefficients associated with the conventional, pre-crisis period, we find that a
positive FF5 shock is significantly associated with bond yield changes across maturities
both for the one-day event (Panel A) and the two-day event window (Panel B), though
this effect appears to diminish with the 10-year bond across both event windows. To
provide a sense of the economic magnitude, a one-standard deviation FF5 shock would
be associated, on average, with a 4.73 (4.81) basis point increase in the ten-year bond
yield across the one-day (two-day) event window over the conventional policy period.
For comparison, a one-standard deviation daily (two-day) ten-year bond yield change is
5.76 (8.31) basis points over this period. Finally, we decompose the overall yield changes
into changes in the expected path of the short rate and in the relevant term premia. The
regression results suggest that over the conventional monetary policy period, FF5 shocks
plays a role in altering the expected path of the short rate. As one might anticipate, this
effect diminishes sharply with maturity across both measurement widows. We also
uncover an important role for FF5 shocks in altering term premia, where the risk
compensation effects are relatively stable across different maturities. In sum, during the
period of conventional monetary policy, our measured FF5 shock has implications for
both revisions in expectations about the path of future short rates as well as risk premia.
Next, we turn to the coefficients associated with FF5 shocks during the period of
unconventional monetary policy (both QE and eventual policy tapering). First, overall
yield changes appear to be significantly affected by FF5 shocks across both the QE and
tapering periods for both the one and two-day event windows. As an example, a onestandard deviation FF5 shock during the QE period would be associated, on average, with
a 12.2 (13.6) basis point increase in the ten-year bond yield across the one-day (two-day)
event window. For comparison, a one-standard deviation daily (two-day) ten-year bond
10

We also considered regressions based on a three-day event window. While there still appears to be an
important role for shocks housed in the Treasury futures contracts, the effects on bond yield and their yield
components do start to diminish by day three.

13

yield change is 7.10 (9.99) basis points over the QE period. Similarly, sizeable effects are
present during the tapering period. One interesting point to note is the fact that, unlike
the conventional period, the FF5 shock effects on bond yields during the unconventional
periods monotonically increase over time. Since the effect of a shock on the expected
path of future short rates is likely to be relatively short-lived over the life of a long-term
maturity bond, we can speculate on the manner in which the FF5 shocks map into
revisions in the compensation for interest rate risk. Indeed, despite a role for the FF5
shocks during the unconventional QE and tapering periods altering the expected path of
future short rates, the largest effects are associated with sizeable and statistically
significant revisions in term premia. Further, these risk premia effects monotonically
increase with maturity.
Taken together, during the period of unconventional monetary policy, it may be
the case that our measured FF5 shock has more to do with variation in required risk
compensation relative to variation in the expected path of the short rate. This result is
true despite the fact that high frequency variation in futures contracts are employed in the
construction of the FF5 shocks in the first place. The important role for FF5 shocks in
describing variation in risk compensation during the period of post-crisis unconventional
policy may help us better interpret the manner in which our measured monetary policy
shocks affect global flows and valuations in the sections to follow.
4. The Data
We use data from the U.S. Department of Treasury International Capital (TIC)
System. TIC provides data on U.S. transactions with foreigners in domestic and foreign
securities by type and country on a monthly basis. The data are collected from issuers of
U.S. securities issued directly in foreign markets and from large U.S.-resident end
investors who do not use U.S. custodians for holdings of foreign securities (for example,
pension funds, foundations, and endowments), as well as large U.S. custodian banks
and U.S. broker–dealers. Net debt and equity flows are gross sales to U.S. residents by
foreigners less gross purchases from U.S. residents by foreigners.
Specifically, Bertaut and Tryon (2007) and Bertaut and Judson (2014) generate
monthly estimates of U.S. cross-border investment by combining information from
detailed annual Treasury International Capital (TIC) surveys with data from the TIC

14

forms SLT and TIC S.11 We use this measure of capital flows because it yields a
consistent, high frequency time series that can be decomposed into flows, estimated
valuation changes, and a residual “gap” (the last component arising from the challenge of
reconciling year-end holdings data with within-year cumulative valuation and flow data).
These decompositions can provide a richer and timelier view of developments in both
foreign portfolio investment in the U.S. and U.S. portfolio investment abroad than
available from transactions data or survey data alone.
To obtain a measure of positions in securities by type and country, it is necessary
to interpolate the annual holdings data using the growth rate of country-level fixedincome and equity indices, along with flow data from the monthly transactions data. The
methodology differs slightly over the sample based on the available data. From the start
of the sample through December 2011, the data is compiled using the methodology
developed by Bertaut and Tryon (2007). Starting in January 2012, the data are compiled
using the methodology developed by Bertaut and Judson (2014), which makes use of the
TIC SLT form introduced in 2011 in response to the financial crisis.

4.1.1 Bertaut and Tryon (2007)
Bertaut and Tryon (2007) interpolate annual holdings into a monthly series by
cumulating monthly net transactions reporting on the TIC S form and adjusting for
changes in asset valuation on a monthly basis.
To illustrate, denote as Hi,j,t U.S. holdings of asset-type j from country i at time t.
Then,

Hi,j,t = Hi,j,t-1(1 + Vi,j,t ) + Fi,j,t + Ai,j,t

(3)

where Vi,j,t is the total return on country i’s return index for asset type j and Fi,j,t is the
net flow in U.S. dollars. Ai,j,t accounts for the repayment of principal on asset-backed
securities, acquisitions of equity through stock swaps, and flows consisting of nonmarketable Treasury bonds. As emerging market debt is increasingly denominated in
local currency, the return used is the average of USD EMBI+ and the local currency bond
index weighted by the currency composition of U.S. resident positions. Holdings
11

Their data management efforts are made available at
http://www.federalreserve.gov/Pubs/ifdp/2007/910/default.htm

15

observations in the first month of every year are the values from the annual survey; that
is, annual observations are the interpolation end-points.
Making the above adjustments, however, leaves a substantial gap between the
cumulation-implied holdings at the time of the next survey and the value of reporting
holdings in that month. One complication that arises in constructing estimated positions
for individual country holds is the geographic distortion caused by financial center
transaction bias. By construction, the transaction data are recorded by country of first
cross-border counterparty, rather than actual end buyer or seller of the security. Thus,
estimates calculated in the above fashion will tend to overestimate holdings by residents
of financial center locations and underestimate holdings by residents other countries.
If the gap for the year is negative, then the cumulation-implied holdings for the
year overstates the year-end position in comparison with the survey. If the gap for the
year is positive, the cumulation-implied holdings understate the year-end position. If the
distributed gap in a given month differs in sign from the overall gap accumulated during
the year, the cause can be a very large drop in value, a very large drop in volume, or both
because the valuation and volume enter the weighting formula multiplicatively.
In addition, the gap may be due to approximation and measurement errors in the
construction of prices used to calculate the valuation adjustments, and transaction costs
due which are included in reported transactions, but not in annual holdings surveys. The
basic challenge is to distribute the observed error across the months between annual
survey dates to arrive at a more accurate estimate of monthly positions.
Beginning with an initial survey position, an estimate of the current position of a
given asset type for a given country at an inter-survey date t is constructed as follows:
t

Ŝt = S0 (1+ π̂ 0,t ) + ∑ N̂ k (1+ π̂ kt )

(4)

k=1

Where S0 is the latest survey observation for a given country, security, and holder,
Ŝt is the estimated position at time t, { N̂ i } is the sequence of flows from time 1 to time t,

and π̂ i,t is the rate of increase of the price of security S over the period, with π̂ 0,0 = 0. So,
we assume that flows and prices are observed with error, and between-survey holdings
represent estimated values. When t = T, ST is known. The gap is thus: G T = ST − ŜT .

16

In short, Bertaut and Tryon extrapolate the time 0 survey position forward using
the observed flow data and compute the residual vis-à-vis the reported survey at time T.
The residual is then distributed across time periods according to each period’s share of
net transactions, discounted by the appropriate inflation rate. The cumulative flows will
then match the annual surveys by construction, consistent with both endpoints.
Hi,j,t = Hi,j,t-1 (1 + Vi,j,t) + Fi,j,t + Ai,j,t + Gapi,j,t

(5)

ΔHi,j,t = Hi,j,t-1 Vi,j,t + Fi,j,t + Ai,j,t + Gapi,j,t

(6)

and

4.1.2 Bertaut and Judson (2014)
The financial crisis in 2008 highlighted the need for more timely collection of
information on cross-border security positions, and the Survey-S estimates perform best
when the TIC S data is book-ended by annual survey data meaning the lag on the most
reliable estimates can be up to a year. TIC SLT provides market-value reports of actual
holdings rather than flows, meaning that valuation adjustments are reported directly and
the approach to distributing the gap between flows, valuations and positions over the year
requires fewer assumptions. Annual surveys still provide the most detailed information
available about the distribution of investment flows between valuation effects (“passive
”changes) and purchases or sales (“active” changes). Thus, the monthly holdings
positions are still updated by annual holdings and anchored to them in the intervening
months.
Let Hi,j,t be the holdings of security type j issued in country i at time t and let PSLT
be the position for that security, country and time as recorded in the SLT form.

⎡12 − m
⎤
m
SLT
H i, j,t = H i, j,t−1 + ⎢
Ri, j,y−1 + Ri, j,y ⎥(Pi,SLT
j,t − Pi, j,t−1 )
⎣ 12
⎦
12

(7)

Where Ri,j,y and Ri,j,y -1 are the ratio of the SLT-recorded position at time t to the annual
survey position at current and previous year’s end, respectively. The gap is calculated
as:

Gapi, j,t = ΔH i, j,t − Fi, j,t − Ai, j,t −ValAdji, j,t

17

(8)

In our final dataset, we define positions as outlined above decomposed into (i)
valuations changes and a flow measure that combines the reported flow measures with
the gap. We do so on the assumption that the error attributable to flow mis-measurement
is like to be higher than that attributable to prices. Due to the difference in data
collection, our approach differs by subsample. In the Survey-S data, we simply add the
adjusted flows to the gap. In the Survey-S-SLT data, we back out the valuation
adjustment and take flows to be the difference between the change in positions and the
proportion of position changes attributable to valuation changes.12 When fully
constructed, these data are monthly from 1994 until 2014. The countries in the panel
include Argentina, Brazil, Chile, Colombia, India, Indonesia, Korea, Malaysia, Mexico,
Peru, the Philippines, Russia, South Africa, Thailand and Turkey.
4.2 Control Variables
Our control variables include both “push” and “pull” variables suggested by the
literature on capital flows. Controls for financial conditions include a measure of liquidity
(the Ted spread), market risk (VIX), the U.S. GDP growth rate, the return on the S&P
500 Index, the average of policy rates for the US, France, Germany and Japan, as well as
a lag of the left-hand-side variable to account for autocorrelation. Country-specific
controls include GDP growth rates, changes in local policy rates, the real effective
exchange rate (REER), emerging equity market returns (measured as the annual growth
of the MSCI total return index), government debt as a percent of GDP, the current
account balance as a percent of GDP, the fiscal balance as a percent of GDP, the real
effective exchange rate, and ICRG political risk. Country-specific controls are included
with a lag to rule out simultaneity.
4.3 Summary Statistics
Table 3 presents detailed summary statistics about country-level portfolio flow data
and the pull and push control variables. Total holdings (across both equity and bond
markets) increase, on average across countries, by 165% between the pre-crisis and the
QE period and increase by a further 27% between the QE and Taper period. The

12

We thank Frank Warnock for suggesting this adjustment.

18

difference in means between the two periods is statistically significant. Summing bond
and equity measures, average monthly flows in the data increase, on average across
countries, by 421% over the QE relative to the pre-crisis period and decline, on average,
by 49% over the Taper relative to the QE period, respectively, although the decline is not
statistically significant. Disaggregating total positions into equity and bond positions
shows that both increase significantly, on average across countries, over the QE and
Taper periods relative to the pre-crisis period; however, both exhibit a slower rate of
increase between the QE and Taper periods. Note that monthly changes in both bond and
equity valuations exhibit significant declines, on average across countries, between the
QE and the Taper periods. Given that we employ scaled versions (by GDP) of these
figures later in our main specifications, we also include these ratios towards the bottom of
the table (the directions are largely similar).13
Turning to push factors, while the VIX measuring global volatility increases
during the QE period relative to the pre-crisis period, it actually declines significantly
between the QE and the Taper periods to a value below that which prevailed during the
pre-crisis average. The Ted spread declines over every consecutive sub-period (QE-precrisis and Taper-QE), which implies that lenders believe the risk of default on interbank
loans is decreasing, and therefore liquidity increases. Finally, the S&P’s average annual
return in the Taper period is very high relative to the QE and pre-crisis periods. On
average, advanced economy interest rates decline steadily over the consecutive subperiods while US GDP growth falls between the pre-crisis and the QE periods and rises
over the Taper period.
The policy rate in the destination emerging market, a pull factor, reveals an
interesting pattern. On average, there is a statistically significant decline between precrisis and QE period, but not between the QE and taper periods, indicating a significant
drop in the emerging market policy rate since the global unconventional monetary policy
regime commenced. Table 3 shows that on average, the level of the policy rate in the
sample is unchanged between the QE and Taper periods. However, on average emerging
markets decreased interest rates during the QE period, and tightened during the taper
13

The magnitudes of the flow and valuation change ratios (divided by GDP) are naturally rather small. The
numerator is a monthly USD flow or monthly USD valuation change, whereas the denominator is the GDP
level for the previous year. While the magnitudes are small in percentage terms, the economic implications
remain sizeable for the relevant local markets.

19

period. Consistent with the valuation declines observed in the capital flows data, both the
EMBI bond indices and the MSCI emerging-market equity indices show a significant
decline, on average across countries, in the Taper period, -80% and -76% respectively.
With regard to variables capturing slow-moving macroeconomic conditions, we find that
on average real GDP growth, the fiscal balance, and the public debt ratio deteriorated
between the pre-crisis and QE periods, and deteriorate further between the QE and
tapering periods. Inflation declines over the sub-periods while the real exchange rate
appreciates between the pre-crisis and QE periods and depreciates between the QE and
Taper periods. Finally, the variable “political risk” (as measured by ICRG), on average,
shows a statistically significant improvement between each subsequent period.

5. Benchmark Specification and Regression Results
To examine the impact of monetary policy surprises around FOMC meetings on
capital flows from the United States to a range of emerging markets we estimate the
following benchmark specification using panel data:

yi,t = α yi,t−1 + β dummy pre MPt + γ dummyQE MPt + δ dummytaper MPt
(9)

+ηʹPUSH tAE + θ iʹPULLi,t + εi,t

where y i,t is the capital flow or position measure of interest. We estimate the impact of
monetary surprises on the following variables for both country-level equity and debt
markets: (i) positions, (ii) the monthly net flows into each market, and (iii) the monthly
valuation changes across each market. As mentioned above, the latter two quantities
represent a monthly change, divided by the GDP to facilitate cross-country comparison.
While the ratios are invariant to currency since both the numerators and denominators are
expressed in the same currency, we do nevertheless include (iv) the monthly change in
the bilateral USD exchange rate. To examine the degree to which U.S. policy shocks
affect the FX market, the bilateral exchange rate is expressed as USD/Local currency, so
that an increase is associated with an appreciation of the local currency, and vice versa.
Our specifications include a lagged measure of the dependent variable to account for the
strong autocorrelation we observe in the flows and holdings time-series.

β, γ and δ are the coefficients on the high-frequency monetary surprise measures
in the pre-crisis, QE and taper/unwinding periods, respectively. ηʹ is a transposed vector

20

of coefficients on the set of push variables mentioned above. Finally, θ ʹ is a transposed
vector of coefficients on the set of pull variables also mentioned above. Robust standard
errors are White’s corrected and clustered at the country level. We use the random
effects model instead of fixed effects under the assumption that our sample is sufficiently
long that country-level unobserved heterogeneity cannot be considered immutable. A
Hausman test corroborates our choice, rejecting fixed effects.

5.1 Monetary Surprises and Capital Flows
Table 4 examines the impact of the monetary surprise measures on the various
holdings and flow measures across the three sub-periods: the pre-crisis period, the QE
period and the unwinding period. Columns 1-3 present results for debt positions, flows,
and valuations, respectively. Columns 4-6 present the analogous measures for equity.
Finally, column 7 shows the results for the bilateral USD exchange rate change.
Consistent with the previous literature, both holding and flows display significant
autocorrelation as shown by the positive coefficients on the lagged dependent variables
(displayed near the bottom of the table for each specification).
In the pre-crisis period, changes in the five-year Treasury futures rates (FF5)
corresponding to FOMC announcement dates are generally inversely correlated to bond
and equity positions, monthly flow and monthly valuation changes across emerging
markets (see the first row of each regression specification – where the effect on bond
flows is the only exception). Such a pattern is consistent with a role for both the signaling
and portfolio balance channels. That is, a tightening U.S. monetary policy shock may be
associated with emerging market portfolio outflows as foreign investors substitute into
long-term U.S. bonds. Alternatively, a signal that today’s ‘tight’ monetary policy
portends future tightening, worsening credit conditions in the U.S. can drive a negative
association between monetary policy shocks and portfolio flows and valuations.
Conversely, easing surprises, on average, lead to increased inflows to emerging markets.
In the QE period, while five-year Treasury Futures (FF5) surprises are inversely
and significantly correlated with debt valuation changes (Column 3), we do not see
evidence of statistically significant changes in debt positions or flows. Equity positions
and valuations, on the other hand, are inversely correlated with the FF5 monetary surprise
measure (Columns 4 and 6). Given that interest rates fell dramatically during this period
and the U.S. quickly entered the ZLB regime, this pattern suggests that U.S. investors

21

significantly increased their emerging market equity holdings during the QE period.
While it may seem a little puzzling that the flow measures do not exhibit statistical
significance for either debt or equity, one explanation may be that there is more noise in
the measured flows data during periods of higher volatility. On the other hand, it is
plausible that there was indeed no detectable increase in flows because the positions
inflated due to improved expectations for the valuation of emerging market firms. Many
large emerging markets appeared to weather the crisis well. Optimism about emerging
markets would contribute to increased valuations for emerging market firms. Given that
our flow variables of interest are specific to the United States, the valuation changes
could be attributed to increased domestic investment or increased investment from other
locales. Overall, during the QE period there appears to be a significant and consistent
relationship between FF5 surprises and for both emerging market debt and equity
valuations, rather than flows.
A point to also note is that for equity flows in the QE period, while valuation
changes translate to a statistically significant effect on positions, this is not the case for
debt since positions are not statistically significantly affected by monetary policy shocks.
Moreover, the effect on valuation changes in equity is ten times larger than that for debt.
The unwinding, or taper, period presents a significant shift in the pattern of
results. Across alternative measures of debt and equity flows and valuation changes, we
observe inverse and statistically significant coefficients suggesting that the period of
taper talk and the actual unwinding was associated with significant outflows from
emerging markets. It is also noteworthy that across the board the coefficients associated
with the unwinding period are higher than both the pre-crisis and the QE periods and for
some specifications an order of magnitude higher for debt positions, debt valuations, and
equity flows. Moreover, the levels of statistical significance across all specifications in
the taper period are consistently at the 1% level. The coefficient estimates on the FF5
surprises during the taper period suggest that the market interpreted the unwinding of
unconditional monetary policy as a signal that normalcy was being restored to the U.S.
economy and, consistent with both the signaling and portfolio balance channels, expected
monetary tightening in the U.S. both in the near term and ongoing in the future led to a
massive retrenchment from emerging markets.
Additionally, note that in the tapering period, the effect of monetary policy shocks
on equity measures is double or even triple the magnitude of the effect for debt. It is

22

striking that in both the QE and tapering periods, valuation effects contribute more
heavily to position changes than do active reallocations (flows). Further, in the
unwinding period, the flows become a statically significant contributor to position
changes. Recall that in the QE period, changes in positions are attributable entirely to
valuation changes.
Finally, we turn to the effects of U.S. monetary policy shocks on emerging
markets exchange rates. During the pre-crisis period, an unexpected policy shock is, on
average, associated with a move in emerging market currencies in the same direction
(relative to the USD). For example, a positive (tightening) monetary policy shock in the
U.S. is associated, on average, with an appreciation in emerging market currencies. While
one might expect interest rate differentials to play a textbook role in currency
determination going forward, we nevertheless observe the opposite, possibly suggesting a
role for a confidence channel whereby U.S. policy tightening is, for instance, correlated
with expectations of global economic expansion.
In sharp contrast, we observe that a U.S. policy shock is associated with emerging
market currency fluctuations in the opposite direction during UMP periods. This is
particularly true during the later tapering period. For example, during the QE period, the
average monetary policy shock was negative (or a loosening shock), and is associated
with emerging market currency appreciation. In contrast, during the taper period positive
(tightening) U.S. policy shocks are associated with large and significant emerging market
currency depreciations. Taken together, it appears that the role for US monetary policy
shocks extends beyond capital flows and local markets valuations to also include the
exchange rate.

5.1.1 Push Factors and Capital Flows
In addition to the monetary surprise measures across sub-periods, Table 4
includes controls for a range of push and pull factors that can drive capital flows. In
particular, liquidity and volatility in advanced financial markets can affect flows to
emerging markets. Table 4 includes an indicator of global risk aversion, the VIX, and a
transformed TED spread, our measure of global liquidity. The TED spread measure is
orthogonalized to the VIX in order to capture the component of the spread that is not due
to changes in volatility or risk aversion.

23

Turning to the push variables, we see that in all but one specification the TED
spread, our measure of global liquidity, is inversely correlated with capital flows. ; thus, a
decrease in global liquidity (measured by increasing spreads) leads U.S. investors to
decrease their holdings and flows to emerging markets. This result is unsurprising in the
sense that a liquidity squeeze can make it difficult for institutions to obtain capital,
especially in times of heightened overall risk aversion (Fratzscher 2012). Debt positions,
flows and valuations in emerging markets are inversely correlated with TED spreads,
consistent with the hypothesis that increased spreads represent reduced financial market
liquidity and are therefore correlated with a decline in capital flows to emerging markets
(Columns 1 - 3). A similar inverse correlation is seen with equity positions and valuations
(Columns 4 and 6). We would expect that an increase in the market volatility or risk
aversion would cause capital flows to emerging economies to slow or reverse as investors
reallocate their portfolios toward safer assets (Ahmed and Zlate 2014; Milesi-Ferretti and
Tille 2011; Broner et al 2013). An increase in the VIX, or volatility, is positively
correlated with debt positions and valuations but not with debt flows. This finding could
arise due to an increase in the risk premium on emerging-market debt. Also, the VIX is
inversely correlated with changes in equity positions at the 15% level of significance but
our specifications do not pick up a significant impact of changes in the VIX on either
equity flows or valuations.
Next, we control for the S&P 500 Index return and U.S. real GDP growth rates as
push factors. Results in the literature on capital flows suggest that the return on advanced
economy equities should evince a negative relationship with emerging market equity
flows, as an increase in the U.S. equity return increases the relative attractiveness of
returns in the U.S. (Ghosh et al 2012; Lo Duca 2012). However, we find that the S&P
return is positively and significantly related to a range of debt equity valuations and
equity positions (Columns 3, 4 and 6). We could be observing here a wealth effect of the
U.S. return on capital flows—an increase in the return to investment in the U.S. increases
the total wealth available for investment activity. This result, however, is not without
precedent, as Forbes and Warnock (2012) find a similar pattern.
There are two countervailing forces readily apparent regarding the expected sign
on the real GDP growth coefficient,. We might expect real GDP growth in the U.S. to be
negatively correlated with emerging market capital for the same reasoning outlined for
the S&P return—the return differential shrinks, incentivizing investors toward advanced

24

economies (Ahmed and Zlate 2014). However, there is some evidence that mature
economy growth has a positive effect on emerging market flows via a wealth effect
(Forbes and Warnock 2012). We find that U.S. real GDP growth is positively related to
bond and equity positions and mildly inversely related to equity valuations in emerging
markets (Columns 1,4 and 6).
We include in our push variables the average of advanced economy interest rates
as an indicator of the world interest rate—numerous studies have concluded that an
increase in the external interest rate environment exerts a negative effect on emerging
market portfolio flows (Dalhaus and Vasishtha 2014; Montiel and Reinhart 1999; Sarno
and Taylor 1997) or that an increase in the spread between emerging market interest rates
and that of advanced economies tends to exercise a positive effect on emerging market
portfolio flows (Ahmed and Zlate 2014). We find that the average advanced economy
interest rates are inversely related with emerging market debt positions and flows but
positively related to debt and equity valuations (Columns 1-3 and 6). This result suggests
that when, for example, advanced economy interest rates fall debt positions and debt
flows to emerging markets rise and debt and equity valuations rise.

5.1.2 Pull Factors and Capital Flows
Regarding country-specific pull factors, we find that a lagged increase in the
emerging-market policy rate is on average directly related to equity positions (Column 4).
A lagged increase in the MSCI emerging market equity return is inversely correlated with
debt and equity positions and equity flows (Columns 1, 4 and 5) and debt and equity
valuations (Columns 3 and 6). Although we might expect to see a positive relationship
between such measures of domestic returns and capital flows the literature on emerging
market capital flows also produces some contrasting evidence in domestic returns
(Ahmed and Zlate 2014; Forbes and Warnock 2012).
Turning to macro-fundamental pull factors, there is some evidence in the
literature that real GDP growth in the destination country plays a role in determining
emerging market flows, although it is less robust (Fratzscher 2012; Forbes and Warnock
2012). We find that a lagged increased real GDP growth in the recipient country is
associated with increased bond positions as well as bond flows and equity flows
(Columns 1, 2 and 5). Inflation in emerging markets is, in contrast, inversely correlated
with equity positions (Column 4).

25

Turning next to slow-moving macroeconomic variables, there is some evidence
that country vulnerability indicators such as the current account, fiscal balance and
government debt impact portfolio flows because of their effect on the confidence of
investors regarding growth potential and perceived risk (Eichengreen and Gupta 2014;
Moore et al 2013; Chen et al 2014). However, these vulnerability measures also indicate
increased financing needs, generating a mechanical relationship with debt flows in
particular. In this vein, we find that lagged current account balances are inversely
correlated with debt positions and flows (Columns 1-2). We also find, however, that
lagged current account balances are positively correlated with equity valuations (Column
6). Similarly, the lagged fiscal balance in the destination country is inversely correlated
with debt positions and flows (Columns 1-2), but positively correlated with equity flows
and valuations (Columns 5-6). This division is consistent with the forces described
above—a positive fiscal balance indicates lower financing needs, but a negative fiscal
balance might also disincentivize investment. For debt flows, the effect of financing
needs appears dominant. The positive relationship between the lagged fiscal balance and
equity flows and valuations is consistent with changes in perception of risk in the face of
a public deficit—a strong fiscal position spurs equity flows and prices and vice-versa. A
similar logic may apply to government debt ratios. We find that the lagged gross
government debt ratio is inversely correlated with debt positions and flows (Columns 12) and positively correlated with equity positions and equity valuations (Columns 4 and
6).
We also include in the regressions the ICRG political risk index, which is
increasing in perceived institutional quality. The positive and significant coefficient on
this factor for debt positions and debt flows is consistent with the prediction that capital
flows to a country increase as political risk declines (Fratzscher et al 2013; Eichengreen
and Gupta 2013). Finally, real exchange rate appreciation is positively correlated with
equity flows. This result is not unexpected, since real exchange rate appreciation is often
itself used as a measure of increased capital flows (Calvo et al., 1993).

5.2 Economic Significance: Quantifying the Impact of US Monetary Policy Shocks
The advantage of extracting the magnitude of the monetary surprises directly
from the futures data is that we can directly estimate a dollar amount in terms of U.S.
investor position and flow changes to emerging markets controlling for a variety of push

26

and pull factors. To get a sense of the economic magnitudes in question, Table 5 presents
the response of monthly capital flows and valuation changes to the monetary policy
shocks evaluated at the mean as well as for a one standard deviation shock from the
mean.
We consider two examples of emerging-market capital flow measures with
significant coefficients for the FF5 surprise in the QE and taper sub-periods. First, let’s
examine the equity positions measure. In the baseline regression (Table 4, Column 4) the
coefficients on the FF5 surprise measure during the QE period is -0.99 percent of annual
GDP. From Table 1 Panel A, the mean value for FF5 changes during the QE period is 0.02. Country-level GDP in the QE and Taper periods averaged $791.29B and $911.88B
across the markets we consider, respectively. Combined with the coefficient estimates,
this suggests that the average monetary policy shocks (loosening shocks during the QE
period) appear to be accompanied by, on average, a monthly increase of $153.5M in
emerging-market equity positions.
During the taper period, the coefficient on the FF5 change measure is -0.97
percent of annual GDP (Table 4, Column 4). From Table 1 Panel A, the mean values for
the FF change, during the taper period is 0.016. Together, these coefficient estimates for
reversals in the unwinding period, the mean- magnitude shocks are correlated on average
with monthly outflows of $144.1M.
One standard deviation on either side of the mean for the FF5 monetary surprise
measures distribution during the QE period, is correlated with monthly changes in equity
positions that range from [-$672.26M, +$979.26M]. Similarly, one standard deviation
from the mean for the FF5 monetary surprise measures during the tapering period, is
correlated with equity position changes that range from [-$970.45M +$682.35M]. Given
that these are simple one-standard deviation shocks in either direction and that these local
markets tend to be relatively small and illiquid, position changes of these magnitudes are
quite sizeable. Table 5 presents detailed capital flow changes predicted by the
quantification exercise for all the debt and equity capital flow measures with significant
coefficients on the FF Treasury futures; the one-standard deviation effects are
economically large across all variables of interest.
An average monetary policy shock (at its mean) during the QE period leads to a
1% monthly appreciation, on average, in emerging market currencies. In contrast, during
the taper period, an average policy shock leads to a 0.11% monthly depreciation in

27

emerging market currencies. In the QE period, the changes in currency values range for a
0.16% depreciation for a mean plus one-standard deviation shock to a 0.24% appreciation
for a mean minus one-standard deviation shock. In the taper period these changes range
from a 0.52% appreciation for a mean minus one-standard deviation shock to a 0.75%
depreciation for a mean plus one-standard deviation shock. While the impact on bilateral
exchange rates is statistically significant, the magnitudes are not large from an economic
perspective. Note that the unconditional standard deviation of the monthly change in
bilateral exchange rates is 3.57%.
Extracting the magnitude of the monetary surprises allows us to quantify the
distributional impact of U.S. monetary policy on our emerging-market capital flow
measures. Previous studies that use dummy variables or alternative approaches to
examine U.S. monetary policy spillovers are only able to make qualitative statements
about the direction of impact.

5.3 Alternative Specifications and Robustness
To ensure the robustness of the patterns we document, we conducted a number of
alternative exercises.
First, a concern with the five-year Treasury futures contract is that these contracts
may not be as liquid as contracts of shorter maturity such as the one-month ahead and
two month ahead contracts that are the most heavily traded contracts. The abundance of
short-term interest rates that potentially measure federal funds rate expectations has led to
a proliferation of asset price-based monetary policy expectation measures emanating
from Kuttner (2001). Gürkaynak (2005) proposes alternative shock measures that capture
changes in market expectations of policy over slightly longer horizons. We measure
monetary policy shocks proposed by Gürkaynak (2005) and by Kuttner (2001). These are
described below.
Note that Federal funds futures have a payout that is based on the average
effective federal funds rate that prevails over the calendar month specified in the contract.
Thus, immediately before an FOMC meeting, at time t - Δt, the implied rate from the
current-month federal funds future contract, ff1, is largely a weighted average of the
federal funds rate that has prevailed so far in the month, r0, and the rate that is expected to
prevail for the reminder of the month, r1:

28

ff 1t - Δt =

d1
M1 - d1
1
r0 +
E t - Δt (r1 ) + ρt−Δt
M1
M1

(10)

where d1 denotes the day of the FOMC meeting, M1 is the number of days in the month,
1
and ρt−Δt
denotes any term or risk premium that may be present in the contract. By

leading this equation to time t and differencing, the surprise component of the change in
the federal funds rate target, which Gürkaynak (2005) calls MP1, is given by:

MPt1t = (ff 1t − ff 1t - Δt )

M1
M1 - d1

(11)

The scale factor M1/(M1 – d1) is necessary because the surprise is only relevant
for the remaining part of the month, although it adds a complication. Note that to
interpret the above as the surprise change in monetary policy expectations, we need to
assume that the change in the risk premium ρ in this narrow window of time is small in
comparison to the change in expectations itself. For example, for a policy action on the
last day of a month, the change in the term premium is multiplied by thirty amplifying the
noise in the measurement of the surprise. To surmount this problem, Kuttner (2001)
suggests using the next month’s contract (i.e., the month ahead contract in place of the
current month contract) when a policy action takes place in the last week of the month.
Gürkaynak (2005) goes a step further, constructing a measure to capture the
change in the federal funds rate expected to prevail after the next FOMC meeting. Given
the unexpected change in the federal funds rate following the current meeting, MP1t, the
change in the rate expected after the subsequent meeting, MP2t, can be calculated as
follows:
MP2 t =

M2
d2
(Δff t2 −
MP1t )
M2 - d2
M2

(12)

where Δff t2 is the change in the federal funds futures contract for the month of the
next FOMC meeting. This is contained in the two-month-ahead contract, as FOMC
meetings are scheduled to take place once every six weeks.
To see whether the pattern of results is different for shocks extracted from short
maturity contracts we repeat the estimations using the one-month (MP1) and two-month
(MP2) Fed Funds futures contracts (Table 6). The pattern of results is interesting.

29

The two monetary policy surprise measures (MP1 and MP2) are included together in
the regression under the assumption that they capture distinct elements of monetary
policy. Interacting our monetary surprise measures with time dummies allows us to
capture the differential effect of monetary policy over three distinct regimes while
allowing our controls to have a regime-invariant effect. Table 6 presents an interesting
pattern of results using these more liquid contracts.
In the pre-crisis period, there appears to be no effect of MP1 on any of our bond
flow measures. In contrast, the coefficient on the MP2 monetary surprise measure is
positive and statistically significant for debt positions and flows (Columns 1 and 2). The
MP2 measure based on the two-month Fed Funds Futures contract which captures, in
part, revisions in the expected ‘path’ of monetary policy in the conventional policy
period. A positive and statistically significant coefficient therefore suggests that markets
interpret a tightening as a signal that the Fed is feeling sanguine about global market
conditions such that debt positions, flows and valuations in emerging markets increase.
Turning to the equity data, we see that emerging market equity valuations scaled
by destination GDP are inversely related to the MP1 monetary surprise measure, i.e., a
US tightening surprise is correlated with a statistically significant decline in emergingmarket equity valuations (Column 6) consistent with a role for the signaling and portfolio
balance channels. In the pre-crisis period, for all the other capital flow and holdings
measures, monetary surprises extracted from short contracts do not appear to be
significantly correlated with U.S. capital flows to our emerging-market sample countries.
Recall in comparison that the coefficients on the longer five-year Treasury futures
measure (FF5) measure was negative and significant in nearly every specification.
In contrast to the conventional policy period, the QE period displays a somewhat
different pattern for the shocks extracted from the short-duration contracts. The MP1
surprise measure is now positively and statistically significantly correlated with total debt
positions, suggesting that on impact quantitative easing led to a decline in debt flows to
emerging markets (Column 1) consistent with the confidence channel (or a lack thereof).
In contrast, the MP2 measure, associated in large part with revisions in market
participants require risk compensation during this period, is inversely and significantly
correlated with debt positions, valuations and flows (Columns 1-3). Given that interest
rates fell dramatically during this period and the U.S. quickly entered the ZLB regime,
monetary policy surprises extracted from Fed Funds futures contracts suggest that U.S.

30

investors significantly increased their emerging market debt and equity holdings during
the QE period. Equity positions and valuations are inversely correlated with the MP1
monetary surprise measure (Columns 5 and 8). However, none of the equity measures are
significantly correlated with the MP2 or path measure of monetary policy. While it may
seem a little puzzling that the equity flow measures do not exhibit statistical significance,
one explanation may be that there is more noise in the measured flows data during
periods of higher volatility.
Similar to the results using five-year Treasury futures surprises, the unwinding, or
taper, period presents a significant shift in the pattern of results. Across both monetary
surprise measures and alternative measures of debt and equity flows and valuations, we
see inverse and statistically significant coefficients suggesting that the period of taper talk
and the actual unwinding was associated with significant outflows from emerging
markets. It is also noteworthy that once again the coefficients associated with the
unwinding period are an order of magnitude larger than both the pre-crisis and the QE
periods. The coefficients on both the MP1 and MP2 measures suggest that the market
interpreted the unwinding of unconditional monetary policy as a signal that normalcy was
being restored to the U.S. economy and, expected monetary tightening in the U.S. both in
the near term and ongoing in the future led to a massive retrenchment from emerging
markets.
We also experimented with longer shorter horizons of the monetary policy shock,
for example at the three one month and four two month Fed Funds futures contract
horizons (MP3 and MP4). These coefficients on these variables did not enter the
regressions with consistent statistical significance. We do not therefore report these
results but note that the exercise established that the relevant monetary surprise measures
are MP1 and MP2.
We repeated the estimations with our final monetary surprise measure the
difference in the yield two-year treasury bond on the date of an FOMC meeting. The
principle is the same as the five-year Treasury futures rate—over a very narrow window,
it is reasonable to state that change in the price of the asset reflects a change in the
expectations component of yield i.e., the sum of expected future interest rates, which is
driven by a monetary surprise. Table 7 presents the results, which remain robust
especially for the taper/unwinding period.

31

To examine whether the yield on the two-year bond is capturing expectations
about the path of the short rate over the life of the bond or about changes in risk
compensation we appeal to Kim and Wright’s (2005) decomposition of the bond yield
into expected short rates and term premia. Figure 2 depicts the contribution from
expected short rate and the term premium to the overall daily changes in the two year
zero coupon bond yield on FOMC event days. The changes on FOMC dates tend to result
in larger part from changes in the term premium, although the decomposition is
frequently close to an even contribution.
The dependent variables in the benchmark regressions are scaled by the GDP of
the destination country. We repeated the estimations with the previous period’s holdings
as an alternative scaling variable. We also conducted a set of estimations with
destination-country fixed effects. The pattern of results is robust in both cases.14
To ensure that the choice to scale the dependent variables is not driving the
results, we conducted the estimations without scaling the raw data. Table 8 shows that
while the magnitude of the coefficient estimates reflect that the dependent variables have
not been scaled, the pattern of results remains robust.

6. Conclusion
This paper examines the implications of unconventional monetary policy and its
continued unwinding for emerging market capital flows and asset prices with an
emphasis on quantifying the magnitude of these effects. We use U.S. Treasury data on
emerging market flows and asset prices alongside Treasury bond futures data to extract a
surprise component of Fed announcements. High frequency identification (HFI) using
Fed Funds futures data allows us to extract the unexpected element of changes in the
market’s expectations of Fed policy.
Using this methodology, we examine the impact of monetary policy surprises
extracted around FOMC meetings on capital flows from the United States to a range of
emerging markets. Panel regression estimates reveal substantial heterogeneity in the
monetary policy shock implications for flows versus asset prices, across asset classes,
and during across the various policy periods. The most robust finding is that the evolution
in overall emerging market debt and equity positions between various policy sub-periods
14

Not reported but available from the authors.

32

appear to be largely driven by U.S. monetary policy induced valuation changes. In nearly
every specification, the effect of monetary policy shocks on asset values is larger than
that for physical capital flows.
Further, there is an order-of-magnitude difference between the effects of
monetary policy on all types of emerging-market portfolio flows between pre-crisis
conventional monetary policy period, the QE period and the subsequent tapering period.
We detect some significant effects of monetary policy on flows and valuations during the
period of unconventional monetary policy (QE). However, the effects are not consistent
over all dependent variables. In contrast, during the period following the first mentioning
of policy tapering, we uncover a consistent and large effect of monetary policy shocks on
nearly all variables of interest.
A key advantage of extracting the magnitude of the monetary surprises directly
from the Treasury futures data is that we can directly estimate a dollar amount in terms of
US investor position and flow changes to emerging markets controlling for a variety of
push and pull factors. By extracting the magnitude of the monetary surprises we can
quantify the distributional impact of US monetary policy on our emerging-market capital
flow measures consistent with emerging markets’ varied experience across debt and
equity, during the periods of quantitative easing and of its unwinding.

33

6. References
Ahmed, S., Curcuru, S., Warnock, F., and Zlate, A. (2015) "The Two Components of
International Capital Flows." Working Paper.
Ahmed, S., and Zlate, A. (2014). Capital flows to emerging market economies: A brave
new world? Journal of International Money and Finance, 48, 221-248.
Aizenman, J., Binici, M., & Hutchison, M. M. (2014). The transmission of Federal
Reserve tapering news to emerging financial markets. National Bureau of Economic
Research Working Paper No. 19980.
Bertaut, C. C., & Judson, R. (2014). Estimating US cross-border securities positions:
New data and new methods. FRB International Finance Discussion Paper, (1113).
Bertaut, C. C., & Tryon, R. W. (2007). Monthly estimates of US cross-border securities
positions. FRB International Finance Discussion Paper, (910).
Broner, F., Didier, T., Erce, A., & Schmukler, S. L. (2013). Gross capital flows:
Dynamics and crises. Journal of Monetary Economics, 60 (1), 113-133.
Burger, J., R. Sengupta, F. Warnock, and V. Warnock (2015). U.S. Investment in Global
Bonds: As the Fed Pushes, Some EMEs Pull. Economic Policy.
Calvo, G. A., Leiderman, L., & Reinhart, C. M. (1993). Capital inflows and real
exchange rate appreciation in Latin America: The role of external factors. Staff
Papers-International Monetary Fund, 108-151.
Chen, J., Mancini Griffoli, T., & Sahay, R. (2014). Spillovers from United States
monetary policy on emerging markets: different this time? IMF Working Paper No.
14/240.
Christiano, L. J., Eichenbaum, M., & Evans, C. L. (1999). Monetary policy shocks: What
have we learned and to what end? Handbook of Macroeconomics, 1, 65-148.
Curcuru, S. E., Dvorak, T., & Warnock, F. E. (2008). Cross-border returns
differentials. Quarterly Journal of Economics 123(4): 1495–1530..
Dahlhaus, T., & Vasishtha, G. (2014). The Impact of US Monetary Policy Normalization
on Capital Flows to Emerging-Market Economies. Bank of Canada Working Paper.
Eichengreen, B., & Gupta, P. (2014). Tapering talk: The impact of expectations of
reduced Federal Reserve security purchases on emerging markets. World Bank
Policy Research Working Paper, (6754)
Fernandez-Arias, E. (1996). The new wave of private capital inflows: Push or
pull? Journal of Development Economics, 48(2), 389-418.

34

Forbes, K. J., & Rigobon, R. (2002). No contagion, only interdependence: Measuring
stock market comovements. The Journal of Finance, 57(5), 2223-2261.
Forbes, K. J., & Warnock, F. E. (2012). Capital flow waves: Surges, stops, flight, and
retrenchment. Journal of International Economics, 88(2), 235-251.
Fratzscher, M. (2012). Capital flows, push versus pull factors and the global financial
crisis. Journal of International Economics, 88(2), 341-356.
Fratzscher, M., Lo Duca, M., & Straub, R. (2013). On the international spillovers of US
quantitative easing. European Central Bank, working paper #1557.
Gagnon, J., Raskin, M., Remache, J., and Sack, B. P. (2010). Large-scale asset purchases
by the Federal Reserve: did they work?. Federal Reserve Bank of New York Staff
Report #441.
Galati, G., Heath, A., & McGuire, P. (2007). Evidence of carry trade activity. BIS
Quarterly Review, September.
Ghosh, A. R., Kim, J., Qureshi, M., and Zalduendo, J. (2012). “Surges,” IMF Working
Paper WP/12/22.
Gürkaynak, R. S. (2005). Using federal funds futures contracts for monetary policy
analysis. FEDS Working Paper No. 2005-29
Gürkaynak, R. S., Sack, B. P., and Swanson, E. T. (2007). Market-based measures of
monetary policy expectations. Journal of Business and Economic Statistics, 25(2).
Gürkaynak, R. S., Sack, B., & Swanson, E. (2005). The sensitivity of long-term interest
rates to economic news: Evidence and implications for macroeconomic models.
American Economic Review, 5 , 425-436.
Gürkaynak, R. S., Sack, B., & Wright, J. H. (2007). The US Treasury yield curve: 1961
to the present. Journal of Monetary Economics, 54(8), 2291-2304.
Joslin, S., Singleton, K. J., & Zhu, H. (2011). A new perspective on Gaussian dynamic
term structure models. Review of Financial Studies, 24(3), 926-970.
Karolyi, G. A., & McLaren, K. J. (2016). Racing to the Exits: International
Transmissions of Funding Shocks During the Federal Reserve's Taper
Experiment. SSRN 2792347.
Kim, S. (2001). International transmission of US monetary policy shocks: Evidence from
VARs. Journal of Monetary Economics, 48(2), 339-372.
Kim, D. H. and J. H. Wright, 2005, “An Arbitrage-Free Three-Factor Term Structure
Model and the Recent Behavior of Long-Term Yields and Distant-Horizon Forward
Rates,” Finance and Economics Discussion Series No. 33, Federal Reserve Board of
Governors.

35

Krishnamurthy, A., & Vissing-Jorgensen, A. (2011). The Effects of Quantitative Easing
on Interest Rates: Channels and Implications for Policy, Brookings Papers on
Economic Activity, pp. 215-287.
Kuttner, K. N. (2001). Monetary policy surprises and interest rates: Evidence from the
Fed funds futures market. Journal of Monetary Economics, 47(3), 523-544.
Lim, J. J., Mohapatra, S., & Stocker, M. (2014). Tinker, taper, QE, bye? the effect of
quantitative easing on financial flows to developing countries. World Bank Policy
Research Working Paper, (6820)
Milesi-Ferretti, G., & Tille, C. (2011). The great retrenchment: International capital flows
during the global financial crisis. Economic Policy, 26(66), 289-346.
Montiel, P., & Reinhart, C. M. (1999). Do capital controls and macroeconomic policies
influence the volume and composition of capital flows? Evidence from the 1990s.
Journal of International Money and Finance, 18(4), 619-635.
Moore, J., Nam, S., Suh, M., & Tepper, A. (2013). Estimating the Impacts of US LSAP's
on Emerging Market Economies' Local Currency Bond Markets. Federal Reserve
Bank of New York Staff Report #595.
Neely, C. J. (2010). The large scale asset purchases had large international effects (pp.
1-45). Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis, Research Division.
Obstfeld, M., & Rogoff, K. (1995). Exchange Rate Dynamics Redux. Journal of Political
Economy, 103, 624–660.
Passari, E., & Rey, H. (2015). Financial Flows and the International Monetary System
(No. w21172). National Bureau of Economic Research.
Rey, H. (2015). Dilemma not trilemma: the global financial cycle and monetary policy
independence. National Bureau of Economic Research Working Paper No. 21162.
Rogers, J. H., Scotti, C., & Wright, J. H. (2014). Evaluating asset-market effects of
unconventional monetary policy: a multi-country review. Economic Policy, 29(80),
749-799.
Taylor, M. P., & Sarno, L. (1997). Capital flows to developing countries: Long-and
short-term determinants. The World Bank Economic Review, 11(3), 451-470.
Tille, C., & Van Wincoop, E. (2010). International capital flows. Journal of International
Economics, 80(2), 157-175.
Warnock, F. E., & Warnock, V. C. (2009). International capital flows and US interest
rates. Journal of International Money and Finance, 28(6), 903-919.

36

Appendix 1: Description of Variables
Variable
Description
Bond/equity
Sum of bond/equity flows,
positions
valuation changes and gap
Total positions
Equity positions plus bond
positions
Bond/equity flows
TICS Reported transactions
plus repayment of principal on
asset-backed securities and
stock swaps from mergers and
acquisitions
Total flows
Equity flows plus bond flows
Bond/equity
valuation changes

Bond/equity flows
(% of holdings)
Bond/equity gap

VIX
Treasury Futures
Rate
Fed Funds rate
Change in Fed Funds
rate
Ted spread
S&P annual return
Policy rate
Change in policy rate
EMBI annual return
MSCI annual return

Cumulative change in the value
of time t holdings between time
t and t+n as measured by a
weighted average of local
currency and dollardenominated asset returns
Ratio of current flows (t) to
previous period holdings (t-1)

Source
Bertaut and Tryon (2007),
Bertaut and Judson (2009)
Bertaut and Tryon (2007),
Bertaut and Judson (2009)
Bertaut and Tryon (2007),
Bertaut and Judson (2009)

Bertaut and Tryon (2007),
Bertaut and Judson (2009)
Bertaut and Tryon (2007),
Bertaut and Judson (2009)

Bertaut and Tryon (2007),
Bertaut and Judson (2009)
and author’s calculations
Difference between the yearBertaut and Tryon (2007),
end annual survey holdings data Bertaut and Judson (2009)
and the cumulation-implied
holdings, distributed over
between-survey months
proportional to the size of
monthly flows
Implied volatility of S&P 500
FRED database
index options
Implied yield from the five-year Bloomberg
Treasury futures price
Federal reserve target interest
FRED database
rate
Monthly first difference of the
FRED database
Fed Funds rate
3-month LIBOR minus 3-month FRED database
T-bill interest rate
Annual return on the S&P index Standard and Poor’s
Domestic (EM) central bank
Datastream
target interest rate
Monthly first difference of
Datastream
domestic policy rate
Year-on-year growth of MSCI
Datastream
total return index
Year-on-year growth of MSCI
Datastream
total return index

37

-0.4

Source: Kim and Wright (2005)

38

1/31/16

8/31/15

3/31/15

10/31/14

5/31/14

12/31/13

7/31/13

2/28/13

9/30/12

4/30/12

11/30/11

ΔYTP

6/30/11

1/31/11

8/31/10

3/31/10

10/31/09

5/31/09

12/31/08

7/31/08

2/29/08

9/30/07

4/30/07

11/30/06

6/30/06

1/31/06
1994m1
1995m1
1996m1
1997m1
1998m1
1999m1
2000m1
2001m1
2002m1
2003m1
2004m1
2005m1
2006m1
2007m1
2008m1
2009m1
2010m1
2011m1
2012m1
2013m1
2014m1
2015m1
2016m1

-.4

Five Year Futures Yield Change
-.2
0

QE2
Twist
QE3
TT1
TT2

QE1

.2

Figure 1: Five-Year Treasury Futures Yield Changes on FOMC Event Dates

Date

Figure 2: Decomposition of the two year zero coupon bond yield

0.3
ΔY(eh)

0.2

0.1

0

-0.1

-0.2

-0.3

Table 1. Monetary Policy Shocks: Descriptive Statistics and Correlations
Panel A: Comparison of Means
Subsample means (standard deviations in parentheses)
Variables
Five-year futures price changes (FF5)
One-Month Fed Fund Futures (MP1)
Two-Month Fed Fund Futures (MP2)

Two-year bond yield changes (gs2)

Comparison of means
Pre-crisis v. Pre-crisis v. QE v. taper
QE period Taper period
QE
taper period period
-0.02
0.016
***
***
***
(0.11)
(0.09)
-0.003
0.00
***
***
***
(0.02)
(0.01)

Full sample

Pre-crisis

-0.006
(0.08)
0.001
(0.00)

-0.005
(0.07)
0.005
(0.07)

-0.005

-0.004

-0.008

0.005

***

--

**

(0.00)
-0.004
(0.01)

(0.07)
-0.01
(0.08)

(0.04)
0.002
(0.06)

(0.01)
0.015
(0.05)

***

***

***

*** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, *p<0.1

Panel B: Correlations Matrix for Alternative Monetary Surprise Measures

MP1
MP2
Two-year bond yield change
Five-year Treasury futures change

MP1

MP2

1
0.4621
0.3149
0.1592

1
0.5453
0.3757

Two-year
bond yield

Five-year
futures

1
0.783

1

39

Table 2: Response of Yield Changes to a One Standard Deviation Monetary Policy Shock (Five-year Treasury Futures)
Panel A: t-1 to t

VARIABLES
FF5*precrisis
FF5*QE
FF5*TT
Constant

Observations
R-squared

Difference
Difference
Difference Difference
Zero coupon Zero coupon Zero coupon
bond yield
bond yield
bond yield
Yeh(1)
(1yr)
(5yr)
(10 years)
0.0617***
(0.00506)
0.0259***
(0.00259)
0.0249***
(0.00489)
-0.0113***
(0.00206)

0.0633***
(0.00290)
0.100***
(0.00261)
0.0649***
(0.00227)
-0.0167***
(0.00226)

196
0.727

196
0.841

Difference

Difference

Yeh(5)

Yeh(10)

Difference
Term
premium
(1yr)

Difference
Term
premium
(5yr)

0.0473*** 0.0509*** 0.0135*** 0.00903*** 0.0205*** 0.0334***
(0.00273)
(0.00407) (0.00225) (0.00181) (0.00137) (0.00212)
0.122***
0.00504* 0.0452*** 0.0356*** 0.0322*** 0.0729***
(0.00389)
(0.00275) (0.00205) (0.00169) (0.000732) (0.00181)
0.0732***
0.0119** 0.0264*** 0.0205*** 0.0209*** 0.0449***
(0.00499)
(0.00534) (0.00238) (0.00204) (0.000912) (0.00261)
-0.0185*** -0.00620*** -0.00899*** -0.00702*** -0.00351*** -0.00855***
(0.00283)
(0.00196) (0.00133) (0.00108) (0.000889) (0.00177)
196
0.788

196
0.638

Difference
Term
premium
(10 years)
0.0270***
(0.00219)
0.0875***
(0.00272)
0.0515***
(0.00430)
-0.0104***
(0.00217)

196
0.684

196
0.657

196
0.771

196
0.780

196
0.746

Difference

Difference

Yeh(5)

Yeh(10)

Difference
Term
premium
(1yr)

Difference
Term
premium
(5yr)

Difference
Term
premium
(10 years)

0.0113*** 0.0181***
(0.00381) (0.00281)
0.0427*** 0.0322***
(0.00628) (0.00291)
0.0257*** 0.0227***
(0.00415) (0.00145)
-0.0124*** -0.00192
(0.00274) (0.00202)

0.0313***
(0.00491)
0.0779***
(0.00797)
0.0511***
(0.00419)
-0.00804*
(0.00428)

0.0279***
(0.00533)
0.0979***
(0.0113)
0.0609***
(0.00635)
-0.0121**
(0.00527)

175
0.449

175
0.444

Robust standard errors in parentheses
*** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.10, + p<0.15

Panel B: t-1 to t+1

VARIABLES
FF5*precrisis
FF5*QE
FF5*TT
Constant

Observations
R-squared

Difference
Difference
Difference Difference
Zero coupon Zero coupon Zero coupon
bond yield
bond yield
bond yield
Yeh(1)
(1yr)
(5yr)
(10 years)
0.0525***
(0.00804)
0.0177***
(0.00383)
0.0228***
(0.00612)
-0.0156***
(0.00430)

0.0586***
(0.00737)
0.105***
(0.0107)
0.0727***
(0.00688)
-0.0209***
(0.00599)

0.0481***
(0.00790)
0.136***
(0.0161)
0.0864***
(0.00969)
-0.0256***
(0.00739)

175
0.332

175
0.474

175
0.459

0.0413*** 0.0158***
(0.00621) (0.00476)
-0.00633 0.0536***
(0.00563) (0.00768)
0.00721
0.0327***
(0.00585) (0.00510)
-0.00680* -0.0156***
(0.00381) (0.00340)
175
0.288

Robust standard errors in parentheses
*** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.10, + p<0.15

40

175
0.384

175
0.375

175
0.420

Table 3. Emerging Market Capital Flows: Summary Statistics
Subsample means (standard deviations in parentheses)

Comparison of means

Variables
Full sample Pre-crisis
Net flow measures (in millions USD unless otherwise noted) (i.)
Total positions
30758.35
19935.85
(41536.26) (27392.31)
Total flows
130.75
65.87
(815.15)
(555.83)
Bond positions
8502.66
5956.74
(11252.18)
(7004.18)
Equity positions
22255.68
13979.11
(33570.97) (23420.78)
Bond flows
63.43
17.46
(597.77)
(390.51)
Equity flows
67.33
48.41
(558.04)
(403.41)
Bond valuation changes
8.89
7.94
(450.67)
(408.35)
Equity valuation changes
69.75
84.25
(3214.38)
(2440.73)
Bond positions (% of GDP)
2.14
2.12
(1.71)
(1.82)
Equity positions (% of GDP)
3.86
3.38
(3.33)
(2.93)
Bond flows (% of GDP)
0.01
0.01
(0.15)
(0.15)
Equity flows (% of GDP)
0.01
0.01
(0.06)
(0.07)
Bond valuation changes (% of GDP)
0.00
0.00
(0.11)
(0.13)
Equity valuation changes (% of GDP)
0.02
0.01
(0.39)
(0.38)

Pre-crisis v. Pre-crisis v. taper QE v. taper
period
period
QE period Taper period QE

41

52905.74
(54662.20)
342.91
(1135.28)
12752.54
(13663.76)
40153.20
(44300.65)
208.98
(871.17)
133.94
(733.73)
61.51
(392.44)
389.14
(4371.18)
2.02
(1.29)
4.84
(3.70)
0.01
(0.15)
0.01
(0.05)
0.01
(0.05)
0.07
(0.41)

67392.62
(58015.94)
175.12
(1397.44)
19784.44
(20623.46)
47608.18
(44294.58)
103.40
(1004.59)
71.72
(1001.34)
-93.99
(789.55)
-363.57
(3957.35)
2.70
(1.68)
5.58
(4.36)
0.00
(0.18)
0.01
(0.05)
-0.01
(0.08)
-0.03
(0.36)

***

***

***

***

**

--

***

***

***

***

***

***

***

***

**

***

--

--

***

***

***

**

***

***

*

***

***

***

***

***

***

--

**

**

*

***

**

**

***

***

**

***

Table 3. contd.
Subsample means (standard deviations in parentheses)
Variables
"Push" variables
VIX
Ted Spread
S&P annual return
Adv. Econ interest rates (Avg.)
US real GDP growth
"Pull" variables
Domestic GDP growth
Change in REER
Inflation
Policy rate (change)
Policy rate
EMBI annual return
MSCI annual return
Fiscal balance
Public debt
Current account balance
Political risk

Comparison of means
Pre-crisis v. Pre-crisis v. taper QE v. taper
QE period Taper period QE
period
period

Full sample

Pre-crisis

20.42
(8.07)
0.51
(0.39)
10.96
(18.24)
2.46
(1.44)
2.50
(1.86)

19.51
(6.35)
0.56
(0.34)
11.08
(17.00)
3.27
(0.82)
3.11
(1.36)

24.54
(10.36)
0.36
(0.30)
8.14
(21.56)
0.60
(0.18)
0.84
(2.25)

14.63
(2.45)
0.20
(0.02)
22.24
(4.71)
0.25
(0.07)
2.14
(0.62)

4.17
(4.34)
0.06
(3.08)
19.91
(176.56)
-0.04
(9.64)
8.90
(11.82)
11.22
(22.43)
16.97
(45.21)
-0.55
(1.14)
11.67
(6.67)
0.12
(4.66)
65.54
(8.02)

4.40
(4.53)
0.07
(3.39)
26.18
(210.23)
-0.04
(12.35)
11.17
(14.53)
13.11
(23.82)
19.93
(47.27)
-0.45
(1.18)
11.89
(7.26)
0.27
(4.82)
65.91
(8.49)

3.88
(4.22)
0.25
(1.93)
4.99
(3.11)
-0.07
(0.35)
5.22
(2.64)
11.58
(20.84)
15.04
(43.50)
-0.74
(1.03)
11.02
(5.17)
0.12
(4.30)
65.06
(6.42)

3.41
(2.23)
-0.29
(2.25)
4.92
(2.87)
0.08
(0.58)
5.33
(2.68)
2.29
(11.47)
3.61
(22.37)
-0.77
(0.97)
11.75
(4.91)
-1.07
(3.82)
63.44
(7.33)

***

***

***

***

***

***

***

***

***

***

***

***

***

***

***

***

***

**

*

**

--

***

**

--

--

--

***

***

***

--

*

***

***

***

***

***

***

***

--

***

--

**

--

***

***

***

***

***

*** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1
(i.) Net debt and equity flows are gross sales to U.S. residents by foreigners less gross purchases from U.S. residents by foreigners.
(ii.) Reported new flows data as a percentage of cumulation implied monthly holdings.

42

Table 4. The Impact of US Monetary Policy Shocks on Emerging Market Portfolio Flows (Benchmark Specification:
Five-Year Treasury Futures)
Bond positions Bond flows
VARIABLES
Monetary Policy Shocks
FF5*Precrisis
FF5*QE
FF5*Taper
Push factors
Ted spread (orth.)
VIX
S&P annual return
US real GDP growth
Avg. AE interest rate
Pull factors
Policy rate.L1
Real GDP growth.L1
MSCI annual return.L1
Inflation.L1
Current account (% of GDP).L1
Govt. debt (% of GDP).L1
Fiscal balance (% of GDP).L1
ICRG Political risk.L1
RER Growth.L1
Lagged Dependent Variables
Bond positions.L1
(% of GDP)
Bond flows.L1
(% of GDP)
Bond valuation changes.L1
(% of GDP)
Equity position.L1
(% of GDP)
Equity flows.L1
(% of GDP)
Equity valuation changes.L1
(% of GDP)
Bilateral exchange rate .L1
(change)
Constant

Bond valuation
changes

Equity
positions

Equity flows

Equity valuation Bilateral exchange
changes
rate

% of GDP

% of GDP

% of GDP

% of GDP

% of GDP

% of GDP

change

-0.152*
(0.0819)
-0.127
(0.0913)
-0.357***
(0.0890)

0.172**
(0.0744)
-0.0529
(0.0885)
-0.178***
(0.0618)

-0.0916***
(0.0252)
-0.0836***
(0.0257)
-0.214***
(0.0513)

-0.867***
(0.189)
-0.986***
(0.344)
-0.943***
(0.211)

-0.0606**
(0.0306)
-0.0186
(0.0398)
-0.341***
(0.0865)

-0.544***
(0.135)
-0.849***
(0.284)
-0.694***
(0.212)

1.492**
(0.655)
-1.915*
(1.071)
-6.802***
(2.224)

-0.0122***
(0.00457)
0.000733*
(0.000382)
0.000108
(0.000375)
0.00881*
(0.00520)
-0.0101***
(0.00336)

-0.00606**
(0.00275)
-0.000120
(0.000359)
0.000371+
(0.000257)
0.00109
(0.00384)
-0.0106***
(0.00382)

-0.0107***
(0.00283)
0.000993***
(0.000233)
0.000366**
(0.000146)
0.000168
(0.00111)
0.00725***
(0.00223)

-0.0452***
(0.0120)
-0.00217*
(0.00111)
0.00274***
(0.000861)
0.00617
(0.00447)
0.00580
(0.00992)

-0.00226
(0.00292)
-0.000256
(0.000494)
0.000248+
(0.000151)
-0.00106
(0.00234)
4.72e-05
(0.00363)

-0.0570***
(0.0149)
-5.23e-05
(0.000740)
0.00373***
(0.000942)
-0.00585
(0.00421)
0.0244**
(0.0101)

-0.414***
(0.0875)
-0.0110
(0.0112)
0.0293***
(0.00747)
-0.120**
(0.0583)
0.165*
(0.0954)

3.40e-05
(0.000406)
0.00263*
(0.00154)
-0.0454**
(0.0180)
-3.85e-05
(0.000486)
-0.00287***
(0.00105)
-0.00354***
(0.000777)
-0.00846*
(0.00462)
0.00223***
(0.000670)
-0.00120***
(0.000330)

0.000112
(0.000221)
0.00196*
(0.00112)
0.000160
(0.0134)
0.000659
(0.000559)
-0.00161*
(0.000851)
-0.00252***
(0.000497)
-0.00367*
(0.00221)
0.00141**
(0.000585)
-0.000624**
(0.000283)

-0.000106
(8.87e-05)
0.000577
(0.000546)
-0.00961+
(0.00634)
-0.000262
(0.000186)
0.000270
(0.000335)
-8.26e-05
(0.000350)
-0.00114
(0.00128)
0.000217
(0.000331)
-0.000687**
(0.000278)

0.000463
(0.000327)
0.00102
(0.00346)
-0.130***
(0.0320)
-0.00380**
(0.00148)
-0.000135
(0.00233)
0.000795
(0.00156)
0.00751
(0.0103)
0.00211
(0.00208)
-0.00265***
(0.000984)

0.000150
(0.000149)
0.00159*
(0.000854)
-0.0106*
(0.00595)
-0.000354
(0.000344)
0.000194
(0.000687)
-0.000381
(0.000547)
0.00335*
(0.00184)
0.000126
(0.000475)
-0.000255
(0.000253)

0.000110
(0.000217)
-0.00154
(0.00339)
-0.0337+
(0.0214)
-0.00259**
(0.00131)
0.00279
(0.00203)
0.00151
(0.00123)
0.00528
(0.00686)
0.00134
(0.00121)
-0.00255**
(0.000999)

-0.0442***
(0.00412)
0.00807
(0.0208)
-0.947***
(0.244)
0.0366+
(0.0254)
0.0648**
(0.0298)
-0.00698
(0.0172)
-0.0299
(0.0807)
0.0111
(0.0112)
-0.0456***
(0.0126)

0.985***
(0.00294)
0.00321
(0.0351)
-0.0137
(0.0479)
0.991***
(0.00356)
0.207***
(0.0379)
0.0660**
(0.0283)

0.0113
(0.0417)

Observations
1,865
Number of countrycode
15
Robust standard errors in parentheses
*** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1

0.00537
(0.0312)

0.0177
(0.0244)

0.179
(0.173)

0.0361
(0.0327)

0.114
(0.113)

0.163
(0.121)
3.525**
(1.495)

1,865
15

1,865
15

1,865
15

1,865
15

1,865
15

1,865
15

43

Table 5. Economic Significance: The Quantitative Impact of US Monetary Policy on Emerging
Market Capital Flows.
QE period
Taper/Unwinding period
µ
µ-σ
µ+σ
µ
µ-σ
µ+σ
Bond positions
-53.02
251.13
-357.17
Debt flows
-26.43
125.21
-178.08
Debt valuations
12.96
82.69
-56.77
-31.78
150.54
-214.10
Equity positions
152.88
975.30
-669.54
-140.04
663.36
-943.44
Equity flows
-50.64
239.88
-341.16
Equity valuations
131.64
839.79
-576.51
-103.06
488.20
-694.32
Exchange rate
0.04
0.24
-0.16
-0.11
0.52
-0.75
Empty cells indicate a statistically insignificant result. All flow values in USD Million; (-) indicates
outflows; (+) indicates inflows.

44

Table 6. The Impact of US Monetary Policy Shocks on Emerging Market Portfolio Flows (Alternative Monetary Shock
Measures: One-Month & Two Month Fed Funds Futures Surprises)
Bond positions Bond flows
VARIABLES
Monetary Policy Surprises
MP1*Precrisis
MP2*Precrisis
MP1*QE
MP2*QE
MP1*Taper
MP2*Taper
Push Factors
Ted spread (orth.)
VIX
S&P annual return
US real GDP growth
Avg. AE interest rate
Pull Factors
Policy rate.L1
Real GDP growth.L1
MSCI annual return.L1
Inflation.L1
Current account (% of GDP).L1
Govt. debt (% of GDP).L1
Fiscal balance (% of GDP).L1
ICRG Political risk.L1
REER growth.L1
Lagged Dependent Variables
Bond position.L1
(% of GDP)
Bond flows.L1
(% of GDP)
Bond valuation changes.L1
(% of GDP)
Equity position.L1
(% of GDP)
Equity flows.L1
(% of GDP)
Equity valuation changes.L1
(% of GDP)
Bilateral exchange rate .L1
(change)
Constant

Bond valuation
changes

Equity
positions

Equity flows

Equity valuation Bilateral exchange
changes
rate

% of GDP

% of GDP

% of GDP

% of GDP

% of GDP

% of GDP

change

0.0197
(0.0737)
0.0894*
(0.0476)
0.664+
(0.410)
-0.626**
(0.269)
-5.737***
(2.152)
-4.726***
(1.600)

-0.0629
(0.0673)
0.155**
(0.0718)
0.398
(0.343)
-0.333+
(0.223)
-5.436***
(2.050)
-2.993**
(1.322)

-0.0254
(0.0368)
-0.0586
(0.0568)
-0.0608
(0.109)
-0.251***
(0.0797)
-0.779**
(0.343)
-2.537***
(0.596)

-0.176
(0.135)
0.119
(0.140)
-3.609***
(1.071)
0.0405
(0.623)
-11.93***
(2.653)
-9.205***
(1.905)

0.0108
(0.0337)
-0.00510
(0.0347)
-0.230
(0.238)
0.0987
(0.185)
-2.471**
(1.258)
-0.386
(0.536)

-0.391***
(0.129)
0.127+
(0.0790)
-4.112***
(1.066)
0.172
(0.625)
-10.04***
(2.213)
-9.987***
(2.255)

-6.780***
(1.308)
3.554**
(1.770)
-23.85***
(6.914)
-3.748
(5.295)
-126.3***
(19.95)
-82.83***
(13.15)

-0.0138***
(0.00436)
0.000548+
(0.000370)
0.000433*
(0.000260)
0.00278
(0.00336)
-0.00667*
(0.00387)

-0.00648**
(0.00274)
-0.000525**
(0.000249)
0.000176
(0.000225)
0.000993
(0.00323)
-0.00928***
(0.00328)

-0.0102***
(0.00233)
0.000717***
(0.000195)
0.000318***
(8.70e-05)
-0.00133*
(0.000796)
0.00415***
(0.00125)

-0.0660***
(0.0146)
0.000389
(0.000749)
0.00295***
(0.000918)
-0.0126***
(0.00305)
0.0152+
(0.00994)

-0.00399
(0.00285)
-0.000324
(0.000514)
2.50e-05
(0.000132)
-0.00227
(0.00226)
-0.000141
(0.00352)

-0.0739***
(0.0162)
0.000815
(0.000779)
0.00344***
(0.000858)
-0.0182***
(0.00431)
0.0258***
(0.00945)

-0.413***
(0.0625)
-0.0329***
(0.0101)
0.00928**
(0.00473)
-0.102**
(0.0411)
0.176***
(0.0652)

0.000293
(0.000323)
0.00151
(0.00126)
-0.0462***
(0.0157)
-0.000469
(0.000472)
-0.00264**
(0.00128)
-0.00202***
(0.000642)
-0.00357
(0.00430)
0.00114**
(0.000476)
-1.22e-05
(0.00106)

0.000204
(0.000212)
0.001000
(0.000982)
-0.00324
(0.0105)
0.000191
(0.000381)
-0.00169*
(0.00102)
-0.00139***
(0.000426)
-0.000228
(0.00220)
0.000927**
(0.000426)
0.000123
(0.000824)

-4.73e-05
(8.06e-05)
0.000710+
(0.000432)
-0.0105**
(0.00409)
9.70e-06
(9.35e-05)
0.000539**
(0.000223)
2.44e-05
(0.000197)
0.000378
(0.000951)
-0.000106
(0.000154)
0.000437
(0.000409)

0.000808***
(0.000245)
0.00138
(0.00287)
-0.0970***
(0.0301)
-0.00243**
(0.00107)
0.00240+
(0.00163)
0.00138
(0.00120)
0.0165+
(0.0107)
-0.000442
(0.00151)
-0.00130
(0.00229)

0.000366**
(0.000187)
0.00143**
(0.000628)
-0.00158
(0.00608)
-4.35e-05
(0.000386)
0.000839+
(0.000547)
-6.07e-05
(0.000509)
0.00290*
(0.00161)
0.000166
(0.000391)
0.00101
(0.000893)

0.000165
(0.000261)
-0.00141
(0.00283)
-0.0226
(0.0221)
-0.00145+
(0.000977)
0.00440***
(0.00150)
0.00210*
(0.00127)
0.0162**
(0.00792)
-0.000854
(0.000977)
-0.000348
(0.00200)

-0.0394***
(0.00681)
0.0260
(0.0232)
-0.626***
(0.227)
0.0331
(0.0249)
0.0484**
(0.0214)
0.00233
(0.0127)
0.0505
(0.0661)
-0.00683
(0.00790)
-0.0529
(0.106)

0.990***
(0.00285)
-0.0130
(0.0385)
-0.0365
(0.0327)
0.995***
(0.00293)
0.148***
(0.0449)
-0.00177
(0.0310)

-0.0359
(0.0365)

Observations
2,702
Number of countries
15
Robust standard errors in parentheses
*** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1

-0.0121
(0.0332)

-0.0143*
(0.00851)

0.0299
(0.102)

0.00724
(0.0306)

0.0129
(0.0615)

0.260***
(0.0294)
0.800
(0.694)

2,702
15

2,702
15

2,702
15

2,702
15

2,702
15

2,702
15

45

Table 7. The Impact of US Monetary Policy Shocks on Emerging Market Portfolio Flows (Alternative Monetary
Shock Measure: Two-year Treasury Bond Yields)
Bond positions Bond flows
VARIABLES

% of GDP

Δgs2*Precrisis

0.0562
(0.0454)
Δgs2*QE
-0.482***
(0.170)
Δgs2*Taper
-0.837***
(0.242)
Ted spread (orth.)
-0.0146***
(0.00431)
VIX
0.000478
(0.000336)
S&P annual return
0.000472*
(0.000255)
US real GDP growth
0.00252
(0.00313)
Avg. AE interest rate
-0.00512
(0.00379)
Policy rate.L1
-0.000323
(0.000305)
Real GDP growth.L1
0.00144
(0.00125)
MSCI annual return.L1
-0.0457***
(0.0154)
Inflation.L1
8.49e-05
(0.000495)
Current account (% of GDP).L1 -0.00282**
(0.00130)
Govt. debt (% of GDP).L1
-0.00196***
(0.000641)
Fiscal balance (% of GDP).L1
-0.00427
(0.00415)
ICRG Political risk.L1
0.00120**
(0.000482)
RER Growth.L1
-1.11e-05
(0.00108)
Bond positions.L1
0.990***
(% of GDP)
(0.00286)
Bond flows.L1
(% of GDP)
Bond valuation changes.L1
(% of GDP)
Equity position.L1
(% of GDP)
Equity flows.L1
(% of GDP)
Equity valuation changes.L1
(% of GDP)
Bilateral exchange rate .L1
(change)
Constant
-0.0393
(0.0350)
Observations
2,711
Number of countrycode
15
Robust standard errors in parentheses
*** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1

% of GDP
0.151**
(0.0615)
-0.148
(0.152)
-0.574***
(0.211)
-0.00661**
(0.00273)
-0.000364+
(0.000249)
0.000282
(0.000218)
0.000526
(0.00283)
-0.00769**
(0.00333)
-0.000145
(0.000217)
0.00111
(0.000994)
-0.00460
(0.0108)
0.000502
(0.000356)
-0.00176*
(0.00102)
-0.00135***
(0.000413)
-0.000509
(0.00209)
0.000941**
(0.000419)
5.78e-05
(0.000843)

Bond valuation
changes

Equity
positions

Equity flows

Equity valuation
changes

Bilateral
exchange rate

% of GDP

% of GDP

% of GDP

% of GDP

change

0.0219
(0.0962)
-1.505***
(0.480)
-1.895***
(0.490)
-0.0745***
(0.0155)
0.00111*
(0.000656)
0.00357***
(0.000849)
-0.0191***
(0.00433)
0.0309***
(0.00905)
-0.00259***
(0.000393)
-0.00170
(0.00259)
-0.0235
(0.0180)
0.00103
(0.00114)
0.00352**
(0.00145)
0.00239*
(0.00131)
0.0137+
(0.00833)
-0.000667
(0.000967)
-0.00112
(0.00209)

-2.079
(1.548)
-5.531***
(1.794)
-18.97***
(4.412)
-0.396***
(0.0605)
-0.0264***
(0.00834)
0.0108**
(0.00491)
-0.112***
(0.0380)
0.131**
(0.0635)
-0.0261***
(0.00496)
0.0334+
(0.0208)
-0.665***
(0.224)
0.0232
(0.0268)
0.0512**
(0.0210)
-0.00109
(0.0114)
0.0630
(0.0645)
-0.00586
(0.00766)
-0.0518
(0.115)

-0.108***
0.155
-0.00839
(0.0270)
(0.145)
(0.0213)
-0.139***
-2.397***
-0.0649
(0.0417)
(0.699)
(0.0604)
-0.380***
-2.371***
-0.657***
(0.0779)
(0.539)
(0.179)
-0.0106***
-0.0669***
-0.00291
(0.00237)
(0.0145)
(0.00275)
0.000798***
-0.000523
-0.000469
(0.000171)
(0.000626) (0.000491)
0.000281*** 0.00302*** -1.22e-05
(8.34e-05)
(0.000899) (0.000150)
-0.00121+
-0.0147***
-0.00259
(0.000802)
(0.00321)
(0.00228)
0.00416***
0.0175*
-0.00386
(0.00137)
(0.0100)
(0.00285)
-0.000184* -0.000720*** 0.00189***
(0.000104)
(0.000194) (0.000302)
0.000666+
0.00113
0.00172***
(0.000407)
(0.00258)
(0.000630)
-0.00992**
-0.0928***
-9.45e-07
(0.00386)
(0.0266)
(0.00489)
0.000142*
-0.000903
-0.00126*
(7.52e-05)
(0.00107)
(0.000676)
0.000459**
0.00203
0.00129***
(0.000223)
(0.00163)
(0.000492)
3.55e-05
0.00139
-0.000341
(0.000198)
(0.00120)
(0.000436)
0.000233
0.0146
0.00426**
(0.000981)
(0.0105)
(0.00185)
-7.94e-05
-0.000380
0.000106
(0.000152)
(0.00149)
(0.000403)
0.000471
-0.00132
0.00120
(0.000429)
(0.00221)
(0.000850)

-0.0135
(0.0385)
-0.0295
(0.0345)
0.995***
(0.00293)
0.150***
(0.0437)
0.0165
(0.0297)

-0.0191
(0.0331)

-0.0179**
(0.00898)

0.0485
(0.101)

0.0206
(0.0331)

-0.0102
(0.0617)

0.268***
(0.0292)
0.657
(0.664)

2,711
15

2,711
15

2,711
15

2,711
15

2,711
15

2,711
15

46

Table 8. The Impact of US Monetary Policy Shocks on Emerging Market Portfolio Flows
(Dependent Variables Scaled by Lagged Positions)

VARIABLES

Bond flows

Bond valuation
changes

Equity flows

Equity valuation
changes

% of lagged
positions

% of lagged
positions

% of lagged
positions

% of lagged
positions

-3.887***
(0.882)
-6.602***
(1.654)
-7.816***
(1.358)
-0.764***
(0.124)
0.0600***
(0.0115)
0.0233***
(0.00467)
-0.0738+
(0.0476)
0.528***
(0.0875)
-0.00118
(0.00331)
0.0160
(0.0339)
-0.630*
(0.336)
0.0222
(0.0228)
0.0113
(0.0141)
0.0271**
(0.0124)
0.0584
(0.0674)
-0.00852
(0.0122)
-1.39e-07
(0.0283)

-2.885**
(1.150)
-1.898
(2.601)
-7.391***
(1.578)
0.0472
(0.139)
0.00305
(0.0208)
0.00386
(0.00961)
-0.0667
(0.0764)
-0.119
(0.144)
0.0646***
(0.0141)
0.108**
(0.0497)
-0.626
(0.458)
-0.0920+
(0.0576)
0.0244
(0.0250)
-0.0101
(0.0205)
0.406*
(0.225)
-0.0268+
(0.0175)
0.0293**
(0.0149)

-10.90***
(3.878)
-24.88***
(4.421)
-13.55***
(3.771)
-1.951***
(0.177)
0.000587
(0.0238)
0.0822***
(0.0219)
-0.107
(0.106)
0.898***
(0.205)
-0.0471***
(0.0143)
-0.0832
(0.132)
-1.250*
(0.734)
0.108**
(0.0433)
0.112*
(0.0650)
0.105***
(0.0318)
0.296
(0.309)
-0.00332
(0.0216)
-0.161
(0.117)

Monetary
policy shocks FF5*Precrisis

Push factors

Pull factors

Lagged
dependent
variables

12.07**
(4.951)
FF5*QE
-4.198
(5.690)
FF5*Taper
-8.958***
(2.615)
Ted spread (orth.)
-0.456**
(0.211)
VIX
-0.00172
(0.0178)
S&P annual return
0.0499*
(0.0290)
US real GDP growth
-0.332
(0.274)
Avg. AE interest rate
-0.0381
(0.355)
Policy rate.L1
0.0128
(0.0155)
Real GDP growth.L1
0.131**
(0.0572)
MSCI annual return.L1
0.599
(0.638)
Inflation.L1
0.0265
(0.0354)
Current account (% of GDP).L1 -0.0833**
(0.0377)
Govt. debt (% of GDP).L1
-0.0564+
(0.0364)
Fiscal balance (% of GDP).L1
-0.179
(0.131)
ICRG Political risk.L1
0.0345*
(0.0190)
RER Growth.L1
-0.0201
(0.0813)
Bond flows.L1
0.0477
(% of GDP)
(0.0560)
Bond valuation changes.L1
(% of GDP)
Equity flows.L1
(% of GDP)
Equity valuation changes.L1
(% of GDP)
Constant
-1.615
(1.522)

Observations
Number of countrycode
Robust standard errors in parentheses
*** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.10, + p<0.15

1,863
15

47

0.0118
(0.0456)
0.115***
(0.0306)

-1.862**
(0.931)

2.370*
(1.267)

0.0630*
(0.0364)
-1.911
(1.469)

1,863
15

1,865
15

1,865
15

