                            NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                            ONE SHARE/ONE VOTE AND THE
                           MARKET FOR CORPORATE CONTROL




                               Sanford J.   Grossman

                                  Oliver   D. Hart




                             Working Paper No. 2347




                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                            1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                              Cambridge, MA 02138
                                   August 1987




Both authors gratefully acknowledge research support from the National Science
Foundation. The research reported here is part of the NBER's research program
in Financial Markets and Monetary Economics. Any opinions expressed are those
of the authors and not those of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
                                                NBER Working Paper #2347
                                                August 1987

         One Share/One Vote and the Market for Corporate Control


                                    ABSTRACT


    A corporation's securities provide the holder with particular claims on the
firm's income stream and particular voting rights.   These securities can be
designed in various ways: one share of a particular class may have a claim to
votes which is disproportionately larger or smaller than its claim to income.
In this paper we analyze some of the forces which make it desirable to set up
the corporation so that all securities have the same proportion of votes as
their claim to income ("one share/one vote").
    We show that security structure influences both the conditions under
which a control change takes place and the terms on which it occurs. First,
the allocation of voting rights to securities determines which securities a
party must acquire in order to win control. Secondly, the assignment of
income claims to the same securities determines the cost of acquiring these
voting rights. We will show that it is in shareholders' interest to set the cost
of acquiring control to be as large as possible, consistent with a control
change occurring whenever this increases shareholder wealth. Under certain
assumptions, one share/one vote best achieves this goal.
   We distinguish between two classes of benefits from control: private
benefits and security benefits. The private benefits of control refer to
benefits the current management or the acquirer obtain for themselves, but
which the target security holders do not obtain. The security benefits refer
to the total market value of the corporation's securities. The assignment of
income claims to voting rights determines the extent to which an acquirer
must face competition from parties who value the firm for its security benefits
rather than its private benefits.
Sanford Grossman                                Oliver D, Hart
Department of Economics                         Department of Economics
Princeton University                            MIT
Princeton, NJ 08544                             Cambridge, MA 02139
                                      1



1.1   INTRODUCTION

      A corporation's securities provide the holder with particular claims on

the firm's income stream and particular voting rights. These securities can

be designed in various ways: one share of a particular class may have a claim

to votes which is disproportionately larger or smaller than its claim to

income. In this paper we analyze some of the forces which make it desirable

to set up the corporation so that all securities have the same proportion of

votes as their claim to income ("one share/one vote").

      Although the literature has emphasized that there are agency problems

created by the delegation of control to management, it has not established

that a one share/one vote security structure is the solution to these

problems. For example, Easterbrook and Fischel write "As the residual

claimants, the shareholders are the group with the appropriate incentives

(collective choice problems to one side) to make discretionary decisions"

(1983, p.403).1" In practice, of course, as Easterbrook and Fischel

recognize, collective choice problems cannot be left to one side, and it is

presumably for this reason that shareholders delegate many discretionary

decisions to management. This delegation creates a conflict of interest

between those who make decisions and those who bear the consequences, which

may be mitigated by giving management a claim to the firm's profit. Note,

however, that this agency problem does not bear directly on the security—vote

structure; it implies only that management should receive performance—based

compensation. It is also clear that while shareholders collectively have an

incentive to monitor management —- and hence tieing votes to shares may be

desirable to allow them to act on this incentive -— such monitoring is likely

to be effective only when a single party becomes large enough to overcome

collective choice problems.2" We are thus led to explore how a firm's

security structure affects the market for corporate control.
                                         2



        We show that security structure influences both the conditions under

which a control change takes place and the terms on which it occurs. First,

as is fairly clear, the allocation of voting rights to securities determines

which securities a party must acquire in order to win control. Secondly, the

assignment of income claims to the same securities determines the cost of

acquiring these voting rights. We will show that it is in shareholders'

interest to set the cost of acquiring control to be as large as possible,

consistent with a control change occurring whenever this increases shareholder

wealth. Under certain assumptions, one share/one vote best achieves this

goal.

        We distinguish between two classes of benefits from control: private

benefits and security benefits. The private benefits of control refer to

benefits the current management or the acquirer obtain for themselves, but

which the target security holders do not obtain. These include synergy

benefits realized by the acquirer, perquisites of control, and in extreme

cases the diversion of resources from the security holders to subsidiaries of

management or the acquiror. The security benefits refer to the total market

value of the corporation's securities.

        The assignment of income claims to voting rights determines the extent

to which an acquirer must face competition from parties who value the firm for

its security benefits rather than its private benefits. For example, in the

absence of competition from another buyer with private benefits, a voting

claim with no dividend rights will be tendered by a security holder to an

acquirer at any positive price. The vote holder would fail to tender at such

a price only if the acquirer faced competition, but the only potentially

profitable source of competition for pure votes would come from another party

with private benefits. In contrast, if dividend rights are tied to voting

claims, some competition can come from parties with only security benefits of
                                          3




control.

      Through this competition effect, the allocation of voting rights

influences whether control will rest in the hands of a high private benefit

party or a high security benefit party, and it also determines the value of

income claims under the management of the controlling party. These effects

taken together represent the "allocative" role of the assignment of claims.

The assignment of claims also determines the price that the acquirer must pay

to vote holders for the private benefits of control, and this we call the

"surplus—extraction" role.



1.2   STRUCTURE OF PAPER AND SUMMARY OF RESULTS

      Section 2 presents the basic framework of an entrepreneur who desires to

set up a corporation with a voting structure which maximizes the total market

value of securities issued. The corporate charter specifies the share of

dividends and the share of votes to which each security class has a claim. It

also specifies the fraction of votes a party must acquire to effect a control

change, which we denote by "alpha". The charter is set up with the

expectation that the corporation's securities will become widely held, and in

the belief that incumbent management cannot be relied upon to oversee future

changes in control and in particular to fire itself if a superior management

team becomes available (i.e. agency problems will exist). It is also supposed

that incumbent management will receive the support of all small security

holders.3'1 Thus alpha =   .5   refers to the situation where there is majority

rule and an acquirer must purchase 50% of the votes in order to take

control.41

      Sections 3 and 4 consider a class of cases where a single buyer desiring

control will appear with private and security benefit characteristics which

are drawn randomly from a population which is known at the time the charter is
                                      4



written. In order to focus on the allocative role of the voting structure,

these sections assume that the buyer faces competition only from parties with

no private benefit (we refer to these as arbitrageurs). Further, the parties

who compete against the buyer cannot negotiate directly with him for a share

of his private benefit. We establish that a one share/one vote security

structure is optimal. It is also proved that, in the absence of resistance by

the incumbent, it is optimal to set alpha = 1, i.e., an acquirer should be

required to purchase 100% of the company to get control.

      Section 5 explores situations where the buyer faces resistance from a

party representing incumbent management, who also derives private benefits

from control. Under these conditions the "surplus—extraction" role of shares

can be important. As a result it may be desirable to assign

disproportionately low income claims to the votes, so as to encourage the

incumbent to compete strongly for the votes in situations where he cannot

compete strongly for the dividend claims because they are worth much more

under the buyer's control. An extreme case of this is where votes are

assigned no dividend rights. Then, if the buyer's private and security

benefits are higher than the incumbent's, the buyer wins control, but he must

do so by paying a higher price than under one share/one vote where the

incumbent's competition against the buyer would be ineffective. If this were

the only type of situation, the optimal charter would deviate from one

share/one vote. Of course, the allocational role can conflict with the

surplus—extraction role, since shifting dividend claims away from voting

claims may cause a bidder with lower security benefits to win control.

      Section 5 also explores the optimal voting rule. Once the resistance of

the incumbent is taken into account it is no longer optimal to have a charter

which requires that a bidder purchase 100% for control. In particular,

setting alpha above .5 makes it easier for the incumbent to use his private
                                          5



benefit to resist the buyer than it is for the buyer to use his private

benefit to gain from the acquisition. For example with alpha =      .9,   the buyer

must get just over 90% to achieve control. On the other hand, the incumbent,

by purchasing 10% of the votes, can prevent the buyer from taking control.

This makes it more likely that the incumbent can maintain control since he can

afford to spend his private benefit concentrated on only 10% of the voting

securities.

      The tradeoffs discussed above are complicated, and do not lead to simple

conclusions about security structure or voting rules. However, under the

assumption that the buyer's private benefit is likely to be small relative to

the incumbent's, we prove that one share/one vote and alpha = .5 (majority

rule) is optimal. Further, if the buyer's private benefit is likely to be

small (though not necessarily relative to the incumbent's), and the likelihood

of both private benefits being simultaneously large can be ignored, then one

share/one vote is optimal, though majority rule may not be (however, alpha < 1

is optimal).

      Section 6 considers a different model of competition. In this model a

party (the "arbitrageur") can purchase a block of shares which the buyer needs

to attain control. The party than negotiates with the buyer and sells the

block needed for control to the buyer in return for a share of the buyer's

benefit from control. This model allows a broader understanding of the

determinants of u.    In   particular it is proved that it is optimal for the

charter either (a) to make hostile acquisitions impossible (which corresponds

to alpha = 1 in this section), or (b) to make alpha a number between 1/2 and

  1, where     depends on the ratio of the buyer's private benefit to the net

social gain from a control change. Further in case (b) alpha should be close

to 1/2 when the buyer's private benefit is small.
                                         6



1.3   EMPIRICAL EVIDENCE ON DEVIATIONS FROM ONE SHARE/ONE_VOTE

      Our theoretical results can be further clarified by reference to

empirical evidence rn   deviations   from one share/one vote. First, our model

assumes that securities are widely held, and that the market for corporate

control is the important factor in allocating control. We thus have nothing

to say about the much more complicated specific control agreements which are

used in closely held                     Second, since until very recently one
share/one vote was a requirement for listing on the New York Stock Exchange,

it is necessary to look elsewhere for widely held companies with different

voting structures.

      DeAngelo and DeAngelo (1985, p.39) identified 78 publicly traded

companies on the American Stock Exchange and the Over the Counter Market (out

of a universe of thousands of companies), which had classes of securities with

differing voting rights. They found that where there was a deviation from one

share/one vote, in a majority of cases it had the effect of giving the

"incumbent" enough votes so that a change in control was impossible without

his approval. That is, this is a situation corresponding to alpha = 1 in

Section 6. In particular, the observed deviation from one share/one vote did

not create a situation where widely held securities had differing effective

voting rights; instead it created a situation where the incumbent had all the

effective votes necessary to maintain control. In the model of Section 6 this

can occur when the benefits of preventing value—decreasing hostile control

changes outweigh the costs of preventing value—increasing control changes.

      In Sections 5 and 6, we emphasize that when private benefits are small

relative to security benefits, it will be the case that one share/one vote and

alpha < 1 are optimal. Empirically, private benefits are, in most cases,

forced to be small by.the fiduciary responsibility of management, and by the
                                             6/
minority shareholders' appraisal remedy.          The former often prevents
                                      7



management from extracting significant private benefits, and the latter can

prevent an acquirer from doing the same thing.7" The DeAngelo and DeAngelo

study suggests that when there is a deviation from alpha < 1 and one share/one

vote, it is for the purpose of maintaining family control over an enterprise.

Presumably in such cases the family receives significant private benefits from

control.8' If the private benefits were small the family would find it in its

interest to allow the market to determine control changes, and be rewarded for

these benefits by a compensation agreement which paid it following a change in

control. However, because the private benefits are large, the family prefers

a charter which makes hostile bids impossible.9' We therefore believe that

DeAngelo and DeAngelo's findings are consistent with our theoretical results

about optimal security structure. That is, though deviations from one

share/one vote occasionally occur, they do so in situations where our model

suggests they should.
                                        8



2.     THE MODEL

               We suppose the following stylized scenario. We imagine that the

corporate charter creates various classes of shares, with possibly

disproportionate voting rights. We assume that the charter is written by an

entrepreneur who desires to maximize the total market value of securities

issued. Since incumbent management cannot be relied upon to oversee future

changes in control the charter builds in a process for replacing management;

in particular, it specifies that a person who receives a fraction u of all the

corporation's votes in an election can replace existing management, where       c

     1.1/ It further specifies a number of security classes, n, and the

fraction of total votes v.P, and the share of dividends s., to which the   th
security class is entitled.2'

       To simplify matters, we suppose that in the normal course of events each

of the firm's securities is in the hands of a large number of small investors

(i.e., the corporation is widely held), all of whom vote in favor of incumbent

management. This situation changes on the occasion of a control contest.

Then someone seeking control, whom we call the "buyer", and perhaps also a

resisting group representing either management or an arbitrageur, may become

large to influence a subsequent vote.

       We assume that in order to become large, a party must make a public

tender offer. The form of the bid we consider is an unconditional, restricted

(i.e., partial) offer. That is, the bidder will offer to buy up to a fraction

f. of security i at a price of p. per 100% of class i, and he will prorate
                                 1

equally   if more than f. is tendered. For example, if he makes an offer for 50

shares at a price of $1 per share fora particular class and 100 shares are

tendered from that class, then half of the shares tendered by each investor

are returned1 and the bidder pays out a total of $50.
                                        9




      Let y' be the market value of the total income stream accruing to all

the firm's security holders under the management of the incumbent, and let

be that value under the management of the buyer. We shall suppose that

control can provide benefits to management over and above those received by

the firm's security holders. The buyer's firm may obtain synergy benefits

from running the corporation, and/or it may be able to freeze out minority

shareholders at a value which is below yB; or the buyer might be a person who

derives benefits from the perquisites associated with control. Let      denote

the present value of the flow of private control benefits. Similarly,

incumbent management may derive control benefits, which we denote by z'.

      At the time the corporate charter is written, the market recognizes that

the incumbent's characteristics (y',z') cannot be known far into the future.

The same is true of the characteristics of potential buyers            The

charter thus creates a mechanism which will be expected to work well in

allocating control, averaging over the future random occurrences of (y1,z')

and (yBzB)     We focus on how the assignment of voting rights in the charter

affects the allocation of management and shareholder benefits due to control

changes ."

      In   the scenario described above, the assignment of voting rights affects

shareholder welfare by influencing the price which must be paid for control.

The reason is that the price a buyer must pay for votes will depend on the

value of the votes to others, which in turn is affected by the share of firm

income tied to the votes. Thus, the assignment of votes to shares will

influence the degree of competition in the market for control. We develop

this point below, starting from the simplest case of no competition.
                                                          10



3.       NO COMPETITION -_THE CASE OF A SINGLE BUYER

         Assume that a bidder of type (yB,zB) contemplates taking control of the

target, and there is no other party who can make a tender offer. First,

consider the case where there is one share/one vote and only one class of

securities, i.e. s1 =                   =   1, and a control shift requires a majority of the
                                   v1
votes, i.e.             =   .5.   Consider an extreme situation where y' = 100, z' = o,

=    ,     = 1,         i.e., under incumbent management the firm is worth 100, while

under control of the buyer the firm's shares would be worth 3. Clearly, the

shareholders do not want this buyer to get control and indeed there is good

reason to blieve that he won't under one share/one vote. In particular, the

most that the buyer is willing to pay for the 50% required to obtain control

is lB           B                                 lB
                    =   2.5, composed of a value of y = 1.5
•

    y +     z                                                                from the shares purchased

plus z3 = 1 which is the private benefit from control. However, this

translates into a price of 5 per 100%, and at this price B's tender offer

could fail. This is because the shares under the incumbent are worth 100, and

so any shareholder who thinks that the bid will fail does not tender his

shares, correctly forecasting that he will obtain 100 rather than the 5

offered by the buyer.4"

         Next, contrast the above outcome with what would occur if the charter

had two classes of shares. Let class 1 have all of the votes and 1% of the

income claims, while class 2 has no voting rights and 99% of the income

claims, i.e., s1 = .01, V1                  = 1,        = .99,        = 0.   Now the market values of
                                                   S2            V2

the income from the securities under the incumbent are s1y1 = 1 for class 1,

and s2y = 99 for class 2. The value of class 1 under the buyer is s1y =

.03.     Let the buyer make an offer for all of class 1 at a price per 100% of

1.01. Each shareholder of class 1 will tender his shares since 1.01 is larger

than the value of holding shares under either the incumbent or the buyer.

Hence, this bid is successful. Moreover, since the bid yields the buyer a
                                         11


total benefit of 1.03 (composed of        = 1 plus the income from the class 1

shares of .03), which exceeds the cost of the bid, 1.01, this is a profitable

takeover bid.   (It is not the most profitable takeover bid, however. We shall

see in the next section that B can increase his profit by making a restricted

offer for 50% of the voting shares.)

      The point is that creating a class of shares with disproportionately

high voting rights lowers the cost of obtaining control. The reason is that

while the security income benefits to the buyer of obtaining control are

reduced, the private benefits are not. Shareholders are implicitly competing

against the buyer by being unwilling to part with their votes unless they are

compensated for the dividend claims that are associated with the votes.

However, since the buyer receives a private benefit from control, he is

willing to pay more per vote than a vote is worth to a single shareholder.

      These ideas can be clarified and developed further by strenghtening the

definition of shareholder competition to include the possibility that a

shareholder can become an arbitrageur and explicitly make a counter bid to

block the buyer.   This is the topic of the next section.5"



4.    COMPETITION FROM AN ARBITRAGEUR

      We suppose that the arbitrageur, A, is someone with a very small initial

holding of some security i in the company, and so has an interest in ensuring

that this security's value is preserved. However, the arbitrageur is supposed

to get no other private benefit from maintaining the status quo, i.e.       =    o.

Hence we assume that A only enters the competition if he can defeat the buyer

B without making losses on the shares he purchases. We shall also suppose

that each security i =   1,...,   n includes among its investors someone who will

act as an arbitrageur to defend that security's value; we use A to refer to a

general arbitrageur.
                                             12


        We now require that the buyer's bid be such that it deters entry by any

arbitrageur. The buyer's offer specifies the price per share p and the

fraction he is willing to accept fB for each security class

        Obviously deterrence by A is an issue only if B's bid would succeed in

the absence of any opposition. The condition for this is



(4.1)
                   ii
                   f v.     ,
where the summation is over all security classes i with pB                    The point

is that, if p <             no (negligible) class i shareholder who expects B to
                    s1y3,
win will tender, since he will reason that he can obtain SY3 by holding on to

his shares.6"



Definition. Let B make a bid b8 =                 p3; f,..., f) which satisfies

(4.1). We say that this deters A if, either



(4.2) For all i,    if       B          B
                         s,y > p1, then s1y3
                                                    I
                                                            and
                                                                      B   B        33
                                                  s1y   ,
                                                                  if sy p, then f p
               B     B            I
            (1—ft) s.y
        +                             ; or
                            s1y


(4.3) there does not exist a counter bid bA by A, such that in the resulting

        contest between bB and bA there is an equilibrium where A wins and does

        not lose money on securities purchased.



        (4.2) states that the buyer's offer raises (or keeps the same) the value

of each security class, in which case A has no incentive to block B since he

benefits from the bid. (Note that we ignore the possibility that A acquires a

large voting block with the intention of negotiating later with B over a

transfer of control; this is the focus of Section 6, however.) If p3 <
                                      13



no class i holder, expecting B to win, tenders his shares and so the market

value is 5B• On the other hand, if B syB, all class i holders,

expecting B to win, tender their shares, which are prorated so that a fraction

   are accepted and a fraction (1—f) are returned (the latter having value

syB). Thus f p3 + (1—f3) s.y3 is the post announcement price in this case.

       (4.3) says that, while A might like to block B, doing so is too costly.

The condition refers to an equilibrium when there are competing bids. The

basic idea behind this equilibrium is that security holders have rational

expectations about the outcome of the contest and tender to the bidder who

offers the highest rate of return, where account is taken of other people's

tender decisions and hence of the take—up rate on tendered securities. It is

supposed that B Z3, y', z' are common knowledge at the time of the contest

(any uncertainty about these variables has been resolved by then). It is also

assumed that each security holder is negligible in the sense that he ignores

his influence on the outcome of the contest. A formal definition of this

equilibrium is deferred to the Appendix; however, we shall give an informal

discussion as we proceed, which should be sufficient for an appreciation of

(4.3) .7/

      The following Lemma, proved in the Appendix, is useful.



Lemma 1: Given competing offers by two parties the equilibrium profit which

either party can make from its offer is no larger than the private benefit it

receives from running the company; no of feror makes profit from the price

appreciation of the shares he purchases.

      This is a variant of the free—rider problem discussed in Grossman—Hart

(1980): a winning bid must be at a sufficiently high price that no

shareholder, and thus no bidder, can expect shares to appreciate in value

after the offer is consummated.
                                          14



      In order to analyze the effects of arbitrage resistance, consider first

the case where y8   y',   i.e. control by B would be value-increasing for

security holders. Then (4.2) is automatically satisfied, and so A will not

block any bid by B. One winning bid that B could make is an unrestricted

offer for each security i at price syB per 100%. It is then an equilibrium

for everyone to tender to B (security holders are indifferent between

tendering and holding on; however B could always offer slightly more than s1y3

to ensure that they tender). B's profit will be z3, and. so we know from Lemma

1 that there is no way of getting control for B which is more profitable.8"

The total return to security holders in this event will be y3.
                      B      I.is                              is
      he case where y <     y        more complicated and it        useful to consider

first some examples. Suppose y1 = 100, y8 = 80 and there is one share/one

vote and majority rule (u   = .5).     Suppose first that B tried to get control as

above by making an unrestricted offer for the shares at             = 80 (or just

above). Without opposition by A, there is again an equilibrium in which B is

expected to win, everybody tenders to B, and B does win. This is the

equilibrium described in footnote 4 of Section 3.       (There is also an

equilibrium in which B is expected to lose, nobody tenders and.B loses.) Now,

however, shareholder return will fall from 100 to 80, and so A has an

incentive to block this bid. In fact he can do so costlessly by making his

own unrestricted offer at 100. With these two offers on the table, the only

equilibrium is where A wins; for if B is expected to win, tendering to A

dominates either tendering to B or holding on (which yields 80); this means

that A will get all the votes and so B cannot win.9"

      How can B win in this case? One possibility is for B to make an

unrestricted offer at 100. A has no interest in blocking thissince he does

not face a capital loss if B gets control. Such a strategy is, however, very

expensive for B. If B is expected to win, everybody will tender to B (since
                                       15



 holding on yields 80), which means that B incurs a loss of 100 — 80 = 20 from

 the tender offer.

        There is a cheaper strategy for B to adopt: B can make a restricted

 offer at just above 100 for 50% of the shares. B still makes a capital loss

on this offer, but it is reduced to     (100—80) = 10.   Note that this offer, if

unopposed, causes the value of the firm to fall from 100 to         (100) +    (80) =
90 since all shares will be tendered to B, B will pay 100 on half of them and

the remainder, which are returned, will be worth 80. A would therefore like

to block this offer, but the problem is that the most he is prepared to offer

for the shares is 100 per 100% (since he gets no private benefit from

control). If A counters with this bid, however, he will lose. The point is

that shareholders will want to tender their shares to both A and B, but it

cannot be a rational expectations eujljbrjum for A to get more than 50%; the

reason is that if a shareholder expected B to get less than 50%, he would

anticipate no prorationing of his shares by B, and he (and all other

shareholders) would tender to B to get a price above 100 instead of 100 from

A.10'

        So B can get control with the restricted offer described above. In fact

Proposition 1 below shows that this is the cheapest way for B to get control.

Of course, given B's capital loss on the shares purchased, he will only make

this bid if his private benefit B > 10.

        It is useful to contrast the above outcome with what would happens if

there were two classes of shares. Suppose each class has 50% of the income

                                                 = 1       =             0).
claims, but only class 1 has votes (i.e. s1 =
                                              s2    , v1       1,   V2
Similar arguments to the above show that the cheapest way for B to get control

is to make arestrjcted offer for 50% of the class 1 shares at a price equal

to s1y' =   .5(100) per 100% (see Proposition 1 below). B continues to make a
                                            16



capital loss, but this is reduced to .5 (.5(100) —               .5(80))   = 5 since B only

has to buy up 25% of the total profit stream. Hence B will win control more

often than under one share/one vote; in fact whenever                  >   5.   Also in the

events where B does win control, the market value of the firm is .5(.5(100)) +

(1—.5(.5(80)))   = 85, which is lower than the value of 90 under one share/one

vote (again because B has to buy up only 25% of the profit stream at 100) .                   We

see then that dual class stock has two disadvantages relative to one share/one

vote: it more readily attracts inferior buyers (those with B< y; and an

inferior buyer causes a greater decline in market value.
                                            B                I
      Let us now return to the general case y <             y    and an arbitrary security

structure. As in the above example, one way for B to get control is to make

an unrestricted offer at s1y' for each security i (A has no interest in

blocking this). This costs B: y' —      y3.       Again, however, there are cheaper

strategies for B to adopt (if     <   1).        The following lemmas, established in

the Appendix, are useful.



Lemma_2: No deterring bid by B that increases or keeps the same each

security's value (i.e., where (4.2) holds) is cheaper than an unrestricted

offer at sy' for each security i.



So, a cheaper strategy for B must reduce the price of some security, but deter

A via condition (4.3).



Lemma 3: The most effective form of resistance by A is to make an

unrestricted offer at sy' for all i. Hence, to deter A, B's bid must win

against this offer. That is, if B <         y',    a necessary and sufficient condition

for the buyer's bid to satisfy (4.3) is that in a contest matching this bid

with the unrestricted
                            -A
                            b  = (s1yI ,...,       sy I ;   1,..., 1) by A, every
                                                                  17


equilibrium has enough securities tendered to B so that he wins (i.e., has at

least           votes).

            In the Appendix, we use these results to prove:



Popos±tion1:              If   y8 <       y',       then the cheapest way for B to get control is by

making a restricted offer at a price just above sty' for each security i. The

fractions asked for each of the securities, f*, are chosen to minimize the
                                                                              3.


total       share of the firm's profit stream, S*, that B must take up given that he

must accumulate a fraction u                            of   the corporation's votes. That is (ft,

                                n                                      n
        f*) minimizes
            n
                                         f.s. subject to                     f.v.      u
                               1=1                                     i=1
            We may apply Proposition 1 to the two examples considered above. Under

one share/one vote, s = v1 = 1 and so S =

majority rule. On the other hand, given voting and nonvoting shares with
                                                                              f    =   u, which   equals .5 under



equal income claims (s1 =                      S2 = .5,        v1 = 1, V2         = 0), f =   ,f       = 0 and so S =

(i2)    ,   which equals .25 under majority rule.

            Proposition 1 tells us that if B y', the cost to B of getting control

(net of the market value of the income stream purchased) is S*(y1 —                                         B)   and so

B will only take control if



(4.5)               S*(yI — yB )           <    z
                                                    B




In this event, security holders will be presented with the offer p =                                          s1y'
(plus a penny), f1 =                f*    for each i, all will tender, and the take—up rate will

be f*• The total value of security i is then



                    f sy1 + (1—ft)
                                                         18



and the total value of the firm is



                                                          B             T                B
                        (f*
                          11s.yI +     (1_f*)
                                           1
                                                 s.y ) = 5*
                                                     1
                                                                    y + (1_S*)       y
                  i=1
        We    may summarize our results so far as follows:




Prq1position_2.        In   the case of arbitrage resistance, if:



        (a)       yB    yl then B gets control and security holders receive yB;

        (b)
                   B        I
                  y ( y and S*(y —y )
                                        lB       <
                                                          B
                                                         z then B gets control and security

                  holders receive S*y1 +             (l_S*)yB;
        (c)       yB ' y
                            I           lB z B
                                and 5*(y —y )                 then B does not get control and

                  security holders receive y'.



Thus, the total return (i.e., the market value of all the firins securities)

in the event that the incumbent and buyer characteristics are given by (y',
 B zB.
y ,  ) is:



                                          B
                                         y                          ifyB y I
                                                                    .




(4.6)             R*(y1, B zB) = S*y1            +       (l_S*)yB     ,B < y'        and S*(yI_yB) <

                                         y
                                             I                      .
                                                                    if y (
                                                                            B
                                                                                y
                                                                                 I           lB
                                                                                     and 3*(y -y )     z
                                                                                                           B




                   B        I and control shifts to B, shareholders suffer from a bid
Note that if y < y

(since S*y1 +      (l_S*)yB < y1). This is in spite of the fact that for all
securities the bid price exceeds s1y'.

        It is clear from Proposition 2 that shareholder return is determined by

S. Furthermore, increases in S are good for shareholders since they make it

less likely that an inferior buyer wins control (S*(y1 B) <                                  B   will be
                                        19


satisfied by fewer zBs) and they reduce the loss to shareholders in the event

that this happens (Sk y' + (1_S*)y8 is increasing in S*). We saw an

illustration of this above where one share/one vote yielded a higher value of

S than dual class shares and therefore protected shareholder value better.

Proposition 3 below shows that this conclusion generalizes: one share/one

vote protects shareholder value better than any other security structure. The

proposition follows directly from the following Lemma, which is proved in the

Appendix.



Lemma 4. S u with      equality if and only if there is one share/one vote

(i.e. (s1/v1) =   ... = (s/v)).

Lemma 4 says that any departure from one share/one vote allows a fraction        of

the votes to be obtained with a purchase of less than a fraction u of profits.

The reason is that if some votes have disproportionately large profit claims

assigned to them, others must have disproportionately small ones, and the

latter can always be purchased first.



Proposition 3: Suppose a voting rule u       is   given. Then the total market value

of the firm's securities (as given in (4.6)) will be higher under one

share/one vote than under any other security structure.



      The intuition behind Proposition 3 is that tying shares to votes

intensifies the competition from the arbitrageurs against the buyer. Since

votes are valuable for the private benefit of control, while dividend shares

are valuable to those seeking to raise market value, the tie—in raises the

value of the votes to an arbitrageur and hence causes him to bid more

aggressively against the buyer: this leads the buyer to pay more for the
                                       20


votes. As a result, buyers who will tend to lower the market value of the

firm, and are attempting to purchase the firm for their own (private) benefit,

are more likely to be screened out.

      Since most tender offers are not restricted, and since value—reducing

tender offers are virtually nonexistent (see, e.g. SEC (1985)), some further

comments on the role of such offers are necessary.

      Note that a bidder for whom      < y' can succeed in making a value—

reducing offer because he can offer a premium for only 50% of the shares, and

in effect give less than the status quo to the other 50%. If he had to pay

the same price for all 100% of the shares, then a successful value—reducing

offer would be impossible. In particular, if B is a corporation that desires

to merge with the target after purchasing 51%, then it would have to pay a

"fair value" for the other 49%. Even though the actual market value of the

income stream is y3, the minority shareholders of the target could demand an

appraisal and argue to a court that (a) the best estimate of the worth of the

company is the price paid for the other 51% of the shares by B, or (b) that

the firm was really worth y' prior to the offer and that is what they are

entitled to

      The buyer could avoidall of these difficulties by not merging with the

target, but still maintaining voting control. A problem with this approach is

that the extraction of the private benefit      from the target firm could

create conflict of interest litigation from the minority shareholders of the

target. Note, however, that if        is not so large as to make a conflict of

interest undeniable, then a partial offer for 50% which reduces shareholder

value is feasible when    < y'. It is difficult to know how the courts will

deal with these issues in the abstract, since no actual court case will have

all parties agreeing on the values of y', B, •and B In any event, even if

we assume partial offers for a share class are not feasible, it will still be
                                         21


the case that our propositions on the optimality of one share/one vote hold

true.

        Finally, in the model of this Section, it is assumed that no party tries

to deter takeovers which are value—increasing. For this reason, the security

holders can only benefit from requiring that      = 1 for a control change (by

Lemma 4, S* achieves a maximum of 1 under one share/one vote and u    = 1).
Setting     = 1 deters a value—decreasing bidder since he can no longer

profitably use a restricted offer at a premium to get control. The Appendix

proves an even stronger result:



Proposition 4: A corporate charter with one share/one vote and       = 1 gives

security holders a higher total market value than any other security structure

and any other u.




        Clearly,   the problem with requiring a buyer to get all of the firm's

votes for control is that it can then be very easy for incumbent management,

or some group who wants to free ride on the improvement, to buy a small

fraction of the firm and block the bid. These points are taken up in the

following sections.
                                          22



5.       RESISTANCE BY INCUMBENT MANAGEMENT

         In the last section, we gave some arguments in favor of the one

share/one vote rule. The same arguments, however, led to the conclusion that

corporate charters should require a bidder to get 100% of the corporation's

votes to acquire control. Since such extreme voting rules are not observed in

practice, we consider in this and the next section how our analysis can be

modified to explain values of        less than one.

         It seems plausible that the main disadvantage of a 100% rule (or

something close to it) is that it would make it too easy for a value—

increasing control bid to be blocked. We analyze this in two ways. In this

section, we explore the implications of managerial resistance —— as opposed to

arbitrageur resistance ——    to   a bid. In the next section we return to

arbitrageur resistance but allow the arbitrageur to block a bid with the

intention of negotiating later with the bidder for a share of the acquisition

gains.

         We start with the case of managerial resistance.     (For simplicity we now

ignore any other forms of resistance, e.g. by arbitrageurs.) Suppose B makes

a bid bB. Then in principle, incumbent management I is willing to make a

counterbid b' as long as I wins the resulting contest and the private benefit

from maintaining control          is no smaller than the net cost of the counterbid.

(We assume that I would lose his private benefit if B takes control.) The

incumbent may finance the counterbid out of his own resources (e.g., a

leveraged buyout) or he may find a "friendly" firm to which the private

benefit z' can be transferred and who will make the counteroffer (i.e., a

"white knight"). We assume, however, that thecorporate charter prevents l's
                                                                     112/
use of the corporation's assets for the purpose of maintaining z

         This leads to the following:
                                        23


Definition. Let B make a bid bB. We say that this deters I if



(5.1)           there does not exist a counterbid b' by I, such that in the

                resulting contest between bB and b', there is an equilibrium

                where I wins and does not make a net loss.



         The notion of deterrence is almost the same as for the case of an

arbitrageur (see       (4.3)). One difference is that I resists even if B's bid

raises security prices.

         It follows from Lemma 1 that it never pays B to make a bid which

attracts a counterbid from I (since neither B nor I can make money from a

losing offer). Out of all the bids that deter I, let bB BB
f11..., f) maximize B s net profit. Then B will make a bid and gain control

whenever this maximized profit is nonnegative, and in this event the total

return to security holders is




(5.2).           E (Max (5B, ? ; + (1...B) 5B) 13/

On the other hand, if B desn't take control, total return to security holders

is

         It is fairly clear why in this framework u   close   to 1 will not generally

be optimal. Under these conditions, management need accumulate only a small

number of votes to block a bid. Given a positive private benefit z' of

retaining control, management is therefore prepared to pay a high price for

each of these votes, which makes it easy to outbid B. For example, under one

share/one vote, if y8 =   55, z = 9, y' = 50 and z' = 2, then the highest price
per share that B can pay for 100u% is B =    B   +       while   the highest price

that I is willing, to pay for 100 (1—)% is p1 = y1 +     z'/(l—cc).   Thus, if the
                                             24



charter specified that B must get 90% to obtain control, then p3 = 65, and p1

= 70.    Therefore, I can prevent B's value—increasing bid from succeeding. On

the other hand, if     =   .5,   p8 = 73 and p1 = 54 so B would succeed against I,

and this is good for shareholders.

        What drives the above example is that a rise in u         puts relatively more
weight on the incumbent's private benefit than on the buyer's. This focuses

the competition for control on the size of the buyer's private benefit

relative to that of the incumbent, rather than on size of the buyer's security

value relative to that of the incumbent.

        In the above example, it is harmful to shareholders to put more weight

on I's private benefit since this deters a value—increasing offer. However,

sometimes I's private benefit can be used to increase competition for control

in a way that is in the shareholders' interest. In particular, a charter

which departs from one share/one vote may increase competition between the two

parties and give shareholders a larger share of the total surplus. We

illustrate this with an example.

        Let B = too,       =   1.1,   y' = 10, and z' =   1.   This is a case where the

buyer will improve the target. With one share/one vote and u            =,B    will

offer to purchase all the shares at a price of 100. The incumbent cannot

resist this offer, since there is no way that he can tender for 50% of the

shares at a price anywhere near 100 and avoid substantial losses. Hence,

under one share/one vote, shareholders receive 100 for 100% of the

corporation. Now suppose that the charter specified two classes of

securities: security 1 has all the votes and none of the dividends (s =               0,   V1
= 1) while security 2 has all of the dividends and none of the votes                  =    1,
  =   0).   In order to deter I, the buyer must make an offer for 50% of the

votes (i.e., class 1) at a price per vote of just above 2.             (An offer by B for

class 1 at a price of less than 2 will permit I to make a counteroffer for 50%
                                      25


at 2 which will defeat B and leave I with no net losses.) Thus class 1

security holders receive a total of (.5) (2) =   1, while class 2 holders have
securities which are worth 100 under the control of B. Therefore, security

holders receive a total of 101 under a charter with voting and nonvoting

shares. For the chosen values of (yBzByIZI) this is better for security

holders than is one share/one vote.

      The intuition underlying this example is the following. Both one

share/one vote and pure votes ensure that B gets control. Under one share/one

vote, however, the shareholders extract none of B's private benefit. The

reason is that in the competition over bundles of "public" benefit y and

private benefit z, B is sufficiently dominant relative to I that B can win by

paying only B. which is what shareholders get by free—riding anyway. In

contrast, under a pure votes system, the competition takes place over the pure

private benefit, and, since    and z' are close, this leads to the extraction

of a large fraction of B's surplus.

      To put it very simply, shareholders benefit when B and I compete over

products for which they have similar willingnesses to pay; in this example,

pure votes qualify better for this than shares and votes together.14"

      The above example shows that when both parties have private benefits,

departures from one share/one vote can raise a firm's market value by allowing

shareholders to extract a greater fraction of these benefits. This surplus—

extraction effect will only be important, however, when B and z' are both

large. In situations where only one of them is significant, factors similar

to the ones analyzed in Section 4 will be relevant in determining optimal

financial structure.

      To see this it is convenient to divide up the possible values of private

benefits into the following four categories, which are assumed to be mutually

exclusive and exhaustive.                                                -
                                                        26




                                                                                        , s small
        1: zB = z—B                    I                                         ,,
Case                               0, z = 0           (B's private benefit large ,

Case 2:                0, z' =        z       (B's private benefit "small", I's "large")
               B           I
Case 3: z = z                  = 0                    (both private benefits snail

Case 4: B =            B       >   o, z' =       )0   (both private benefits "large")



Here "large and "small" mean relative to the security benefits,                           and y'.

         Let us analyze each of these possibilities in turn. Case 1 is just like

the situation studied in Section 4 since the resisting party's private benefit

is zero. The outcome for this case is therefore summarized by Proposition 2

and (4.6))" In particular, one share/one vote is good because it minimizes

the chance of an inferior buyer getting control and the loss to shareholders

in the event that this does happen.

         Case 2 is the mirror—image of Case 1 in which I's private benefit is

significant, while B's is not. It is easy to extend the logic of Section 4 to

show that:



(A) Since B = 0, the most effective bid by B is an unrestricted offer at SB

       for all i (cf. Lemma 3).

(B) If           )   y',       the cheapest way for I to resist this bid is to make a

       restricted offer for a fraction f of security i at a price s.y8, where

       f1,..., f minimize the total share of the firm's profit stream, S, that I

       must take up given that he must accumulate a fraction (1—a) of the

       corporation's votes to block B; i.e. (f1,..., f) minimizes

        n
        E
       i=1
             f         subject to
                       -
                                             n

                                           i=1 f v
                                                         (1—u).   (cf. Proposition 1). Such a bid
                                                                         -

       costs     I     S(yB_yI) and so I will only make it if S(yB_yI)                zI.
                                          27


(C) If y3 c y', B cannot win control since I can defeat him costless].y with an

    unrestricted offer at sy' for each i.



        From (A)—(C) it follows that:



(5.1)             In Case 2, B gets control if B > y1 and S(y3—y') >    z';   otherwise

                  I retains control. If B gets control, shareholder return is YB.

                  If I retains control, shareholder return is y'.'6'



        (5.1) tells us that in Case 2 the corporation's security structure

affects shareholder return only through S. Clearly, increases in S are good

for shareholders since they make it more likely that a superior buyer (one

withy3 >    y')   gets control (the inequality S(yB_yI)       z' is more likely to be

satisfied when S is large). The following lemma (which is a restatement of

Lemma 4) says that out of all possible security structures one share/one vote

yields the highest possible value of S.



Lemma 5. S         (1—a) with equality if and only if there is one share/one vote

(i.e. (s1/v1) =      .... = (s/v)).

        It follows from Lemma 5 that one share/one vote is better than all other

security structures in Case 2 since it maximizes the probability of a superior

buyer winning control. The intuition is as in Section 4: tying votes to

shares increases the competition from the buyer against the incumbent.hhhl

        An example may be useful here. Suppose there is one share/one vote and

majority rule, and y' = 80, y3 = 100.          Then (A) tells us that the most

effective way for B to get control is by making an unrestricted offer at 100.

By (B), I's best response to this is a restricted offer for 50% of the shares
                                           28


at 100 (or just above). Such an offer will bring I victory, but at a capital

loss of (100—80). Hence, I will only be prepared to resist if z'                   10.

           Contrast this with what would happen with two classes of shares. Let

class 1 have all the votes and 50% of the income claims, while class 2 has 50%

of the income claims but no voting rights. Then to get control B will make an

unrestricted offer for the class 1 shares at (100) = 50, while I's best

response is a restricted offer for 50% of these shares at 50. I's capital

loss is reduced to          (50 — 40) = 5 since he needs to buy up only 25% of the

firm's profit and so I will retain control as long as z' > 5.                 This confirms

the idea that a departure from one share/one vote will increase the

probability of an inferior incumbent retaining control.

           We turn now to the remaining cases, 3 and 4. Case 3 is in fact trivial

since, in the absence of private benefits, control goes to the party with the

highest market value. That is, if           )   y',    B wins control with an

unrestricted offer at s.y3 for all          (and I cannot afford to resist); while if

      <   y',   I can defeat this offer with an unrestricted offer at sty' and so

retains control)8" It follows that in Case 3 security structure is

irrelevant. On the other hand, in Case 4 we have seen that one share/one vote

may not be optimal.

           The results for Cases 1—3 can be summarized as follows:



Summary. With managerial resistance:
                                                                                         I
(1)        In Case 1:     B gets control if (a) y
                                                      B
                                                          y
                                                           I
                                                               ,   or (b) yB < yI and S*(y —
                           B
                          y )   zB ; otherwise I retains control. Under (a),
                                                B                     I                       B
                          shareholder return is y ; under (b) it is S*y +           (1_S*)y.;
                          if I retains control, it is y'.
                                          29


(2)   In Case 2:         B gets control if     >             and   S(yB —   y')   >   z';   otherwise I

                         retains control. If B gets control, shareholder return is

                         y3. If I retains control, shareholder return is y'.

(3)   In    Case   3:    B gets control if     >       y',   while I retains control if y

                        y. For a particular realization (Yl,                           shareholder

                         return is the larger of y' and



      Evidently, if Cases 1—3 were the only ones ever to occur, one share/one

vote would be optimal. Shareholders like high values of S (in Case 1) and S

(in Case 2) since this makes it more difficult for an "undesirable" party to

take or remain in control. Under one share/one vote, S = u and S = (1—a)

where u    is   the plurality, and so the feasible set is S + S = 1.                        Under any

other security structure, however, S + S           <    1 (by Lemmas 4 and 5) and so the

feasible set is strictly inferior; in particular any feasible (S*, S) can be

dominated by one from the one share/one vote feasible set. In Case 4,

however, one share/one vote nay not maximize market value and so if this case

occurs sufficiently often relative to the others, the optimal charter may

depart from one share/one vote.

      How important is the surplus—extraction effect in Case 4 likely to be

empirically? Yhile it is possible that it can sometimes explain observed

departures from one share/one vote, our feeling is that in a large class of

cases it is likely to be swamped by the other two effects. As support for

this position, note that while the private benefits z3, z' may sometimes be

large (relative to B y'), legal doctrines of "fiduciary responsibility" and

"fairness" will prevent them from being large very frequently. In particular,

unless the corporate charter explicitly permits the majority to derive

significant benefits from control (via the types of dilution discussed in

Grossman—Hart [1980]), minority shareholders can assert and perfect claims
                                        30



against the private benefits enjoyed by the majority. Of course, the courts

cannot always be relied upon to ensure that the majority and minority enjoy

equal treatment, so the entrepreneur in writing a charter must take into

account the possibility that       will sometimes be large.

      Suppose that for the above reasons B will be small with high

probability. Then Cases 1 and 4 will be very infrequent relative to Cases 2

and 3, and so the reason for deviating from one share/one vote will be absent.

Further, it is never desirable to raise        above     since this makes it easier

for the incumbent to resist a value increasing offer. (To put it another way,

the optimal value of u   in   Case 2 is u   = .) Hence   the Appendix establishes:



Proposition 5: If the probability that z' > 0 is bounded away from zero, and

                  the probability that z 0 is sufficiently small, then

                  and one share/one vote yield a strictly higher expected

                  security return than any other security structure and u•



      In   our model, the incumbent resists B's offer by (directly or

indirectly) becoming a large shareholder. As a large shareholder, he may not

be able to use the "business judgment" rule to resist suits demanding that he

return the private benefit z' to security holders. In such cases the z' which

is relevant for managerial resistance may be small in similar situations to

those in which B is small; in particular, the probability that z' is

significant may be small. We can still prove the optimality of one share/one

vote in such circumstances as long as the probability that z8 and z' are

simultaneously large is negligible (this means that Case 4 can be ignored).

However, majority rule need no longer be optimal.
                                                 31


                     Assume that there is a positive probability that y' <            y + z3
                     given that        =   o,     =    and B y'. Assume that the

                     probability of the events in Case 4 is negligible relative to

                     the probability of the events in Cases 1 and 2. Then: given

                     any security structure (s1            ,S
                                                                V1
                                                                          v)   with s/v        1


                     for all i, and a plurality u,              c 1, one share/one vote

                     and the plurality          yield a strictly higher   expected   return.



        A situation where the conditions of Proposition 6 are satisfied is if

B, z', B y' are mutually independent random variables and Prob tzB =                           =

Prob       =     =    , where    t is small. However, more general cases where large

z's tend to imply low y's (because a lot of profit is being siphoned off) are

consistent with the proposition.

        Proposition 6 demonstrates the desirability of the one share/one vote

rule for some plurality u.         However, it does not tell us anything about the

magnitude of .       Increases    in       raise shareholder return in Case 1 by reducing

the likelihood, and mitigating the consequences, of value—decreasing bids;

while decreases in       raise shareholder return in Case 2 by reducing the

likelihood that an inefficient incumbent remains in place. The optimal value

of u,   denoted by u*,   will   be determined by which of these two effects is more

important; this in turn depends on the joint probability distribution of y',

B z', z3. It is easy to construct examples showing that o may be bigger
     1
than -.
                                       32


6.    BARGAINING FOR A SHARE OF THE CONTROL BENEFITS

      So far we have considered situations where a party makes a counterbid to

permanently block the buyer from taking control. We now consider the case

where an arbitrageur takes advantage of the voting rule to buy enough shares

to threaten to block the buyer and thereby bargain for a share of the buyer's

gains. For example, if the corporate charter specifies that a change in

control requires 90% approval of shareholders, then an arbitrageur can

purchase 11% of the votes and threaten to block any buyer. We assume that if

the buyer does not choose a high enough tender price to discourage the entry

of an arbitrageur, he will have to share the takeover gains with him. This

has the effect of raising the price that the buyer must pay to acquire

control.

      In the model of Section 4, security holders desire a corporate charter

which forces a buyer to purchase 100% of the company. However, under the new

assumption about arbitrageur behavior, this need not be in the security

holders' interest since such a rule makes it very easy for an arbitrageur to

block the offer and demand a share of the gains. Even a buyer who would raise

the value of the firm might find that the cost of deterring the entry of an

arbitrageur is sufficiently high that he is discouraged from making an offer.

Hence, we are able to explain values of u       1.   In particular, we prove that

if the buyer's private benefit is small, then the optimal       is either      or 1.

Further, for any private benefit, if buyers always raise the value of the firm

to security holders then the optimal        is never larger than .   In   any case,

as the buyer's private benefit gets smaller, the optimal       gets closer to

These results are obtained under the assumption of a one share/one vote

security structure; we believe, however, that the main ideas generalize to

arbitrary security structures.

      The model has the same structure as in the previous sections, except
                                          33



that after the buyer (B) makes an offer for a of the votes, the arbitrageur

 (A) can make an offer for 1 — a•    If   A gets 1 —       a, then   B must negotiate with

A for control. We assume that the outcome of the negotiations is that the

gains from control are divided equally between the parties. That is,



(6.1)           each party gets the status quo value of his shares plus               of the

                total gain created by the acquisition.1'



For example, suppose the charter specifies that a change in control requires a

favorable vote of 100 a = 70% of the shareholders, and that there is a one

share/one vote security structure (as noted, we assume this throughout this

section). Suppose the status quo value (i.e., the value under the incumbent)

is y' = 100, and B can make the firm's shares worthy8 = 200.               Further,

suppose B will realize private value B = 20.              In order to get the

shareholders to tender their shares, B must make an offer of at least 200.

Suppose he makes such an offer. Let A make a counteroffer to shareholders at

a price just above 200 (say 201) for 30% of the shares. Since A is offering

more than B, he will get just above 30% of the shares and have the ability to

block B. Now, A and B negotiate and agree to split the gains from the

takeover as in (6.1). The gain created by the takeover is the private value

   = 20 plus the appreciation in the value of the shares y3 — y1                200 — 100 =

100.    Hence



                A gets (.3)y' +   (z8 + y8 —       y')   = 90

                B gets (.7)y' +   (zB +   B    —
                                                   y1) = 130



Note that these numbers represent gross benefits; they do not take into

account the sunk cost of acquiring the shares. Indeed the acquisition costs
                                                34



are (.3) (201) =      60.3 for A and (.7)(200) = 140 for B. Thus, in net, B loses

money on the bid. Of course, B will anticipate this, i.e., he will not be

willing to make an offer for 70% at a price of 200 per 100%. However, since

shareholders must be offered at least 200 to get them to tender rather than

hold on to their shares, there is no cheaper winning bid and B is simply

discouraged from entering. This has the negative consequence of preserving

the status quo.

          Now consider the effect of lowering a         to   .5 (i.e., majority rule). If A

purchases just over .5, then his share of the gains is (.5)y' +              (.5) (zB   +   y3   —


y')   =   (.5)(100)   +   (.5)(120)   = 110, and, of course, B receives an equal share.

IfB makes an offer for 50% of the shares at a price just above 220 per 100%,

then it will be too costly for A to enter the bidding (he must offer above 220

for 50% which costs him above 110, and is larger than his share of the gains).

The offer by B deters A from entering and competing against him. With A

absent, B gets 50% of the shares at a total cost just above 110, and this is

worth 120, composed of B = 20 and the value of the shares (.5) (200). Note

that once B makes a sufficiently high offer that A is deterred, then B does

not have to share his private benefit with A. Under B's offer, the target's

shares are worth (.5) (220) +          (.5) (200)   = 210, which is much larger than their

worth under a 70% rule.

          We may summarize this example as follows. When the charter deviates

from majority rule, then for a given offer price of the buyer, the

arbitrageur's cost of threatening to block the buyer is lowered. Hence, the

buyer must raise his tender price to deter A's entry. A sufficiently large

deviation from majority rule lowers the cost to A of blocking to the point

where B would only suffer losses from a successful offer. This can occur even

with an' offer which, if completed, would raise the market value of the firm,

because a deviation from majority rule gives A both more than his pro rata
                                                      35


share of Bs private benefit and more than his pro rata share of the public

gains from improving the company. That is, given that the cost of shares

purchased is sunk, B cannot be expected to recover the relatively high cost of

purchasing       >      in   subsequent bargaining with an arbitrageur who has had to

purchase only (1—u) <

        To elaborate on and generalize the above discussion, note that there are

2 cases to consider: Case (1) is where                          +      >   y', so that if A and B

together own 100%, it is optimal for them to replace the incumbent; and Case

(2) is where yB + zB c y' and it is not optimal to replace the incumbent. In

Case (1) note that if the voting rule requires B to get u                          for   control, and B

makes an offer at a sufficiently low price that A enters to purchase 1 —

then A will get


(6.2)            (1 —   u)y'     + 1   (B +   B   —




gross of the cost of acquiring 1 —              u• In          order to deter A from entering, the

tender price P must be such that (1 — u)P is just larger than (6.2), i.e.,




(6 3)           P —
                        -
                             +
                                 BBI
                                 2(1—u)

        This yields a profit to B of u            B        +   B    — up, i.e.,


(6.4)           B's profit =                   {2u    (B_I) [               u] + 3z3[      ufl.


        In   the case where (6.4) is positive, a bid will take place and the firm

will have a market value of uP +              (l.u)yB.         Using (6.3) to eliminate P, we

conclude that shareholder return satisfies
                                                                     36


                 If
                        B + B
                            z           >    'I
                                                      then r()          (cc(2u—1)          B + B - I
                                                                                               z   Y )        + uzB   +
                                                                                                                          B
                                                                                                                          y
(6.5)                                                                            when B's profit is positive,

                                                                          y' when B's profit is negative.


Examination of (6.5) shows that shareholders prefer a higher u as long as it

doesn't drive B's profit negative (since a higher u                                           raises     the tender price

and the amount purchased). From (6.4), j YB > yl, then B's profit is

negative if             >
                            . It            follows that there will be no bids in this case if u >

     If       yB <    y',   the analysis is somewhat more involved, and u                                     >    may be

optimal. Define x to be the ratio of private benefits to the total net

acquisition benefits:
                                        B
                                    z
(6.6)
                             y +z -y

If        <          then x )       1.        It can be shown that B's profit is zero at an                                   which

we denote by (x) where

(6.7)                  (x) = 4x—1— i(1+8x)                      ,
                                    —--Th:1i

and further, when                   >       (x),      B's profit is negative for realizations of (y
I   B
y , z ) such that x =
                                —           'B  —B
                                            z /(y +
                                                           B
                                                          z —
                                                                    1
                                                                    y   ) (    x. 2/    Therefore in Case (1), if

shareholders knew that                            <   x for sure they would never choose u                        ) u(x).
                                             B
Examination of (6.6) and (6.7) shows that as z goes to zero, u(x) goes to

Further, by evaluating (6.7), we see that: if x = 1, then                                                 <   u(1) =          if x =
2 then u        < u(2)      =   .72;         if x =     3, then            <   (3)     =   .75,   etc.

          In Case 2 where                         + y8 c y', then B need not worry about deterring A,

since if B accumulates u and A accumulates 1 —                                         u, they     will find it in their

mutual interest to keep the incumbent in power; hence there will be no

benefits to divide. In this case the best offer for B is one for lOOu% at a

price of y'. This yields:
                                         37




(6.8)          Bsprofit=yB +zB —yI
        and the shareholder return satisfies:
                                                            B        I.if
                                                       ocy +    (1-u)y        B s profit
                  B
(6.9)          If z + yB c yI then r() =                                 is   positive.

                                                       yl                 if B's profit

                                                                          is negative.



A crucial feature of this case is that changes in control are not in the

shareholder's interest. Further, when a is raised above 50%, there are fewer

values of        B YI for which B can make a profitable bid and in the cases

where a profitable bid is made shareholders receive a higher return (since a

higher a leads to more shares taken up at the premium tender price; cf.

Section 4).

        These results allow us to establish the following:



Proposition 7: The corporate charter will specify a voting rule for control

changes a, which is either (a) sufficiently high so that no control change can

occur without the incumbent's approval or (b) lies between               and a(x) where x

is the largest possible ratio of private benefits to total acquisition

benefits. In Case (b), if x      1 then it    is   optimal to choose an a between
                                                                                          1


and .    Further,   in case (b) if z is sure to be less than b, then as

tends to zero, a tends to ,    i.e.,   in the limit we have majority rule.

        This result follows from the fact that to the extent that Case (2)

obtains (i.e., the incumbent is more productive than the buyer) shareholders

want to prevent control changes, while in Case (1) shareholders never need to

choose a larger than a(x) to discourage control changes, and indeed would want

a less than u(x) to encourage beneficial control changes.
                                     38



7.    FURTHER REMARKS



A. More Complex Securities



      So far we have analyzed the optimal voting structure in a context where

all claims to income are proportional, i.e., each security is characterized by

a share "s" of profit. We have thus excluded debt, warrants, convertible

debentures, etc. To incorporate such securities in the model we would have to
                                                       th
consider non—linear sharing rules, say which give the i     security   a function

      of total profit y. It can be shown that if these functions are

restricted to be non—decreasing in profit, then (if private benefits are

small) an optimal voting/security structure will consist of a combination of

riskless debt and one share/one vote common stock.

      Another restrictive assumption made is that the charter specifies voting

rights to be independent of future information. This excludes risky debt

where a default event shifts control (i.e. votes) from equity holders to debt

holders. It also excludes non—voting preferred shares which obtain voting

rights consequent to a series of low dividend payments. A careful analysis of

such state contingent voting rights would involve studying a multiperiod

model, and this is deferred to future work. However we think that the basic

principle which we have identified will still apply: tieing votes to shares

on a one to one basis is most likely to cause control to shift to an outsider

who will raise the market value of the firm.

      The above draws attention toa further restrictive assumption, namely

that the voting/security structure -is responsible for allocating control,

while the managerial compensation scheme is responsible for assuring that

management maximizes profit to the best- of its ability. In reality, the

allocation of control and the managerial compensation scheme are not
                                     39


completely separable. An entrepreneur who sets up a corporation will make

various investments of time and other resources, for which adequate

compensation may be impossible unless the entrepreneur possesses the residual

rights inherent in control." For this reason, parties to the initial

capitalization of the corporation will try to allocate control changes in a

manner which is as sensitive to public information as is feasible. For

example, in the case of debt, the contract will explicitly define default

events in which failure to make an immediate payment in full will shift

control from management to debt holders. Presumably, the award of ordinary

voting rights, which, independent of a default event, would allow the debt

holders to achieve control gives insufficient protection to the entrepreneur

(and possibly other security holders) relative to its benefits.2'



B. More Complex Takeover Bids

      Our analysis has considered takeover bids which involve specifying a

price per share and a total number of shares which the offeror is willing to

accept. There are more complicated offers which are theoretically feasible.

For example, in the case of one share/one vote, the acquirer could offer to

pay a high price per share if he gets less than alpha, and a low price per

share if he gets more than alpha. In such a case the acquirer could win at

the low price, since if everyone thinks that he will get less than alpha, then

they tender shares to him, and it is thus not an equilibrium for him to get

less than alpha. Depending on the particular type of competition among

bidders it is possible that a one share/one vote security structure loses its

ability to protect shareholder property rights and to allocate control to a

high value bidder. However, other security structures will not do better.

      We have assumed throughout that it is illegal or infeasible to sell

votes separated from shares. If an investment bank could profitably unbundle
                                       40



votes from shares, and repackage a firm's security/voting structure, then

security holders would not be able to protect themselves from high private

benefit but low security benefit acquisitions.3" However the opening of a

market in votes appears to be illegal; see Easterbrook and Fischel (1983).

      In Section 5, we considered how the surplus—extraction role of the

security/voting structure can be in conflict with the al].ocational role in the

presence of private benefits possessed by the incumbent or the acquiror. Our

analysis and results would be essentially unchanged if, instead of considering

competition between the acquiror and the incumbent, we had considered

competition between two acquirors.4"



8.    CONCLUSIONS

      We conclude with some remarks as to the relevance of our model to the

current policy debate as to whether a corporation should be required to have a

one share/one vote security structure as a condition for listing on various

physical or electronic stock exchanges. First, our results show that

deviations from one share/one vote can be a characteristic of a corporate

charter which is in security holders' best interest. We thus see no reason to

interfere with the ability of a new company to choose a corporate charter and

security structure which gives it the lowest cost of raising capital.

      Our analysis has not, however, dealt with the issue of a change in the

security/voting structure by an old company which has a one share/one vote

charter. Nevertheless, we would view such a change with suspicion. If such a

corporation changes its structure so that incumbent management is entrenched

and isolated from the market for corporate control, then our result that one

share/one vote is generally in security holders' interest, and the fact that

managerial entrenchment is in the managers' self interest, leads us to believe

that it is possible that security holders will be harmed. We would hold this
                                       42


reason why traders cannot obtain information elsewhere regarding the voting

structure of the firm. But we also see no reason why an Exchange should be

prevented from specializing in the trading of shares with a particular voting

structure if it wishes to do this.5'

      To the extent that ex—post changes in security/voting structure should

receive further regulation, then, instead of regulating listing requirements,

it would seem more appropriate to award dissenting rights to shareholders of

the type that they already have in mergers, or other asset sales. In

particular, dissenting shareholders could be given rights of appraisal which

would allow them to attempt to show that the value of their holdings has

fallen under the proposed change in security/voting structure.
                                    41


view even if a majority (or 2/3) of shareholders voted for the change. The

role of the market for corporate control derives from the fact that it is

generally optimal for small shareholders to vote with management, and not

devote the time and effort to read proxy statements and form an independent

view. Hence, the fact that shareholders vote for a withdrawal from the

corporate control market is no defence of management's position.

      The above observation may apply with less force to a corporation where

management already holds a majority of the votes, and wants to change the

voting structure so that it may hold fewer shares of profit, yet still

maintain voting control. For example, a family may desire to raise capital

for other projects, or to diversify some of its wealth out of a company which

it founded. Such a family does not necessarily want to sell its shares, since

this would entail a loss of voting control, so it separates its shares from

its votes by creating a class of shares with lower dividend claims but higher

votes than common shares. To the extent that initial shareholders expected

management to maintain voting control, then this change in security structure

is consistent with the original desire of security holders to isolate the

company from the corporate control market, and hence should not be interfered

with. Of course, this conclusion would not be valid if shareholders'

expectations were instead that management would sell its combined shares and

votes at this point and relinquish control.

      Even if it is undesirable to allow post changes in security/voting

structures, this has no particular implication for legislation regarding

listing requirements. An Exchange's listing requirements are an attempt to

provide information to traders about the characteristics of the securities

being traded. (Until recently, a trader of shares on the New York Stock

Exchange would know, merel" from the fact that the firm was trading on the

NYSE, that all equity of the company had one share/one vote.) We see no
                                          43


                                      APPENDIX

      We begin by defining an equilibrium when there is a contest between two

bidders (see Section 4). Denote the bids by (p,..., PB; f...., f) and

(p,..., p; f,..,, fe), where o stands for opposition (o = A or I).

      Faced with these two bids, a holder of security i has three choices. He

can tender to B, earning a return p on those securities taken up and s1y on

those returned where W is the winner of the subsequent voting contest; he can

tender -to 0, earning a return p0 on those securities taken up and s1y on

those returned; or he can hold on to his shares, earning a return of s

Under rational expectations, each investor is supposed to be able to forecast

the total amounts tendered to B and , XB, x0, and the ultimate winner, W, and

thus determine which of these choices is best (note that there is no aggregate

uncertainty). This leads to the following definition of equilibrium.



Definition. Given the bids bB =       B          pB;               f) and b° =
                                                                                   (p,...,
' ::"' f°),      an equilibrium consists of a vector ((x9, x°) i =                    1,...,   n),

where x is the fraction of security i tendered to j (j =              B,0),     and a winner

W=B or 0 of the subsequent voting contest, such that:



(1) x,x0, xB+x?i (foralli);
                                                           B                      B

(2)
        B o                           B B                                                 OH
      (x1, x1) solves: maximize x1{p1 mm (-j l)+sY max (1—
                          Ba                        x.i                           i
                                                                                 x.
                        (x1,x)



                           +?         mm       (—      ,    1) +s.y max C]. —          , 0)


                           +   (1 —       — x)   sy                        (for all i),
                                                      44




subject t,o x        0,   x         0, x +     x      1, where y0 =   y';

(3)   If .   mm       (f3, ;B) v.
                          1    3.     1

      then W = B; otherwise W = 0.

      (2) says that shareholders' tender decisions are profit maximizing given

their expectations about the outcome of the control contest and given the fact

that since they are small they will have a negligible effect on this outcome

(note that since all security holders face the same maximization problem, we

can consider just the representative security holder). (3) tells us who wins

the subsequent voting contest.

      It is worth noting that in some circumstances there can be multiple

equilibria in a voting contest; in particular, B may win if he's expected to,

while 0 may if he's expected to. However, there are no stochastic equilibria,

since if B is expected to win with some probability, this leads to

deterministic tender decisions (xB, x°.) in the aggregate and hence, by (3),

to a deterministic winner B or 0. There may also be cases where there is no

equilibrium at all.

      It is straightforward to compute the profits of B and 0 from the bidding

contest. Let          =    1 if V =       j,        = 0 otherwise. Then B and 0's profits are:




                 B        B    o          n            B   B      V         B         WB
                                                                            p    +
                                                                                      BZ
                                                .

(4)            ir     (b ,    b ) =            mm    (f , x1 ) (s y —


(5)             w° (bB, b°) =
                                       il      mm (f? ,    x° ) (s V — p°       ) +
                                                                                      x   z0,



since each unit of security i tendered to j costs 4 and is worth s yV

is clear from (2) that if 4                   (s    y, the rate of return to investors from

tendering to j is less than that from holding on to security i, and so x =                      0.
                                                 45


It follows that



               wB (bB, b°)           XW

(6)


               ir
                  0       0
                          B    Wo
                      (b,b)(l—x)z,

which proves Lemma 1.



Proof of Lemma 2. Observe that B's profit in the absence of a counter—bid by

Ais


(7)                   =
                          il    f ?lin (s.yB —   ,+
since   all of security i will be tendered to B if syB p and none if SYB >

        (4.2) and B < y1, however, imply that f(p — s1y3)                  s(y' —
Hence
        B                      - y1) +   B= B    — (y1 — y3)              Q.E.D.
             il

Proáf of Lemma 3. Necessity is clear since                  makes zero profit if A wins

(and an equilibrium can easily be shown to exist in the bB —                A   contest). To

establish sufficiency, suppose not, i.e. while b3 wins against                     it doesn't

win against another bid hA, which makes nonnegative profit for A. Without

loss of generality we can assume p                       for all i, since otherwise A gets
                                                  s1y'
none of security i tendered to him in the V = A equilibrium (investors will

free—ride). Also p' > s.y' and Mm (f, x) > 0 is inconsistent with A's

                                                                          for all i. But this
profit being nonnegative, and so we may suppose p =                sty'
means that hA is the same bid as              but with restrictions. It follows

immediately that if V = A is an equilibrium in the (bB, A) contest, it is

also one in the (bB, b1') contest. Contradiction.                         Q.E.D.
                                                         46




Proof of Proposition 1. We establish first that the bid p3 =                                         + E, f. =
                                                                                          s1y'
f.*   will deter A. By Lemma 3, it is enough to show that this bid will win

against .           To see this, note that since B is offering slightly more for each

security i, he must get at least what he asks for, i.e. x                                f1*•         (If x (

         tendering to B is a dominant strategy and so                     =    1.)       But it follows

that B will accumulate at least                       votes and will win any voting contest

against A; therefore W = B.

         We establish next that any bid b3 that deters A costs B more than S*(y1

—   B)
                                                                     f
              By Lemma 3, bB must win against

         Let I =    hip31        > s.y' and f ) 01. Then 1EI
                                    1            1
                                                          .               v.
                                                                         11          since, otherwise,

in a contest with bA, there is an equilibrium in which the holders of all

securities i E I tender to A,and B has less than                         votes and loses. Given

that bB does deter A, B's profit is given by



         —B =            B          B       B                 B B         B          B    + z
                                                                                                B
                      fi         (sty —          +      mm       x) (sty —


Note that s1y3 > p =>
                                        x = 0.       Hence the second term is nonpositive and so


         —B
         ir
                 (j1fs)      B           B
                                        (y  I
                                           —y)+zB



                 S (YB -                +


since J1        fu =)i f V S.
                    V1                                                                              Q.E.D.


Proof of Lemma 4. Since f1 = ... = f = u is                        feasible in the minimization

problem described in Proposition                                      = u, which          proves the first

part of the claim. To prove the second part, note that the first order

conditions for the linear programming problem imply that the solution cannot
                                              47


be interior unless (s1/v1) =        ... = (sly).         Q.E.D.



Proof of Proposition 3. It follows from (4.6) that market value is increasing

in S*. Now apply Lemma 4.                                                Q.E.D.



Proof of Proposition 4. The result follows directly from the fact that S

achieves a maximum of 1 uniquely under one share/one vote and u            =1     (see Lemma

4).                                                                      Q.E.D.


            Before establishing Propositions 5 and 6, it is necessary to be precise
about       the meaning of sufficiently small and negligible. Let the probabilities

of    the four cases in Section 5 be ir1(t), i2(t), ir3(t), 4(t), respectively,

where t is a parameter. Suppose also that 1r(t) is continuous in t for all i

and that the distribution of (y', z, y8, zB) conditional on Case j occurring

is independent of t for all j.



Proposition 5: Assume that ir1(t), i-4(t) —) 0 as t —) 0, but that T2(t) is

bounded away from zero. Suppose also that (*) Prob tz1 ( (B_I) B =

zI = —I
     z  y
          B
             ,
                      I.
                   > y 3 is strictly increasing in , 0
                                                                  1
                                                                  -.
                                                                       Then the following

is true for small enough t: given any combination of a security structure

(Si,..., s; v1,..., v) and plurality u,            with either (s/v)       1 for some i

or u    >        one share/one vote and u =    yields   a strictly higher expected

return than this combination.



Proof. Take limits as t —> 0. Then only Cases 2 and 3 are relevant. In Case

3, security structure does not affect shareholder return. In Case 2, one

share/one vote and         =   yields   a strictly lower value of S than any other
                                      48


security structure and plurality (by Lemma 5 and (*)), and hence a higher

return to security—holders. The result follows.                      Q.E.D.



Proposition 6: Assume that there is a positive probability that y' <        +


given   that   =       =    and      y'. Assume also that (ir4(t)/ir1(t)) —> 0,

(w4(t)/ir2(t)) —) 0 as t —) 0. Then the following is true for small enough t:

                                                                    1 for some
given any security structure (s1,..., s; v19...1 v) with s1/v

i, and a plurality ,       u   1, one share/one vote and the plurality   yield

a strictly higher expected return.



Proof. Take limits as t —> 0. Then Case 4 becomes negligible relative to

Cases 1, 2 and 3. A move to one share/one vote (keeping     constant) strictly

increases S and S and hence raises shareholder return in Cases 1 and 2 (in

Case 1, strictly). Shareholder return in Case 3 is unaffected.    The result

follows.                                                            Q.E.D.
                                    49




                          FOOTNOTES FOR SECTION 1




1/   Fischel (1986, p.16) notes that large shareholders have better

     incentives to monitor management than do small shareholders and that

     "one share/one vote recognizes this economic reality by assigning votes

     and thus the ability to monitor managers, in direct proportion to

     shareholders' stake in the venture". DeAngelo and DeAngelo (1985, p.37)

     recognize that a one share/one vote rule does not assign effective votes

     in direct proportion to shares, since under majority rule sømeone with

     50.1% of the shares has 100% of the effective votes.

2/   See Manne (1965) and Harris (1964).

3/   We therefore ignore proxy fights as a means for an outsider to get

     control. However proxy fights do sometimes occur; see Dodd and Warner

     (1983)

4/   It should be noted that ours is not the first attempt to develop a

     formal model of security structure. Blair, Gerard and Golbe (1986) also

     construct a model of the relationship between security structure and

     takeover bids. However, they exclude private benefits of control and

     find that security structure is irrelevant in the absence of taxes.

5/   It should be noted that voting rights are most important to security

     holders who are not promised a particular payout, but instead a claim to

     discretionary payments. Thus, our theory excludes default free debt,

     and preferred stock issues which are equivalent to such debt.

     Similarly, another deviation from one share/one vote involves mutual

     insurance companies, banks, and investment funds, where the takeover bid

     mechanism cannot operate to effect control changes. In such firms, the
                                     50


     types of activities engaged in are more severely circumscribed by

     charter provisions than is the case in the typical common stock

     corporation. This, combined with industry regulation and competition

     reduces somewhat the discretionary character of the payments given to

     security holders. See 1ayers and Smith (1986) for an analysis of mutual

     vs stock insurance companies.

6/   See Eisenberg (1976) for a discussion of fiduciary responsibility, and

     Fischel (1983) for a discussion of the appraisal remedy and of

     Weinberger v. UOP.

7/   Indeed there is a growing body of evidence that acquirers in hostile

     takeovers do not significantly benefit from the acquisition; see Jensen

     and Ruback (1983, p.22).

8/   The private benefits may have been created by sunk investments of

     managerial effort, and hence may represent a return to these activities

     which the initial security holders were willing to pay for.

9/   If a compensation agreement were used when private benefits are large,

     the compensation ("golden parachute") would have to be large. Clearly,

     compensation which is a significant percentage of the market value

     creates moral hazards which might lead the incumbent to induce a control

     change even if it did not raise market value. More to the point, the

     best compensation rule would involve giving the incumbent a share of

     market value, but when the private benefits are large this has negative

     risk bearing consequences, and hence can be a very costly method of

     inducing the incumbent to allow the market to decide who should have

     control.
                                     51


                        FOOTNOTES FOR SECTIONS 2 - 5




1/   If u   (,a   situation can arise where two or more parties have enough

     votes to choose manaqement. In order to avoid such an ambiguous

     situation, we constrain    to be at least half.

2/   We assume that voting rights matter only because of their role in

     determining the corporation's management. Lease, McConnell, and

     Mikkelson (1984, p.451) have pointed out that possession of voting

     rights may subject the holder to legal claims from shareholders without

     voting rights; we ignore this possibility.

3/   We take (y, z) to be exogenous for B and I. In a richer model (y, z)

     would depend on managerial actions and would be endogenous (for an

     analysis of managerial agency problems in the presence of takeover bids,

     see Scharfstein (1986)).

4/   There is another equilibrium where shareholders think that the buyer

     will succeed with an offer of 5 and tender to him; each shareholder

     correctly expecting success knows that his shares will be worth y8 = 3

     if he does not tender, while if he does tender he has a chance of

     getting 5. As we will see in the next Section, this "equilibrium" will

     disappear when some shareholder can act as an arbitrageur and preserve

     the status quo by making a counteroffer at 100 per share.

5/   If we do not include the possibility of arbitrageur entry, then security

     structure     make no difference at all. As noted in Footnote 4, there

     is an equilibrium where the low value buyer succeeds because all

     shareholders think that he will succeed even under one share/one vote.

     That is, shareholder competition can be ineffective. The existence of

     the arbitrageur will eliminate many of these "multiple equilibria"
                                           52



      problems.

6/    This is the free rider problem discussed in Grossman—Hart (1980). Note

      that we ignore the possibility that the corporate charter explicitly

      allows a successful bidder to dilute minority shareholder property

      rights by diverting company profits to himself, e.g. in the form of

      salary (the private benefits z do, however, represent an implicit

      dilution of such property rights). However, see Demsetz (1983) on the

      existence of large shareholders and Vishny and Shleifer (1986) on their

      role in reducing the free—rider problem.

7/    See Fishman (1986) for a model of preemptive bidding under asymmetric

      information.

8/    If    =   0,   B is indifferent between taking control and not; we assume

      that he does take control.

9/    We assume that the transactions cost to A of making the bid is

      sufficiently small to be ignored (alternatively, the preoffer shares

      held by A go up in value by enough to cover the transaction cost).

10/   In fact if B's offer price is 101, say, the equilibrium involves a

      fraction x tendering their shares to B where



                      101 + (1 —       80 = 100,



      (i.e., x =     10/21);   here the right—hand side is the value of tendering to

      A and the left—hand side is the value of tendering to B.

11/   See Fischel (1985) for a review of the appraisal remedy. In the U.K.,

      the London Stock Exchange's Panel on Take—overs and Mergers restricts

      the ability of a buyer to deviate from paying the same price for all

      100% of the shares; see Roell (1986). Note, however, that to the extent

      a buyer can always engage in some open market purchases prior to a
                                         53


      tender offer it is impossible to eliminate a buyer's ability to pay more

      per share for some shares than for others.

12/   Contests between incumbent management and an outsider have been analyzed

      in different contexts by Harris—Raviv (1985) and Blair, Gerard and Golbe

      (1986). See also Baron (1983) and Stein (1986) for a discussion of

      other forms of managerial resistance.

13/   Note that if p (    s.y3,   no class i shareholder tenders and the value of

      class i shares is

14/   The reader may wonder whether greater competition between B and I could

      also be generated by sticking to one share/one vote and raising        above

          This is indeed the case in this example (set u = 99%); however, more

      complicated examples can be constructed where departures from one

      share/one vote are desirable even when      is set optimally.

15/   The only possible difference between this case and Section 4 is that I,

      unlike A, might try to block a value—increasing bid. However such bids

      only occur when B >    y'   (see Proposition 1) and, under these conditions,

      I cannot afford to block since this would require him to purchase

      securities at 5B which are only worth s1y' to him (I's private benefit

      is zero).

16/   One difference between this case and the preceding one should be noted.

      In Section 4, when B obtained control in spite of being inferior for

      shareholders (i.e. B <      y,   the market value of the firm fell, but not

      all the way to y (in fact to S*y1 +      (l_S*)yB);   the reason is that B had

      to disgorge some of his private benefit to deter A. In the present

      case, when I retains control in spite of being inferior, the market

      value of the firm is y', i.e. I is not forced to disgorge any of z'.

      The asymmetry is caused by our assumption that B moves first and only

      makes an offer if he can win; hence when I retains control, he does so
                                           54


      by default —— B will not even bother to make a bid. An alternative

      approach, which would preserve symmetry, is to suppose that in order to

      retain control I must make an offer which deters B.

17/   One difference from Section 4 is that one share/one vote does not reduce

      shareholders' loss in the event that a superior buyer fails to win

      control. The reason for this is explained in footnote 16.

18/   The one exception to this statement occurs when there is a security
                                                                 B       I
      consisting of pure votes (s =        0),   in which case s1y =
                                                                       sy    .    This
      structure is inferior to all others in Case 3, however, and so will be

      disregarded.




                                 FOOTNOTES FOR SECTION 6



1/    See Binmore, Rubinstein and Wolinsky (1986) for an explicit model of

      bargaining where this is the "subgame perfect equilibrium" outcome

      Such a model assumes that the two parties receive the flow of benefits

      under the status quo while they bargain, and that after they agree on a

      division of the gains, the incumbent is removed. Note that B cannot

      just call an election and expect A to vote for him for free, because it

      is assumed that A knows that if he votes against B, then there will be

      another round of bargaining where B will offer A money for his shares.
2/    To see this, write (6.4) as
                                  EBI
                 B's profit =
                                (——)       (( u)      + x(1—u)2],

      Note for u         this   is decreasing in , and (6.7) gives the           such that

                ) ÷ x(1—o)2 =   0.   Further in Case (1), B's profit is negative if

      x   <   x and   > o(x).
                                     55




                       FOOTNOTES FOR SECTIONS 7 AND 8




1/   See Grossman and Hart (1986) for an analysis of the determinants of the

     allocation of control rights.

2/   See Aghion and Bolton (1986), and Jensen and Meckling (1976) for a

     discussion of this and some related points.

3/   Conversely, if a corporation had a suboptimal voting/security structure

     an investment bank could profitably repackage the securities and votes

     to be in the form of one share/one vote.

4/   One difference is that setting alpha > .5 would make the model closer to

     Section 6 than to Section 5. The reason is that the latter model

     assumes that the acquisition of (1 —   alpha) by one of the bidders
     entitles him to the private benefits of control. This makes sense when

     we interpret one of the bidders as the incumbent, but does not make

     sense if neither bidder is the incumbent. The results on the optimality

     of one share/one vote would remain unchanged.

5/   See Gordon (1986) for an alternative point of view, however.
                                     56



                                  REFERENCES

Aghion, P. and P. Boltori, 1986, An 'incomplete contracts' approach to
  bankruptcy and the optimal financial structure of the firm, unpublished
  paper, Harvard University.

Baron, D.P.,, 1983, Tender offers and management resistance, Journal of Finance
  38, May, 331—43.

Binmore, K., Rubinstein, A. and A. Wolinsky, 1986, The Nash bargaining
  solution in economic modelling, The Rand Journal of Economics, 17(2),
  (Summer) 176—188.

Blair, Douglas, Gerard, James and Devra Golbe, 1986, Unbundling the voting
  rights and residual profit claims of common shares, Unpublished paper,
  Rutgers University.

Caplin, Andrew and Barry Nalebuff, 1985, On 64% majority rule, September,
  mimeo.

DeAngelo, Harry, Linda DeAngelo and Edward H. Rice, 1984, Going private:
  Minority freezeouts and stockholder wealth, Journal of Law and Econoics
  27(2), 367—401.

DeAngelo, Harry and Linda DeAngelo, 1985, Managerial ownership of voting
  rights: A study of public corporations with dual classes of common stock
  Journal of Financial Economics 14(1), 33—69.

Demsetz, Harold, 1983, The structure of ownership and the theory of the firm,
  Journal of Law and Economics 26(2), 375—390.

Dodd, Peter and Jerold B. Warner, 1983, On corporate governance: A study of
  proxy contests, Journal of Financial Economics 11, 401—438.

Easterbrook, Frank H. and Daniel R. Fischel, 1982, Corporate control
  transactions, Yale Law Journal 91, 698—737.

Easterbrook, Frank H. and Daniel R. Fischel, 1983, Voting in corporate law
  Journal of Law and Economics 26(2), 395—428.

Eisenberg, Melvin, 1976, The structure of th      orat n:Ale al
  Little Brown and Co., Boston and Toronto.

Fischel, Daniel R., 1963, Appraisal remedy in corporate law, American Bar
  Foundation Research Journal 4, 875—902.

Fischei, Daniel R., 1986, Organized exchanges and the regulation of dual class
  common stock, monograph by Lexecon Inc.

Fishman, N.J.. 1986, A theory of preemptive takeover bidding. Unpublished
  paper, Northwestern University

Gordon, Jeffrey, 1986, Ties that bond: Dual class common and the problem of
  shareholdcr choice, Unpublished paper, New York University.
                                     57



Grossman, Sanford J., and Oliver D.Hart, 1980, Takeover bids, the free—rider
  problem, and the theory of corporation, Bell Journal of Economics 11,
  (Spring) 42—64.

Grossman, Sanford 3.,, and Oliver D. Hart, 1981, The allocational role of
  takeover bids in situations of asymmetric information, Journal of Finance 36
  (May), 253—270.

Grossman, Sanford 3., and Oliver D. Hart, 1986, The costs and benefits of
  ownership: A theory of vertical and lateral integration, Journal of
  Political Economy 94(4), 691—719.

Harris, Milton and Art Raviv, 1985, Corporate control contests and capital
  structure, Unpublished paper, Northwestern University.

Jensen, Michael C. and William H. Meckling, 1976, Theory of the firm:
  Managerial behavior, agency costs, and ownership structure, Journal of
  Financial Economics 3, 305—360.

Jensen, Michael and Richard Ruback, 1983, The market for corporate control:
  The scientific evidence, Journal of Financial Economics, April, 5—50.

Lease, Ronald C., John 3. McConnell and Wayne H. Mikkelson, 1984, The market
  value of differential voting rights in closely held corporations, Journal of
  Business 57(4), 443—467.

Levy, Haim, 1983, Economic evaluation of voting power of common stock, Journal
  of Finance 38, 79—93.

Nanne, Henry G., 1965, Mergers and the market for corporate control, Journal
  of Political Economy (April) 110—120.

Marris, Robin, 1964, The economic theory of managerial capitalism, Illinois:
  Free Press of Glencoe.

Mayers, D. and C. Smith, Jr., 1986, Ownership structure and control: The
  mutualizatjon of stock life insurance companies, Journal of Financial
  Economics (May) 73—98.

Roell, Ailsa, 1986, The economics of takeovers, unpublished paper, London
  School of Economics.

Scbarfstein, David, 1985, The disciplinary role of takeovers, Unpublished
  paper, MIT.

SEC. 1985, The economics of any—or—all, partial, and two—tier tender offers.
  A study by the office of the Chief Economist, Securities and Exchange
  Commission, Washington DC.

Shleifer, Andrei, and Robert V. Vishny, 1986, Large shareholders and corporate
  control, Journal of Political Economy 94(3), 461—488.

Stein, Jeremy, 1986, Takeover threats, shareholder impatience and managerial
  myopia, mimeo.
