                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                 PER CAPITA INCOME AND THE DEMAND FOR SKILLS

                                          Justin Caron
                                         Thibault Fally
                                        James Markusen

                                      Working Paper 23482
                              http://www.nber.org/papers/w23482


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     June 2017




This paper was part of the working paper Caron, Fally and Markusen (NBER 2011, CEPR 2012)
which was divided in two, the first part published as Caron, Fally and Markusen (2014). The
work presented here is a much expanded development of the second part and has not been
published elsewhere. We thank Donald Davis, Peter Egger, Ana- Cecilia Fieler, Lionel Fontanie,
Juan Carlos Hallak, Gordon Hanson, Jerry Hausman, Larry Karp, Wolfgang Keller, Ethan Ligon,
Keith Maskus, Tobias Seidel, Ina Simonovska, David Weinstein, conference and seminar
participants for helpful comments. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not
necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2017 by Justin Caron, Thibault Fally, and James Markusen. All rights reserved. Short sections
of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that
full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Per Capita Income and the Demand for Skills
Justin Caron, Thibault Fally, and James Markusen
NBER Working Paper No. 23482
June 2017
JEL No. F10,F16,J31,O10

                                         ABSTRACT

Almost all of the literature about the growth of income inequality and the relationship between
skilled and unskilled wages approaches the issue from the production side of general equilibrium
(skill-biased technical change, international trade). Here, we add a role for income-dependent
demand interacted with factor intensities in production. We explore how income growth and trade
liberalization influence the demand for skilled labor when preferences are non-homothetic and
income-elastic goods are more intensive in skilled labor, an empirical regularity documented in
Caron, Fally and Markusen (2014). In one experiment, counterfactual simulations show that
sector neutral productivity growth, which generates shifts in consumption towards skill-intensive
goods, leads to significant increases in the skill premium: in developing countries, a one percent
increase in productivity leads to a 0.1 to 0.25 percent increase in the skill premium. In several
countries, including China and India, simulations suggest that the historical growth experienced
in the last 25 years may have led to an increase in the skill premium of more than 10%. In a
second experiment, we show that trade cost reductions generate quantitatively very different
outcomes once we account for non- homothetic preferences. These imply substantially less
predicted net factor content of trade and allow for a shift in consumption patterns caused by
trade-induced income growth. Overall, the negative effect of trade cost reductions on the skill
premium predicted for developing countries under homothetic preferences (Stolper-Samuelson) is
strongly mitigated, and sometimes reversed.

Justin Caron                                                     James Markusen
Department of Applied Economics                                  Department of Economics
HEC Montreal                                                     University of Colorado
3000, chemin de la Cote-Sainte-Catherine                         Boulder, CO 80309-0256
H3T 2A7                                                          and NBER
Montreal, QC                                                     james.markusen@colorado.edu
Canada
and Joint Program on the Science
 and Policy of Global Change
Massachusetts Institute of Technology
justin.caron@hec.ca

Thibault Fally
Department of Agricultural and Resource Economics
University of California at Berkeley
301 Giannini Hall
Berkeley, CA 94720-3310
and NBER
fally@berkeley.edu
1        Introduction
Over the past three decades, the large increase in income inequality, especially between skilled and
unskilled workers, has led to a vast body of research aiming to explain these changes, often focusing
on the roles of trade and (or versus) skilled-biased technological change.1 Other recent work has
highlighted the role of several alternative channels in explaining these changes, such as trade and off-
shoring through Heckscher-Ohlin-type mechanisms,2 heterogeneous technology adoption across firms,3
changes in matching patterns between heterogeneous workers and firms,4 and quality upgrading en-
couraged by trade liberalization.5 While this significant body of work concentrates on the production
side of general equilibrium, there is a smaller literature that considers shifting patterns of demand
across sectors which require different types of skills.6 The source of these demand shifts are in some
cases modeled explicitly and in others simply taken as exogenous as the consequences of the shifts for
the skill premium are explored. Our paper fits with some of this demand-driven literature, though we
link characteristics of goods in consumption to characteristics of goods in production in a very explicit
way. We will first describe our approach, and then explain how it relates to other literature later in
the section.
        In this paper, we illustrate how income growth and reductions in trade costs affect the skill premium
when preferences are non-homothetic. Our results rely on the correlation between income elasticity
in consumption and skill intensity in production across goods, shown to be very large in Caron, Fally
and Markusen (2014). This correlation implies that homogeneous productivity growth across sectors
is no longer neutral for the skill premium in general equilibrium. It implies that as countries get richer,
their consumers increase their relative consumption of goods which are more skill-intensive in their
production, thereby increasing the returns to skilled labor relative to those of unskilled labor. The
effect of trade cost reductions on the skill premium also differ when preferences are non-homothetic
and when income-elastic goods are more skill intensive, as they affect the factor content of trade and
interact with trade-driven income growth.
        To quantify these mechanisms, our analysis proceeds in three steps. In step 1, we describe a model
of production, trade and consumption in general equilibrium. In step 2, we estimate the preference,
trade cost and technology parameters of the model. We take a cross-sectional approach which allows
us to identify the role of income in explaining shifts in consumption. In step 3, we simulate various
counterfactual equilibria to quantify and illustrate the impact of productivity growth and trade cost
reductions on the skill premium.
        Before proceeding, it might be appropriate to emphasize that our methodology does not permit
a “horse race” between alternative theories of the skill premium mentioned above, and we make
no attempt to evaluate the relative contributions or lack thereof of alternative mechanisms. Our
    1
      Katz and Murphy (1992), Goldberg and Pavnick (2007), Autor et al. (2015)
    2
      Krugman (2000), Feenstra and Hanson (1997)
    3
      Bustos (2011), Burstein and Vogel (2017).
    4
      Card et al. (2013), Helpman et al. (2017)
    5
      Hallak (2010), Feenstra and Romalis (2014), Fieler, Eslava and Xu (2016)
    6
      Buera and Kaboski (2012), Johnson and Keane (2013)



                                                         1
conclusions are limited to the argument that the overlooked correlation between income elasticities
and skill intensities is likely an important contributor to understanding the skill premium, especially
for developing countries where standard trade theory offers quite different predictions.
   The first step of our analysis is to develop a model combining non-homothetic preferences with a
standard multi-sector and multi-factor model on the supply side. Consumption patterns are derived
from “constant relative income elasticity” (CRIE) preferences as in Caron et al (2014) and Fieler
(2011). The supply-side structure is an extension of Costinot et al. (2012) and Eaton and Kortum
(2002) with multiple factors of production and an input-output structure as in Caliendo and Parro
(2012). The model can be used to derive first-order approximations of the response of the skill
premium to small changes in productivity and trade costs, with and without taking the demand for
intermediate goods into account. These approximations help develop intuition behind the mechanisms
and emphasize the role played by the correlation between income elasticity and skill intensity.
   In a second step, we estimate preference, trade cost and technology parameters. Our estimations
rely on the Global Trade Analysis Project (GTAP) version 8 dataset (Narayanan et al., 2012) for
2007, which comprises 109 countries with a wide range of income levels, 56 broad sectors including
manufacturing and services, and 5 factors of production including the disaggregation of skilled and
unskilled labor. This dataset is uniquely suited to our purposes, as it contains a consistent and
reconciled cross-section of production, input-output, consumption and trade data. However, the broad
categories of goods and services make it unsuitable for the discussion of issues related to product
quality and within-industry heterogeneity. We follow the same estimation method as Caron et al
(2014). We first estimate gravity equations within each sector, which allows us to identify patterns of
comparative advantage and construct price indexes across importers and sectors. We then estimate
consumer preferences, adjusting for these price differences. To account for endogeneity, we instrument
prices with indices which do not depend on domestic demand. This strategy allows us to estimate
and identify price and income elasticity parameters for a large range of sectors. Doing so is usually
complicated by the lack of consistent price and expenditure data as well as endogenous prices. We
find that per capita income plays a crucial role in determining demand patterns across countries and
sectors. Income-elasticity in consumption varies largely across goods and is highly correlated with
skill intensity in production, as documented also in Caron et al (2014), with an estimated correlation
close to 50 percent across all goods, and even higher if we exclude services.
   In a third step, we use our estimates of preference, trade cost and technology parameters to
quantitatively illustrate the role of non-homothetic preferences, by comparing results to an homothetic
preference benchmark, with two sets of counterfactual simulations in general equilibrium. The first
set of counterfactual exercises aims to quantify the potential for growth in income to affect the skill
premium through shifts in consumption patterns. We simulate a homogeneous one percent increase in
factor productivity across all sectors. If this increase is uniform in all countries, homothetic preferences
imply that the counterfactual equilibrium should be identical to the baseline equilibrium in terms of
skill premium, consumption shares, trade and production patterns. However, with our non-homothetic
preference estimates, homogeneous productivity growth leads to an increase in the skill premium in


                                                     2
all countries in our dataset. Our results are very close to the first-order approximation provided in the
first step. They are driven by the strong correlation between skill intensity and income elasticity, which
induces a quantitatively large increase in the demand for skill intensive goods as per capita income
increases. The main mechanism in this counterfactual does not rely on trade and we obtain no sizable
difference between closed and open economy simulations, except for a few small open countries. The
results are also only slightly mitigated when we account for input-output linkages, since the industries
that are upstream of skill-intensive final demand industries tend to be skill intensive themselves.
       We also simulate country-specific productivity growth based on historic rates. The magnitude of
the skill premium estimates coming out of the model suggests that this demand-driven mechanism
may have played a quantitatively important role in driving observed changes in relative wages7 . The
predicted increase in the skill premium is especially large in the developing world. For example, the
growth in income which occurred between 1990 and 2014 would have led to a 10% predicted increase
in the skill premium in China. This compares to the 40% increase believed to have occurred in China
between 1992 and 2006 (Ge and Tao Yang, 2009). The predicted increase is larger in many of the
least developed countries. In rich countries the effect is smaller, but not negligible: the mechanism
generates an increase in the skill premium which represents about 20% of the increase in the US over
that period (Parro, 2012). These findings are overall consistent with the fact that the observed skill
premium increases have generally been more important in developing countries during that period.
       Our second set of counterfactuals examines how preferences affect the relationship between trade
liberalization and the skill premium. We simulate a one percent trade cost reduction, both uniformly
across all countries or to and from a given country. The impact of trade costs reductions depends on
export and import patterns across industries. The standard Stolper-Samulelson argument suggests
that in skill-abundant rich countries, the direct effect of trade costs reductions is to lead to an increase
in the relative demand for skilled workers. The reverse would occur in developing countries. Our results
suggest that the introduction of non-homothetic preferences into the model substantially moderates
this prediction: the benefits of trade for the unskilled workers of the developing world are smaller. We
highlight and quantify four channels through which non-homothetic preferences affect results.
       The first channel reflects how non-homothetic preference affect predicted trade patterns and the
strength of the Stolper-Samulelson effect. With non-homothetic preferences, consumption and pro-
duction patterns are more correlated, as rich and skill abundant countries are predicted to consume
more of the income-elastic and skill-intensive goods which they have a comparative advantage in pro-
ducing. As documented in Caron et al (2014), this leads to less trade overall and relatively more trade
between countries which have similar levels of income per capita. The net factor content of trade is
thus smaller, which leads to a weakening of the Stolper-Samuelson effect and a weaker relationship
between trade cost reductions and the relative demand for skilled labor. Our results indicate this to
   7
     We emphasize that our discussion of the skill premium is strictly a counterfactual: we do not estimate the effect
of actual productivity changes on the skill premium nor do we assert that neutral technical change is a characteristic
of recent history. Previous research has emphasized the role of skill-biased technological change (Autor et al., 1998), as
well as outsourcing and competition from low-wage countries (Feenstra and Hanson, 1999). Our counterfactual does not
dispute the findings of this research, we just use it to help quantify the significance of our results.



                                                            3
be especially important for developing countries which are predicted to export less unskilled-intensive
goods and for which trade liberalization has a smaller depressing effect on the skill premium. The
opposite occurs to rich countries, but to a lesser extent.
    A second channel highlights the income effect of trade. As trade costs decline, gains from trade
make countries richer. Similar to the effect productivity growth, consumption thus shifts towards
income-elastic and skill intensive goods. Simulations show that the trade-induced income effect is
quantitatively large in many developing countries and neutralizes a significant share of the remaining
Stolper-Samuelson effect on the skill premium. We also illustrate the role of input-output linkages
(which magnify our results) and general-equilibrium feedbacks (which mitigate our results), but we find
that these two channels only moderately affect the first two. Combined, these effects suggest that non-
homothetic preferences generate a higher skill premium for the same amount of trade liberalization.
The difference is most striking for developing countries, many of which see trade’s depressing effect
on the skill premium disappear altogether.

    As noted earlier, there is a great deal of literature on the skill premium. Since we are not attempting
to run a horse race among approaches as also noted earlier, we will not review the large literatures
focusing on skill-biased technical change and standard Heckscher-Ohlin type trade mechanisms. These
models and results are clearly empirically important, but for the sake of exposition we instead focus
on work more related to our own.
    In the international trade literature, Markusen (2013) theoretically identified the potential con-
sumption - driven impacts on the skill premium which we quantify. In a stylized model, he postulates
that non-homothetic preferences and a possible correlation between income elasticity in consumption
and skill intensity in production would make neutral productivity growth increase the relative wage
of skilled workers. Caron, Fally and Markusen (2014) show that the correlation is empirically strong
and illustrate the consequences for trade patterns, trade-to-GDP ratios, and the missing trade puzzle.
Here, we examine and quantify the implications of this correlation for the skill premium.8
    More generally, this paper is part of a renewed interest in non-homothetic preferences in open-
economy settings in the trade literature. Fieler (2011), Simonovska (2015), Fajgelbaum and Khandel-
wal (2016) also incorporate non-homotheticities in consumption, adding to a literature initiated by
Markusen (1986), Flam and Helpman (1987), Matsuyama (2000) among others. While related to our
work in terms of non-homotheticity, these papers concentrate on issues other than the skill premium,
such as explaining trade volumes and patterns, and markups in relation to per-capita incomes. Mat-
suyama (2017) pushes this literature further by endogenizing the relationship between non-homothetic
preferences and differential productivity growth rates across sectors and patterns of specialization in
production.
    Conversely, work on trade and the skill premium has mostly focused on the supply-side. Few
papers have confirmed Stolper-Samuelson effects for developing countries (e.g. Robertson 2004 for
   8
     A working paper version, Caron et al. (2012), included some of our results on the skill premium. The working paper
had to be split in two and these results are not part of the published version, Caron et al. (2014).



                                                          4
Mexico, Gonzaga et al. 2006 for Brazil) which are often at odds with increasing wage inequality
that we observe in most countries (Goldberg and Pavcnik 2007). Most of the recent literature on
trade and the skill premium thus aims to explain why trade may lead to a larger increase on the skill
premium than suggested by the standard Heckscher-Ohlin model. Bustos (2011) proposes a mechanism
whereby access to foreign markets triggers the adoption of skill-biased technologies and provides
supportive evidence from Argentinian firm-level data. Burstein and Vogel (2016) also examine how
the heterogeneous effect of trade across firms influences the relative demand for skilled labor, and show
that this within-sector reallocation channel can be potentially much larger than standard Heckscher-
Ohlin channels. Costinot and Vogel (2010) indicate that poor countries facing large demand for skill
intensive goods from rich countries might experience a positive effect of trade on the skill premium,
but do not examine this claim empirically. Cravino and Sotelo (2016) show that a reduction in trade
costs leads to a relative expansion of the service sector relative to the manufacturing sector when those
are strong complements. Since service activities are more intensive in skilled labor, this leads to a
larger increase in the skill premium.
       Non-homotheticity in consumption also plays an important role in the literature on trade and
quality (e.g. Hallak, 2010, Feenstra and Romalis, 2014). If the production of higher-quality goods
requires relatively more skilled labor, the idea developed here can be applied to link the skill premium
to the demand for quality. Opening to trade with richer countries, as well as increasing income per
capita should both lead to increasing demand for higher-quality goods and an increase in the skill
premium. The link between quality and skill labor is present in the work of Fieler et al. (2016) who
examine the effect of trade liberalization in Columbia. They argue that opening to trade led to a
quantitatively important increase in the demand for skilled workers due to the increase in the quality
of goods being produced.
       Since our model and approach rely on shifts in the composition of demand across sectors, at
least two papers that provide strong evidence for these shifts should be noted. In the literature
examining the source and consequences of structural change, Buera and Kaboski (2012) discuss how
productivity growth leads to an increase in the skill premium. They develop and calibrate a two-sector
model in which growth leads to a higher share of services that are more skill intensive. They do not
however estimate or quantify the role of non-homothetic preferences, nor do they discuss the correlation
between skill intensity and income elasticity beyond the two-sector approach. Our estimated income
elasticities tend to be larger for services sectors, but the correlation between skill intensity and income
elasticity holds even when we exclude services. Since it holds for traded goods, the correlation also
has implications for the composition of trade and can help us explain why trade has a smaller effect on
the skill premium in developing countries relative to standard models. A second paper is Johnson and
Keane (2013) who examine how sectoral shifts in consumption influence the demand for many different
types of labor. In particular, they document the importance of demand shifts across occupations, such
as the shift toward (heavily female) service occupations.9 However, Johnson and Keane (2013) do not
   9
    Parenthetically, they document a number of other facts that cast doubt on the proposition that skill-biased technical
change is the main culprit behind the skill premium.



                                                           5
model or explain these sectoral demand shifts, a primary purpose of our paper.
    Finally, a growing literature examine the differential effect of trade on the cost of living across
workers and households within a country. This channel has been examined, among others, by Fa-
jgelbaum and Kandelwahl (2016), Nigai (2016) and He and Zhang (2017).10 For most countries,
Fajgelbaum and Kandelwahl (2016) estimate that poor households gain relatively more from trade
through cost-of-living effects, while Nigai (2016) tends to find the opposite. He and Zhang (2017)
extend Fajgelbaum and Kandelwahl (2015) to allow for worker sorting across multiple sectors, and
show that the effect of trade on the cost of living can be quantitatively larger than the effects on
nominal income. While we acknowledge that cost-of-living effects matter for welfare, we focus here
on the channels through which trade (and growth) affects the skill premium in nominal terms.11 Our
approach is closer to the Heckscher-Ohlin tradition of multiple factors of production, so we can easily
analyze skilled versus unskilled wages and distinguish sectors by factor intensities, which is exactly
what we have in our data.
    The rest of the paper is organized in three sections. We describe our theoretical framework in
Section 2, our empirical strategy and estimation results in Section 3, and the quantitative implications
for the skill premium in Section 4.


2     Theoretical framework
2.1    Benchmark Model set-up
The model closely follows Caron et al (2014) with the same non-homothetic preferences but a more
flexible production function in terms of skilled and unskilled workers.

Demand

The economy is constituted of heterogeneous industries. In turn, each industry k is composed of a
continuum of product varieties indexed by jk ∈ [0, 1]. Preferences take the form:
                                                                        σk −1
                                                          X              σk
                                                 U=           α1,k Qk
                                                          k

where α1,k is a constant (for each industry k) and Qk is a CES aggregate:

                                                 Z   1              ξk −1
                                                                                    ξ ξ−1
                                                                                        k
                                                                                      k
                                         Qk =               q(jk )    ξk
                                                                             djk
                                                    jk =0
  10
     See also Porto (2006) for Argentina, Faber (2014), Cravino and Levchenko (2016) for Mexico, Faber and Fally (2017)
for the US.
  11
     Our approach allows us to generate predictions of the change in the relative wage of skilled vs. unskilled workers
even if there is no available data on initial wages by skill category in most of the developing countries in our sample.
Adjusting for cost-of-living effects would instead require data on initial wages differences between types of workers and
the distribution within each type.




                                                              6
Preferences are identical across countries, but non-homothetic if σk varies across industries. If σk = σ,
we are back to traditional homothetic CES preferences.12
                                                                                                        R                           1
                                                                                                          1          1−ξk dj        1−ξk
       The CES price index of goods from industry k in country n is Pnk =                                 0 pnk (jk )       k              .
Given this price index, individual expenditures (Pnk Qnk ) in country n for goods in industry k equal:

                                                 xnk = λ−σ
                                                        n α2,k (Pnk )
                                                           k         1−σk
                                                                                                                                     (1)

where λn is the Lagrange multiplier associated with the budget constraint of individuals in country
n, and α2,k = (α1,k σkσ−1
                       k
                          )σk . The income elasticity of demand ηnk for goods in industry k and country
n equals:                                                        P
                                                                    0 xnk 0
                                                   ηnk   = σk . P k                                                                  (2)
                                                                    k0   σk0 xnk0
which implies that the ratio of the income elasticities of any pair of goods k and k 0 equals the ratio of
                         ηnk        σk
their σ parameters:      ηnk0   =   σk0   and is constant across countries.13

Production

We assume a constant-returns-to-scale production function that depends on several factors and bundles
of intermediate goods from each industry. We assume that factors of production are perfectly mobile
across sectors but immobile across countries. We denote by γhk the share of the input bundles from
industry h in total costs of industry k (direct input-output coefficient), and each input bundle is a
CES aggregate of all varieties available in this industry (for the sake of exposition we assume that the
elasticity of substitution between varieties is the same as for final goods). We denote by wf n the price
of factor f in country n. Total factor productivity Zik (jk ) varies by country, industry and variety.
Labor inputs, comprised of unskilled or low-skill labor (f = L) and high-skilled labor (f = H), are
combined into a CES aggregate with elasticity of substitution ρ.
       As common in the trade literature, we assume iceberg transport costs dnik ≥ 1 from country i to
country n in sector k. The unit cost of supplying variety jk to country n from country i equals:

                                             dnik                      Y              Y
                           pnik (jk ) =               (cikLab )γkLab        (wif )γkf   (Pih )γhk                                    (3)
                                            Zik (jk )                f ∈Lab
                                                                       /              h

                                                                         P             P
where Pih is the price index of goods h in country i and                   f   γkf +       h γhk   = 1 to ensure constant returns
to scale in each industry k. The cost of labor cikLab is a CES aggregate of the wage of high-skilled
and low-skilled workers:                            h                                  i    1
                                                          1−ρ         1−ρ                  1−ρ
                                           cikLab = µikL wiL  + µikH wiH                                                             (4)
  12
     These preferences are used in Fieler (2011), with early analyses and applications found in Hanoch (1975) and Chao
and Manne (1982). To the best of our knowledge, there is no common name attached to these preferences, so we will
refer to them as constant relative income elasticity (CRIE) tastes.
  13
     Note that CRIE preferences (and separable preferences in general) preclude any inferior good: the income elasticity
of demand is always positive for any good. Another notable feature of income elasticities is that they decrease as income
increases (holding prices fixed). This property is actually quite general: average income elasticities decrease with income
for any Walrasian demand.


                                                                7
Parameters µikH and µikL capture the high and low-skilled-labor intensity of sector k in country i,
and ρ the elasticity of substitution between types of labor.
       There is perfect competition for the supply of each variety jk . Hence, the price of variety jk in
country n in industry k equals:
                                             pnk (jk ) = min{pnik (jk )}
                                                             i

       We follow Eaton and Kortum (2002) and assume that productivity Zik (jk ) is a random variable
with a Frechet distribution. This setting generates gravity within each sector. Productivity is inde-
pendently drawn in each country i and industry k, with a cumulative distribution:
                                                           h                       i
                                           Fik (z) = exp −(z/zik )−θk

where zik is a productivity shifter reflecting average TFP of country i in sector k. As in Eaton and
Kortum (2002), θk is related to the inverse of productivity dispersion across varieties within each
sector.14 As in Costinot, Donaldson and Komunjer (2010), we also allow the shift parameter zik to
vary across exporters and industries, keeping a flexible structure on the supply side and controlling
for any pattern of Ricardian comparative advantage forces at the sector level.

Endowments

Each country i is populated by a number Li of individuals. The total supply of factor f is fixed in
each country and denoted by Vif . Each person is endowed by Vif /Li units of factor Vf i implying no
within-country income inequality.15

2.2      Equilibrium
Equilibrium is defined by the following equations. On the demand side, total expenditures Dnk of
country n in final goods k simply equals population Ln times individual expenditures as shown in (1).
This gives:
                                         Dnk = Ln (λn )−σk α2,k (Pnk )1−σk                                         (5)

where λn is the Lagrange multiplier associated with the budget constraint:
                                                             X
                                                  Ln e n =           Dnk                                           (6)
                                                                 k

where en denotes per-capita income. Total demand Xnk for goods k in country n is the sum of the
demand for final consumption Dnk and intermediate use:
                                                                 X
                                             Xnk = Dnk +                 γkh Ynh                                   (7)
                                                                     h
  14
    Note that we also assume θk > ξk − 1 for all k to insure a well-defined CES price index for each industry.
  15
    We show in Caron et al (2014) that we obtain very similar preference estimates when account for the distribution of
income across quintiles for a subset of countries.


                                                          8
where Ynh refers to total production in sector h.
       On the supply side, each industry mimics an Eaton and Kortum (2002) economy. In particular,
given the Frechet distribution, we obtain a gravity equation for each industry. We follow Eaton and
                                                                              M as import shares
Kortum (2002) notation with the addition of industry subscripts. By denoting πnik
and Xnik as the value of trade from country i to country n, we obtain:

                                                     M         Xnik   Sik (dnik )−θk
                                                    πnik ≡          =                                                    (8)
                                                               Xnk         Φnk

where Sik and Φnk are defined as follows. The “supplier effect”, Sik , is inversely related to the cost
of production in country i and industry k. It depends on the factor productivity parameter zik ,
intermediate goods and factor prices:

                                  θk
                                     (cikLab )−θk γkLab                      (wif )−θk γkf         (Pih )−θk γhk
                                                                       Y                      Y
                           Sik = zik                                                                                     (9)
                                                                    f ∈Lab
                                                                      /                       h

                                             h                                i    1
                                      1−ρ         1−ρ                             1−ρ
with the cost of labor cikLab = µikL wiL  + µikH wiH                                    as in equation (4).
       In turn, we define Φnk as the sum of exporter fixed effects deflated by trade costs. Φnk plays the
same role as the “inward multilateral trade resistance index” as in Anderson and van Wincoop (2003):

                                                                       Sik (dnik )−θk
                                                                   X
                                                       Φnk =                                                           (10)
                                                                   i

This Φnk is actually closely related to the price index, as in Eaton and Kortum (2002):

                                                                                   − θ1
                                                         Pnk = α3,k (Φnk )              k                              (11)

               h               i     1
                     θk +1−ξk        ξk −1
with α3,k = Γ            θk                  where Γ denotes the gamma function.16
       Finally, two other market clearing conditions are required to determine factor prices and income in
general equilibrium. Income for each factor equals the sum of total production weighted respectively
by factor intensity. With factor supply Vf i and factor price wf i for factor f in country i, market
clearing for factors other than labor implies:
                                                               X                  X
                                                 Vf i wf i =       γkf Yik =            γkf Xnik                       (12)
                                                               k                  n,k


For each type of labor l ∈ {L, H}, factor intensity is given by:

                                                         µikl wil1−ρ
                                 βikl =                1−ρ         1−ρ              = µkl wil1−ρ cρ−1
                                                                                                  ikLab                (13)
                                                 µikL wiL  + µikH wiH
  16
    Alternatively, we can generalize this model and assume that the elasticity of substitution for intermediate use differs
from the elasticity of substitution for final use, and depends on the parent industry. This does not affect the elasticity of
the price index w.r.t. Φk . Differences in elasticities of substitution would be captured by the industry fixed effect that
we include in our estimation strategy and would not affect our estimates.


                                                                       9
and labor market clearing imposes:
                                               X                              X
                                  Vil wil =          βikl γkLab Yik =               βikl γkLab Xnik .                (14)
                                                 k                            n,k


In turn, per-capita income is determined by average income across all factors:

                                                               1 X
                                                        ei =        Vf i wf i                                        (15)
                                                               Li f

By Walras’ Law, trade is balanced at equilibrium.

2.3   Counterfactual equilibria
Following Dekle et al. (2007) and Caliendo and Parro (2014), the model lends itself naturally to
counterfactual simulations in general equilibrium. By reformulating the above equilibrium conditions
in terms of changes relative to the baseline observed equilibrium, counterfactuals can be obtained
using a set of observed variables and only a few parameters to estimate. We do so with the help of
hat notation, where Zb = Z 0 /Z denotes the relative change for variable Z (Z 0 referring to the value in
the new equilibrium).
   We consider two sets of counterfactual simulations. In a first set, we examine the impact of an
                                      0
                                     zik
increase in productivity zc
                          ik =       zik   . We will simulate both a homogeneous 1% productivity increase
across all countries and sectors and growth in productivity corresponding to recent changes in real
GDP per capita for each country, as well as the impact of factor-specific changes in productivity.
   In a second set of counterfactual equilibria, we examine the impact of a uniform 1% decrease in
                     d0nik
trade costs dd
             nik =   dnik     across all country pairs as well as the impact of country-by-country decrease
in trade costs.
   The model yields the following set of equilibrium conditions:

                                           −σk          1−σk
                        D
                        d nk = λn
                               c                 P
                                                 d nk                                                                (16)
                                      P d
                                        k Dnk Dnk
                             ecn =      P                                                                            (17)
                                          k Dnk
                                           "                         #
                                       1               X
                        X
                        dnk =               Dnk D
                                                d nk +   γkh Ynh Yd
                                                                  nh                                                 (18)
                                      Xnk                         h

                       Xd     d d −θk P
                        nik = Sik dnik
                                         θk
                                       nk Xnk
                                       d    d                                                                        (19)
                                      P
                                           n Xnik Xnik
                                                     d
                             Yc
                              ik =         P                                                                         (20)
                                              n Xnik
                                        θk
                                             d )−θk γkL                               −θk γkf              −θk γhk
                                                                      Y                         Y
                             S
                             d ik = zc
                                     ik    (cikLab                            (w
                                                                               d if )               (P
                                                                                                     d ih )          (21)
                                                                      f 6=L                     h
                                     "                                         #−    1
                                                                                    θk
                                          1 X           d −θk
                         P
                         d nk =                Xnik S
                                                    dik dnik                                                         (22)
                                         Xnk i



                                                                 10
                                    h                                                 i    1
                                                1−ρ             1−ρ                       1−ρ
                        cikLab
                         d     =      βikL w
                                           d iL     + βikH w
                                                           d iH                                                              (23)
                                    "                                          #1
                                                                                ρ
                                                                   ρ−1
                                     X
                          w
                          d if =                shikf cikLab
                                                       d                 Yc
                                                                          ik               for f ∈ {L, H}                    (24)
                                            k
                                    X
                          w
                          d if =                shikf Yc
                                                       ik                     for f ∈
                                                                                    / {L, H}                                 (25)
                                        k
                                     P
                                            f   V f i wf i w
                                                           d fi
                            ebi =       P                                                                                    (26)
                                                f V f i wf i

                                             β Y
where, in equations (24) and (25), shif k = P ifβk ik0 Y                            is the share of sector k in total revenues for
                                                                  k0   if k   ik0
factor f , and βif k is factor intensity described in equation (13) and also equals γkf for factors other
than labor.
       Knowing the values of variables Dnk , en , Xnk , Xnik and Vf i wf i in the baseline equilibrium as well
as parameters σk , θk , γhk and βf k , we can solve for all changes D
                                                                    d nk , λn , e
                                                                           c c    n , Pnk , Snk and w
                                                                                      d d           d f n driven
by a given change in productivity zc
                                   ik or trade costs dnik .
                                                     d
       We solve this system in three iterative steps. In a first step, taking income and factor prices as
given, we use equations (21), (22) and (23) to solve for prices. Then, in a second step, given the
change in prices from step 1, we use equations (16) to (20) to solve for demand, trade and production.
In a third step, we adjust for changes in factor prices and income using (24) to (26). We iterate these
three steps until convergence is achieved.

2.4       Implications for the skill premium
In this section, we illustrate how productivity growth and trade can have an impact on the returns of
some factors production if demand is non-homothetic and there is a systematic relationship between
preference parameters and factor intensities. Such a relationship is supported by the results presented
in Caron et al (2014) which finds, in particular, a positive correlation across sectors between skilled-
labor intensity and income elasticity.

2.4.1      Productivity growth and the skill premium

When skill intensity and income elasticity are correlated across industries, productivity (TFP) growth
has a positive effect on the skill premium through the composition of consumption. The intuition is
simple. As productivity increases, people become richer and consume more goods from income-elastic
industries which are, as we show, more intensive in skilled labor.17 This increases the demand for
skilled labor relative to less skilled labor and thus increases the relative wage of skilled workers. On
the contrary, with homothetic preferences, uniform productivity growth across countries is neutral in
terms of skill premium. To develop intuition, we now derive first order approximations of the response
of the skill premium to productivity growth. We show later on how these approximations compare
  17
    Assuming that the evolution of income is not driven by an accumulation of skills, which can of course mitigate the
increase in the skill premium.



                                                                       11
with estimates of changes in the skill premium from general equilibrium simulations. The complete
derivation of these approximations can be found in Appendix B.

Autarky without intermediate goods If countries are in autarky and intermediate goods are
ignored, all changes in production can be traced back to changes in domestic consumer demand.
Holding nominal GDP constant (normalization), homogeneous productivity increase zb leads, as a first
approximation, to a homogeneous change in prices P
                                                 d     b−1 . Using equations (16) and (26), we
                                                  nk ≈ z
obtain that the changes in demand, and therefore production, in country n and sector k are simply
given by the income elasticity ηnk : log D nk ≈ (ηnk − 1) log z
                                                              b. We can then obtain a simple expression
                                         d
                                                  wnH
for the elasticity of the skill premium,          wnL ,   to a TFP increase zb:

                                            wnH            1
                                            d                      X
                                     log              =       log zb   (shH      L
                                                                          nk − shnk ) ηnk                       (27)
                                            wnL           ρ̃n        k


where shH    P βHk Ynk
        nk ≡    β 0Y          nk0
                                    is the share of sector k in the total skill labor employment in country n (and
                    k0   Hk
shL
  nk refers to to the share of unskilled workers in sector k), and ηnk is the income elasticity in sector
k, country n. In this expression, the effect on the skill premium is deflated by an adjusted elasticity
of substitution ρ̃i = ρ − (ρ − 1)
                                           P     H    − shL
                                            k (shik       ik )βikH , which is very close to ρ for most countries (and
always smaller than ρ given the positive correlation between skill intensity and income elasticity).
      We can see that this term is positive if income elasticity ηnk is correlated with the demand for high
vs. low-skilled labor (the term in shH      L
                                     nk − shnk ) across sectors. In that case, growth in TFP generates
an increase in the skill premium.
      This first-order approximation neglects the feedback effect of the changes in the skill premium on
relative prices across products. When the skill premium increases, the relative price of skill-intensive
goods increases, decreasing the relative demand for these goods and thus the relative demand for
skilled workers. Our general equilibrium simulations indicate that that this feedback effect is small
and can be neglected in a first-order approximation. Note also that this equation provides a good
approximation of the skill premium increase even if labor is not the only factors of production – we
also consider capital, land and other natural resources in our simulations to confirm this. Finally, let
us also point out that this relationship would hold with income elasticities derived from any other
type of preferences as a first-order approximation: the structure imposed on the model only matters
for large changes and for the estimation of income elasticities.
      Input-output linkages and trade can also affect the relationship between income elasticity and the
demand for skills, and can be approximated as described just below.

With trade in final and intermediate goods: Under the assumption that the productivity increase
zb augments all factors of production in all countries, the change in price P
                                                                            d                        b−1
                                                                             nk still corresponds to z
when we neglect the feedback effect of wages on prices.18 Similarly, we obtain that S
                                                                                    d      bθk for each
                                                                                      ik ≈ z
                                                           M =                    Xnik
exporter i in industry k, which implies that trade shares πnik                    Xnk    remain constant. Combining
 18
      Holding world nominal GDP constant as our normalization.


                                                                12
equations (18), (19) and (20), we can now account for trade and international production chains. The
changes in production and demand satisfy:
                                      X                      XX
                                            M                              M
                          Yik Yc
                               ik =        πnik Dnk D
                                                    d nk +                πnik γkh Ynh Yd
                                                                                        nh                    (28)
                                       n                     h       n

              M γ
Coefficients πnik kh (direct requirement coefficients) reflect the value of inputs from industry k and
country i required for the production of one unit of output in sector h and country n. The matrix
contraining these coefficients is a standard modeling tool to account for input-output linkages (Miller
and Blair, 2009; Johnson, 2014). If we denote this matrix by Γ, the coefficients of the matrix (I −Γ)−1 ,
also called Leontief total requirement coefficients, can be then used to link changes in output to changes
in final demand (see appendix for additional details):

                                                   1 X tot
                                       Yc
                                        ik =             γ     Dnh D
                                                                   d nh                                       (29)
                                                  Yik n,h nikh

       tot is the value of inputs from i in sector k needed for each dollar of final good h consumed
where γnikh
in country n. Using this result and Yik =
                                                  P     tot
                                                   n,h γnikh Dnh ,       we can then express the difference in the
changes in wages between skilled and unskilled workers as function of the changes in final demand,
and therefore as a function of income elasticities in downstream sectors, following the same first-order
approximation as above:

               wiH        1 X                                       1 X
              d
        log          =            (shH − sh L
                                               ) ϕ dir
                                                        log D
                                                            d nh +          (shH − shL     indir
                                                                                     ik ) ϕnikh log Ynh
                                                                                                    d
               wiL       ρ̃i k,h,n ik       ik     nikh
                                                                   ρ̃i k,h,n ik
                            |                {z                  }           |               {z           }
                             Income effects in final demand                          IO linkage effects

                          1          X
                     =       log zb      (shH      L     tot
                                            ik − shik ) ϕnikh ηnh                                             (30)
                         ρ̃i        k,h,n


where ϕtot     tot
       nikh = γnikh Dnh /Yik denotes the share of production in country i sector k that is eventually
consumed as final good from sector h in country n. This generalizes equation (27) to account for
international trade and intermediate goods: a country’s skill premium will increase if a sector’s demand
for high vs. low-skilled labor (the term in shH      L
                                              nk − shnk ) is correlated with the average income elasticity
of all its downstream sectors, in all countries.

2.4.2    Trade cost reductions and the skill premium with non-homothetic preferences

How does a reduction in trade costs affect the skill premium? Standard models of trade such as
Heckscher-Ohlin model have focused on the supply side and ignored any role for the demand side in
explaining the changes in the skill premium. Here we discuss how the structure of preferences may
affect these results relative to a similar structure where we impose homothetic preferences.



                                                       13
   In a similar fashion as above for the productivity and the skill premium, we can provide a first-
order approximation of the effect of trade cost reductions dˆ on the skill premium (additional details
                                                                   ˆ 2 . The decomposition isolates
are provided in Appendix) by neglecting second-order terms in (log d)
the direct effect of changes in trade costs and the direct effect of changing consumption patterns from
remaining general equilibrium effects.
     Combining equations (25) for factor prices, (20) for production and (19) for bilateral trade, we
obtain:
                                                                "                                   #
                     wiH            1 X
                    d
                                                                                          ) log dˆ
                                                                         X
              log              ≈ −       (shH      L             X
                                            ik − shik ) θk (1 − πiik ) −
                                                                            X
                                                                           πnik       M
                                                                                (1 − πnnk                   (31)
                     wiL           ρ̃i k                                 n
                                                           |                      {z                    }
                                                               Direct trade patterns effects
                                      1 X                 X                −σ
                                                                               k      1−σk 
                                   +       (shH      L
                                              ik − shik )
                                                             X
                                                            πnik ϕnF k log λcn   P
                                                                                 d nk                       (32)
                                     ρ̃i k                n
                                                           |                 {z                 }
                                                               Income effects in final demand
                                        1 X                 X
                                   +         (shH      L
                                                ik − shik )
                                                                 X
                                                                πnik ϕnhk log Yd
                                                                               nh                           (33)
                                       ρ̃i k                n,h
                                                           |           {z         }
                                                           IO linkage effects
                                      1 X                 X      X
                                   +       (shH      L
                                              ik − shik )
                                                             X
                                                            πnik      M
                                                                    πnjk  (log S
                                                                               dik − log Sjk )
                                                                                         d                  (34)
                                     ρ̃i k                n       j
                                                           |                 {z                 }
                                                                Cost feedback effects

       X denotes the share of production from country i in sector k that is exported to country n
where πnik
                γhk Ynh                                                                                      X
and ϕnhk =       Xnk       is the share of production in country n that is purchased as inputs by sector h. πnik
     M are fitted export and import shares which are constructed based on consumption patterns
and πnik
derived from either homothetic or non-homothetic preferences.
     This decomposition, (31) through (34), can be used to illustrate several mechanisms through which
consumption patterns and trade costs affect the demand for skills. The first term captures the direct
incidence of trade costs on production, ignoring changes in consumption patterns and other general-
equilibrium effects, while the remaining terms capture indirect effects. The second term captures the
effect of changes in the composition of final demand caused by changes in income and prices. The
third term captures the effect of changes in intermediate demand through input-output linkages. The
fourth term captures changes in factor costs. As we will show, the quantification of all of these terms
depends on preferences being homothetic or non-homothetic.
     The first term, which reflects the most direct effect of trade costs on production, depends crucially
on export shares π X across countries and sectors. In particular, it reveals that trade cost reductions
will lead to a larger increase in the skill premium in countries in which the sectors which employ
the largest shares of skilled workers (high shH      L                                         X
                                              ik − shik ) have the highest export shares (1 − πiik ).
P      X           M ) is a term capturing import competition, indicating that the skill premium will be
             (1 − πnnk
    n πnik
negatively affected by the decrease in trade costs in a country that imports a large share of their


                                                           14
consumption of skill-intensive products.
         As we will illustrate, fitted export shares depend not only on the supply side (comparative advan-
tage) but also differ largely across specifications on the demand side. With non-homothetic preferences,
poor countries consume relatively less skill-intensive and income-elastic goods than other countries,
and thus have higher export shares for these goods. Conversely, they have relatively lower export
shares in income-inelastic and less skill-intensive goods. A consequence is that a reduction in trade
leads to proportionally larger increases in the production of skill-intensive goods relative to the ho-
mothetic case in poor countries. In rich countries, the opposite should hold.
         Another direct impact of trade cost reductions on the skill premium can potentially stem from
differences in tradability and trade elasticities across sectors. If skill-intensive sectors have higher
elasticity of trade to trade costs θk or higher export shares, they would expand relatively more with
a reduction in trade costs, and the demand for skills would increase with trade openness. Hence we
will later examine whether trade shares 1 − πiik or θk are correlated with skill intensity and income
elasticities (section 3.4).
         The remaining channels in the decomposition relate to different ways in which the model’s en-
dogenous variables react to the reduction in trade costs. The second channel identifies the role of
trade-induced income effects in final demand described in (32), leading to changes in consumption
patterns across industries. As a country and its neighbors open to trade, their income increases, λn
decreases, and consumption shifts towards income-elastic and skill-intensive goods. This mechanism
is the same as was highlighted in the first set of counterfactuals in which we increase productivity.
Obviously, this income effect is not present if we assume homothetic preferences. The term (32) also
captures a price effect, as trade affects the relative price of final goods.
         The third term in (33) captures the relationship between the skill premium and changes in the
demand for intermediate goods. Skill-intensive sectors tend to require skill-intensive inputs, so dif-
ferences in demand patterns caused by non-homothetic preferences can potentially magnify both the
direct effect and the final demand effect through input-output linkages.19
         Finally, the fourth “Cost feedback” term (34) reflects changes in the supplier terms Sjk and captures
general-equilibrium feedback on wages and other factor prices. This feedback mitigates the effect of
trade on the skill premium. For instance, a higher skill premium leads to relative higher costs in skill-
intensive industries, lower exports in these industries, and mitigation of the skill premium increase.


3         Estimation
We now discuss the data and the estimation of the key parameters in the model. The estimation here
closely follows Caron, Fally and Markusen (2014), although with a newer dataset and a number of
additional robustness checks.
    19
   One should note that we assume Cobb-Douglas production functions, which implies constant input-output require-
ment coefficients. Additional effects on the skill premium can be obtained by assuming strong complementarity between
manufacturing goods and services, as described in Cravino and Sotelo (2016).




                                                         15
3.1     Data
Our empirical analysis is mostly based on the Global Trade Analysis Project (GTAP) version 8 dataset
(Narayanan et al., 2012). This dataset contains consistent and harmonized production, consumption,
endowment, trade data and input-output tables for 57 sectors20 of the economy, 5 production factors,
and 109 countries in 2007. The set of sectors covers both manufacturing and services and the set of
countries covers a wide range of per-capita income levels. Demand systems are estimated over all avail-
able countries using final demand values based on the aggregation of private and public expenditures
in each sector.
    Factor usage data by sector are directly available in GTAP and cover capital, high-skilled and
low-skilled labor, land and other natural resources. In our counterfactual simulations, we use country-
specific labor shares to characterize our benchmark equilibrium, but our results remain essentially
identical when we use averages of labor shares instead, either across all countries or across relevant
subset of countries. These robustness checks are discussed in Section 4.3.21
    Finally, bilateral variables describing physical distance, common language, access to sea, colonial
link and contiguity, required to estimate gravity equations, are obtained from CEPII (www.cepii.fr).22
Dummies for regional trade agreement and common currency are from de Sousa (2012).
    Among other model parameters, all but one will be estimated. We do not estimate the elasticity
of substitution between skilled and unskilled labor, ρ, and instead calibrate ρ to 1.4 as estimated by
Katz and Murphy (1994). We examine alternative calibrations in Section 4.3 and show that the effect
                                                                                                               1
of productivity growth and trade costs reductions are approximately proportional to                            ρ.   Since most
estimates in the literature lie between 1 and 2, our results are robust to alternative calibrations.

3.2     Estimation strategy
The value of final demand in an industry is determined as in Equation (5) or equivalently Equation
                                                Dnk
(1) for individual expenditures xnk =           Ln .   In log, the model provides:


                                log xnk = −σk . log λn + log α2,k + (1 − σk ). log Pnk                                     (35)

where α2,k is a preference parameter which varies across industries only. In addition, final demand
should satisfy the budget constraint which determines λn : a higher income per capita is associated
with a smaller Lagrange multiplier λn .
   20
      Some sectors in GTAP are used primarily as intermediates and correspond to extremely low consumption shares of
final demand. 6 sectors for which less than 10% of output goes to final demand (coal, oil, gas, ferous metals, metals
n.e.c. and minerals n.e.c.) are assumed to be used exclusively as intermediates and are dropped from the final demand
estimations. We also drop “dwellings” from our analysis, as it is associated with no trade and large measurement errors
in consumption and factor intensities.
   21
      The results are also not sensitive to using either country-specific or average direct requirement coefficients to calibrate
the cost parameters γkhi (equation 9).
   22
      Distance between two countries is measured as the average distance between the 25 largest cities in each country
weighted by population. Similarly, internal distance within a country is measured as the weighted average of distance
across each combination of city pairs. See Mayer and Zignago (2011).




                                                               16
       If there were no trade costs, the price index Pnk would be the same across countries and could not
be distinguished from an industry fixed effect. If, in richer countries, consumption were larger in a
particular sector relative to other sectors, the estimated σ̂k would be larger for this sector. Since trade
is not costless, estimated income elasticities would be biased if we did not control for the price index
Pnk (to capture supply-side characteristics). As richer countries have a comparative advantage in skill-
intensive industries, the price index is relatively lower in these industries. Conversely, poor countries
have a comparative advantage in unskilled-labor-intensive industries and thus have a lower price index
in these industries relative to other industries. When the elasticity of substitution between industries
is larger than one, these differences in price indexes in turn affect the patterns of consumption. If we
were not controlling for Pnk , we would overestimate the income elasticity in skill-intensive sectors.
       We thus proceed in two steps. The main goal of the first step is to obtain a proxy for the
price index log Pnk . According to equilibrium condition (11), log Pnk depends linearly on log Φnk
which itself can be identified using gravity equations. Gravity equations by sector are derived from
equation (8). Specifying trade costs log dnik as a linear combination of trade proxies, we obtain our
first-step estimation equation:
                                             "                                                               #
                                                                        X
                           Xnik = exp F Xik + F Mnk −                         βvar,k T Cvar,ni +      εG
                                                                                                       nik                  (36)
                                                                        var

where the set of variables T Cvar,ni refers to trade costs proxies: log physical distance between countries
n and i, a border effect (dummy equal to one if n = i), dummies for common language, colonial links,
contiguity (equal to one if countries i and n share a common border), free-trade-agreements, common
currency and common legal origin (additional details are provided in Appendix). Following the model
structure and using our estimates, we can then construct :
                                                  X                   X                          
                                     Φ
                                     b nk =                 X ik −
                                                       exp Fd                 βbvar,k T Cvar,ni                             (37)
                                                   i                   var

Notice that, if country n is close to an exporter that has a comparative advantage in industry k, i.e.
an exporter associated with a large exporter fixed effect F Xik (large Sik ), our constructed Φ
                                                                                              b nk will be
relatively larger for this country reflecting a lower price index of goods from industry k in country n.
       In a second step, we estimate the final demand equation (35) using Φ
                                                                          b nk , which can be rewritten
as:
                                                                       (σk − 1)     b nk + εD
                                log xnk = −σk . log λn + α3,k +                 log Φ       nk                              (38)
                                                                          θk
where α3,k is an industry fixed effect and λn is the Lagrange multiplier associated with the budget
                                                                                 P
constraint which must be endogenously satisfied, such that                         k   xnk = en (using observed per capita
                                                                                              (σk −1)
income en ). While the coefficient for log Φ
                                           b nk helps identify the ratio
                                                                                                θk ,    the level of each term
is not identified. We therefore allow θk to vary across sectors but we impose its average to equal 4,
a standard calibration value in the trade literature (Simonovska and Waugh, 2014).23 We estimate
  23
       In our estimation, the coefficients for log Φ
                                                   b nk equal 0.4 on average. This implies that σk lies around 2 for most sectors.



                                                                17
equation (38) by constrained non-linear least squares.
    Using our estimates of σk , income elasticities can then be retrieved as:
                                                                P
                                                                   0 x̂nk 0
                                                ηbnk   = σ̂k . P k                                                     (39)
                                                                   k0   σ̂k0 x̂nk0

given that the weighted average of income elasticities must equal one (Engel aggregation).
    We describe our procedure in the appendix in more details, along with alternative specifications
to examine the robustness of our estimates. Firstly, an alternative specification disregards the bud-
get constraint in our estimation, i.e. estimates equation (38) without imposing the sum of fitted
expenditures to equal the sum of actual expenditures. Secondly, we instrument
                                                                        
                                                                                   log Φ
                                                                                       b nk by an alter-
                                                                                                           
                                                    b IV =
native measure based only on foreign markets, i.e.: Φ
                                                           P
                                                                    exp   F
                                                                          d X ik −
                                                                                   P
                                                                                         β
                                                                                         b
                                                                                           var,k T Cvar,ni
                                                      nk     i6 = n                  var
summing across i 6= n. This leaves out each country’s own exporter fixed effect Fd
                                                                                 X nk which may
be endogenously related to final expenditures xnk . Thirdly, we examine an alternative specification
approximating the log of the Lagrange multiplier by a linear function of the log of income per capita:
log λn ≈ −ν log en . This approach allows us to identify σd
                                                          k ν up to a constant term ν, but one can
see that this constant term drops out of equation (39): the implied income elasticities estimates are
scale invariant. Finally, we have also re-estimated (38) by calibrating θk = 4 across all sectors thereby
imposing an additional constraint on the coefficient of log Φ
                                                            b nk in equation (38).


3.3    Parameter estimates
Gravity      Table 1 presents the results of the gravity equation estimations (Equation 36). The first
column shows the average estimated coefficient across industries while the second column shows the
standard deviation of the coefficient estimate across industries. These standard deviations reflect the
variations of the coefficients across industries but do not reflect measurement errors: all coefficient
estimates are significantly different from zero for most industries. There is significant variation in
the distance and border effect coefficients across industries. As usually found in the gravity equation
literature, the coefficient for distance is on average close to minus one and the border effect coefficients
are large. Coefficients for political variables such as free trade agreements and currency unions are
also significant. These estimates imply an important role for geography in explaining relative prices.
Proximity to countries with a comparative advantage in certain industries leads to significantly lower
relative prices in these industries. These effects are captured in the Φ
                                                                       b nk terms, which vary greatly
across countries and sectors (the standard deviation of demeaned log Φ
                                                                     b nk is 1.22, taking the residual
of a regression of log Φ
                       b nk on country and sector fixed effects).


Preferences:       Table 2 describes our income elasticities estimates for the average-income country, as
well as differences in skill intensity across sectors. Estimates range from nearly zero for rice to 1.311
Note that the level of sigmas does not affect the computation of income elasticities, as described in equation (39). Note
that while CRIE preferences imply an explicit link between price and income elasticities, In Section 4.3 we examine the
robustness of our results by using Comin et al. (2015) preferences, which results in an estimated elasticity of substitution
of 0.76 across sectors.


                                                              18
for financial services, with a clear dominance of agricultural sectors at the low end and service sectors
at the high end. Half of the estimates are significantly different than unity at 95 %, with standard
errors between 0.05 and 0.2 for most sectors.24
       Comparing our estimation results with the same regression imposing homotheticity (i.e. impos-
ing σk = σ), we confirm the results from Caron, Fally and Markusen (2014): allowing for non-
homotheticity improves the R-squared (non-homotheticity reduces by 25.6% the variance left unex-
plained with a homothetic preference specification). The contribution of non-homotheticity to the fit of
demand patterns is statistically significant: the F-stats associated with imposing common σk ’s across
industries show that homotheticity is clearly rejected (F-stat equal to 12.15, all P-values < 0.001).25
       We also examine several alternative specifications as robustness checks. First, removing the budget
constraint as a constraint in our estimation leads to very similar results, with the new estimates of
Lagrange multipliers correlated at 99% with our baseline estimates. In other words, given the large
variations in per capita income, introducing error terms in the budget constraint constraint does not
affect our results. In all these regressions, Lagrange multipliers and per capita income are highly
correlated, hence once can obtain very similar results by approximating log λn by a linear function of
the log of per capita income. In an alternative specification, we instrument log Φ
                                                                                 b nk by an alternative
measure based only on foreign markets, taking the sum of exporter fixed effects across all other
countries but excluding its own market, but the estimated income elasticity estimates remain very
close, as shown in Figure A.1 in Appendix. Finally, imposing θk = 4 leads to estimates of income
elasticities that are highly correlated with our baseline estimates, as illustrated again in Figure A.1 in
Appendix.
       Aside from alternative estimations of preferences featuring Constant Relative Income Elastici-
ties (CRIE), we have also estimated preferences as in Comin, Lashkari and Mestieri (2016). These
preferences impose a common price elasticity σ across sectors while allowing for different income elas-
ticities of demand. Again, this specification leads to very similar results. We also refer to Caron et
al (2014) for a comparison between CRIE, LES (Stone Geary) and AIDS (Deaton and Muellbauer,
1980). While LES yields to much smaller differences in income elasticities across sectors, estimates
based on AIDS are fairly similar to CRIE (the rank correlation is higher than 85% between any two
of these specifications).

3.4      Empirical regularities
Correlation between income elasticity and skill intensity                      We now investigate the relationship
between income elasticities and factor intensities across sectors, as in Caron, Fally and Markusen
(2014). As we illustrated in the theory section, the correlation between skill intensity and income
elasticity plays a crucial role in determining the impact of productivity growth and trade on the
relative demand for skilled labor. Table 3 reports correlation coefficients between skill intensity and
  24
    Two sectors have standard deviations between 0.2 and 0.3: gas and wheat.
  25
    As in Caron et al (2014), the Akiake (AIC) and Bayesian (BIC) information criterions favor the specification allowing
for non-homotheticity.



                                                           19
income elasticity, or, in columns 2 and 4, the beta coefficients associated with each intensity parameter
in regressions of income elasticity on several factor intensities, as well as robust standard errors.26
Our measures of factor intensity correspond to the ratio of skilled labor, capital or natural resource
(including land) to total labor input. These factor intensities are computed including the factor
usage embedded in the intermediate sectors used in each sector’s production. The correlation is also
illustrated in Figure 1.
       We find that skill intensity is positively and significantly correlated with income elasticity. This
correlation is particularly large and higher than 50%, while income elasticity is only weakly correlated
with natural resources intensity and capital intensity once we control for skill intensity. Part of this
large correlation is explained by the composition of consumption into services vs. manufacturing
industries, with services being generally associated with a larger income elasticity. However, the
correlation remains above 50% even after excluding service industries.
       As described in appendix, we examine the robustness of our income elasticities estimates using
alternative specifications: imposing θk = 4, instrumenting log Φnk , using a reduced-form approxima-
tion, etc. In all these specifications, the correlation between the estimated income elasticity and skill
intensity remains very high, above 50%. Moreover, we find similar correlations if we estimate alterna-
tive (non-homothetic) preferences such as AIDS, LES or implicitly additive preferences as in Comin
et al (2016).

Correlation between income elasticity and other factor intensities                           It is interesting to note
that capital intensity is positively correlated with income elasticity, as found by Reimer and Hertel
(2010), but this correlation is not as large as for skill intensity (less than 10% in most specifications)
and not robust to controlling for skill intensity as shown in columns (2) and (4) of Table 3. In our
framework, this implies for instance that growth should not greatly affect the returns from capital
relative to wages. Income elasticity also tends to be negatively correlated with intensity in natural
resources, which supports Prebisch-Singer hypothesis and implies that a growth in income per capita
would lower the relative price of natural resources. However the correlation is small and not robust
to controlling for skill intensity (Table 3).

Correlation with trade shares              Another potential determinant of the incidence of trade costs on
the skill premium is the correlation between trade shares and skill intensity across sectors. A decrease
in trade costs leads to a increase in the relative price of traded products, and therefore a change in the
relative employment share of sectors, depending on the elasticity of substitution among sectors. Here
                                                                                                   X )
we examine the cross-sectoral correlations between skill intensity and average export shares (1 − πiik
(averaged across countries).
       Burstein and Vogel (2016) document that skill intensive sectors tend to be more traded, but
do not consider service sectors. In our data, we find that the correlation depends crucially on the
  26
    In Caron et al (2014), we find that robust standard errors are very close to bootstrap standard errors constructed by
resampling importers and sectors in all steps of the estimation in order to account for generated variable biases (income
elasticities are estimated rather than observed).


                                                           20
inclusion of service sectors. If service sectors are ignored, the correlation is positive at +30%. Once
we include services, however, the correlation is considerably reduced, weakly negative (-6%) and no
longer significantly different from zero. These patterns are illustrated in Figure 2.
         Similar patterns are observed for the correlation between export shares and income elasticities.
Looking across all sectors, income-elastic goods tend to be less traded (-27% correlation). Once we
exclude services, this correlation becomes significantly positive (+38%).


4         Quantitative implications for the skill premium
4.1        Productivity growth and the skill premium
As argued in Section 2.4, non-homothetic preferences may help explain why the skill premium has
been increasing for a large number of countries (see Goldberg and Pavcnik 2007 for empirical evidence
on the skill premium increase).
         When preferences are homothetic, an homogeneous increase in productivity in all countries should
neither affect the patterns of trade nor the relative demand for skilled labor. However, when preferences
are non-homothetic and when the income elasticity of demand is positively correlated with the skill
intensity of production, an increase in productivity makes consumers richer which in turn induces a
relative increase in consumption in skill-intensive industries (high-income elastic industries) and thus
raises the relative demand for skilled labor. This demand-driven explanation contrasts with previous
studies that have focused on the supply side.
         In this section, we use our general equilibrium model27 to quantitatively estimate the elasticity
of the skill premium to total factor productivity (TFP). We first simulate a 1% increase in TFP
in all countries and examine how it affects the skill premium in an open economy setting. This
counterfactual pinpoints the role of non-homothetic preferences since the same counterfactual would
keep the skill premium unchanged if preferences were homothetic. We also simulate productivity
increases corresponding to growth rates of per capita income in each country between 1990 and 2014.
Finally, we use the approximations provided in Section 2.4.1 to decompose the role of preferences,
intermediate goods and trade.
         Figure 3 displays the elasticity of the skill premium to TFP resulting from an exogenous 1%
TFP increase in all countries28 . Very similar elasticities are obtained by simulating a 10% increase.
Our simulations show that this elasticity is positive for all countries and often large, particularly for
developing countries. For instance, the elasticity of the skill premium to productivity is about 0.07
for China. The predicted elasticity is higher than 0.2 in a number of the least developed countries,
particularly those of South Asia and Africa. The elasticity for South American countries and other
middle income countries is generally in the 0.05 to 0.10 range, while the elasticity for most rich
countries is around or below 0.05.
    27
   The model is formulated in GAMS and solved by the non-linear PATH solver.
    28
   The elasticity is simply the result of dividing the simulated change in the skill premium by the exogenous change in
TFP, 0.01.



                                                          21
Role of trade and input-output linkages           We now use the approximations derived in the theory
section to identify the relative roles of trade and intermediates in explaining the results above. As
discussed in section 2.4.1, the main argument for the role of non-homothetic preferences does not
involve trade. It also applies to closed economies. To identify the role of trade, we compute closed-
economy approximations of the elasticity of the skill premium to productivity. We use our estimates
for income elasticities (ηnk ) as well as labor shares (shH        L
                                                          nk and shnk ) and input-output coefficients, in
the approximation described by equation (30), which accounts for input-output linkages.
   These closed-economy elasticity approximations are plotted on Figure 4 against the simulated
open-economy elasticity estimates. As can be seen, there is a very high correlation between the ap-
proximated skill-premium elasticity in closed economy and the simulated elasticities in open economy.
The coefficient of the fitted line yields a coefficient equal to 1.03 (s.e. 0.03) with an R-squared of 99%.
Besides production being mostly destined to local consumption, the difference between the closed-
economy and open-economy counterfactuals is small because countries tend to trade with countries
of similar per capita income, so that the change in the composition of consumption of their trading
partners is fairly similar to their own. We conclude that ignoring trade linkages when investigating
the role of income-driven shifts in consumption would not lead to substantial biases.
   We next investigate the importance of input-output linkages in determining the skill premium
estimates. Figure 4 shows that the skill premium elasticity approximations implied by the formula
in equation (27), which only takes the final demand for goods into account, also provides a good
approximation of the open-economy simulated elasticity. In this case, though, approximated elasticities
are consistently above the simulated elasticities, suggesting that ignoring input-output linkages would
lead to over-estimating the increase in skill premium somewhat.

Decomposition       Why is this effect on the skill premium larger for poor countries? As we have
shown in section 4, it depends on the income elasticity of demand and employment shares across
skills and sectors. CRIE preferences generate income elasticities of consumption which decrease with
income, which could explain why the effect on the skill premium may be smaller for richer countries:
income growth leads to less re-allocation of consumption across sectors.
   A simple decomposition shows that while this mechanism is at play, differences in employment
shares across skills and countries play a more important role. In developing countries, a larger share
of the low-skilled labor force produces income-inelastic goods while skilled workers produce income-
elastic goods. In rich countries, there are smaller differences in income elasticity between the goods
that skilled and less-skilled workers produce. This is illustrated in Figure 5: the predicted elasticity
of the skill premium to productivity also decreases with income if we replace employment shares by
their average across countries within each sector, but the difference across countries is slightly more
pronounced if instead we replace income elasticity by its average across countries within each sector
(i.e. such that all the variations across countries comes from differences in employment shares).




                                                    22
With actual growth in per capita GDP Finally, we examine the change in the skill premium
predicted by our mechanism if each country grew at historical rates. Figure 6 shows our estimates of
the change in the skill premium resulting from the simulation of growth rates from the Penn World
Table (version 9 “cgdpe”) between 1990 and 2014. Per capita GDP and simulated skill premium
increases are also reported in Table 4) in Appendix. The objective of the exercise is not to provide
predictions of future changes in the skill premium, nor quantify the share of observed changes which
the mechanism might have explained. Observed estimates of skill premium are likely caused by a
number of confounding and possibly interacting mechanisms. Rather, it aims to provide an estimate
of the potential magnitude of the effect which can simply be contrasted with observed values.
    Results vary considerably between countries. The predicted increase can be very large (above
10% for 18 countries) or negative (for only 3 countries). For China, our simulation leads to a 10.1%
increase in the skill premium. To contrast, Ge and Yang (2009) find that the skill premium increase
was 40% in China between 1992 and 2006.              29   Our simulation yield a 15.6% increase for India, to
be contrasted to an observed 11.9% increase over the 1987-2004 period (Azam, 2009). For Thailand,
our simulations lead to a 5% increase, to be contrasted to the 17.2% observed skill premium increase
from 1990 to 2004 (DiGropello and Sakellariou, 2010). Overall, the effect is largest in fast-growing
developing economies.
    In Latin America, the mechanism explains smaller but still significant shares of observed increases:
our simulations lead to a 6.2 % increase in Peru, contrasted to an observed increase of 23.9% from 1994
to 2000 (Mazumdar and Quispe-Agnoli, 2004); a 1.8% increase in Mexico, contrasted to an observed
12.5% increase (Verhoogen, 2008) from 1990 to 2001; and a 3.5% increase in Columbia to be contrasted
to an observed 26.4% skill premium increase between 1990 and 2000 (Gutierrez, 2009).
    Among developed countries, the predicted increase in skill premium driven by demand-side reallo-
cation is rather small but non-negligible: slightly less than 1% for instance for the US, contrasted to
an observed 3.1% skill premium increase (Parro, 2013); 1% in Great Britain, contrasted to an observed
2% increase for 1990-2005 (Parro, 2013). The low estimates resulting from the simulations generally
match the lower observed increases in the skill premium for the richest countries.
    Another observation which we can make is that despite large differences in skill premium estimates,
we find that the implied elasticities of the skill premium to productivity using actual income growth
are similar to what we obtain in the neutral productivity growth simulations. Indeed, most of the
variation in estimates stems from the high variation in the growth rates which countries experienced
during this time period, especially among developing countries. This suggests again that trade linkages
between countries are not major drivers of this demand-driven mechanism.

4.2    Trade liberalization and the skill premium
Our next set of counterfactual simulations examines the effect of a 1% reduction in trade costs, first
across all country pairs, then, in Section 4.3, country-by-country (to and from each country in turn).
 29
    The Gini coefficient in China has also sharply increased from less than 30 in the early 1990s to 42 in 2005 (World
Bank data).


                                                          23
In each case, we compare two specifications, one imposing homothetic preferences and one allowing
for non-homotheticity, using our baseline estimates.
   Figure 7 displays the percentage change in the skill premium caused by the 1% reduction in trade
costs. With homothetic preferences, the effect of trade on the skill premium tends to be negative for
developing countries and positive among the richest countries. This is in line with standard Stolper-
Samuelson predictions: trade leads to a decrease in the relative demand for skilled labor in countries
that are abundant in unskilled labor, and an increase in the skill premium in more skilled-labor
abundant countries.
   This effect is mitigated, and sometimes reversed, when we allow for non-homothetic preferences. As
can be seen in Figure 7, the significant correlation between the effect of trade on the skill premium and
a country’s per capita GDP largely disappears. To make things clearer, Figure 8 plots the difference in
the effect of trade on the skill premium between non-homothetic and homothetic preferences. While
the difference is largest for countries with low per capita income, it is positive for almost all countries:
trade cost reductions lead to a larger increase in the skill premium with non-homothetic preferences.

Decomposition:        We use equations (31) through (34) to examine the channels that explain these
systematic differences between homothetic and non-homothetic preferences.
   Figure 9(a) plots the “direct trade patterns effects” term of the decomposition, (31). This term
approximates the direct effect of a trade cost reduction on the skill premium, holding trade and
demand patterns constant (for each specification of preferences) and neglecting general-equilibrium
feedback effects caused by changes in factor costs. Figure 11(a) plots the difference between non-
homothetic and homothetic preferences. These differences are driven only by variations in trade shares
caused differences in demand patterns, as the supply-side parameters are held constant across both
preference specifications. With non-homothetic preferences, low income countries have a relatively
smaller demand for skill-intensive goods, and thus tend to export a larger share of these goods relative
to the homothetic preferences benchmark. As a result, a decrease in trade costs leads to a larger
expansion of skill-intensive sectors and therefore a larger increase in the relative demand for skilled
labor and the skill premium. The converse holds for rich countries, who end up facing a relatively
smaller demand for skill-intensive goods when they open up to trade. The difference between non-
homothetic and homothetic preferences is quite large and explains (on average) about half of the
overall simultated difference in skill premium changes for the poorest countries. While the effect on
high-income countries is much weaker, it does reveal that a homothetic model would slightly over-
estimate the impact of the skill premium on very open rich countries. We conclude that models
imposing homothetic preferences when describing trade shares would substantially over-estimate the
net factor content of trade, and therefore the effect of trade on the skill premium.
   As equation (31) suggests, the direct effect of trade costs may also be affected by a systematic
correlation between income elasticity, skill intensity and average tradability across sectors. In Section
3.4, however, we find that such a correlation is slightly negative but very weak once services are




                                                    24
included.30 In order to further test for the potential relevance of this correlation, we have re-evaluated
the direct effect using average export shares at the sector level. The difference between non-homothetic
and homothetic preferences in this case is very small. Most of the direct effect, thus, relies on variations
in country-specific export shares driven by differences in comparative advantage.
    Figure 9(b) plots the second “income effects in final demand” term of the decomposition and Figure
11(b) plots the difference between the two preference specifications. This term captures changes in
consumption patterns driven by changes in prices and income. With homothetic preferences, trade
only generates small changes in consumption patterns.31 However with non-homothetic preferences,
trade liberalization generates an increase in real income which, similar to productivity growth, leads
to a reallocation of consumption towards income-elastic goods which are also more skill intensive,
and leads to an increase in the skill premium. Contrasted to the direct impact of trade on the skill
premium, this channel is quantitatively strong. The effect of trade on income changes consumption
patterns in a way that explains a large part of the differences in the effect of trade across preference
specifications. As in the first set of counterfactual simulations, it is strongest for developing countries.
Note that this term only reflects the direct impact of changes in final demand, the effect of intermediate
demand being captured in the following term.
    Figure 10(a) illustrates the role of input-output linkages for each specification, while Figure 11(c)
plots the difference between the two specifications. Since trade-driven income growth leads to a larger
expansion in skill-intensive sectors with non-homothetic preferences, it also leads to a relatively larger
demand for skill-intensive intermediate goods. One can see in Figure 11(c) that the difference in the
specifications is not as large as what is explained by the first two decomposition terms (and about
half of the differential effect on final demand).
    Finally, as illustrated in the fourth term of our decomposition, general equilibrium effects captured
by the differences in Sik mitigate the direct effect of trade costs. As shown in Figure 10(b) this feedback
effect can be large for some countries, especially those for which the direct effect was large. However,
the difference between homothetic and non-homothetic preferences is small (as also illustrated in
Figure 11(d) – notice the scale on the Y axis): while general equilibrium feedbacks mitigate the
differences described with the previous decomposition terms, they are far from offsetting them.
    To summarize, a combination of the income-driven consumption composition effect (which drives
the second and third terms) and the substantially reduced Stolper-Samuelson effect (identified through
the first term) explains why, in our general equilibrium simulations, non-homothetic preferences imply
only a small depressing effect of trade on the skill premium in poor countries. For rich countries,
non-homothetic preferences play a smaller role, in part because the two effects coming from non-
homotheticities (direct and income effects) go in opposite directions. In their case, though, the income
effect generally dominates and the skill premium is slightly higher than with homothetic preferences.
   30
      Note that to be able to simulate general equilibrium effects on the skill premium, we must include all sectors in the
economy.
   31
      With lower price elasticities, as in Cravino and Sotelo (2016), we find higher effects on the skill premium, but the
effects remain larger with non-homothetic preferences, as documented in our robustness checks in Section 4.3.




                                                            25
4.3    Robustness
Elasticity of substitution between skilled and unskilled workers                    As made evident in the
analytical approximations provided in Section 2.4, the effects of productivity and trade are sensitive
to the elasticity of substitution ρ between skilled and unskilled labor. A higher ρ leads to smaller
effects. While this elasticity is difficult to estimate in practice, most estimates lie between 1.4 and 1.7
(Acemoglu 2007).
   Using our analytical approximations, it is fairly straightforward to predict the role of alternative
elasticities on the effect of productivity and trade. Relative to the Cobb-Douglas specification (ρ = 1),
the change in the skill premium is scaled by a ratio of 1 over ρ̃i = ρ − (ρ − 1)
                                                                                       P       H    − shL
                                                                                          k (shik       ik )βikH .
We find that this adjustment provides a very good approximation of actual simulations results with
higher elasticities as long as the changes are not too large. It can therefore be used to quickly identify
the sensitivity of results to ρ.
   For instance, for the trade counterfactual (reducing trade costs by 1%), we compare results with
ρ = 1.4 (as in our benchmark calibration) and ρ = 1.7, after multiplying the skill premium increase
by ρ̃i = ρ − (ρ − 1)
                       P    H    − shL
                       k (shik       ik )βikH . Elasticities of substitutions between 1.4 and 1.7 imply values
of ρ̃i between 1.3 and 1.6. As shown in Figure 12, there is virtually no difference between simulations
once we account for the ρ̃i adjustment. Also, the effect of growth and trade remains sizeable across
this range of elasticities.

Homogeneous trade elasticity θk = 4              Another parameter which may potentially affect our sim-
ulation results is θk . This parameter drives the response of trade flows to changes in trade costs. It
affects our price index estimates and thus the estimation of income elasticities, and may also affect
the results of the trade cost counterfactual. Our baseline simulations rely on sector-specific estimates
of θk which we recover from the estimation of preferences of equation (38). As documented in Caron
et al 2014, the income elasticity estimates are sensitive to this choice. Moreover, our estimated θk
are slightly correlated with income elasticity (11% correlation) but this correlation is not crucial for
our results. To check the robustness of results, a simple alternative is to assume that θk = 4 in all
sectors as in Simonovska and Waugh (2011), a calibrated value often borrowed by the international
trade literature, also in line with estimates by Costinot et al (2012), Donaldson (2012) among others.
In appendix, we show that this assumption leads to alternative estimates of income elasticities that
are highly correlated (at 86%) with our baseline estimates. As these are also highly correlated with
skill intensity, using these estimates in our simulations leads to similar results for the skill premium.
Figure A.3 in appendix replicates the productivity counterfactual and Figure A.4 replicates the trade
cost counterfactual with these alternative preference estimates.

Price elasticity and Comin et al (2016) implicitly-additive preferences The preferences as-
sumed in our benchmark specification are separable. Separability is a natural and common assumption
but an important disadvantage is that it imposes a strong link between price elasticities and income
elasticities in consumption. Comin et al (2016) and Matsuyama (2017) explore “implicitly-additive”


                                                        26
preferences that have the advantage of breaking the link between price and income elasticities. As a
robustness check, we estimate Comin et al (2016) preferences using our data and similar tools.
      This specification is described in equation (A.11) in Appendix. We impose a value θk = 4 for
this specification, and estimate the elasticity of substitution between sectors. Our estimated elasticity
of substitution is equal to 0.76, which is within the range of Comin et al (2016)’s own estimates
(0.8 and 0.6 with cross-section and panel data respectively). Using mean expenditure shares, implied
income elasticities are highly correlated with our benchmark income elasticities (CRIE) as described
in Figure A.5 (89.9% correlation) and are again highly correlated with skill intensity in production
(71.2% correlation).
      As argued by Cravino and Sotelo (2016), lower elasticity of substitution between sectors leads
to larger skill premium increases with both types of preferences, yet the difference between non-
homothetic and homothetic preferences remains large, if not larger with Comin et al (2016) implicitly-
additive specification. The results of our two main counterfactuals (1% productivity increase and 1%
trade costs decrease) are plotted in Figure A.6(a) and (b) and are qualitatively and quantitatively
similar to our benchmark specification.

Alternative measures of skill and unskilled labor intensity                 While the GTAP dataset provides
skilled and unskilled labor usage for all countries, part of this information is extrapolated from a subset
of European countries and 6 non-European countries (US, Canada, Australia, Japan, Taiwan and
South Korea).32 Also, skilled labor is defined on an occupational basis for a few of these countries (e.g.
the US). In our baseline analysis, we use country-specific shares of skilled labor (provided by GTAP)
βikL and βikH in equation 23 in order to solve for the counterfactual change in wages. Our results
are however not very sensitive to this choice. An alternative would be to use a cross-country average
of skilled labor and unskilled labor intensity (β̄kL and β̄kH ) in equation 23. As shown in Figure A.3
for the productivity counterfactual and Figure A.4 for the trade cost counterfactual, this specification
leads to similar results. The robustness of results is due to income elasticities being strongly correlated
with the country-specific measures of skill intensity of most countries, as documented in Caron et al
(2014).

Reducing trade costs one country at a time An alternative set of counterfactual simulations
is to reduce trade costs for each country, one at a time (to and from a given country). The effect
of trade costs reductions on the skill premium slightly differs from the main counterfactuals, but the
main point remains: non-homothetic and homothetic preferences yield very different changes in the
skill premium for the country for which we consider a trade cost reduction. With this set of counter-
factuals, we can derive a similar decomposition as in Equation (31-34), highlighting a direct effect of
trade costs on production patterns (taking demand and factor prices as given) as well as an income
effect and general-equilibrium feedback effects. We provide the details in Appendix and results are
provided in Figure A.7. In this graph, each point is a different counterfactual (one counterfactual
 32
      See: https://www.gtap.agecon.purdue.edu/resources/download/4183.pdf



                                                        27
separately for each country liberalizing trade) and we plot the effect on the skill premium for the cor-
responding country. Simulated changes in the skill premium are similar to the baseline counterfactual
for the country from and to which trade costs are reduced. Importantly, the results strongly differ
between homothetic and non-homothetic specifications, especially for developing countries where the
skill premium does not decrease as much as in the homothetic case.


5    Summary and conclusions
Growing income inequality is a defining feature of our time, and many reasons for the increasing
premium awarded to skilled workers have been identified and studied by the literature. We provide a
quantitative assessment of a simple yet overlooked mechanism: growth in income increasingly shifts
consumption patterns towards goods and services that require relatively more skilled labor in their
production. We assess the potential scope for this mechanism through a general-equilibrium framework
which relates consumption choices to the demand for skills. Our approach relies on cross-country
variations in income and consumption to identify the income elasticity of demand.
    Simulations suggest that factor-neutral productivity growth can indeed lead to substantial in-
creases in the skill premium, especially for developing countries which are rapidly transitioning out of
unskilled-labor intensive sectors such as agriculture and basic manufacturing. The predicted changes
in the skill premium caused by the changing composition of consumption represents a sizable share
of observed increases in many countries and is comparable in magnitude to other well-studied mech-
anisms such as skill-biased technological change in explaining why, despite accumulation of skills,
inequality has been increasing.
    We then show that income-driven changes in the composition of consumption can also be quan-
titatively important during an episode of trade liberalization – another commonly studied cause of
changes in the skill premium. Like productivity, trade raises incomes and increases the return to skill
labor, with, once again, a strong effect in the developing world. The relationship between income
and consumption patterns has further implications: relative to a homothetic preference benchmark in
which consumption shares across sectors are independent of income, accounting for non-homothetic
preferences reduce trade’s impact on the skill premium. The sector-level correlation between income
elasticity and skill intensity implies a country-level correlation between relative specialization in con-
sumption and relative specialization in production. This leads to a lower predicted net factor content
of trade and therefore a weaker link between trade and relative wages. In many developing countries,
this weakening of Stolper-Samuelson forces, combined with the effect of shifting consumption patterns,
completely cancel the decrease on the skill premium predicted by a standard homothetic-preference
model. In rich countries, both of these effects are weaker. Overall, our simulations suggest much
smaller differences in the impact of trade liberalization on the skill premium between rich and poor
countries.
    We do not claim this to be the main mechanism behind increasing wage disparities. It is likely
working alongside other forces, such as skill-biased technical change (Burstein and Vogel 2015) and


                                                   28
structural transformation (Cravino and Sotelo 2016), with which it is not incompatible. Future re-
search may want to integrate and contrast alternative mechanisms in a unified framework.
   Our results are contingent on the cross-country approach which we have taken. While the broad
cross-section of countries allows us to predict the range of per capita incomes in which the effect is
likely to be strong, we cannot directly test whether preferences are indeed identical across countries nor
constant in time. Our approach also does not allow us to make out-of-sample predictions regarding
the continuing evolution of income-driven consumption shifts in the richest countries. Instead, we
rely on a robust empirical fact (the correlation between income elasticity and skill intensity) and a
structural approach to illustrate the impact of trade and growth on the skill premium.


References
Anderson, James E. and Eric van Wincoop, “Gravity with Gravitas: A Solution to the Border
 Puzzle,” American Economic Review, 2003, 93(1), 170–192.

Autor, David H, David Dorn, and Gordon Hanson, “Untangling trade and technology: Evi-
 dence from local labour markets,” The Economic Journal, 2015, 125 (584), 621–646.

Autor, David H., Lawrence F. Katz, and Alan B. Krueger, “Computing Inequality: Have
 Computers Changed The Labor Market?,” The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 1998, 113(4),
 1169–1213.

Azam, Mehtabul, “India’s Increasing Skill Premium: Role of Demand and Supply,” 2009. IZA
 Discussion Paper No. 3968.

Buera, Francisco J and Joseph Kaboski, “The rise of the service economy,” The American
 Economic Review, 2012, 102 (6), 2540–2569.

Burstein, Ariel and Jonathan Vogel, “International trade, technology, and the skill premium,”
 Journal of Political Economy, 2017. forthcoming.

Bustos, Paula, “Trade liberalization, exports, and technology upgrading: Evidence on the impact
 of MERCOSUR on Argentinian firms,” The American economic review, 2011, 101 (1), 304–340.

Caliendo, Lorenzo and Fernando Parro, “Estimates of the Trade and Welfare Effects of NAFTA,”
 November 2012. NBER Working Papers 18508.

   and , “Estimates of the Trade and Welfare Effects of NAFTA,” The Review of Economic Studies,
  2014, 82(1), 1–44.

Card, David, Jörg Heining, and Patrick Kline, “Workplace Heterogeneity and the Rise of West
 German Wage Inequality,” The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 2013, 128(3).

Caron, Justin, Thibault Fally, and James R Markusen, “Skill premium and trade puzzles:
 A solution linking production and preferences,” 2012. NBER working paper 18131, also issued as
 CEPR discussion paper 8999, May 2012.

  ,  , and , “International trade puzzles: a solution linking production and preferences,” The
  Quarterly Journal of Economics, 2014, 129 (3), 1501–1552.


                                                   29
Comin, Diego A, Danial Lashkari, and Martı́ Mestieri, “Structural change with long-run
 income and price effects,” 2015. National Bureau of Economic Research w21595.

Costinot, Arnaud and Jonathan Vogel, “Matching and inequality in the world economy,” Journal
 of Political Economy, 2010, 118 (4), 747–786.

  , Dave Donaldson, and Ivana Komunjer, “What Goods Do Countries Trade? A Quantitative
  Exploration of Ricardo’s Ideas,” Review of Economics Studies, 2012, 79 (2), 581–608.

Cravino, Javier and Andrei A Levchenko, “The distributional consequences of large devalua-
 tions,” 2016. Working Paper, University of Michigan.

  and Sebastian Sotelo, “Trade Induced Structural Change and the Skill Premium,” 2016. Working
  Paper, University of Michigan.

de Sousa, Jose, “The currency union effect on trade is decreasing over time,” Economics Letters,
  2012, 117 (3), 917–920.

Dekle, Robert, Jonathan Eaton, and Samuel Kortum, “Unbalanced Trade,” American Eco-
 nomic Review, 2007, 97 (2), 351–355.

DiGropello, Emanuela and Chris Sakellariou, “Industry and skill wage premiums in east Asia,”
 2010. World Bank Policy Research Working Paper No. 5379.

Donaldson, Dave, “Railroads of the Raj: Estimating the Impact of Transportation Infrastructure,”
 American Economic Review, forthcoming, 2012.

Eaton, Jonathan and Samuel Kortum, “Technology, Geography, and Trade,” Econometrica,
 2002, 79(5), 1453–1498.

  , , and Francis Kramarz, “An Anatomy of International Trade: Evidence From French Firms,”
  Econometrica, 2011, 79(5), 1453–1498.

Faber, Benjamin, “Trade liberalization, the price of quality, and inequality: Evidence from Mexican
  store prices,” Technical Report, UC Berkeley Working Paper 2014.

   and Thibault Fally, “Firm heterogeneity in consumption baskets: Evidence from home and store
  scanner data,” Technical Report, National Bureau of Economic Research w23101, 2017.

Fajgelbaum, Pablo D and Amit K Khandelwal, “Measuring the unequal gains from trade,” The
  Quarterly Journal of Economics, 2016, 113(3), 1113–1180.

Fally, Thibault, “Structural gravity and fixed effects,” Journal of International Economics, 2015,
  97 (1), 76–85.

Feenstra, Robert C. and Gordon H. Hanson, “The Impact Of Outsourcing And High-Technology
  Capital On Wages: Estimates For The United States, 1979-1990,” The Quarterly Journal of Eco-
  nomics, 1999, 114(3), 907–940.

Feenstra, Robert C and John Romalis, “International Prices and Endogenous Quality,” Quarterly
  Journal of Economics, 2014, 129 (2), 477–527.

Fieler, Ana Cecilia, “Non-Homotheticity and Bilateral Trade: Evidence and a Quantitative Expla-
  nation,” Econometrica, 2011, 79(4), 1069–1101.


                                                30
  , Marcela Eslava, and Daniel Yi Xu, “Trade, Quality Upgrading, and Input Linkages: Theory
  and Evidence from Colombia,” 2016.

Flam, Harry and Elhanan Helpman, “Vertical product differentiation and North-South trade,”
  The American Economic Review, 1987, pp. 810–822.

Ge, Suqin and Dennis T Yang, “Accounting for rising wages in China,” 2009. Manuscript, Virginia
 Tech and Chinese University of Hong Kong.

Goldberg, Pinelopi Koujianou and Nina Pavcnik, “Distributional Effects of Globalization in
 Developing Countries,,” Journal of Economic Literature, 2007, 45(1), 39–82.

Gonzaga, Gustavo, Naércio Menezes Filho, and Cristina Terra, “Trade liberalization and the
 evolution of skill earnings differentials in Brazil,” Journal of International Economics, 2006, 68 (2),
 345–367.

Gutierrez, Catalina, “Trade and Technology: Decomposing the Rise of the Skill Premium,” 2009.
 IZA manuscript.

Hallak, Juan Carlos, “A Product-Quality View of the Linder Hypothesis,” The Review of Economics
 and Statistics, 2010, 92 (3), 453–466.

Hanoch, Giora, “Production and Demand Models with Direct or Indirect Implicit Additivity,”
 Econometrica, 1975, 43(3), 395–419.

He, Zheli and Feiran Zhang, “Trade and Real Wages of the Rich and Poor: Cross Country
 Evidence,” 2017. Columbia University working paper.

Helpman, Elhanan, Oleg Itskhoki, Marc-Andreas Muendler, and Stephen J Redding,
 “Trade and inequality: From theory to estimation,” The Review of Economic Studies, 2017, 84(1),
 357–405.

Hung-po, Sehun Kim Chao and Alan S. Manne, “Computation of Equilibria for Nonlinear
 Economies: Two Experimental Model,” Journal of Policy Modeling, 1982, 4(1), 23–43.

Johnson, Matthew and Michael P Keane, “A dynamic equilibrium model of the US wage struc-
  ture, 1968–1996,” Journal of Labor Economics, 2013, 31 (1), 1–49.

Johnson, Robert C, “Five facts about value-added exports and implications for macroeconomics
  and trade research,” The Journal of Economic Perspectives, 2014, 28 (2), 119–142.

Katz, Lawrence F and Kevin M Murphy, “Changes in relative wages, 1963–1987: supply and
 demand factors,” The quarterly journal of economics, 1992, 107 (1), 35–78.

Krugman, Paul R, “Technology, trade and factor prices,” Journal of international Economics, 2000,
 50 (1), 51–71.

Markusen, James R., “Explaining the Volume of Trade: An Eclectic Approach,” American Eco-
 nomic Review, 1986, 76, 1002–1011.

  , “Putting per-capita income back into trade theory,” Journal of International Economics, 2013, 90
  (2), 255–265.



                                                  31
Matsuyama, Kiminori, “A Ricardian Model with a Continuum of Goods under Non-Homothetic
 Preferences: Demand Complementarities, Income Distribution, and North-South Trade,” Journal
 of Political Economy, 2000, 108, 1093–2000.

  , “Engel’s Law in the Global Economy: Demand-Induced Patterns of Structural Change and Trade
  across Countries,” 2017. Working paper, March 2017.

Mayer, Thierry and Soledad Zignago, “Notes on CEPII’s distances measures: The GeoDist
 database,” Working Papers 2011-25, CEPII research center Dec 2011.

Mazumdar, Joy and Myriam Quispe-Agnoli, “Can capital-skill complementarity explain the
 rising skill premium in developing countries? Evidence from Peru,” 2004. Federal Reserve Bank of
 Atlanta working paper No 0411.

Miller, Ronald E and Peter D Blair, Input-output analysis: foundations and extensions, Cam-
 bridge University Press, 2009.

Narayanan, Badri, Angel Aguiar, and Robert McDougall, “Global Trade, Assistance, and
 Production: The GTAP 8 Data Base,” 2012.

Nigai, Sergey, “On measuring the welfare gains from trade under consumer heterogeneity,” Economic
 Journal, 2016, 216, 1193–1237.

Parro, Fernando, “Capital-skill complementarity and the skill premium in a quantitative model of
 trade,” American Economic Journal: Macroeconomics, 2013, 5 (2), 72–117.

Porto, Guido G, “Using survey data to assess the distributional effects of trade policy,” Journal of
 International Economics, 2006, 70 (1), 140–160.

Reimer, Jeffery J. and Thomas W. Hertel, “Nonhomothetic Preferences and International
 Trade,” Review of International Economics, 2010, 18, 408–425.

Robertson, Raymond, “Relative prices and wage inequality: evidence from Mexico,” Journal of
 International Economics, 2004, 64 (2), 387–409.

Silva, JMC Santos and Silvana Tenreyro, “The log of gravity,” The Review of Economics and
  statistics, 2006, 88 (4), 641–658.

Simonovska, Ina, “Income differences and prices of tradables: Insights from an online retailer,” The
  Review of Economic Studies, 2015, 82 (4), 1612–1656.

   and Michael E Waugh, “The elasticity of trade: Estimates and evidence,” Journal of interna-
  tional Economics, 2014, 92 (1), 34–50.

Verhoogen, Eric A., “Trade, Quality Upgrading, and Wage Inequality in the Mexican Manufactur-
 ing Sector,” The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 05 2008, 123 (2), 489–530.




                                                32
Tables and Figures


               Table 1: Coefficients from the gravity equation estimations
         Trade cost variable:                       Mean              Standard Deviation
                                                across sectors           across sectors
         Distance (log)                               -0.879                  0.636
         Contiguity                                   0.328                   0.460
         Common language                              0.407                   0.370
         Colonial link                                0.320                   0.534
         Both access to sea                           0.574                   0.610
         RTA                                          0.567                   0.589
         Common currency                              0.586                   1.034
         Common legal origin                          0.024                   0.264
         Border effect                                3.767                   2.128
         Exporter FE                                   Yes
         Importer FE                                   Yes
         Nb. of industries                              55
         Pseudo-R2 (incl. domestic)                   0.999
         Pseudo-R2 (excl. domestic)                   0.833
         Notes: Poisson regressions; dependent variable: trade flows. The coefficients above
         are estimated separately for each industry. Pseudo-R2 equal the square of the cor-
         relation coefficient between fitted and observed trade flows, including or excluding
         domestic flows.




                                                 33
                                Table 2: Estimated income elasticity by sectors
GTAP code       Sector name                                Skill intens.    Income elast.   Theta θk      Export share
pdr             Paddy rice                                    0.060             0.001         0.962            0.133
wol             Wool, silk-worm cocoons                       0.088             1.042         1.354            0.423
cb              Sugar cane, sugar beet                        0.090             0.633         2.226            0.020
vf              Vegetables, fruit, nuts                       0.094             0.538         14.04            0.231
ocr             Crops nec                                     0.114             0.783         1.998            0.376
wht             Wheat                                         0.116             0.863         3.360            0.217
frs             Forestry                                      0.117             0.323         0.962            0.185
osd             Oil seeds                                     0.118             0.183         0.962            0.276
fsh             Fishing                                       0.123             0.270         0.962            0.145
pcr             Processed rice                                0.129             0.137         0.962            0.151
oap             Animal products nec                           0.131             0.310         4.397            0.114
gro             Cereal grains nec                             0.134             0.212         1.555            0.146
rmk             Raw milk                                      0.151             0.466         0.962            0.004
ctl             Bovine cattle, sheep and goats, horses        0.163             0.186         1.988            0.085
pfb             Plant-based fibers                            0.166             1.277         4.390            0.289
lea             Leather products                              0.211             0.997         3.609            0.351
vol             Vegetable oils and fats                       0.216             0.424         2.239            0.359
sgr             Sugar                                         0.220             0.587         3.709            0.250
tex             Textiles                                      0.230             0.769         3.517            0.384
omt             Meat products nec                             0.232             1.075         3.837            0.116
cmt             Bovine meat products                          0.237             0.970         4.587            0.107
wap             Wearing apparel                               0.246             1.031         5.923            0.323
mil             Dairy products                                0.247             0.884         3.356            0.106
lum             Wood products                                 0.247             0.626         4.299            0.318
ofd             Food products nec                             0.267             0.706         2.077            0.225
omf             Manufactures nec                              0.278             1.074         2.941            0.246
nmm             Mineral products nec                          0.280             0.921         9.078            0.157
cns             Construction                                  0.293             0.972         3.820            0.012
otp             Transport nec                                 0.295             0.865         2.258            0.164
bt              Beverages and tobacco products                0.296             0.667         2.015            0.124
fmp             Metal products                                0.296             0.908         4.787            0.203
wtp             Water transport                               0.298             0.676         0.962            0.409
trd             Trade                                         0.307             1.052         2.347            0.063
pc              Petroleum, coal products                      0.312             0.831         9.748            0.169
atp             Air transport                                 0.312             0.901         1.652            0.455
ppp             Paper products, publishing                    0.339             0.879         1.913            0.159
mvh             Motor vehicles and parts                      0.340             1.167         6.150            0.323
otn             Transport equipment nec                       0.342             1.084         2.552            0.347
crp             Chemical, rubber, plastic products            0.355             0.992         11.82            0.393
ele             Electronic equipment                          0.357             1.083         2.264            0.352
ely             Electricity                                   0.371             0.773         2.164            0.054
ome             Machinery and equipment nec                   0.371             0.973         2.126            0.428
wtr             Water                                         0.377             0.829         0.962            0.029
ros             Recreational and other services               0.474             0.819         1.180            0.124
cmn             Communication                                 0.484             1.032         3.079            0.128
osg             Public Administration and services            0.502             1.060         2.905            0.037
obs             Business services nec                         0.503             1.192         2.149            0.176
isr             Insurance                                     0.532             1.073         1.631            0.208
ofi             Financial services nec                        0.545             1.311         3.159            0.094
Notes: Estimates of income elasticities and theta θk based on the benchmark specification; income elasticities evaluated
using average country expenditure shares; skill intensity based on total requirements; export share is the sector average
                           X
of the export share (1 − πiik ) across countries.




                                                           34
            Table 3: Correlation between income elasticity and skill intensity
Dependent variable:                                    Income elasticity
                                    (1)            (2)             (3)                (4)
                                All sectors    All sectors   Excl. services      Excl. services
Skill intensity                    0.583           0.546           0.613              0.660
                                 [0.108]∗∗       [0.114]∗∗       [0.126]∗∗          [0.154]∗∗
Capital intensity                                    0.177                           -0.033
                                                    [0.200]                          [0.274]
Natural resource Intensity                       -0.045∗                              0.138
                                                 [0.021]                             [0.255]
Observations (sectors)               55               55            43                 43
Notes: Dependent variable: income elasticity by sector evaluated using average expenditures; beta
coefficients; robust standard errors in brackets; ∗ significant at 5%; ∗∗ significant at 1%.




                                               35
           Table 4: Skill premium increase – Based on actual per capita GDP growth
      1990 pcgdp   2014 pcgdp   skill prem   elasticity         90 pcgdp   14 pcgdp   skill prem   elasticity
ALB         3796        10581       0.0902      0.0880    KWT      20055      63486       0.0439      0.0381
ARG         5931        20144       0.0514      0.0420    LAO       1297       5491       0.4368      0.3026
ARM         5669         8576       0.0425      0.1025    LKA       2825      10262       0.1424      0.1104
AUS        26759        42663       0.0109      0.0233    LTU      12066      28048       0.0319      0.0378
AUT        25245        47285       0.0161      0.0257    LUX      44423      94224       0.0214      0.0285
AZE         6967        15844       0.0490      0.0596    LVA      15274      23487       0.0169      0.0392
BEL        25817        43203       0.0137      0.0267    MAR       4008       7063       0.0471      0.0831
BGD         1379         2862       0.1519      0.2079    MDG        990       1227       0.0546      0.2544
BGR        11068        17359       0.0188      0.0418    MEX      10208      15745       0.0147      0.0338
BHR        15485        41325       0.0347      0.0354    MLT      13611      31432       0.0198      0.0236
BLR        12591        20177       0.0446      0.0946    MNG       3141      11321       0.0927      0.0723
BOL         2115         5988       0.0980      0.0942    MOZ        509       1118       0.1033      0.1315
BRA         5678        14742       0.0390      0.0408    MUS       9140      17777       0.0451      0.0678
BWA         6214        15891       0.0315      0.0335    MWI        947        949       0.0003      0.1350
CAN        30293        41936       0.0079      0.0243    MYS       8266      22949       0.0274      0.0268
CHE        38881        57855       0.0082      0.0206    NAM       4919      10783       0.0427      0.0545
CHL         7638        21404       0.0403      0.0391    NGA        844       5485       0.5824      0.3112
CHN         2363        12240       0.1013      0.0616    NLD      25657      46847       0.0165      0.0274
CIV         2263         3336       0.0614      0.1581    NOR      26405      63479       0.0221      0.0252
CMR         2348         2673       0.0185      0.1430    NPL       1000       2155       0.1639      0.2134
COL         6860        12516       0.0351      0.0583    NZL      20642      34499       0.0163      0.0317
CRI         7221        14099       0.0352      0.0525    OMN      10605      38075       0.0316      0.0247
CYP        21036        28437       0.0096      0.0318    PAK       2443       4641       0.1006      0.1568
CZE        21267        31567       0.0101      0.0255    PAN       6052      19437       0.0786      0.0674
DEU        25465        45652       0.0145      0.0248    PER       3395      10915       0.0624      0.0535
DNK        25970        44522       0.0151      0.0280    PHL       3452       6624       0.0562      0.0863
ECU         4993        10871       0.0670      0.0861    POL       7771      25028       0.0379      0.0324
EGY         2031         9893       0.1488      0.0939    PRT      14426      28306       0.0223      0.0332
ESP        17693        33568       0.0170      0.0265    PRY       3686       8258       0.0706      0.0875
EST        10860        28247       0.0347      0.0363    QAT      26221     142044       0.0405      0.0240
ETH          848         1308       0.0984      0.2266    ROU       6479      20636       0.0684      0.0590
FIN        24976        40027       0.0124      0.0262    RUS      18323      23918       0.0120      0.0450
FRA        24742        39029       0.0139      0.0305    SAU      18588      47441       0.0325      0.0347
GBR        24327        39960       0.0108      0.0218    SEN       1992       2228       0.0135      0.1203
GEO        10201         9332      -0.0147      0.1657    SGP      20767      71568       0.0197      0.0159
GHA         1886         3531       0.1532      0.2444    SLV       1022       7834       0.2010      0.0987
GRC        16336        25888       0.0184      0.0399    SVK      16171      28421       0.0146      0.0260
GTM         3610         6835       0.0551      0.0862    SVN      18940      30250       0.0108      0.0232
HKG        24870        51400       0.0111      0.0152    SWE      27115      44175       0.0136      0.0278
HND         2859         4397       0.0325      0.0754    THA       5015      13843       0.0500      0.0492
HRV        13836        21519       0.0337      0.0764    TUN       5208      10286       0.0567      0.0833
HUN        12149        25586       0.0202      0.0272    TUR       9887      19099       0.0418      0.0635
IDN         3217         9576       0.0977      0.0896    TWN      18852      43999       0.0228      0.0269
IND         1310         5168       0.1559      0.1135    TZA       1116       2189       0.1224      0.1815
IRL        18087        48283       0.0262      0.0267    UGA        801       1824       0.1097      0.1333
IRN         2976        15409       0.1219      0.0742    UKR      10218      10324       0.0006      0.0614
ISR        20942        33024       0.0126      0.0278    URY       8936      20244       0.0325      0.0397
ITA        25384        35531       0.0086      0.0256    USA      36620      51983       0.0078      0.0223
JPN        26714        35107       0.0058      0.0214    VEN       8438      14007       0.0180      0.0355
KAZ        10812        23340       0.0487      0.0633    VNM       1272       5310       0.1531      0.1071
KEN         2032         2757       0.0632      0.2071    ZAF       8211      12044       0.0133      0.0346
KGZ         6978         3350      -0.0922      0.1257    ZMB       1354       3672       0.1080      0.1082
KHM         1051         2983       0.1391      0.1334    ZWE       4148       1867      -0.0551      0.0690
KOR        12347        34701       0.0280      0.0271




                                                  36
                1.5
                                                                                                                                 ofi
                                                            pfb

                                                                                                  mvh                obs
Income elasticity of consumption
                                                                           omt      omf trd     otnele           osg       isr
                                         wol                                  wap                              cmn
                                                                       lea                         crpome
                          1

                                                                            cmt       cns
                                                                                    nmm atp
                                                wht                           mil      otp     ppp
                                                                                           p_c         wtr    ros
                                                ocr                       tex             oil         ely
                                                                                  ofd
                                                                                       wtp
                                                                                       b_t
                                         c_b                                  lum
                                                                        sgr
                                          v_f
    .5




                                                          rmk
                                                                       vol
                                                frs oap
                                                  fsh
                                                    gro    ctl
                                                osd
                                                   pcr

                                   pdr
                0




                                         .1                       .2                  .3                 .4     .5
                                                                                Skill intensity




                                   Figure 1: Income elasticity and skill intensity correlation.




                                                                                 37
                 .5
                                                                                            atp
                                                                                            oil
                                     wol                                                               ome
                                                                                          wtp


                 .4
                                                                      tex                           crp
                                            ocr
                                                                   vol
                                                                  lea                             otnele
       Average export shares
                                                                            wap
                                                                            lum                   mvh
                      .3

                                                       pfb
                                            osd
                                                                    sgr             omf
                                      v_f                                         ofd
                                            wht                                                                                       isr
           .2




                                            frs                                                                                 obs
                                                                                      otp p_c ppp
                                                                                    nmm
                                              pcr
                                               gro
                                             fsh
                               pdr                                                     b_t                               roscmn
                                               oap                    omt
                                                                       cmt
                                                                        mil
                 .1




                                                      ctl                                                                                   ofi
                                                                                           trd         ely
                                                                                                        wtr                     osg
                                     c_b                                               cns
                                                     rmk
                 0




                                     .1                      .2                       .3                   .4              .5
                                                                                Skill intensity

                                                                  All sectors                      Excluding services.
                                                                  Linear Fit                       Linear Fit




Figure 2: Correlation between average export shares and skill intensity across sectors.




                                                                                  38
                       NGA
                    LAO




.3
             MDG
                          GHA
       ETH
             NPL
              BGD   KEN
.2


              TZA
                                     GEO
                      CIV
                       PAK
                       CMR
     MWI MOZ
          UGA KHM
                      KGZ
                        SEN
                     ZMBINDNIC LKA
                     VNM
.1




                                       ARM
                                        SLVBLR
                           BOLIDN
                              EGY
                            PHLPRY GTMECU
                                    MAR   ALB
                                        TUN
                            MNG HND IRN MUS              HRV
             ZWE                                PANTUR
                                 CHN      COL KAZROU
                                   AZEUKRNAM
                                       PER
                                     THA CRI RUS
                                             ARG
                                               BGR
                                                BRA
                                                URY
                                                  CHL     LVA
                                                        LTU       GRC
                                                                KWT        ARE
                                              ZAF
                                              BWAVEN  SAU
                                                    MEX
                                                      POL   EST
                                                              BHR
                                                              PRTCYP
                                                                  NZL
                                            MYS        HUNSVKISR
                                                         TWN
                                                          CZE KOR  ESPFRA
                                                                    ITA  DNK
                                                                        SWE
                                                                       NLD
                                                                       IRL
                                                                        BEL
                                                                       FIN
                                                                      AUT    NOR LUX
                                                        OMN   MLT    DEU
                                                               SVN JPNCAN
                                                                      AUSUSA
                                                                        GBR QAT
                                                                          CHE
                                                                SGP
                                                                HKG
 0




         6                          8                     10                       12
                                Log per capita expenditures



     Figure 3: Simulated elasticity of the skill premium to TFP




                                        39
             .4     .3
     Approximations
            .2
             .1
             0




                         0               .1                 .2                .3          .4
                             Skill premium increase: full counterfactual (open economy)

                                  Skill premium increase: closed-economy approx.
                                  Skill premium increase: without IO linkages



Figure 4: Elasticity of the skill premium to TFP - Closed-economy approximations




                                                     40
                        .3
              Skill premium increase
                   .1   0      .2




                                       5   6          7           8         9         10        11    12
                                                          Log per capita expenditures

                                           Total effect      Using mean income elasticity by sector



Figure 5: Elasticity of the skill premium to TFP - Decomposition of the closed-economy approximation,
using average income elasticity




                                                                  41
                                                                         SLV




                        .2
                                                 NPL
                                                  BGD      IND
                                                         VNM GHA EGY
                                                     KHM         LKA
                                            TZA                          IRN
              Skill premium increase
                                           UGA           ZMB
                                          MOZ             PAKBOLIDNCHN
                                 .1
                                        ETH
                                                              MNG         ALB
                                                                                 PAN
                                                                  PRY ECU          ROU
                                                        KEN
                                                         CIV            PER
                                                 MDG           PHL   GTM TUN  ARG
                                                                    AZETHA
                                                                     MAR       KAZ
                                                                              MUS
                                                                        ARM BLR
                                                                           NAM      TUR
                                                                                  CHL           KWT        QAT
                                                                             CRI
                                                                           COL  BRA   POLHRV  BHR
                                                                   HND          URY SAU
                                                                              BWA
                                                                            MYS         OMNEST
                                                                                        LTU   KOR
                                                                                         TWN  PRT     IRL NOR LUX
                                                          CMR                  BGR MEXHUN    MLTSGP
                                                                                                  GRC
                                                            SEN               ZAFVEN
                                                                                  RUS     LVAISR
                                                                                          SVK
                                                                                          CZE   HKG
                                                                                               SVN
                                                                                                   ESP
                                                                                                  NZL
                                                                                                 CYP
                                                                                                   ITA
                                                                                                      NLD
                                                                                                     AUT
                                                                                                    DEU
                                                                                                     FRADNK
                                                                                                       BEL
                                                                                                       SWE
                                                                                                      FIN
                                                                                                     AUS
                                                                                                       GBR
                                                                                                         CHE
                                                                                                     CAN
                                                                                                   JPN  USA
                                       MWI                              UKR
                0




                                                                      GEO


                                             ZWE


                                                         KGZ
                        -.1




                                             6                      8                      10                   12
                                                                Log per capita expenditures



Figure 6: Predicted increase in the skill premium caused by historical per capita GDP growth (1990
to 2014)




                                                                          42
                                                                                             BHR
                                                                                             BHR                     LUX
                                       NPL              SEN                                        CYP               LUX
                                                                                                   CYP
           .1                                 LAO
                                        BGD                       ARM                           KWT
                                                                                                KWT           QAT
                                                                       BLR     RUS   OMN                      QAT
                                            KEN SEN PHL      AZE
                                                               GEO                   OMN
                                                                  ARMNAM       RUS
                                                                              VEN      HRV                USA
                                                 IND             UKR
                                                                   SLV MUS   PAN
                                                                              VEN                 GRC GBRGBR
                                                                                                          USAARE
                                                         LKA AZE IRNALB
                                                        EGY            BLR BGR
                                                                          BWAPANROU    HRV KOR
                                                                                            KOR
                                                                                             PRT             ARE
                                                                                                               NOR
                                                                          BWA          TWN MLT
                                   UGA         PAK MNG           UKR NAM
                                                                THA    MYS BGR ROU     TWN PRTSVN
                                                                                              SVN JPNFRA
                                                                                                      FRA
                                                      PHL            ALB MUS
                                                                       MYS                  ISR            DNK
                                                                                                         SWE
                                                                                                           DNK
                                                                THASLV ZAF                               SWE
Skill premium increase




                                      BGD LAO                                        HUN    ISR      DEU
                                                                                                    ITA
                                                                                                   ESP  FIN CHE
                    0




                                                               GEO                 POL    EST
                                                                                        LVA         ITA
                                                                                                   ESP
                                                                                                     DEUFIN CHE
                                                                                                       CAN
                               ETHMOZ            IND          MAR  TUN   ZAFBRA MEX  HUN  EST
                                                                                        SVK             NLD
                                                                                                      AUS
                                                        IDN
                                                                  IRN       BRA MEX     LVA
                                                                                   POL CZE
                                                                                        SVK
                                                                                        CZE
                                                                                                      AUT
                                                                                                        NLD
                                                                                                      AUT
                                             ZMB     MNG LKA
                                                        EGY             CRI
                                                                      COL URY        LTU        HKG      BEL
                                   ZWE       VNM                        CRI URY      LTU
                                                                                   SAU          HKG      BEL
                                            KENPAK
                                              KGZ       IDN CHN    TUNCOLARGKAZ                         IRL
                                                              MAR        ARG       SAU                  IRL
                                   UGA
                                    MDG KHM ZMB BOL                              TUR
                                                                            KAZCHL              SGP
                                     TZA                    CHN
                                                              GTM                TUR
                                                                               CHL              SGP
                                  MOZ               NIC PRY                                       NZL
                                                           HND
         -.1




                                   ZWE          CMRGHA    PRY GTM
                             MWI             VNM BOL       HND PER
                                                                  PER
                               ETH       KHM KGZ
                                                                 ECU
                                     TZA        CMRNIC
                                                                 ECU
                                    MDG        NGA
                                                   GHA
           -.2




                                              CIV
                             MWI

                                                 CIV
           -.3




                                                    NGA

                         5         6                7          8             9              10            11               12
                                                              Per Capita Income

                                              Homothetic preferences                    Non-homothetic pref.
                                              Linear Fit                                Linear Fit




       Figure 7: Percent change in the skill premium caused by a 1% trade cost reduction




                                                                  43
                                 .15
                                                            ETH



                Difference in skill premium increase
                                                                     MDG     NGA


                                           .1
                                                                            KEN
                                                           MWI
                                                                           LAO GHA
                                                                   NPL
                                                                 MOZ
                                                                  UGA
                                                                    TZA      KGZ
                                                                             VNM
                                                                               SEN
                                                                     BGD
                                                                  ZWE KHM        NIC
                                                                             PAK   EGY GEO
                         .05




                                                                             CMR    LKA
                                                                              IND PHL
                                                                            CIV BOL
                                                                                 MNG    MAR
                                                                            ZMB           IRN BLR
                                                                                        GTM
                                                                                           SLV
                                                                                       AZE TUN
                                                                                      HND ARM
                                                                                   IDN      ALBMUS
                                                                                          UKR
                                                                                     PRY ECU NAM
                                                                                      CHNTHA COL KAZ SAU  HRV
                                                                                          PER CRI
                                                                                               ARG  RUS
                                                                                                  PAN
                                                                                                BGR   TUROMN
                                                                                                     ROU
                                                                                               ZAF
                                                                                              MYS  VEN
                                                                                                 URY     LTU
                                                                                                        POL LVA         BEL
                                                                                                                        NLD
                                                                                                                      DEUGBR     LUX
                                                                                                 BRA
                                                                                                BWA  MEX TWN
                                                                                                    CHL  HUN EST SGP
                                                                                                           SVK
                                                                                                           CZE    HKG
                                                                                                                  K
                                                                                                                PRT
                                                                                                                 SVN
                                                                                                               ISR
                                                                                                               KOR  WT FRA
                                                                                                                       AUT
                                                                                                                     ITA
                                                                                                                     ESP
                                                                                                                          CHE
                                                                                                                        IRL
                                                                                                                          USA
                                                                                                                        SWE
                                                                                                                        FIN
                                                                                                               BHR
                                                                                                               MLT  GRC
                                                                                                                     JPN  DNKQAT
                                                                                                                             NOR
                                                                                                                       AUS
                                                                                                                       CAN
                                 0




                                                                                                                    NZL
                                                                                                                   CYP      ARE

                                                       5         6           7            8          9       10         11         12
                                                                                       Per Capita Income



Figure 8: Differential effect of a 1% trade cost reduction: Non-homothetic vs. homothetic preferences




                                                                                           44
Figure 9: Decomposition of the effect of trade cost reductions on the skill premium




                            .4
        Skill premium increase -- direct effect
                                                                                                                           BHR                  LUX
                                                                                                                           BHR                  LUX
                                        .2
                                                                   NPL                                                      CYP
                                                                   NPL                                                      CYP
                                                                            SEN
                                                                                            UKR
                                                                                            UKR            ROU
                                                                     LAO SEN                  SLV BLR BGR
                                                                                                     BWA
                                                                                                     BWA               MLT
                                                                                                                        PRT  GRC GBR USAARE
                                                                BGD LAO IND
                                                                          PAK                ARMNAM               HRV
                                                                                                          RUS POL HRV
                                                                                                        PAN        LVA KOR GRCFRADNK
                                                                                                                       MLT               QAT
                                                                                                                                         QAT
                                                                                                                                        ARE
                                                                BGD         IND PHL               MYS  BRA         LVA     HKGJPN
                                                                                                                     EST SVN   ITA FINDNK
                                                                                                    MUS PAN          EST            SWE
                          0




                                                             UGA       KEN
                                                                          PAK      EGY
                                                                                    LKA   GEO ALB   ZAF
                                                                                                    MUS
                                                                                                    ZAF         HUN
                                                                                                                  TWN
                                                                                                                LTU
                                                                                                                                DEU
                                                                                                                              ESPAUS
                                                                                                                                   IRL
                                                                                                                                 AUS
                                                                                 PHL CHN  GEO                      CZE
                                                                                                                   SVK ISR SGP    CAN
                                                                                                                                   IRL
                                                                                                                                  CAN
                                                                                                                                   NLD
                                                                                                                                 AUT   CHE
                                                         ETH ZWE        ZMB         LKA
                                                                                   IDN
                                                                                   EGY CHN THA         URY
                                                                                                         VEN                 NZL
                                                                                                                       ISR NZL            NOR
                                                                                                                                          NOR
                                                             UGA        ZMB          PRY      TUN ARG       MEX
                                                            MOZ                              PER
                                                                                              TUN
                                                             ZWE       KEN
                                                                          NGA BOL        MAR PER       KAZ TUR
                                                                                                       KAZ
                                                                                         MAR IRN                                    BEL
                                                            MOZTZA
                                                         ETH MDG KHM           BOL
                                                                               NIC               COL
                                                                                                 COL
                                                                           CMR                            CHL
                                                                                                          CHL              KWT
                                                               TZA KHM
                                                              MDG                       AZE                                KWT
                                                                               NIC      AZE                     OMN
            -.2




                                                       MWI                            HND
                                                                        VNMCMRGHA                               OMN
                                                       MWI               KGZ                                  SAU
                                                                        VNM                                   SAU
                                                                              GHA        GTMECU
                                                                                            ECU
                                                                                         GTM       CRI
                                                                                                   CRI
                                                                         CIV
                                                                                MNG
                                                                                MNG
                                                                         KGZ
                            -.4




                                                   5           6               7               8             9            10          11              12
                                                                                              Per Capita Income

                                                                           Homothetic preferences                    Non-homothetic pref.
                                                                           Linear Fit                                Linear Fit



                                                                   (a) First term: Direct trade patterns effect

                                                                                        MNG
                            .08




                                                                           LAO                             MUS
                                                                              VNM                        BLR
                                                                                                                           MLT
        Skill premium increase -- Income effects




                                                                               KGZ GHA            GEO                                BEL
                                          .06




                                                                         KHM                   AZE
                                                                   NPL       KEN    NIC       HND                   OMNMLT          BEL
                                                                                                        NAM
                                                                                                              SAU
                                                       MWI         MDG
                                                                           SEN MNGLKA GTMIRN        BWA
                                                                                                    MUS                    KWT
                                                         ETH   TZA                                BLR           OMN
                               .04




                                                                       VNM              MARTUN CRI URY
                                                                BGD                    AZE SLV                  LTU
                                                                                                                     EST
                                                             ZWE                    PRY
                                                                                     HND    ARM NAM BWA PAN              SVN
                                                            MOZ                                      BGR      SAUHRV
                                                                                                                   LVA ISR       AUT
                                                                                                                                   NLD
                                                                         NGA
                                                                   KHM CIV                             URY                 KWT           QAT
                                                                                                                                       CHE
                                                             UGA
                                                                        KGZ     PHL
                                                                                  EGY                             TWNEST SVN
                                                                                                                   SVK              SWEARE
                                                                                                                                   NLD
                                                                                                                                 AUT
                                                                         PAK              ECU      CRI          LTU     BHR CYP       DNK
                                                                              NIC         THA  ALB              HUN    ISR          SWECHE
                                                                                                                                         QAT
                                                                        ZMB                                                     DEU
                     .02




                                                                          CMRBOL PRY GTM             BGR
                                                                                                       KAZ        CZE
                                                                                                                   SVK
                                                                                                                  TWN      SGP     IRLDNKNOR
                                                                                        MAR IRN
                                                                                           UKR            CHL      LVA          DEU
                                                                                         GEO TUN          RUS HUN       BHR
                                                                      KEN
                                                                     LAO IND PHL   LKA
                                                                                  IDN                   PAN       CZE   PRT        FIN
                                                                                                                            CYP CAN ARE
                                                                                          THA COLARG          POL          SGP            NOR
                                                             ZWE                          ECU               MEX HRV KOR GRC
                                                                                                          CHL                      FIN
                                                                                                                              ESPCAN
                                                              NPL             BOL
                                                                                             SLV ARGVEN
                                                                                            ARM
                                                                                           UKR
                                                                                                            TUR
                                                                                                           ROUPOL       PRT NZL FRAIRL
                                                                                                                                    GBR
                                                                                  EGY                     RUS
                                                                                                            MEX        KOR NZLESP
                                                                                                                               ITA  GBR
                                                                             GHA IDN
                                                                           SEN                    MYS
                                                                                                COL    KAZ                    JPN
                                                                                                                             GRC FRA
                                                                                                                                 AUS
                                                       MWI   UGABGD
                                                               TZA                         PER MYS       VEN                   ITA
                                                                        ZMBIND                      ZAF ROU TUR               JPNAUS
                                                                          CMR
           0




                                                                         PAK
                                                                        CIV           CHN      ALB                                   USA
                                                                                                                                     USA        LUX
                                                              MDG                          PER      ZAF
                                                         ETHMOZ
                                                                                      CHN                                  HKG
                                                                                                              BRA              HKG
                                                                                                              BRA                               LUX
                            -.02




                                                   5           6               7               8             9            10          11              12
                                                                                              Per Capita Income

                                                                           Homothetic preferences                    Non-homothetic pref.
                                                                           Linear Fit                                Linear Fit



                                                           (b) Second term: Income effects in final demand




                                                                                                  45
Figure 10: Decomposition of the effect of trade costs on the skill premium




                     .05
                                                                                                        OMN
                                                        NPL
                                                                        SEN
                                                          KHM          MNG             ALB
                                                                       MNG             ALB      VEN
   Skill premium increase -- IO effects            MOZ
                                                     MDG               PHL         IRN
                                                                              AZE ARM
                                                                                                VENMEX
                                                                                                   MEX                      USA
                                                                                                                            USA
                                                     NPL           SEN    LKA              ZAF                     CYP
                                                                                                                  HKG
                                                                                                                   CYP
                                                                                                                    GRC
                                                       BGD               EGY        SLV
                                                                                   ARM     ZAF   RUS              HKG
                                                                                                                    GRC
                                                    UGA         KGZ
                                                              KEN               GEO
                                                                               GTM
                                                                               MAR
                                                                              AZE  IRN        KAZRUS
                                                                                               PAN                               NOR
                                                   MOZ                 PHL HNDMAR   SLV  MYSKAZ
                                                                                              BRA                             CHE
                                                                                                                              CHE
                                                                KGZ      EGY     THAT
                                                                                  UKR UNCOL   BRA             KOR
                                                                                                               PRT   JPN
                                                                                                                     ESP
                                                                                                         HRV PRT ESPCAN    GBR
                                                                                                                         CAN
                                                                                                                           GBR
                                                                          LKA GTM
                                                                         IDN    GEO
                                                                                  ECU     CRI PANROU
                                                                                         MYS                            FRA
                                                                                                                      ITA
                                                          KHM ZMBIND                                          ISR
                              0

                                                                            HND
                                                                                    TUNCOL         TUR HRV
                                                                                                  ROU    TWN  ISR     ITA
                                                                                                                        FRA ARE
                                                                                                                        AUS
                                              MWI             KEN                 UKR
                                                                                 THA               TUR   TWN
                                                    UGA        VNM
                                                               ZMB                ECU     CRIBGR CHL SAU
                                                                                             BGRCHL    HUN    MLT
                                                                                                                SVN          DNK
                                                                                                                                       LUX
                                                                                                                  SGP
                                                                                                                SVN          DNK       LUX
                                                ETH    BGD LAO IND
                                                      TZA
                                                     MDG            GHA IDN                            HUN
                                                                                                     SAU  SVK MLT
                                                                                                          SVK
                                                                                                          CZE     SGP DEU
                                                                                                                        AUTSWE
                                                                                                                          FIN
                                                                                                                        AUT
                                                                                                                       DEU SWE  QAT
                                                                                                          CZE              BEL
                                                                                                                          NLD
                                                                 PAK BOL     CHN           ARG       POL    EST            BEL
                                                                                                                          NLD
                                                    ZWE         CIV          CHN                     POL  LVA
                                                                                                            EST
                                                ETH
                                              MWI                   GHA                     BWA        LTULVA             IRL
                                                                                            BWA
                                                                                           MUS         LTU
                                                      TZA        PAK
                                                                  CMRBOL                   ARG                            IRL
                                                                     NIC               NAMMUS
                                                    ZWE
                                                            LAO                    PER
                                                               VNMCMR              PERNAM                         KWT
                                                                CIV
                                                                     NIC
           -.05




                                                                 NGA                                              KWT
                                                                 NGA                     BLR URY
                                                                                              URY
                                                                                         BLR                        NZL
                                                                                                                    NZL
                                                                           PRY

                                                                               PRY                             BHR
                                                                                                               BHR
                     -.1




                                          5         6               7            8             9              10            11               12
                                                                                Per Capita Income

                                                                Homothetic preferences                    Non-homothetic pref.
                                                                Linear Fit                                Linear Fit



                                                        (a) Third term: input-output linkage effects
                     .2




                                                                                                      SAU
                                                                                                        OMN
                                                                                                      SAU
                                                                                     GTM

                                                                                  GTM
                                                                                 AZE                    OMN
                                                                  VNM
                                                                   CIV
   Skill premium increase -- GE effects




                                                                                 AZE
                                                                   CIV
                                                                   KGZ
                                                                  VNM
                                                                         GHA          ECU
                                                                                      ECU
                                                                     CMR
                             .1




                                                                                            COL
                                                                                            COL
                                                                                   IRN
                                                                                   IRN         CHL
                                                                                               CHL
                                                                    GHA                       VEN
                                              MWI                                             VEN
                                                                 CMRNIC     HND                                               NOR
                                                              KEN           HND                                               NOR
                                              MWI MOZ                          MAR
                                                      TZA            BOL         THA        URY                              QAT
                                                                     NIC       MAR        ARG
                                                                                            KAZRUS          ISR   NZL   BEL  QAT
                                                ETHMOZTZA            BOL            TUN          MEX        ISR NZL
                                                    ZWE                PHL
                                                                         IDN
                                                                           PRY
                                                                         IDN                KAZ TUR    TWN
                                                ETH UGA       KEN        EGY        TUN BLR                           AUS
                                                                                                                       NLD
                                                                                                                       CAN
                                                    ZWE
                                                     MDG               PHL                MUS
                                                                                          MUS
                                                                                        MYS             SVK
                                                                                                        CZE        JPNAUS
                                                                                                                       CAN
                                                       BGD
                                                       BGD        IND     LKACHNGEO
                                                                         EGY       ARMNAM ZAFPAN                   ESPAUT
            0




                                                     MDG
                                                    UGA        ZMB                PER     ZAF
                                                                                            BRA      HUN
                                                                                                       HRV  KOR     DEU SWE ARE
                                                          KHM    PAK      LKA   GEO                           SVN ITAFRA
                                                                                                                       FIN CHE
                                                            LAO                                    POL                    USA
                                                     NPL KHMLAO SEN                   ALB            LTU ESTPRT GRC IRL  GBR
                                                                                                                        IRL
                                                                                                                          DNK
                                                                                                                            ARE
                                                                  SEN                     BWA           LVA
                                                                                                                 CYP
                                                                                  UKR
                                                                                  UKR      BGR                   CYP
                                                                                                                HKG
                                                                                    SLV    BGR  ROU             SGP
                                                                                                             BHR
                                                                                                             BHR
                                                                                                            MLT

                                                                    NGA
                                                                    NGA                                                                LUX
                     -.1




                                          5         6               7            8             9              10            11               12
                                                                                Per Capita Income

                                                                Homothetic preferences                    Non-homothetic pref.
                                                                Linear Fit                                Linear Fit



                                                              (b) Fourth term: cost feedback effects




                                                                                      46
Figure 11: Difference in effects of trade cost reductions on the skill premium - Non-homothetic vs.
homothetic preferences




                                                                                                                                                     .06
                                                                                                                                                                                                       GHA
                   .1




                                                                                                                                                                                                 LAO



                                                ETH                                                                                                                                        MDG
  Difference in skill premium increase




                                                                                                                                  Difference in skill premium increase
                                                                 CMR
                                                               KEN GHA                                                                                                                     NPL
                                                                                                                                                                                  ETH                            GEO
                                                                                                                                                                                 MWI
                                                                                                                                                                                              KEN




                                                                                                                                                             .04
                                                   UGA                                                                                                                                           SEN
                            .05




                                              MWI MOZ                                                                                                                                    TZA
                                                                                                                                                                                                    MNG
                                                                VNM NIC                                                                                                                MOZ     KGZ
                                                      MDG
                                                      ZWE              EGY
                                                       TZA          BOL
                                                                            MAR                                                                                                             KHMVNM NIC
                                                                                                                                                                                          BGD
                                                                  SEN       GTM                                                                                                                CIV
                                                                  IND PHL                                                                                                                                         SLVBLR
                                                                                                                                                                                                                      MUS
                                                                 PAK    LKA                                                                                                                               LKA
                                                         BGD                                                                                                                                       PAK           ARM
                                                        NPL KHM
                                                              LAO           GEO TUN                                                                                                                          AZE IRN
                                                                           AZE                                                                                                         UGA                    GTM
                                                                                                                                                                                                            HND    ALB
                                                                                                                                                                                                                  TUN
                                                                ZMB       CHNECU
                                                                              PERCOL                                                                                                   ZWE         CMR EGY MAR
                                                                                                                                                                                                  ZMB




                                                                                                                                           .02
                                                                 NGA IDNHND UKR
                                                                CIV                  ZAFVEN                                                                                                                                     HRV
                                                                               IRNNAM
                                                                                   BLR     TUR
                                                                                       BRAROUPOL              GBR
                                                                                                            FRA
                                                                                                           DEU USA
                                                                                   MYSBGR MEX HUN
                                                                                                CZE       ITASWE                                                                                                    NAM PAN SAU
           0




                                                                         PRY THASLV
                                                                               ARM
                                                                                 ALB ARG RUS
                                                                                       URY      SVKKOR
                                                                                                TWN  PRT
                                                                                                      SVN
                                                                                                       HKG
                                                                                                       SGPJPN
                                                                                                          ESPFIN
                                                                                                             NLD
                                                                                                               CHE
                                                                                                             BEL
                                                                                              LTU           AUT
                                                                     MNG             BWACHL    HRVEST GRC
                                                                                                 LVA
                                                                                                    ISR
                                                                                                            AUSDNKNOR
                                                                                                             IRL QAT
                                                                                                            CAN
                                                                                                                                                                                                        PHL
                                                                                                                                                                                                                ECU CRI
                                                                                                                                                                                                                        KAZ             KWT       ARE
                                                                                      KAZ
                                                                                     MUS
                                                                                       PAN SAU      BHR
                                                                                                    MLT  NZL                                                                                        IND    PRY                 OMN
                                                                                                                                                                                                                               LTULVAMLT               LUX
                                                                                                                      LUX                                                                             BOLIDN    UKR BWABGR         EST CYP IRL
                                                                                    CRI                                                                                                                        THA        RUS        BHR      BEL
                                                                                                                                                                                                                           ROU
                                                                                                                                                                                                                            TUR TWN      GRC       QAT
                                                                                                        CYP
                                                                                                       KWT                                                                                                          COL URY
                                                                                                                                                                                                                          CHL        ISR     AUT
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              NLD
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                DNK
                                                                                                                                                                                                                         VEN     SVK
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 CZE
                                                                                                                                                                                                                               HUN     SVN
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        SGP
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      PRT
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        HKG     CHENOR
                                                                                                                 ARE                                                                                        CHN PER           POL
                                                                                                                                                                                                                            MEX      KOR  ESP
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         NZL  SWE
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            DEU
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              FIN
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             FRA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               GBR
                                                                                              OMN                                                                                                                     ZAF
                                                                                                                                                                                                                      ARG
                                                                                                                                                                                                                     MYS                  JPNCAN
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           ITA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                        BRA                  AUSUSA




                                                                                                                                                     0
                   -.05




                                         5          6             7         8          9          10         11         12                                                   5         6           7            8          9           10     11         12
                                                                         Per Capita Income                                                                                                                   Per Capita Income


                                             (a) First term: Difference in direct effect                                                                                     (b) Second term: Difference in income effect

                                                        MDG                                                                                                                                        NGA                                         ARE
                   .03




                                                                VNM
                                                                                                                                                                       .01                                             CRI
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      LUX
                                                            KHM                                                                                                                                          MNG             KAZ
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 SAUKWT
  Difference in skill premium increase




                                                                                                                                  Difference in skill premium increase


                                                         BGD                                                                                                                                                                     ISR CYP
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      NZL
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              QAT
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         AUS
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         CAN NOR
                                                                                                                                                                                                             IRN MUSCHL          BHR
                                                                                                                                                                                                                    PAN
                                                                                                                                                                                                                   BWARUS           SGP   IRL
                                                               LAO                                                                                                                                      CHN                  TWN
                                                                                                                                                                                                                             SVK KOR
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 MLT   JPN
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       ESP
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      GRC BEL
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         AUTCHE
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        DEUDNK
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          NLD
                                                                                                                                                                                              ZMB
                                                                                                                                                                                               PAK
                                                                                                                                                                                                IND    PRY THA
                                                                                                                                                                                                             ARMBLR
                                                                                                                                                                                                                 MYSBRAMEXPOLCZE
                                                                                                                                                                                                                           HUN EST  HKGITA GBR
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         FRAUSA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          SWE
                                                                                                                                                             0




                                                                 CIV                                                                                                                                                URY            SVN
                            .02




                                                                                                                                                                                                             PER  ARG  ROU
                                                                                                                                                                                                                        TURLTU
                                                                                                                                                                                                                            HRV
                                                                                                                                                                                                                              LVA PRT     FIN
                                                                                                                                                                                      NPL
                                                                                                                                                                                       BGD                  UKR NAM
                                                                                                                                                                                                              SLV
                                                                                                                                                                                                               ALB BGR
                                              MWI    NPL                                                                                                                                                          ZAF
                                                                                                                                                                                                                COL
                                                                                                                                                                                                     IDN
                                                                                                                                                                                            LAO                      VEN
                                                      TZA
                                                    UGA
                                                                                                                                                                                                SEN     HND
                                                    MOZ        KENSEN                                                                                                                 MDG
                                                                      PHL
                                                                    NIC                                                                                                              ZWE  KHM
                                                     ZWE                                                                                                                          ETH TZA     CIV PHL         TUN
                                                                                                                                                -.01




                                                                        LKA                                                                                                                               GEO
                                                                                                                                                                                                            ECU
                                                                   GHA IDN                                                                                                                           EGY
                                                                                                                                                                                                      LKAAZE
                                                ETH              PAKBOL
                                                                  IND                                                                                                                UGA
                                                                                    ARG
            .01




                                                                 CMR EGY  HND
                                                                         PRY
                                                                             GEO
                                                                             THA
                                                                               IRN BLR
                                                                                    MUS                                                                                                           BOL     MAR
                                                                ZMB           UKR CRI
                                                                           AZEECU                     KWT
                                                                            GTMSLV                                                                                               MWI
                                                                KGZ            ARM MYSPAN SAU
                                                                                  NAM                                                                                                  MOZ
                                                                                                                                    -.02




                                                                                TUN
                                                                                  COL                                LUX
                                                                            MAR ALB URY       HRV           IRL
                                                                     MNG CHN         BGR
                                                                                      BRA
                                                                                      KAZ
                                                                                    ZAF RUS
                                                                                          TUR
                                                                                         ROU       BHR      NLD                                                                                                 GTM
                                                                                       VEN   LTU
                                                                                            POL
                                                                                             HUN EST
                                                                                                LVAMLTHKG
                                                                                                      SGP   BEL
                                                                                                        NZLFRACHE
                                                                                                             GBR
                                                                               PER BWA  CHL
                                                                                          MEX           GRC
                                                                                                         ESP  USA
                                                                                               SVKISR
                                                                                               CZE
                                                                                               TWN  PRT
                                                                                                     SVN
                                                                                                       CYPDEU
                                                                                                           AUT
                                                                                                            SWE
                                                                                                           CAN
                                                                                                         ITA  DNK
                                                                                                   KOR JPN  FIN
                                                                                                           AUS ARE
                                                                                                                QAT                                                                               VNM NIC
                   0




                                                                                             OMN                 NOR
                                                                                                                                                     -.03




                                                                  NGA

                                         5          6             7         8          9          10         11         12                                                   5         6           7            8          9           10     11         12
                                                                         Per Capita Income                                                                                                                   Per Capita Income


(c) Third term: Difference in input-output linkages effects                                                                                         (d) Fourth term: Difference in cost feedback effects




                                                                                                                             47
                  .3               .2
elasticity of substitution rho=1.7
      -.1        0-.2
                  -.3      .1




                                        -.3   -.2    -.1             0             .1    .2   .3
                                                    elasticity of substitution rho=1.4


  Figure 12: Comparing skill premium increases times ρ̃i , for ρ = 1.4 and 1.7




                                                               48
Appendix – For online publication
A) Baseline and counterfactual equilibria
From the demand equation (5):

                                   Dnk = Ln (λn )−σk α2,k (Pnk )1−σk

It is easy to obtain the counterfactual change in demand as a function of the change in prices and
Lagrange multiplier, which yields equation (16) in the main text:

                                                      −σk             1−σk
                                          D
                                          d nk = λn
                                                 c            P
                                                              d nk


The change in the Lagrange multiplier is such that total expenditures equal income (equation 6). This
yields equation (26); the change in total expenditures also equals the change in income:
                                                   P d
                                                    k Dnk Dnk
                                           ecn =    P
                                                          k   Dnk

Total demand Xnk for goods k in country n is the sum of the demand for final consumption Dnk and
intermediate use (equation 7). This also holds in the counterfactual equilibrium, which yields:
                                                                X
                                Xnk X
                                    dnk = Dnk Dnk +
                                              d                        γkh Ynh Yd
                                                                                nh
                                                                  h

which can then be rewritten as in equation (18).
   Next, using gravity equation (8) and (9), we directly obtain equation (19):

                                                          −θk           θk
                                    Xd
                                     nik = Sik dnik
                                           d d                   P
                                                                 d nk        X
                                                                             dnk


and equation (21):

                                θk
                                     d )−θk γkL                       −θk γkf                  −θk γhk
                                                    Y                           Y
                      S
                      dik = zc
                             ik    (cikLab                    (w
                                                               d if )                  (P
                                                                                        d ih )
                                                    f 6=L                          h


For the change in labor costs, we have:

                       c1−ρ    d 1−ρ = µikL w
                        ikLab cikLab        d iL
                                                 1−ρ 1−ρ
                                                    wiL + µikH w
                                                               d iH
                                                                    1−ρ 1−ρ
                                                                       wiH

Hence:
                                d 1−ρ = βikL w
                               cikLab        d iL
                                                  1−ρ
                                                      + βikH w
                                                             d iH
                                                                  1−ρ


which gives equation (23).




                                                      1
   In turn, for price indexes, we obtain from equation (10):

                                                                        d −θk (d )−θk
                                                         X
                                         Φ
                                         d nk Φnk =            S
                                                               dik Sik (dnik )  nik
                                                          i

Hence:                                        P d         d −θk (d )−θk
                       −θk                     i Sik Sik (dnik )  nik                                              −θk
                                                                                              X
                                                                                                    M d d
                  P
                  d nk     =Φ
                            d nk =                                                        =        πnik Sik dnik         (A.1)
                                                                Φnk                           i

which yields equation (22) in the text (π M are import shares).
   Given the change in trade flows, equation (20) then follows from the equality between production
and total outward trade for country i sector k:
                                                     P
                                                       n Xnik Xnik
                                                                  d                X
                                                                                        X d
                                             Yc
                                              ik =       P                     =       πnik Xnik
                                                              n Xnik               n

       X refers to export shares.
where πnik
   We can now examine the changes in income and factor prices. From
                                                                       X
                                                       V f i wf i =             γkf Yik
                                                                           k

and:
                                                                       X
                                                 V f i wf i w
                                                            d fi =              γkf Yik Yc
                                                                                         ik
                                                                           k

we obtain for factors other than labor:
                                                                 X
                                                       w
                                                       d fi =              shif k Yc
                                                                                   ik
                                                                  k

                γ Y
where shif k = P kfγ ikY        is the share of factor f used in sector k.
                  k   kf   ik
   Finally, for labor, we have (equation 13):

                                                     βikl = µkl wil1−ρ cρ−1
                                                                        ikLab


and thus:
                                                     βd     cil 1−ρ cikLab
                                                      ikl = w        d ρ−1

For each type of labor f ∈ {L, H}, labor market clearing imposes:
                                                                  X
                                                     Vif wif =             βikf γkL Yik
                                                                   k

and thus:
                                                                                          1−ρ
                                                                                               d ρ−1 Yc
                                         X                         X
                                w
                                d if =        shikf βd
                                                     ikl Yik =
                                                         c                     shikf w
                                                                                     d if     cikLab  ik
                                         k                             k



                                                                      2
                    βikf γkL Yik
where shikf =         Vif wif      is the share of labor type f employed in sector k. Solving for wd
                                                                                                   ikf as a

function of cikLab
             d and Yc
                    ik , we obtain equation (24):

                                                          "                                      #1
                                                                                                  ρ
                                                                                     ρ−1
                                                              X
                                                 w
                                                 d fi =               shikf cikLab
                                                                             d             Yc
                                                                                            ik
                                                              k

This equation can also be combined with the change in labor costs cikLab
                                                                   d , to yield:
                                                                  h                                       i−1
                                       ρ                                 1−ρ             1−ρ
                                            X
                                   w
                                   d fi =            shikf Yc
                                                            ik βikL w
                                                                    d iL     + βikH w
                                                                                    d iH
                                             k


B) Implications for the skill premium
First, we examine how the skill premium depends on changes in production patterns. A first-order
approximation in log, for each f ∈ {L, H}, yields:

             log cikLab
                  d     = βikL log w
                                   d iL + βikH log w
                                                   d iH
                                             X                                 X
              ρ log w
                    d if = (ρ − 1)                    shikf log cikLab
                                                                 d +                 shikf log Yc
                                                                                                ik
                                                 k                              k
                                             X                                                                X
                            = (ρ − 1)                 shikf [βikL log w
                                                                      d iL + βikH log w
                                                                                      d iH ] +                      shikf log Yc
                                                                                                                               ik
                                                 k                                                             k

Taking the difference between high- and low-skilled workers, we get the change in the skill premium:

             w iH
                                    X                                                                         X
                                         (shH     L
                                                                                                                   (shH     L
             d
     ρ log           = (ρ−1)                ik −shik ) [βikL log w iL + βikH log w iH ] +                             ik −shik ) log Yik
                                                                 d               d                                                   c
             w
             d iL                    k                                                                        k
                                                                                             w
                                                                                                     
                                                                                               iH
                                    X                                                                     X
                                         (shH     L
                                            ik −shik ) log w                                                  (shH     L
                                                                                             d
                     = (ρ−1)                                 iL + βikH log                        +              ik −shik ) log Yik
                                                           d                                                                    c
                                     k
                                                                                             w
                                                                                             d iL         k
                                    X                                      w iH
                                                                                  X
                                         (shH     L
                                            ik −shik )βikH
                                                                           d
                     = (ρ−1)                                           log      +   (shikH −shikL ) log Yc
                                                                                                         ik
                                     k
                                                                           w
                                                                           d iL   k

Hence:
                                                     w iH    1 X H
                                                                  (shik −shL
                                                     d
                                            log           =                ik ) log Yik
                                                                                    c                                                      (A.2)
                                                     w
                                                     d iL   ρ̃i k
                                   H    L
                              k (shik−shik )βikH .
                           P
where ρ̃i = ρ−(ρ−1)                                        This relationship between the skill premium and production
can then be used in each counterfactual to link the changes in production patterns to changes in the
skill premium.



First counterfactuals: productivity growth First, without intermediate goods and trade, P nk ≈
                                                                                        d
zb−1 as a first approximation. Holding nominal income constant and using equation (16), we get:

                                          log D nk = −σk log λn + (σk − 1) log z
                                              d              c                 b



                                                                          3
Given the constraint on total expenditures provided by (26), we need:

                                                                       Dnk (−σk log λcn + (σk − 1) log zb)
                                    P                          P
                                     k      Dnk log D
                                                    d nk           k
                    0 = log ecn ≈           P            =                       P
                                             k Dnk                                 k Dnk


Solving for log λcn yields:
                                                                   − 1)Dnk
                                                           P
                                                             k (σk
                                              log λcn =        P           log zb
                                                                 k k Dnk
                                                                  σ

Re-incorporating the solution for log λcn into the change in demand, we obtain the first-order approx-
imation provided in the text:
                                                   log D nk = (ηnk − 1) log z
                                                       d                    b
           P
      σ           Dnk0
ηnk = Pk       k0
              σk0 Dnk0
                         is the income elasticity of demand in sector k, country n.
         k0
   Using equation (A.2) above, we can then obtain a simple expression for the response of the skill
           wnH
premium    wnL     to a TFP increase zb:

                                            wd
                                             nH    1          X
                                     log        =      log zb   (shH      L
                                                                   nk − shnk ) ηnk                                 (A.3)
                                            wd
                                             nL   ρ̃ i        k



   Next, with trade in final and intermediate goods. Under the assumption that the productivity
increase zb augments factors of production, the change in price P
                                                                d                         b−1 when we
                                                                  nk still corresponds to z
neglect the feedback effect of wages on prices. One can check that P
                                                                   d      b−1 and S
                                                                     ik = z
                                                                                  d     bθk are the
                                                                                   ik = z
solutions to the following system of equations:

                                    d /zb)−θk γkL                             b)−θk γkf                  −θk γhk
                                                               Y                             Y
                            S
                            dik = (cikLab                              (w
                                                                        d if /z                   (P
                                                                                                   dih )
                                                               f 6=L                          h
                                        "                                     #−    1
                                                                                   θk
                                             1 X            d −θk
                            P
                            d nk =                Xnik S
                                                       d ik dnik
                                            Xnk i

Hence relative prices and import shares remain constant (as a first-order approximation).
   Equation 19 yields:
                                                                   θk
                                                nik = Sik Pnk
                                               Xd     dd                 X
                                                                         dnk = Xnk
                                                                               d

Combining with 20, we get:
                                                     X                     X
                                                           X d                      X d
                                             Yc
                                              ik =        πnik Xnik =              πnik Xnk
                                                      n                       n

Finally, using equation 18 we obtain that the changes in production and demand satisfy:
                                              X                          XX
                               Yik Yc
                                    ik =           πnik Dnk D
                                                            d nk +                      πnik γkh Ynh Yd
                                                                                                      nh
                                               n                          h       n


If we denote by Γ the matrix with coefficients πnik γkh , by Π the matrix with coefficients πnik 1k,h (and
where 1k,h is a dummy equal to one if h = k), by Y Yb the vector of production and DD
                                                                                    b the vector


                                                                   4
demand, we can write this equality as:

                                                   Y Yb = Π . DD
                                                               b + Γ . Y Yb


which yields:
                                                   Y Yb = (I − Γ)−1 . Π . DD
                                                                           b

             tot the coefficients of the matrix (I − Γ)−1 Π, we can link changes in output to changes
Denoting by γinkh
in final demand:
                                                              1 X tot
                                               Yc
                                                ik =                γ     Dnh D
                                                                              d nh
                                                             Yik n,h nikh

Given that we also have Yik =
                                         P      tot
                                           n,h γnikh Dnh ,      we also have:

                                                              1 X tot
                                          ik − 1 =
                                         Yc                         γ     Dnh (D nh − 1)
                                                                               d
                                                             Yik n,h nikh

then, in log, a first-order approximation yields the two expressions in the text:

                                                                1 X
                            log w iH − log w iL =                       (shH − shL     tot
                                                                                 ik ) ϕnikh log Dnh
                                                                                                d
                                                               ρ̃i k,h,n ik
                                d          d

                                                                1          X
                                                     =             log zb      (shH      L    tot
                                                                                  ik − shik )ϕnikh ηnh
                                                               ρ̃i        k,h,n


Second counterfactuals: reduction in trade costs.                                 Given equation (A.2), we need to examine
how a reduction in trade costs leads to a change in production patterns. Combining equations (20)
for production and (19) for bilateral trade, we have:
                    X
                             X
      log Yc
           ik =             πnik log Xd
                                      nik
                        n
                    X
                             X                     −θk         θk
                =           πnik log[S
                                     dik dnik
                                         d               P
                                                         dnk        X
                                                                    dnk ]
                        n
                    X
                             X                     −θk         θk      X
                                                                               X
                                                                                                        X
                                                                                                               X
                =           πnik log[S
                                     dik dnik
                                         d               P
                                                         d nk ] +             πnik ϕnkF log D
                                                                                            d nk +            πnik ϕnkh log Yd
                                                                                                                             nh
                        n                                                 n                             n,h

       X denotes the share of production from country i in sector k that is exported to country n
where πnik
             γnhk Ynh
and ϕnhk =     Xnk      is the share of production in country n that is purchased as inputs by sector h.
   Then, using P
                        −θk
                              =
                                  P   M d d −θk ,
                nk                 i πnik Sik dnik             we get:
               d

                                         −θk         X
                                                              M                    −θk
                              log P
                                  d nk         ≈             πnjk log(S
                                                                      d jk dnjk
                                                                           d             )
                                                         j
                                                     X                               X
                                                              M                               M
                                               =             πnjk log Sjk − θk               πnjk log dd
                                                                                                       njk
                                                                      d
                                                         j                            j




                                                                      5
                                                      X
                                                                M                      M
                                              =                πnjk log Sjk − θk (1 − πnnk ) log d
                                                                        d                        b
                                                          j


for a change in trade costs log dˆ between country i and all its foreign trading partners.
   Using D     c −σk P    1−σk
          nk = λn      nk      , plugging the change in prices back into the previous equation, we
         d           d
get:
                 X
                       X                    −θk               θk            X                        −σk             1−σk              X
   log Yc
        ik =          πnik log[S
                               dik dnik
                                   d                P
                                                    dnk ] +                       ϕnkF log(λcn               P
                                                                                                             d nk           )+               ϕnkh log Yd
                                                                                                                                                       nh
                  n                                                          n                                                         n,h
                 X
                       X                    −θk               X
                                                                     X        M                            −θk
            =         πnik   log[S
                                 dik dnik
                                     d              ]−              πnik     πnjk      log[S
                                                                                           d jk dnjk
                                                                                                d                ]
                  n                                           n,j
                      X
                           X                      −σk                1−σk           X
                                                                                              X
                 +        πnik ϕnkF log(λcn                   P
                                                              d nk            )+             πnik ϕnkh log Yd
                                                                                                            nh
                      n                                                                n,h
                                                                                            
                 X
                       X               −θk         X
                                                               M                       −θk           X
                                                                                                           X
                                                                                                                     X
                                                                                                                           M
                                                                                                                                                           
            =         πnik log dd
                                nik             −             πnjk log dd
                                                                        njk
                                                                                             −           πnik            πnjk log S
                                                                                                                                   d jk − log Sik
                                                                                                                                              d
                  n                                   j                                              n               j
                      X
                           X                    −σk                 1−σk          X
                                                                                           X
                 +        πnik ϕnkF log λcn               P
                                                          d nk               +            πnik ϕnkh log Yd
                                                                                                         nh                                                 (A.4)
                      n                                                           n,h


These four terms reflect the decomposition provided in the text. The first term, capturing the direct
effect of the change in trade costs dnik , is also equal to:
                                                                                                                              
                                         X
                                                 X                              −θk         X
                                                                                                  M                      −θk
                 Direct effect =                πnik log dd
                                                          nik                          −         πnjk log dd
                                                                                                           njk
                                                                                                                               
                                            n                                                j
                                                      X                                           X                  X
                                                                X                                          X               M
                                    =    −θk                   πnik         log dd
                                                                                 nik + θk                 πnik            πnjk log dd
                                                                                                                                    njk
                                                      n                                              n               j
                                                                                                 X
                                                   X                                                      X         M
                                    =    −θk (1 − πiik ) log db + θk                                     πnik (1 − πnnk ) log db
                                                                                                 n
                                                                    "                                                              #
                                                                                                 X
                                                          X                                           X                   M
                                    =    −θk log db (1 − πiik ) −                                    πnik    (1 −        πnnk )
                                                                                                 n

Combining this direct effect with the previous equality, we obtain:
                                                                    "                                                              #
                                    ≈ −θk log dˆ (1 −
                                                                                                 X
                                                                                  X                   X                   M
                          log Yc
                               ik                                                πiik )      −       πnik    (1 −        πnnk )
                                                                                                 n
                                                X                   X
                                                       X                     M
                                         −            πnik                  πnjk (log S
                                                                                      djk − log Sik )
                                                                                                d
                                                  n                     j
                                                X
                                                       X                 −σk     1−σk
                                                                                                                
                                         +            πnik ϕnF k log λcn     P
                                                                             dnk
                                                  n
                                                X
                                                       X
                                         +            πnik ϕnhk log Yd
                                                                     nh
                                                n,h


Combining these changes in production patterns with equation (A.2), we obtain a four-term decom-



                                                                              6
position of the effect of a trade cost reduction on the skill premium:
                                                                  "                                    #
                w iH       1
                       ≈ − log dˆ
                                  X                                 X
                                    (shH      L             X          X         M
                d
            log                        ik − shik ) θk (1 − πiik ) −   πnik (1 − πnnk )
                w
                d iL      ρ̃i     k                                 n
                                1 X                 X      X
                           −         (shH      L
                                        ik − shik )
                                                       X
                                                      πnik    M
                                                             πnjk (log S
                                                                       djk − log Sik )
                                                                                 d
                               ρ̃i k                n      j
                                1 X                  X                  −σ
                                                                        cn k P    1−σk 
                           +         (shH
                                        ik − sh L
                                                ik )   π X
                                                         nik ϕnF k log  λ    d nk
                               ρ̃i k                 n
                                1 X                 X
                           +         (shH      L
                                        ik − shik )
                                                         X
                                                        πnik ϕnhk log Yd
                                                                       nh
                               ρ̃i k                n,h




C) Estimation strategy
Step 1: Gravity equation estimation and identification of Φnk

As described in the text, the model yields equation (36):
                                      "                                                            #
                                                                X
                       Xnik = exp F Xik + F Mnk −                      βvar,k T Cvar,ni +   εG
                                                                                             nik             (A.5)
                                                                 var


In this equation, importer fixed effects correspond to log X
                                                           Φnk and exporter fixed effects correspond to
                                                             nk


log Sik . These terms are identified up to an industry constant (e.g. αk in preferences). We normalize
the exporter fixed effect SU S,k to unity in each sector k.
   T Cvar,ni refers to the variables (indexed by var) included in the gravity equation to capture trade
costs between n and i. Following the literature on gravity, we include the log of physical distance
(including internal distance when i = n), a common language dummy, a colonial link dummy, a border
effect dummy (equal to one if i 6= n), a contiguity dummy (equal to one if countries i and n share
a common border), a free-trade-agreement dummy (equal to one if there is an agreement between
countries i and n), a common currency dummy and a common-legal-origin dummy (equal to one if i
and n have the same legal origin: British, French, German, Scandinavian or socialist). Parameters
δvar,k capture the elasticity of trade costs to each trade cost variable var, which may differ across
industries. Since all coefficients to be estimated are sector specific, we estimate this gravity equation
separately for each sector. Following Silva and Tenreyro (2006) and Fally (2015), we estimate gravity
using the Poisson pseudo-maximum likelihood estimator (Poisson PML).
   We then use equation (10), Φnk =
                                              P               −θk ,
                                              i Sik (dnik )           to construct Φnk . The exporter fixed effects
                                                  P
Fd
 X ik ) provide estimates for log Sik while        var   βbvar,k T Cvar,ni yields an estimate of trade cost dnik
multiplied its elasticity for each sector and each country pair: θk log dnik .
                                 X                   X                                            
                       Φ
                       b nk =              X ik −
                                      exp Fd                βbvar,k T Cvar,ni − βAT C,ik Bi6=n               (A.6)
                                  i                   var




                                                          7
This constructed Φ
                 b nk varies across industries and countries in an intuitive way. It is the sum of all
potential exporters’ fixed effect (reflecting unit costs of production) deflated by distance and other
trade cost variables. If country n is close to an exporter that has a comparative advantage in industry
k, i.e. an exporter associated with a large exporter fixed effect F Xik (large Sik ), our constructed Φ
                                                                                                      b nk
will be relatively larger for this country reflecting a lower price index of goods from industry k in
country n. Note that Φ
                     b nk also accounts for domestic supply in each industry k (when i = n).


Step 2: Demand system estimation and identification of σk

The first step estimation gives us an estimate of Φnk . From Equation (11), we know that the price
index Pnk is a log-linear function of Φnk which we can use as a proxy for Pnk on the right-hand side
of Equation (35) describing final demand.33
       As described in the text, we estimate equation (38) for final demand:

                                                                    (σk − 1)     b nk + εD
                           log xnk = −σk . log λn + log α3,k +               log Φ       nk                         (A.7)
                                                                       θk

where εD
       nk denotes the error term. In each country n, we further impose the sum of fitted expendi-
tures across sectors to equal observed total per capita expenditures en , which leads to the following
constraint:
                                                                   (σk − 1)
                           X                                                          
                                 exp −σk . log λn + log α3,k +              log Φ
                                                                                b nk = en                           (A.8)
                             k
                                                                      θk

We jointly estimate these equations using constrained non-linear least squares (we minimize the sum
of squared errors (εD   2
                    nk ) while imposing both Equations 38 and A.8 to hold). Observed variables
are: the price proxies Φ
                       b nk , individual expenditures xnk per industry (net of intermediate goods) and
total expenditures en .Free parameters to be estimated are the σk , θk , λn and α3,k . This estimation
procedure can be seen as a non-linear least squares estimation of equation (38) in which λn is the
implicit solution of the budget constraint, equation (A.8), and thus a function of fitted coefficients
and observed per capita expenditures en .
       At least one normalization is required. Given the inclusion of industry fixed effects, λn can be
identified only up to a constant.34 We normalize λU SA = 1 for the US.

Alternative specifications

We explore several alternative specifications to illustrate the robustness of our income elasticity esti-
mates:

       • Specification without budget constraint
  33
     In Caron et al (2014), we show that this approach yields better and more conservative outcomes than using actual
prices from the International Comparison Program. Using actual prices leads to a lower R-squared and a stronger
correlation between income elasticity and skill intensity across sectors.
  34
     To see this, we can multiply λn by a common multiplier λ0 and multiply the industry fixed effect αk by (λ0 )σk . Using
λn λ instead of λn and αk (λ0 )σk instead of αk in the demand system generates the same expenditures by industry.
    0




                                                            8
  In our baseline estimation, we constraint our fitted per capita expenditures to sum up to observed
  per capita total expenditures en for each country. In other words, we assume that en is observed
  without measurement errors. However, we obtain similar estimates without this constraint, as
  illustrated in Figure A.1.
  Given our good fit for final demand at the country-by-sector level, the fit of total expenditures
  for each country is then also very good. The difference is negligible if we compare it to the very
  large variations in per capita income across countries. Hence, imposing a perfect fit for en does
  not generate substantial differences in our estimates.

• Reduced-form estimation
  While our estimation procedure is consistent with general equilibrium conditions and our speci-
  fication of preferences, we show that similar estimates are found when estimating Equation (38)
  with a reduced-form approximation in which log λn is replaced by a linear function of log en .
  Assuming that log λn ≈ ν log en , we obtain:

                                                                  1 − σk
                       log xnk = −σk ν log en + log α4,k +               . log Φnk + nk      (A.9)
                                                                    θk

  where log α4,k and ν are constant terms. Even if ν is not separately identified from σk , we can
  obtain an estimate of income elasticities in each sector:
                                                         P
                                                 σd
                                                  kν       k0   xnk0
                                         ηnk = P                                             (A.10)
                                                            0
                                                         0 σ νx  nk0
                                                           d
                                                     k     k

  We report our estimates in Figure A.1.

• Specification with θk = 4
  The benchmark specification described above identifies σk and income elasticities solely based
  on the coefficient associated with the Lagrange multiplier λn . The σk parameter also appears
  in the coefficient for Φnk in Equation (38) but the benchmark specification does not impose any
  constraint on the coefficient for Φnk since θk is a free parameter. In an alternative estimation,
  we jointly identify σk from the coefficients on λn and Φnk by constraining θk to equal 4 in all
  sectors. This choice of θ is close to the Simonovska and Waugh (2014) estimates of 4.12 and
  4.03. Donaldson (2012), Eaton et al. (2011), Costinot et al. (2012) provide alternative estimates
  that range between 3.6 and 5.2. Alternative values for θ (e.g. θk = 8) yield very similar results
  for income elasticities.

• Instrumenting or dropping log Φ
                                b nk

  Figure A.2 illustrates an alternative estimation of income elasticities where log Φ
                                                                                    b nk is instru-
  mented by an alternative measure constructed using foreign exporter fixed effects only. Instead
  of taking the sum of fixed effects across all countries as in the text (including own market), we



                                                 9
                                b IV by taking the sum across foreign countries only:
        construct as instrument Φ nk

                                       X                       X                                          
                              b IV =
                              Φ                    X ik −
                                              exp Fd                  βbvar,k T Cvar,ni − βAT C,ik Bi6=n
                                nk
                                       i6=n                     var


        Figure A.2 indicates that the two approaches yield very similar estimates with the exception of
        a few small sectors (“wtr”: water, “c b” cane and beet sugar, “ros”: recreational services).
        To illustrate how controlling for trade costs matters, we also estimate final demand by dropping
        log Φ
            b nk = 0 in the regression. This is equivalent to assuming that there is no trade costs and
        that all countries face the same prices. In this specification, we find even larger differences in
        estimated income elasticity, as illustrated in Figure A.1. These estimates are correlated at 93%
        with our baseline estimates.

       • Comin, Lashkari and Mestieri (2016)
        Following Comin, Lashkari and Mestieri (2016), we examine a specification where utility Un for
        consumers in country n is implicitly defined by:

                                                      X     1     k −σ    σ−1
                                                           αkσ Un   σ
                                                                          Qnkσ = 1
                                                       k


        This leads to final demand:35
                                                      xnk = αk eσn Unk −σ Pnk
                                                                            1−σ
                                                                                                                   (A.11)

        This implicit utility function does not impose any link between income elasticities (parameterized
        by k ) and price elasticities (σ), unlike separable utility functions where income elasticities are
        proportional to price elasticities across sectors for any country.
        We estimate equation (A.11) by letting Un be a free parameter. An alternative (as in Comin
        et al 2016) would be to construct a proxy for Un , which would be roughly equivalent to the
        reduced-form approach discussed above (estimation equation A.9).36
        Using these estimates, the income elasticity can be retrieved as:

                                                                             k − ¯n
                                                     ηnk = 1 + (1 − σ)
                                                                             ¯n − σ

        where ¯n is an average of k weighted by consumption shares to ensure that the weighted average
        of income elasticities equals one for each country n (Engel aggregation).
        Figure A.5 compares these estimates to our baseline specification, using average expenditures
        to compute ¯n . The two sets of estimates are very close and correlated at 89.9%. Moreover, the
                                                                                             1   k −σ   σ−1
  35
     In this sum, each term is equal to the share of good k in expenditures: xenk
                                                                               n
                                                                                  = αkσ Un σ Qi σ .
  36
     One can see from the definition of U above that we can rescale with any exponent U 0 = U a , hence (i − σ) is defined
only up to a constant term. However, the income elasticity in CLM can still be identified as it is invariant to re-scaling
utility by an exponent a.



                                                                10
     income elasticities estimated with Comin et al (2016) preferences remain highly correlated with
     skill intensity in production (71.2% correlation).

D) Robustness of counterfactual simulation results
D1) Using Comin Lashkari Mestieri preferences

Here we describe the counterfactual equilibrium conditions for final demand when we use the prefer-
ences as in Comin et al (2016). Taking change ratios of final demand (equation A.11), we obtain:

                                                             σc    k −σ     1−σ
                                                   D       n Un
                                                   b nk = ec               Pbnk

Like the Lagrange multiplier with CREI preferences, the change U
                                                               cn is constrained by consumers’
budget, which yields:

                                     1 X        b nk = 1
                                                           X
                                                                       cn k −σ Pb 1−σ
                            ebn =           Dnk D             Dnk ebσn U          nk
                                    Ln en k           Ln en k

These two equations allow us to determine D
                                          b nk and U
                                                   bn depending on other outcome variables (changes
in income ebn and prices Pbnk ) and estimated parameters.

D2) Reducing trade costs, one country at a time

We now examine the effect of a trade cost reduction log dd
                                                         nik for all countries pairs that include a given
country i.
   The decomposition is the same as before up to equation A.4. The only term that differs from the
previous decomposition is the first “direct effect” term:
                                              X                              X                X
                                                         X                             X            M
                Direct effect =          −           θk πnik log dd
                                                                  nik +            θk πnik         πnjk log dd
                                                                                                             njk
                                               n                              n                j


      njk = d if n = i or j = i but n 6= j, and dnjk = 1 otherwise, we get:
With dd     b                                   d

                                              X                                    X                         X
                                                      X                X                   M                         X    M
       Direct effect =        − θk log db            πnik + θk log db πiik                πijk + θk log db          πnik πnik
                                              n6=i                                 j6=i                      n6=i
                                              X
                                                      X         M                  X         M
                        =     − θk log db            πnik (1 − πnik ) + θk log db πiik (1 − πiik )
                                              n6=i
                                                                                                  
                                                                     X
                                          X         M                        X         M 
                        =     θk log db πiik (1 − πiik ) −                 πnik (1 − πnik )
                                                                     n6=i


Combining this direct effect with the previous equality we obtain:
                                                                                                      
                                         ˆ π X (1 − π M ) −
                                                                              X
                                                                                      X         M 
                             ik ≈ θk log d
                        log Yc               iik      iik                            πnik (1 − πnik )
                                                                              n6=i



                                                              11
                                             X            X
                                                    X          M
                                        −          πnik       πnjk (log S
                                                                        djk − log Sik )
                                                                                  d
                                             n            j
                                             X
                                                    X
                                                                     −σk      1−σk     
                                        +          πnik ϕnF k log λcn     P
                                                                          d nk
                                             n
                                             X
                                                    X
                                        +          πnik ϕnhk log Yd
                                                                  nh
                                             n,h


Combining these changes in production patterns with equation (A.2), we obtain a four-term decom-
position of the effect of a trade cost reduction on the skill premium:
                                                                                                                
               w iH        1
                              log dˆ
                                        X                                                   X
                                             (shH      L       X         M                         X         M 
               d
           log        ≈                         ik − shik ) θk πiik (1 − πiik ) −                  πnik (1 − πnik )
               w
               d iL       ρ̃i            k                                                  n6=i
                              1 X                             X          X
                          −             (shH      L
                                           ik − shik )
                                                                   X
                                                                  πnik        M
                                                                             πnjk (log S
                                                                                       djk − log Sik )
                                                                                                 d
                              ρ̃i   k                         n          j
                             1 X                  X                 −σ
                                                                    cn k P    1−σk 
                          +       (shH
                                     ik − sh L
                                             ik )   π X
                                                         ϕ
                                                      nik nF k log  λ    d nk
                            ρ̃i k                 n
                               1 X                 X
                          +         (shH      L
                                       ik − shik )
                                                        X
                                                       πnik ϕnhk log Yd
                                                                      nh
                              ρ̃i k                n,h




                                                               12
   pdr
   pcr                                                                         Benchmark
  osd
     ctl
   gro                                                                         no budget constraint
   fsh
 oap
    frs                                                                        theta=4
   vol
 rmk
   v_f                                                                         No Phi
   sgr
  lum
  c_b
   b_t
                                                                               Reduced-form
  wtp
   ofd
     oil
   tex
   ely
   ocr
   ros
   wtr
  p_c
  wht
   otp
 ppp
   mil
   atp
nmm
  cmt
  cns
ome
   crp
   lea
 wap
 cmn
   wol
    trd
  osg
    isr
 omf
 omt
   ele
   otn
 mvh
  obs
   pfb
    ofi




           0                          .5                                   1                     1.5
                                           Estimated Income elasticities



               Figure A.1: Estimated income elasticities across alternative specifications




                                                      13
                                       1.5
                                                                                                                                         ofi
                                                                                                                           isr

Income elasticity - instrumented Phi
                                                                                                                                      obs

                                                                                                                         trd
                                                                                                    wtr   ros           cmnosg mvh
                                                                                                                           omfotn
                                       1

                                                                                                                  ppp cns
                                                                                                                      ome
                                                                                                                    omt         pfb
                                                                                                                  atpwap crp
                                                                                                                   lea
                                                                                                              otp wol
                                                                                                          mil cmt
                                                                                               wtp ely p_c       nmm      ele
                                                                                                  ofd tex
                                                                                                b_t
                                                                                                 wht
                                                                                             lum ocr
                                                                                       sgr
                                       .5




                                                                                 rmk v_f
                                                                          vol
                                                                           fsh
                                                                      oapfrs
                                                                                             c_b
                                                             ctlpcr
                                                               osd
                                                       gro

                                                 pdr
                                       0




                                             0                                      .5                          1                              1.5
                                                                                      Income elasticity - no IV



                                             Figure A.2: Estimated income elasticities – Instrumenting Φ




                                                                                                   14
                                                       .3
            Elasticity of skill premium to productivity
                        .1        0    .2




                                                            6                  8                      10                 12
                                                                           Log per capita expenditures

                                                                Baseline     Theta=4       Alternative skill intensity



Figure A.3: Simulated elasticity of the skill premium increase to TFP across alternative specifications




                                                                                    15
                             .15
            Differential skill premium increase
                      .05    0        .1




                                                  6                  8                      10                 12
                                                                 Log per capita expenditures

                                                      Baseline     Theta=4       Alternative skill intensity



Figure A.4: Trade counterfactual: Differential skill premium increase across alternative specifications
(non-homothetic preferences minus homothetic preferences)




                                                                          16
                                1.5
                                                                                                                   obs
                                                                                                            isr            ofi

                                                                                                             osg
                                                                                                            trd
      Income elasticity - CLM
                                                                                                wtr ppp
                                                                                               ros         cmn     mvh
                                1

                                                                                                       ome omf
                                                                                                       cns     otn
                                                                                                              ele
                                                                                                              omt        pfb
                                                                                                 mil        wol
                                                                                          ely
                                                                                                wht     leawap
                                                                                                otpatp crp
                                                                                                      cmt
                                                                                    wtp       p_c   nmm
                                                                                   b_tofd tex
                                                                       rmk v_f   lum
                                                                     vol       sgr         ocr
                                                           fshoap
                                                   ctl         frs
                                .5




                                                     gro                                 oil
                                                pcr
                                                   osd                           c_b
                                0




                                          pdr

                                      0                                .5                      1                                 1.5
                                                                     Income elasticity - Benchmark



Figure A.5: Estimated income elasticities – based on Comin et al (2016) preferences




                                                                                  17
Figure A.6: Robustness: counterfactuals based on Comin et al (2016) preferences

                                                                  ETH




                              .6
                                                                             BGD




         Elasticity of skill premium to productivity
                                                                                    KEN
                                                                            TZA
                                                                           NPL
                                      .4


                                                                                        CIV




                                                                       MOZ               PAK
                                                                                  KHM            GEO
                    .2




                                                               MWI                   ZMB
                                                                                      CMR
                                                                                       SEN
                                                                       UGA           KGZ             SLV
                                                                                         NIC LKA
                                                                                       IND    PRYGTM
                                                                                            EGY  MARARM
                                                                                     VNM BOL HND
                                                                                            IDN    ECU
                                                                                                     TUNBLR
                                                                           ZWE            MNG
                                                                                           PHL        ALB
                                                                                                    PER             HRV
                                                                                                    IRNCOL  PAN
                                                                                                          MUS
                                                                                                           KAZ ROU
                                                                                                                TUR
                                                                                                AZEUKRNAM
                                                                                               CHN       CRI       LTU
                                                                                                  THA      BGR
                                                                                                          ZAF
                                                                                                            URY
                                                                                                          ARG
                                                                                                          BWA RUS
                                                                                                            BRA
                                                                                                             VEN      LVA     GRC ARE
                                                                                                        MYS    MEX
                                                                                                              CHL SAU
                                                                                                                  POL
                                                                                                                   HUN EST
                                                                                                                     SVK BHRKWT
                                                                                                                          PRT
                                                                                                                         MLT CYP
                                                                                                                              NZLFRA
                                                                                                                                  IRL
                                                                                                                     CZE
                                                                                                                     TWN
                                                                                                                   OMN   KOR    DEU
                                                                                                                               ITA
                                                                                                                           SVNESP
                                                                                                                         ISR      BEL
                                                                                                                                 AUT
                                                                                                                                  SWE
                                                                                                                                  NLD
                                                                                                                                 AUS
                                                                                                                               JPN  DNK
                                                                                                                                  FIN
                                                                                                                                 CAN
                                                                                                                                   GBRQAT
                                                                                                                                    CHE
                                                                                                                                    USANOR LUX
                                                                                                                            SGP
                                                                                                                            HKG
                              0




                                                       5               6                 7           8           9            10             11               12
                                                                                                   Per capita income


                                                           (a) First counterfactual: homogeneous productivity increase
                           .3




                                                                           MDG


                                                                           NPL
                                                                                             GHA
                                                                            BGD
                           .2




                                                                 ETH
                                                                                                                                BHR
                                                                                   KEN SEN                                      BHR
                                                                                     NGA
         Skill premium increase




                                                                                                  GEO                                                   LUX
                                                                                                                                                        LUX
                                                                           KHM                       ARM                            CYP
                           .1




                                                                                         PHL                                        CYP
                                                                                                                                   KWT
                                                                                 KGZ             MAR
                                                                                           EGY AZE                                 KWT
                                                                      NPL
                                                                       TZA          IND
                                                                                  PAK                 SLV CRI PAN
                                                                                                      TUN
                                                                                                     IRN                  HRV                    QAT
                                                                                         PHL         ARM CRI PANROU OMN                      USA
                                                                     UGA                                   BLRBGR       OMN     PRT GRC GBR  USA
                                                                    MOZ                         AZE
                                                                                                 MAR
                                                                                                  GEO
                                                                                                 GTM         ZAF
                                                                                                                 VEN
                                                                                                                   ROU    HRV KOR
                                                                                                                                PRT GRCFRA
                                                                                                                               KOR          GBR
                                                                                           EGY       IRN NAM     VENMEX
                                                                                                                  RUS
                                                                                    SEN     LKA    THATUN
                                                                                                    UKR MYS           POL TWN
                                                                                                                    MEX          SVN JPN
                                                                                                                                      ESP
                                                                                                                                      JPNFRA
                                                                                                                                       ITA  SWE ARE
                                                                                                                                              DNK NOR
                                                                                                                                                  NOR
                                                                        BGD            NIC                 MYSBGRRUS
                                                                                                             ZAF          TWNEST SVN ESP
                                                                                                                               ISR
                                                                                                                               ISR     ITA
                                                                                                                                        DEU SWE
                                                                                                                                           IRL
                                                                                                                                         AUS
                                                                                                                                                ARE
                                                                                                                                               CHE
                  0




                                                                             LAOVNMINDBOL  IDN
                                                                                              HND
                                                                                               CHN THASLV
                                                                                                        ALB  MUS
                                                                                                             BWA TUR  POL
                                                                                                                        HUN
                                                                                                                        LTUSVK
                                                                                                                           CZE MLT
                                                                                                                             EST
                                                                                                                                         AUS
                                                                                                                                        DEUNLD
                                                                                                                                          CAN
                                                                                                                                         AUT
                                                                                                                                           IRLCHE
                                                                                                                                           FIN
                                                                                             PRY         COL
                                                                                                    UKR NAMBLR BRA      HUNCZE
                                                                                                                           SVK
                                                                                                                           LVA MLT         FIN
                                                                                                                                         AUT
                                                                                                                                           NLD
                                                                                ZMB
                                                                               KENPAK          CHN             URY
                                                                                                             BWA
                                                                                                               BRA  TUR
                                                                           KHM KGZ CMR MNG               COLARGURY
                                                                                                               KAZCHL   LTULVA
                                                                     ZWE                    LKA GTM ALB MUS
                                                                                       BOL IDN               ARG CHL
                                                                                                                                            BEL
                                                                     UGA                      HND ECUPER       KAZ    SAU          SGP      BEL
                                                               MWI                           PRY                                     NZL
                                                                                                                                   SGP
                                                                                                                                     NZL
                                                                                                     PER              SAU
                                                                                        MNG
                                                                                       NIC                                         HKG
                           -.1




                                                                 ETHMOZ         ZMB
                                                                                 CIV                ECU                            HKG
                                                                     ZWE        VNMCMRGHA
                                                                           TZA
                           -.2




                                                                           MDG
                                                               MWI
                                                                                        CIV
                                                                                         NGA

                                                       5               6                7            8             9          10             11               12
                                                                                                    Per Capita Income

                                                                                    Homothetic preferences                   Comin et al. pref.
                                                                                    Linear Fit                               Linear Fit



                                                                 (b) Second counterfactual: trade cost reduction




                                                                                                       18
                                                       NPL




                          .2
                                                       NPL     LAO
                                                                         SEN            BLR
                                                                                                    SAU
                                                                                                      OMN
                                                                                   ARM BLR VEN  RUS SAU
                                                                                                      OMN
                                                                                                                               QAT
                                                                                                RUS
                                                                                               VEN            BHR CYP          QAT
                                                           LAO IND PHL             ARM                            CYP         ARE
                                                                                 THASLV
                                                                                   IRN                                     USA
                                                      BGD                                                                  USA NOR   LUX
                                     0
                                                                  SEN             UKR
                                                                                 THA                    HRV
                                                                                    SLV MYS             TWN         JPN GBR
                                                   UGA                            UKR    MYS     ROU
                                                                                                 ROU    TWN KOR GRC
                                                                                                        HRV
              Skill premium increase
                                                                  IND PHL          IRNALB                                 GBR
                                                                          LKA          NAM KAZ
                                                                                             BRA  MEX
                                                                                                  MEX         PRT       FRA
                                                  MOZ           PAK
                                                              ZMB        IDN
                                                                         EGY CHNGEO   ALB
                                                                                       NAM   BRA
                                                                                            BGR
                                                                                           BWA
                                                                                             KAZ
                                                                                            BGR
                                                                                          ZAF       POL
                                                                                                      HUN      SVN
                                                                                                                 HKG
                                                                                                               SVN   ITAFRA
                                               ETH    BGD             MNG    CHN    TUNCOLZAF       POL
                                                                                                      HUN
                                                                                                      LTUCZE
                                                                                                         SVK
                                                                                                         CZE
                                                                                                         SVK        ESPAUS
                                                                                                                        CAN
                                                                                                                      DEUFIN
                                                                         IDN
                                                                           PRY         COL PAN        LTULVA
                                                                                                         LVA          DEU DNK
                                                              ZMB          PRY
                                                   UGA
                                                    MDG
                                                   ZWE
                                                     TZA
                                                             KEN          LKA       TUN CRI
                                                                                         CRI
                                                                                          ARG
                                                                                          ARG     TUR        ISR
                                                                                                           EST
                                                                                                           EST          AUT
                                                                                                                         NLD
                                                                                                                        AUT
                                                                                                                          SWE
                                                                                                                         NLD
                                                                                                                             CHE
                                                                                                                             CHE
                                             MWI MOZ            PAK MNG
                                                              VNM        EGY    GEO          URY  TUR
                                                                                                CHL
                                                                                                                          SWE
                                                                                 ECU
                                                                               MARPER        URY
                                                                               GTM
                        -.2



                                                                     BOL          PER
                                                                                 ECU      MUS                MLT NZL
                                                                                                                   NZL
                                                                     NIC       GTM        MUS                             BEL
                                                                                                                          BEL
                                                                               MAR
                                                   ZWE         KGZ                                               SGP
                                                                                                                 SGP
                                             MWI     TZA      VNM BOL                                                    IRL
                                                         KHM KENNGA         HND                                          IRL
                                               ETH
                                                    MDG              NIC    HND
                                                                 CMR
                                                             KHM   KGZ
                                                                       GHA
                                                                     CMR
                          -.4




                                                                   CIV


                                                                   CIV
                                                                    NGAGHA
                          -.6




                                         5         6                 7          8             9             10            11               12
                                                                               Per Capita Income

                                                              Homothetic preferences                    Non-homothetic pref.
                                                              Linear Fit                                Linear Fit




Figure A.7: Change in the skill premium caused by a 1% trade cost reduction, one country at a time
(each dot corresponds to a distinct counterfactual)




                                                                                  19
