                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                THE LONG-RUN DYNAMICS OF ELECTRICITY DEMAND:
                    EVIDENCE FROM MUNICIPAL AGGREGATION

                                      Tatyana Deryugina
                                      Alexander MacKay
                                          Julian Reif

                                      Working Paper 23483
                              http://www.nber.org/papers/w23483


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                           June 2017, Revised November 2018




We thank ComEd for generously sharing electricity usage data with us, and we are particularly
grateful to Renardo Wilson for many helpful discussions. We also thank Torsten Clausen, the
Illinois Commerce Commission, and Dave Hoover for providing helpful background information
on municipal aggregation. We thank Severin Borenstein, Mike Florio, Don Fullerton, Katrina
Jessoe, Nolan Miller, Erica Myers, Mar Reguant, and participants at the University of Illinois
IGPA seminar, 2017 ASSA meetings, the 2017 CeMENT workshop, the EPIC lunch series, the
POWER Conference on Energy Research and Policy, the Midwest Economics Association
meetings, and the University of Pittsburgh seminar for excellent comments and suggestions.
Mohammad Ahmadizadeh, Noah Baird, Dylan Hoyer, Chitra Jogani, and Prakrati Thakur
provided excellent research assistance. Views reflected here are solely those of the authors. The
views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the
National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2017 by Tatyana Deryugina, Alexander MacKay, and Julian Reif. All rights reserved. Short
sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission
provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
The Long-Run Dynamics of Electricity Demand: Evidence from Municipal Aggregation
Tatyana Deryugina, Alexander MacKay, and Julian Reif
NBER Working Paper No. 23483
June 2017, Revised November 2018
JEL No. D12,Q41,Q48

                                         ABSTRACT

We study the dynamics of residential electricity demand by exploiting a natural experiment that
produced large and long-lasting price changes in over 250 Illinois communities. Using a flexible
difference-in-differences matching approach, we estimate that the price elasticity of demand
grows from –0:09 in the first six months to –0:27 two years later. We also estimate a more
sophisticated model in which usage is a function of past and future prices, and we find similar
elasticity patterns. Our findings highlight the importance of accounting for consumption
dynamics when evaluating energy policy.

Tatyana Deryugina                                   Julian Reif
Department of Finance                               Department of Finance
University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign          University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
515 East Gregory Drive, MC-520                      515 E. Gregory Street
Champaign, IL 61820                                 Champaign, IL 61820
and NBER                                            and NBER
deryugin@illinois.edu                               jreif@illinois.edu

Alexander MacKay
Strategy Unit
Harvard Business School
Soldiers Field
Boston, MA 02163
amackay@hbs.edu
     Economic theory suggests that demand is typically more elastic in the long run relative
to the short run. When consumption depends on goods that are durable or habit-forming,
consumers may take years to respond fully to a price change (Topel and Rosen, 1988;
Becker et al., 1994). These dynamics pose several challenges to demand estimation. In any
period, consumption may depend upon both current and past prices, and, when consumers
are forward looking, also upon future prices. When prices fluctuate, as they typically do,
the demand response will reflect a mix of both short-term and long-term changes in con-
sumption. Finally, unless one accepts restrictive functional form assumptions, unbiased es-
timation requires a source of exogenous price variation large enough to produce detectable
effects in long-run behavior. Quantifying these demand-side dynamics is important in the
electricity sector, where suppliers, market regulators, and policymakers make decisions
with long-run ramifications.
     We estimate how the price elasticity of electricity demand evolves over time by exploit-
ing an Illinois policy that generated plausibly exogenous shocks to residential electricity
prices in over 250 communities. Because these price shocks are large and lasted over two
years, we are able to estimate the demand response more flexibly and over a longer period
than prior quasi-experimental studies. We show that residential electricity consumers take
multiple years to adjust to price changes. Our event study finds an elasticity of −0.27 in
the period 25–30 months after the policy change, almost three times the magnitude of the
elasticity in the first six months (−0.09).
     Our monthly consumption and price data span 2007–2014 and come from the largest
utility in Illinois, ComEd, whose territory encompassed approximately 70 percent of res-
idential consumers in the state. During this period, Illinois implemented a municipal ag-
gregation program.1 The program allowed individual communities to select new electricity
suppliers on behalf of their residents with the approval of a local referendum. This pol-
icy change resulted in large, long-lasting price changes for communities that implemented
aggregation. Our setting provides a clean natural experiment: aggregation customers con-
tinued to receive their electricity bill from the utility in the same format as before, so the
price variation in our analysis is not confounded with other billing changes. Additionally,
Illinois employs a linear price schedule for residential electricity, consisting of a modest
fixed fee and a constant marginal price. With rare and short-lived exceptions, aggregation
affected only the marginal price of electricity, greatly simplifying our analysis.
   1
     In other settings, these programs are sometimes called “community choice aggregation.” Aggregation is
also available in California, Massachusetts, New Jersey, New York, Ohio, and Rhode Island.



                                                    1
    Our empirical approach combines a difference-in-differences methodology with the
matching estimator developed by Abadie and Imbens (2006, 2011). Matching estimators
are particularly well-suited to our study because electricity usage is highly seasonal, and
these seasonal patterns vary substantially across different communities and over time. The
relatively large number of ComEd communities that did not pass a referendum on aggre-
gation (479 in our sample of 768) in combination with a lengthy pre-period provides an
excellent empirical setting for a matching estimator. We find that our matching estimator
obtains more precise estimates than a traditional regression. We view our application as
a useful demonstration of matching for applied researchers, in the vein of Fowlie et al.
(2012). In contrast to their paper, we conduct inference using subsampling, which allows
for a richer space of estimators whose distributions do not have pre-existing formulas.
    Our estimator matches each aggregation community to five “nearest neighbors” that did
not pass a referendum on aggregation.2 We construct the matching criteria using commu-
nities’ monthly electricity usage profiles from 2008 and 2009. This matching period long
precedes our natural experiment: more than ninety percent of the referenda in our sample
are held after February 2012, over two years later. Our identifying assumption is that the
average observed differences in usage between aggregation communities and their matched
controls in the post period are caused only by aggregation. In support of this assumption,
we document that usage patterns between aggregation communities and matched controls
are parallel after the matching period but prior to the referenda. Because we observe us-
age at a high (monthly) frequency and community referenda occur only during infrequent
statewide elections, our finding of no effect in the months immediately preceding the ref-
erenda suggests that communities did not select into aggregation based on expected usage
changes. Whether or not a community pursued aggregation was likely influenced by so-
cial and political factors, including loyalty to the utility and trust in the local government.
To the best of our knowledge, expected future usage was not discussed when considering
aggregation. In light of these factors and the absence of pre-trends, aggregation therefore
provides plausibly exogenous price variation in our sample.
    We find that prices fell by 24 percent and usage increased by 6.1 percent by the end of
the first year following an aggregation referendum, relative to control communities that did
not pass a referendum on aggregation. At the beginning of the second year, the expiration of
   2
     As a robustness check, we also estimate a traditional difference-in-differences regression model without
matching, using only communities that implemented aggregation. These results, presented in the Appendix,
are similar.



                                                     2
a long-term ComEd contract caused a price decrease and an accompanying usage increase
in control communities. Nevertheless, during our estimation period, the estimated price
elasticity declines smoothly from −0.09 in the first six months to −0.27 two years later,
illustrating the importance of long-run dynamics in this setting.
     Although they are long-lasting, the relative price decreases in our sample are not con-
stant over time. Thus, the estimates above reflect a mix of both short-run and longer-run
responses. To address this shortcoming, we also estimate a dynamic model of demand
in which usage is a flexible function of past, current, and future prices. As before, our
identifying variation comes only from price differences caused by aggregation. Using this
model, we estimate an elasticity of −0.08 in the first six months following a price change
and an elasticity of −0.21 19–24 months after a price change. Accounting for the fact that
the median community implements a price change four months after a referendum, we con-
clude that the patterns estimated by the more flexible dynamic model are similar to those
from the reduced-form approach described above. Finally, we employ a parametric formu-
lation of the dynamic model to forecast that the long-run elasticity converges to −0.35 after
approximately 10 years.
     Our results have significant implications for energy policy. Generators and distribu-
tors require forecasts of the long-run demand response to price changes to invest optimally
in capacity and infrastructure. Likewise, market regulators require these forecasts to de-
sign efficient allocation mechanisms and renewable energy subsidies. Utilizing a short-run
elasticity will lead to an underestimate of the longer-run demand response. Using simple
back-of-the-envelope calculations, we show that predicted quantity reductions following
the imposition of a carbon tax are 2.3–2.9 times larger when using the two-year price elas-
ticity of demand compared to using the six-month elasticity, depending on the elasticity
of supply. This difference implies that the carbon tax required to reduce emissions by one
percent is 56–65 percent smaller. Although our exact estimates may not directly translate
to other settings, the relative magnitudes of the short- and longer-run elasticities suggest
that other energy policies can cause a substantially larger usage response in the long run
than in the short run.
     The existing electricity demand literature relies on state-level data and dynamic panel
models to estimate consumption dynamics over a longer period. The long-run elasticity
estimates vary widely, from −0.3 to about −1.1 (e.g., Kamerschen and Porter, 2004; Der-
giades and Tsoulfidis, 2008; Alberini and Filippini, 2011), and none of these estimates is



                                             3
based on quasi-experimental variation.3 Consistency in these models generally requires
strong assumptions about the form of serial correlation, and the estimates are particularly
sensitive to the exact specification used (Alberini and Filippini, 2011). Conversely, our ap-
proach makes relatively few assumptions and is substantially more flexible than what has
been done previously.
    Papers outside of the dynamic panel literature typically estimate only short-run or static
price elasticities.4 Ito (2014) uses quasi-experimental variation by comparing households
located near a boundary between two California utilities, which vary in when and by how
much they change prices. He estimates an average price elasticity of −0.09 in the first 4
months following a price change, which is similar in magnitude to our six-month estimate.
Reiss and White (2005) employ cross-sectional data from California and a structural model
that exploits the non-linearity of the electricity price schedule. They estimate an average
(static) price elasticity of −0.39, but do not investigate how it evolves following a price
change.5 Our findings demonstrate the importance of such dynamics with respect to the
price of electricity: residential electricity consumers are more than twice as responsive in
the longer run relative to the short run.
    A few recent papers estimate consumption dynamics in response to non-price interven-
tions or in other contexts. Allcott and Rogers (2014) estimate that the energy reductions
following random assignment of a home energy report are larger 7–12 months after the
beginning of the program, relative to 1–6 months after. On the other hand, Ito (2015) finds
that the one-year and three-year effects of an appliance rebate program are similar, suggest-
ing that not every policy induces dynamics of the kind we find in our study. In the context
of borrowing, Karlan and Zinman (2018) find that the elasticity with respect to the interest
rate nearly triples over time, from −1.1 in the first year to −2.9 in the third year.
    The rest of this paper is organized as follows. Section I discusses the electricity market
   3
      See Alberini and Filippini (2011) for a review of this literature. Some have argued that a state’s average
price of electricity is exogenous because it is regulated (Paul et al., 2009) or because the unregulated compo-
nent is driven by national trends (Bernstein and Griffin, 2005). However, electricity rates may be set based
on the anticipated cost of electricity to suppliers and that cost, in turn, may be based on anticipated demand.
Therefore, it is not possible to separate supply-side variation stemming from national changes in fuel prices
from demand-side variation without explicitly constructing instruments, and we are not aware of any papers
that employ instruments to estimate a longer-run price elasticity.
    4
      A growing literature investigates the impact of real-time pricing (e.g., Wolak, 2011; Allcott, 2011; Jessoe
and Rapson, 2014). The elasticity we identify here is fundamentally different from the elasticity estimated in
the real-time pricing literature, which reflects intra-day substitution patterns as well as any overall reductions
in electricity consumption.
    5
      Reiss and White (2005) estimate a same-month elasticity, which they allow to vary seasonally, and then
report the average annual value of these estimates.


                                                        4
and municipal aggregation in Illinois. Sections II and III describe our data and reduced-
form empirical approach, respectively. Section IV presents reduced-form results, which
Section V then extends to a dynamic framework. Section VI discusses the implications of
our main results, and Section VII concludes.


                              I    The Illinois Electricity Market

The provision of electricity to residential customers consists of two components: sup-
ply and distribution. Suppliers generate or procure electricity and distributors provide
the infrastructure to deliver it and often handle billing. Illinois has two regulated elec-
tricity distributors: Commonwealth Edison Co. (“ComEd”) and Ameren Illinois Utilities
(“Ameren”). Prior to 1997, they owned generating units as well as the distribution net-
work. In 1997, the passage of the Consumer Choice Act allowed for competitive supply
in the market, due to widespread agreement that, unlike distribution, electricity generation
is not a natural monopoly (Illinois General Assembly, 1997). As part of the deregulation
measures, the two utilities were encouraged to divest their generation assets. These policies
led to the entry of several alternative suppliers into the market.
    Customers are assigned their distributor on the basis of geographic location. ComEd,
the distributor for whom we have usage data, serves northern Illinois, where approximately
70 percent of the state’s residents live. The supply price component of electricity deliv-
ered by Ameren or ComEd is, by law, equal to their procurement cost and does not vary
geographically.6 While customers have no choice in distributors, in 2002 residential and
small commercial customers gained the ability to choose an alternative retail electric sup-
plier (ARES) who would be responsible for supplying (but not delivering) their electricity.7
However, the residential ARES market was practically nonexistent between 2002 and 2005.
This was blamed on barriers to competition and a rate freeze that kept the default utility rate
low. In 2006, the state removed some of these barriers and instituted a discount program
for switchers, but this still had little effect on behavior. By 2009, only 234 residential cus-
tomers had switched suppliers. By contrast, 71,000 small commercial, large commercial,
and industrial customers had switched (Spark Energy, 2011).
    Motivated by these patterns, the Illinois Power Agency Act was amended in 2009
to allow for municipal aggregation, whereby municipalities and counties could negotiate
   6
       Profits stem from delivery fees set by the Illinois Commerce Commission (DeVirgilio, 2006).
   7
       Large commercial and industrial customers gained this ability at the end of 1999.



                                                      5
the purchase of electricity on behalf of their residential and small commercial customers.
Townships gained this ability in 2012. To ensure that individual consumers retained the
ability to choose their supplier, the amendment required municipalities to allow individuals
to opt out of aggregation.
     To implement an opt-out aggregation program, a municipality had to publicize the pro-
posal, hold a town hall meeting to educate the community, register the proposed aggrega-
tion program with the state, and hold a referendum. Referenda dates followed the state
electoral calendar: they were held in March or November in even years and in April in odd
years. The wording of the referendum question was specified in the Illinois Power Agency
Act and is reproduced in Section 1 of the Appendix. In most cases where the referendum
was approved, multiple suppliers submitted bids for predetermined contract lengths (e.g.,
one-, two-, and three-year contracts). In other cases, the municipality negotiated directly
with a supplier. The two main ways in which suppliers differentiated themselves were price
and the share of generation from renewable sources. Nearly all communities selected the
supplier with the lowest price, although environmental preferences occasionally induced
communities to select a more expensive one.
     When determining the bid or negotiating directly, each supplier obtained community-
level usage data from the distributor. These usage data, along with electricity futures, were
the main factors in each offered price.8 Importantly, our analysis employs the same usage
data, which reduces the likelihood that price changes are affected by confounding factors
that are unobservable to us. Because many of communities’ first contracts were in effect
through the end of our usage data, the price variation we employ comes mainly from the
first set of aggregation contracts in Illinois.
     Overall, municipal aggregation was popular in Illinois. Of the roughly 2,100 communi-
ties in the ComEd and Ameren service territories, 741 had voted to implement aggregation
as of March 2016. In our setting, the realized savings from aggregation came largely from
the timing of the program. During our sample period, alternative suppliers were able to
offer lower rates due to the unexpected boom in shale gas, while ComEd was locked into a
long-term high-price procurement contract.
     Customers in a community that passed an aggregation referendum were automatically
switched to the newly chosen electricity supplier unless they opted out by mailing in a
   8
    Suppliers may have also based their bids on the number of electric space heat customers, which we do
not observe. In Illinois, only about 10 percent of households heat their homes with electricity (U.S. Energy
Information Administration, 2009).



                                                     6
card, calling, or filling out a form online.9 Aggregation officially began at the conclusion
of the opt-out process. From the consumer’s point of view, the only visible change was the
supply price of electricity on her bill, which was still issued by the incumbent distributor
(Ameren or ComEd). The design of the bill, as well as the value of the non-supply prices,
remained identical for all customers in the distributor’s territory regardless of aggregation.
Conveniently, this means that the price effects of aggregation were not confounded with
changes in a bill’s appearance. Figures A.1–A.4 in the Appendix display a sample letter
notifying households of aggregation, a sample opt-out card, and a sample ComEd bill.
    Our estimation approach assumes that municipal aggregation was not accompanied by
other programs that could also affect electricity usage. A careful review of news articles,
aggregation-related announcements, and other online materials did not turn up any evidence
contradicting this assumption. ComEd runs several energy-related rebate and discount pro-
grams, but these were offered uniformly to all communities in its service territory during
our sample period (with the exception of small pilot programs, which are typically con-
ducted in communities near ComEd’s headquarters in Chicago). Moreover, ComEd does
not have a strong profit incentive to target its rebate and discount programs to aggrega-
tion or non-aggregation communities. By law, ComEd makes zero profits from electricity
supply. Instead, its profits come from distributing electricity, and ComEd remained the
distributor in all the aggregation communities in our sample.


                                             II    Data

We obtained electricity usage data directly from ComEd. The data contain monthly resi-
dential electricity usage at the municipality level for ComEd’s 887 service territories from
February 2007 through June 2014. We drop 108 communities that were missing data, did
not appear to have consistent geographic boundaries during our sample period, or could
not be assigned an aggregation status with confidence. For our main analysis, we also drop
an additional 11 communities that passed a referendum approving aggregation but never
implemented the program. The resulting dataset is a balanced panel of monthly electricity
   9
     While we do not have an exact number, ComEd and several energy suppliers have told us that the opt-
out rate was low. Community-specific opt-out rates mentioned in newspapers range from 3 to 10 percent
(e.g., Lotus, 2011; Wade, 2012; Ford, 2013). The number of non-aggregated customers did, however, grow
slowly over time because new residents who moved to an aggregation community were not defaulted into the
aggregation program. The few residential customers who had already opted into an ARES or into real-time
pricing prior to aggregation were not switched over to the chosen supplier.



                                                   7
                    Table 1: Count of Aggregation Communities in Sample

                Referendum Date       Implemented         Passed, Not        Voted, Not
                                                         Implemented          Passed

                November 2010               1                  0                  0
                April 2011                 18                  0                  0
                March 2012                164                  0                 28
                November 2012              57                  5                  2
                April 2013                38                   3                  6
                March 2014                 8                   1                  0
                November 2014               3                  2                  0
                Total                     289                 11                 36


usage for 768 ComEd communities.10
    We constructed the time series of ComEd electricity rates using ComEd ratebooks ob-
tained from the Illinois Commerce Commission. Prior to June of 2013, customers with
electric space heating faced a lower rate than those with non-electric space heating. Be-
cause only about 10 percent of households in Illinois heat their homes with electricity (U.S.
Energy Information Administration, 2009), we assume that the incumbent rate was equal to
the non-electric space heating rate, which was true for the majority of non-aggregation cus-
tomers. Data on aggregation referenda dates, aggregation supply prices, and aggregation
implementation dates were obtained from a variety of sources, including PlugInIllinois,
websites of electricity suppliers, and municipal officials. We describe these sources in
further detail in Section 2 of the Appendix.
    As shown in Table 1, 300 communities in the ComEd territory passed a referendum
on aggregation during our sample period, and 289 of those communities eventually imple-
mented an aggregation program. In addition, 36 communities voted on, but did not pass,
the referendum.11 The geographic locations of the 768 aggregation and non-aggregation
communities in our sample are displayed in Figure 1. Aggregation communities are well-
dispersed throughout the ComEd territory but are slightly more prevalent in the greater
Chicago area.
    Our discussions with industry participants suggest that social and political factors, such
as whether the local government should involve itself in negotiating electricity prices,
   10
      See Section 2 of the Appendix for additional data details. Ameren, the other distributor in Illinois,
declined our data request.
   11
      We investigated the possibility of employing a regression discontinuity approach based on the fraction
voting “yes” or “no”, but we do not have enough power. There are only 20 communities where the referendum
failed by less than five percentage points.


                                                     8
                   Figure 1: Spatial Distribution of Communities in Sample
                                              G G        G
                                                  G G ( G               (G
                              (                                 (
                                   G                                              G          (     ( G         G (G ( (( (( ((G (                 (G
                                                                                                                                                 ( ((((G(G( (G(
                                                                                                                                                 (                 G(
                                   (      (       (  (G    G (        G( G    G G G(              (                                           ( ( GG
                                                        G                  G (               G G ((             (
                                                                                                                                 (( ( G (( ( ((( (G
                                                                                                                                                       (
                                                                (G G               (                    G (G ( (          (                           (G((( (
                                                                                                                                                      (      G (((
                                              (G ( (      G(  G                  G     G          GG     G                          (   (    ( G   (G
                                                                                                                                                    (             (
                                                                  G       G                                    G (        ( G(           G (G(( ( G G(G (
                                                                                                                                         (                        G
                                              ( (
                                                        G                   G          G
                                                                                       (       G G GG
                                                                                               (                 (
                                         (               G           (           (      (                              ( (           G ( (G(G G ((G ( G
                                                                    (     G                        (    G      G (        (      (G ( (G  ( G ( GG    (GG (G G    (G
                                                           (G
                                                                 G       G
                                                                         ( G   G               (                               G      (
                                                                                                                                             ( G
                                                                                                                                                   G       G   G  GG
                                                                    G                 G                                   (G            (                     G
                                                                                                                                                       G G (( G         G
                                                       G                                  ( (G (( ( GG G       ( G(            G GG(   G G (G GG(                   ( G(
                                                   (      ( G        G GG G
                                                                     (                        ( (                       G                       G       G G G ( GG
                                                                                                                                      G             G (( G GGG G            G
                                                                                  G          (
                                                                                             (     ( (G       (
                                                                                                                   GG    (     (      (      (( (
                                                                                                                                                                          G
                                                                G G        G      G G   (                                             G         G ( GG G
                                                                                                                                G (( ( (( ( G
                                                   (     (G                                                               (                                      G  G(G
                                                                     G                      G      (    (G GG GG G ( ( (               (  G      G  G    G( G     (G(
                                                                                                                                                               ((G G
                                                    ( ((      ((
                                                                       (      G(                                                                             GG
                                         G( (                       G ( ( G G                           G ( G (( G(
                                                                                                                                      (
                                                                                                                                      (
                                                                                                                                             (
                                                                                                                                                ( ((G G ( ((G G
                                                                                                                                                                 (
                                                                                                                                                                 (((G
                                                                                                                                                                GG   GG
                                         (                                                   ( ((                                      (                             G((G G
                                                 G ( (( G      ( G                      (                                            G(       G
                                                                                                                                                   G G GGGG    (GG   (  G
                                           ( (                                                        G                                                           (G(GG
                                          (                                 (
                                       (                   (                  (              ( (G       G (G (( (G G( GG ((G ( (
                                                                                                        (                                                 G  G   GG G
                                                                                                                                                              ( ( GG (
                                              (                      (( ( G( ( (                                                    G                  G            G
                               (
                                          (   (    G          (                            G (( (G (( G G                      (     G       G     G
                                                                                                                                                   (               GGGGG( G
                                            G     G                                                                      (G G         (                   G(        G  G( ( (((
                                               (   (     (G (        (     (      (    G
                                                                                       ((                    (    (( (                     G       G                      (((((( (G
                                                               (
                                                                                                   ( G(        (    (    (     (       (     ( G( ( (G G           GG G(( G
                                                                                                                                                                   G         ( (G G
                                                                    G                        (
                                                                                             G                                                                                (G G
                                              (    (
                                                   (     (      (   (      (
                                                                           (         ( (                                  (
                                                                                                                             (     (        G   (
                                                                                                                                                              (  G( (( G     G((G( (
                                                                                            (            (          (           (     (      (    G (      G       G ( G G( (( (
                                                   (                                                                          (
                                          (   (                                                                                          (
                                                                                                                     (   (       ( ( G ( G ( GG                    ( ((( G(
                                                                                                               (                                                               (
                                          (
                                                                                                                    (     ( G          (
                                                                                                                                              ( ( G( (
                                                                                                                                                                 (
                                                                                                                                                                   ( G (        G(
                                                                                                                          (      (      (
                                                                                                   (                 G                 ( G(G
                                                                                                                   G(                                 (            G(     ( G(
                                                                                             ( ( ((      (( (             ( (
                                                                                                                            (
                                                                                                                                ( G (    G (( (  (          (
                                                                                                    (                   (              (
                                                                                                                                 ( ( ((  ( G                     G(G
                                                                                             ( ( ( ( (( (( ((            (                    (      (G
                                                                                                                                                            (( (
                                                                                                                                                                           (G (
                                                                                      (                    (
                                                                                                                                G(        G (                     G       G
                                                                                             (
                                                                                                ( (      (     ( ((
                                                                                                               (          (            (      ((   G(     (           G( ( G(
                                                                                                         (                             (                      ( G         G
                                                                                           G (          (
                   G   Aggregation communities                                           (   (     (( (        (( (       (
                                                                                                                           (
                                                                                                                                 (( (
                                                                                                                                             (
                                                                                                                                           ( (
                                                                                                                                              (
                                                                                                 (                  (            G (
                                                                                        (    (     (     (     (    G      (     (
                                                                                            (
                   (   Non-aggregation communities                                            (    (          (     (     (      (
                                                                                                                                  (
                                                                                                                                        (




Notes: Figure displays the locations of communities in our sample. Plus signs indicate communities that
implemented aggregation. Circles indicate communities that did not pass aggregation.


played a role in a community’s decision to hold a referendum. To the best of our knowledge,
changes in expected future usage were not a consideration.12 Anecdotally, the reasons why
some communities voted against aggregation include: (1) lack of trust in the local govern-
ment to secure savings relative to the incumbent; (2) loyalty to the utility; (3) concern about
the environmental impact of the resulting electricity use increase; (4) a misunderstanding
about the opt-out provision; and (5) the belief that choosing an electricity provider for
residents was not an appropriate government function.
    There is some variation in how long communities take to implement price changes af-
ter approving aggregation. The median length of time between passage of the aggregation
referendum and commencement of the aggregation program is 4 months. At least 10 per-
cent of aggregation communities switched suppliers within 3 months of the referendum,
whereas 10 percent had not done so 6 months afterward. For our reduced-form results,
we construct estimates relative to the referendum date to capture any usage response that
occurred prior to the actual price change.
    Many states employ a “block pricing” schedule where the marginal price of electricity
increases with quantity purchased. Illinois, by contrast, employs a constant marginal price
and a moderate fixed fee, which simplifies our analysis because it reduces confusion over
  12
     Our understanding of the motivations behind aggregation is guided by local news articles, local govern-
ment meeting minutes, in-person discussions with ComEd and the Illinois Commerce Commission (Illinois’
electricity regulator), and phone conversations with industry participants.


                                                                                 9
                      Figure 2: Prices for Aggregation and Non-Aggregation (ComEd) Communities

                     (a) Monthly Electricity Rates, 2008-2016                                                                   (b) Mean Residential Electricity Prices




                                                                    300
                10




                                                                                                                          13
                                                                      Count of Communities

                                                                                              Electricity Price (cents/kWh)
 Rate (cents/kWh)
                8




                                                                    200




                                                                                                                          12
                6
                4




                                                                    100




                                                                                                                          11
                2




                                                                                                                          10
                0




                                                                    0
                    2008m1   2010m1   2012m1     2014m1    2016m1
                                         Date




                                                                                                                          9
                              Supply (Aggregation Mean)
                              Supply (ComEd)                                                                                   -24   -18    -12   -6     0     6     12   18   24
                                                                                                                                             Months Since Referendum
                              All Other Usage Charges
                              Number of Aggregation Communities                                                                            Aggregation Communities        ComEd


Notes: The thick blue line in panel (a) displays the average supply rate among all communities that adopted
aggregation. The first community adopted aggregation in June of 2011. Non-aggregation communities pay
ComEd’s supply rate (thick, dashed red line in panel (a)). The thin green line in panel (a) displays the total of
all other electricity rates on a consumer’s residential bill, which do not depend on whether a community has
adopted aggregation. All displayed rates are for a single family residence with non-electric heating. The thin
dashed line in panel (a) indicates the cumulative number of communities that have implemented aggregation.
Panel (b) displays the mean (total) electricity price for aggregation communities as a function of the time
since referendum and compares it to the corresponding ComEd price. The short dashed vertical line indicates
the median implementation date relative to when the referendum was passed.


the “price” to which consumers might be responding. This constant marginal price can be
broken down into three main components: supply, delivery, and taxes/fees. Implementing
aggregation entails a community signing a contract with a supplier for a particular supply
rate (the largest component of the marginal price); delivery charges and other fees remain
the same. Non-aggregation communities pay the default ComEd supply rate. Thus, aggre-
gation only affects the marginal price of electricity. Nearly all suppliers offered contracts
with a constant supply rate, with most terms ranging from 9 months to 3 years.
    Figure 2 demonstrates the price variation in our sample. The thick dashed line and thin
green line in panel (a) display ComEd’s monthly supply rate and the total of all other usage
rates, respectively, during and after our sample period. ComEd’s supply rate decreased sig-
nificantly in 2013, when its long-term high-priced power contract expired. We discuss the
implications of this shock for the interpretation of our estimates in Section IV. In response
to this price drop, several communities switched back to ComEd when their aggregation
contracts expired in June of 2014. This reversal is visible in the black dashed line, which
displays the count of aggregation communities over time.
    The thick blue line in panel (a) shows the average monthly supply rate for aggrega-


                                                                                             10
tion communities, starting from when the first community implemented aggregation (June
2011). During our sample period (2008–2014), the average aggregation supply rate is
always lower than the default ComEd supply rate, although the two rates converge in mid-
2015. We also note that the month-to-month variation in the ComEd rate is small relative
to the level shocks brought about by aggregation and the June 2013 ComEd contract expi-
ration.
    Another way to visualize the price variation in our sample is to plot the mean residential
electricity prices for aggregation communities relative to the referendum date (panel (b) of
Figure 2). The displayed price combines the supply rate with the other usage charges
from panel (a). For comparison, we also show the mean contemporaneous ComEd rate.
The figure illustrates the two large price reductions during the time period spanned by our
sample. Averaging the price changes along the x-axis, we observe a 25 percent reduction
for communities upon implementation, and a 10 percent reduction for non-aggregation
communities about 15 months after the average date of a successful referendum, reflecting
the June 2013 drop in the ComEd supply price. There was also significant cross-sectional
variation in the aggregation price shocks (see Figure A.5 in the Appendix), but, for nearly
all communities in nearly every month, aggregation reduced prices.
    Variation in aggregation prices is due to differences in (i) the timing of the referenda; (ii)
community procurement strategies; and (iii) the load profiles of the communities. This last
source of variation raises the concern that suppliers might have charged different prices
to communities with different expected future usage. Our estimation approach mitigates
this issue because it matches aggregation communities to their non-aggregation controls
based on the same community-level usage data that suppliers used to determine prices.
Furthermore, we investigate the potential for price endogeneity by estimating elasticities
separately by percentiles of the realized price change, and we find no relationship (see
Section IV.B).13
    Both the aggregation-driven price changes and the 2013 drop in the ComEd price were
likely more salient to customers than typical month-to-month changes in electricity rates.
Aggregation is publicized in advance of the referendum, and each household receives a
  13
     An additional concern is that the implementation of aggregation could influence the supply price paid
by remaining ComEd customers through a reverse causality channel: if communities with favorable load
profiles implemented aggregation, then the remaining ComEd communities would be more costly to serve,
causing ComEd to increase its price. However, ComEd still supplied a large pool of customers throughout
our sample period, and the fact that aggregation prices converged to the ComEd price in 2015–2016 suggests
that selection based on the load profile is not a significant concern in our setting.



                                                   11
mailer informing them of the new aggregation price. Likewise, the drop in ComEd prices
received statewide attention in the press.14 Though we cannot say whether other potential
energy policies (e.g., a carbon tax) that affect electricity prices will be more or less salient,
they are also likely to be anticipated and publicized. Aggregation therefore provides a good
setting for assessing the residential usage response to energy policies.
    Finally, because ComEd’s supply price does not vary geographically, we can use our
raw data to calculate the savings aggregation communities obtained from switching suppli-
ers. Specifically, we multiply aggregation communities’ observed electricity usage by the
price difference each month and aggregate over our sample period. We estimate that the
residential aggregation consumers in our sample saved $566 million through June 2014.


                               III    Empirical Strategy

                                         A   Overview

Measuring price differences brought about by aggregation is straightforward. Each ag-
gregation community has a constant marginal electricity supply rate that is set within a
few months of passing a referendum. The counterfactual supply price for each aggrega-
tion community is the ComEd price, as non-aggregation supply prices do not vary within
ComEd’s service area. Similarly, there is no meaningful geographic variation in the other
components of marginal price. Thus, the primary challenge is estimating counterfactual
electricity usage for aggregation communities.
    We estimate the community-level usage response to changes in the electricity price by
matching communities that implemented aggregation (the “treated” group) to communi-
ties that did not (the “control” group) based on their pre-aggregation electricity usage. We
exploit the fact that the implementation of aggregation depended on a referendum, which
was plausibly exogenous with respect to expected changes in electricity usage. (We pro-
vide some empirical evidence for this identifying assumption in subsequent sections.) Our
setting is an ideal application for a matching estimator. The large, diverse set of control
communities makes it likely that a nearest-neighbor matching approach will successfully
find a suitable comparison group. Additionally, we have enough pre-aggregation usage
data for an internal validation of our approach.
  14
   See, for example, “Some ComEd customers to see lower prices,” Chicago Tribune, April 1, 2013.
“What’s happening to your electric bill June 1?” Citizens Utility Board, May 30, 2013.




                                               12
    We then estimate elasticities by regressing usage changes, as calculated by our match-
ing estimator, on corresponding aggregation-driven price shocks. We measure how the
response of usage to contemporaneous electricity prices evolves following a successful ag-
gregation referendum. The elasticities estimated by this model are accurate to the extent
that the post-period price changes in our sample can be reasonably approximated as a one-
time, permanent change in price. We account for the empirical variation in prices over
time in Section V, where we estimate a more flexible model that disentangles the short-run
response to price changes from the longer-run response.

                        B    Difference-in-Differences Matching Estimator

To estimate changes in electricity usage brought about by aggregation, we apply a difference-
in-differences adjustment to the bias-corrected matching estimator developed by Abadie
and Imbens (2006, 2011). For each of the 289 treated communities, we use 2008–2009
electricity usage data to identify the five nearest neighbors from the 479 control commu-
nities available in our sample. We average annual log usage and monthly log deviations
from annual usage across 2008 and 2009 to construct 13 match variables. We standardize
the variables and use an equal-weight least squares metric to calculate distances between
communities. That distance is then used to select the five nearest neighbors for each treated
community.15 We allow non-aggregation communities to be selected as neighbors for mul-
tiple aggregation communities; i.e., each aggregation community draws from an identical
set of potential controls. We use these nearest neighbors to construct counterfactual usage
and employ standard difference-in-differences techniques to adjust for pre-period differ-
ences. The identifying assumption is that, conditional on 2008–2009 usage, the passage of
aggregation and subsequent price changes are unrelated to anticipated electricity use. We
provide evidence that this assumption is reasonable by showing that trends in usage for the
control and treated groups remain parallel after the matching period but before the passage
of aggregation.
    Let Yit denote log usage for community i in period t, where t = 0 corresponds to the
referendum date for each treated community. For control communities, t = 0 corresponds
to the referendum date of the treated community to which they have been matched. Let
the indicator variable Di be equal to 1 if a community ever implements aggregation and 0
otherwise. The outcome Yit is a function of Di , so that, for aggregation communities, Yit (1)
  15
    Table A.1 in the Appendix shows that the results are very similar if we instead select the single nearest
neighbor or the ten nearest neighbors.


                                                    13
indicates usage when treated and Ybit (0) indicates estimated counterfactual usage when not
treated. Given Yit (1) and Ybit (0), we can obtain a community-specific estimate of the effect
of aggregation on usage, ∆Yd it :

                                      d it = Yit (1) − Ybit (0).
                                      ∆Y                                                           (1)

    We observe the outcome Yit (1) for the treated communities in our data. The counter-
factual outcome, Ybit (0), is unobserved and is calculated as follows. For each treated com-
munity i, we select M = 5 nearest neighbors using the procedure previously discussed.
Let JM (i) denote the set of control communities for community i. The counterfactual
outcome, Ybit (0), is then equal to


                           m(t) 1             X                      m(t)
                                                                             
                         bi +
              Ybit (0) = µ                             Yjt (0) − µ
                                                                 bj
                                M
                                            j∈JM (i)
                                                                                         
                             1        X                    m(t)       1      X        m(t) 
                         =                  Yjt (0) + µ
                                                       bi         −                  µ
                                                                                     bj        ,
                             M                                        M
                                 j∈JM (i)                                 j∈JM (i)

where
                                  m(t)         1   2008      2009
                                                                   
                                 µ
                                 bi       =      Yi,m(t) + Yi,m(t)   .
                                               2
                  m(t)
The parameter µ   bi    is a non-parametric bias correction that accounts for the average
                                                                         2008        2009
month-by-month usage patterns of each community. The variables Yi,m(t)        and Yi,m(t) rep-
resent observed usage for community i in calendar month m(t) in      2008 and 2009, respec-
                                                                                          
                                                           m(25)    1    2008       2009
tively. For example, if t = 25 is January 2014, then µ    bi     = 2 Yi,m(25)  + Yi,m(25)   =
1     2008         2009
                            
2
    Yi,January + Yi,January   is equal to the average log usage in January 2008 and January
2009. Thus, the estimated counterfactual Ybit (0) is equal to the average usage for a treated
community’s nearest neighbors plus the difference in usage between that community and
its neighbors averaged across the 2008–2009 calendar months corresponding to t.
     Finally, we obtain a community-specific “difference-in-differences” estimate of the im-
pact on usage by netting out the average change in usage in the year prior to treatment. This
estimate is defined as
                                                     Ns
                                                 1 X
                                  τbit = ∆Y it −
                                         d              ∆Y
                                                        d i,−s ,                                   (2)
                                                 Ns s=1




                                                  14
where Ns indicates the number of periods in the year prior to the policy change.16 The ∆Y
                                                                                        d
terms on the right-hand side of equation (2) are defined in equation (1). Our difference-in-
differences estimate τbit thus reflects the difference in usage between a treated community
and its matched control communities in period t, relative to the average difference in the
year leading up to the policy change. To quantify the average impact of the policy on usage,
we take the mean of the community-specific treatment effects:

                                                     N1
                                                  1 X
                                             τt =
                                             b           τbit .                                            (3)
                                                  N1 i=1

where N1 denotes the number of treated communities in our sample. Because the policy
change occurs at the community level, and we only include communities that implement
aggregation, we interpret this estimate as the effect of the treatment on the treated.17
    In our setting, the aggregation electricity price is announced months before the actual
price change takes place. Thus, consumers may respond to future price changes by, for
example, placing less weight on energy efficiency when replacing old appliances, changing
their thermostat program, or changing energy use habits. Failing to account for anticipa-
tion effects in a difference-in-differences framework can lead to biased treatment effect
estimates when consumers are forward-looking (Malani and Reif, 2015). Ample evidence
from the energy literature suggests that anticipation effects can be important determinants
of consumer behavior. For example, Myers (2016) finds that expected future heating costs
appear to be capitalized fully into housing values. While Allcott and Wozny (2014) re-
ject full capitalization of gasoline prices into used vehicle prices, they nonetheless find
that vehicle prices are significantly affected by future expected fuel costs. Because we
do not observe exactly when the price change is announced, our main specification esti-
mates effects that are relative to the referendum date, rather than when aggregation was
implemented. Section 4 of the Appendix presents evidence of anticipatory behavior by es-
timating changes in electricity use after the referendum is passed but before a community
switches to a new supplier.18
    We estimate price changes the same way we estimate usage changes: by comparing
prices in the treated community to its matched controls. Because electricity rates do not
  16
      For monthly estimates, Ns = 12. For biannual estimates, Ns = 2.
  17
      Because a small proportion of households opted out of aggregation, at the household level our estimate
reflects an intent-to-treat effect (conditional on implementing aggregation).
   18
      It is also possible for consumers to make changes even prior to the passage of the referendum, in antici-
pation that it will pass and that electricity prices will fall. We find no evidence of such behavior.


                                                     15
vary in the cross-section for non-aggregation communities, the price difference is exactly
zero prior to a community’s implementation of aggregation. Therefore, the difference-
in-differences estimate of log price changes is simply the observed difference between the
community’s aggregation rate and the ComEd rate, ∆ ln pit . The mean effect of aggregation
on prices is the average of these differences:

                                                   N1
                                                1 X
                                      ∆ ln pt =        ∆ ln pit .                                        (4)
                                                N1 i=1


                                      C    Estimating Elasticities

To obtain elasticities, we regress community-specific estimates of the change in usage on
community-specific price changes. We estimate separate elasticities over time in order to
show how the elasticity changes dynamically. For a set of post-referendum periods, g, the
corresponding elasticity, βg , is obtained via the regression

                                 τbit = βg · ∆ ln pit + ηit       ∀t ∈ g.                                (5)

We estimate two versions of this specification. First, we estimate equation (5) separately
for each month post-referendum (i.e., {g} = {t}). Second, to increase the precision of our
estimates, we group the data into six-month intervals and estimate equation (5) for each of
these groups. In this second specification, βg is the average elasticity for each six-month
period. We also report estimates of the mean change in log price and in log usage in each
                   1                     1
                      P                     P
six-month period, |g|   t∈g ∆ ln pt and |g|  t∈g τ t .
                                                 b


                                              D    Inference

Because matching estimators do not meet the regularity conditions required for bootstrap-
ping (Abadie and Imbens, 2008), we employ a subsampling procedure to construct confi-
dence intervals for our matching estimates.19 Subsampling, like bootstrapping, obtains a
distribution of parameter estimates by sampling from the observed data.
    Consider a parameter of interest, θ.
                                      b For each of Nb = 500 subsamples, we select with-
                          √
out replacement B1 = R· N1 treated communities and B0 = R· √NN01 control communities,
  19
     Abadie and Imbens (2006, 2011) provide a formula for the standard errors of bias-corrected matching
estimators of average treatment effects. Our panel data structure and the use of match-specific indexing for
the control communities relative to the treated communities preclude a simple implementation of this formula.
Further, our main estimates are not simple average treatment effects.

                                                    16
where R is a tuning parameter (Politis and Romano, 1994) and N0 is the number of control
communities. As before, N1 is the number of treated (aggregation) communities. For each
                                                                      √
subsample, we calculate θbb . The matching estimator converges at rate N1 (Abadie and
Imbens, 2006, 2011), and the estimated CDF of θb is given by:

                                  Nb  √                 
                              1 X        B1 b b b
                      F (x) =
                      b              1 √    θb − θ + θ < x
                              Nb b=1    N1

The lower and upper bounds of the confidence intervals can then be estimated as Fb−1 (0.025)
and Fb−1 (0.975).
    Subsampling requires a large number of effective observations (i.e., treated units) in
each subsample, but it also requires that this number be small relative to the total number
of effective observations in the full sample. We employ R = 3 (B1 = 51) for the confi-
dence intervals and standard errors reported in the paper, which prioritizes the large-sample
properties within each subsample. Table A.2 in the Appendix compares standard errors for
different values of the tuning parameter R and shows they are robust.

              E    Advantages of Matching Estimators with Electricity Data

A key advantage of the nearest-neighbor approach is that it eliminates control communities
that are not observationally similar to treated communities and whose inclusion would thus
add noise (and possibly bias) to the estimation. Electricity usage is highly seasonal, with
peaks in winter and summer and troughs in spring and fall (see Figure A.6 in the Appendix),
and the degree of seasonality varies widely across the different communities in our sample.
Identifying control communities with usage profiles similar to aggregation communities
can therefore greatly increase precision.
    Figure 3 provides a demonstration of this benefit. Panel (a) displays electricity us-
                                                                         m(t)
age adjusted for community-level monthly seasonal patterns (Yit − µ    bi ) for aggregation
(treated) and non-aggregation (control) communities. Even after accounting for community-
specific seasonality using monthly data from 2008 and 2009, usage varies greatly within
and across years: the largest peak occurs in July 2012, which corresponds to a record heat
wave. By contrast, summer peaks are much less pronounced in 2009 and 2013, when the
summers were mild. The difference between these two time series, which corresponds to an
event study regression with community-specific month-of-year fixed effects, is displayed
in panel (c). The increase in the difference is visible beginning in late-2011, which can be


                                             17
                                                  Figure 3: Comparing Regression to Nearest-Neighbor Matching

                                                       (a) Regression                                                                        (b) Nearest-Neighbor Matching
 Log Usage (Seasonally-Adjusted)




                                                                                                 Log Usage (Seasonally-Adjusted)
                                  .3




                                                                                                                               .3
                                                                                                                                                  Matching
                                                                                                                                                  Window
                                  .2




                                                                                                                               .2
                                  .1




                                                                                                                               .1
                                  0




                                                                                                                               0
                                  -.1




                                                                                                                               -.1
                                  -.2




                                                                                                                               -.2
                                      2007m1 2008m1 2009m1 2010m1 2011m1 2012m1 2013m1 2014m1                                         2007m1 2008m1 2009m1 2010m1 2011m1 2012m1 2013m1 2014m1
                                                                Date                                                                                            Date
                                                 Aggregation Communities        All Controls                                                   Aggregation Communities       Matched Controls



                                      (c) Treatment and All Controls: Difference                                      (d) Treatment and Matched Controls: Difference
 Difference in (Adjusted) Log Usage




                                                                                                 Difference in (Adjusted) Log Usage
                                  .1




                                                                                                                                  .1

                                                                                                                                                  Matching
                                                                                                                                                  Window
                                  .05




                                                                                                                                  .05
                                  0




                                                                                                                                  0
                                  -.05




                                                                                                                                  -.05




                                      2007m1 2008m1 2009m1 2010m1 2011m1 2012m1 2013m1 2014m1                                         2007m1 2008m1 2009m1 2010m1 2011m1 2012m1 2013m1 2014m1
                                                                Date                                                                                            Date
Notes: Panel (a) displays seasonally-adjusted usage for all aggregation and non-aggregation communities.
The red line corresponds to the control group in a typical regression, with community-specific month-of-
year fixed effects. Panel (b) employs the nearest-neighbor matching procedure, in which five communities
are selected for each aggregation community, and the control line is weighted by how often each control
community is selected. Panels (c) and (d) plot the differences between the treatment and control lines in
panels (a) and (b), respectively. The vertical dashed lines indicate the first referendum date. We match on
usage during the 24 months in 2008 and 2009. The matching window is indicated by the vertical dotted lines
in panels (b) and (d).


attributed to the implementation of aggregation, but this difference is quite noisy. The het-
erogeneity in seasonal patterns poses a challenge for a standard regression that compares
treated communities to all control communities in the sample: it is difficult to estimate
an effect when the baseline month-to-month divergence in usage is of the same order of
magnitude as the effect.
    Panels (b) and (d) of Figure 3 show analogous plots for the nearest-neighbor matching
approach discussed above. Vertical dotted lines indicate the matching window of 2008

                                                                                                18
through 2009. Panel (d) shows again that the difference in log usage between treatment and
(matched) control communities increases beginning in late-2011. The difference in panel
(d) exhibits far less noise than the difference displayed in panel (c), however, because
the matching estimator selects only those control communities that are similar to treated
communities. This method of selection allows the matching estimator to generate more
precise estimates than the standard difference-in-differences estimator.
    To see whether matching also helps improve the similarity between treated and con-
trol communities on other dimensions, we matched the names of the communities in our
ComEd sample to data obtained from the 2005-2009 American Community Survey (ACS)
Summary File. We obtained ACS matches for 286 out of 289 aggregation communities,
and 385 out of 479 non-aggregation communities.20 Compared to all non-aggregation com-
munities, communities that implemented aggregation are significantly larger, younger, and
more educated (see Table A.3 in the Appendix for more details). They are also less white,
and have more expensive and slightly newer housing. However, the 2010 electricity us-
age per capita is very similar for aggregation and non-aggregation communities. After
matching on monthly and annual electricity usage, the weighted pool of matched controls
is more similar to the aggregation communities. With two exceptions (percent black and
longitude), the differences between non-aggregation and aggregation communities are less
likely to be statistically significant, which indicates that matching on usage also selects
control communities with more similar socioeconomic characteristics.


                                            IV     Results

                                           A    Main Results

We first show that electricity prices fell substantially and persistently following the pas-
sage of aggregation referenda. Panel (a) in Figure 4 displays the average change in log
prices for aggregation communities, relative to their matched controls (∆ ln pt ). The price
change is exactly equal to zero in the pre-period because the treated communities face the
same ComEd supply prices as their matched control communities during that time period.
Within 12 months of passing the referendum, prices in aggregation communities decrease
by 0.27 log points (about 24 percent) relative to control communities, although they re-
  20
    Aggregation is generally implemented at the township, village, or city level. These different levels of
municipal governments frequently overlap and have similar names. In order to minimize incorrect matches,
we avoided ambiguous matches.


                                                    19
                         Figure 4: Reduced-Form Effects of Aggregation on Electricity Prices and Usage

                          (a) Effect of Aggregation on Log Price                                          (b) Effect of Aggregation on Log Usage




                                                                                                   .08
                   0




                                                                                 Change in Log Usage
 Change in Log Price




                                                                                                   .06
                   -.1




                                                                                                   .04
                                                                                                   .02
                   -.2




                                                                                                   0
                                                                                                   -.02
                   -.3




                         -24   -18   -12   -6     0    6   12     18       24                             -24   -18   -12   -6     0    6   12     18       24
                                      Months Since Referendum                                                          Months Since Referendum
                                     Point Estimates       95 Percent CI                                              Point Estimates       95 Percent CI

Notes: Panel (a) shows the effect of aggregation on the log of the electricity price, as calculated by equation
(4). Because treatment and control communities faced the same price prior to aggregation, the pre-period
difference is exactly zero. Panel (b) shows the effect of aggregation on average log electricity usage, as cal-
culated by equation (3). These estimates are normalized so that the average usage difference in the year prior
to the referendum is zero. The short dashed line displayed in both panels indicates the median implementa-
tion date relative to when the referendum was passed (4 months). Confidence intervals are constructed via
subsampling.


bound significantly a few months into the second year. The rebound is attributable to a
sharp decrease in ComEd’s supply price in June of 2013 (see Figure 2). Nonetheless, ag-
gregation prices stay at least 10 percent lower than the control communities for most of the
remaining estimation period.
    Panel (b) in Figure 4 displays the corresponding estimates for electricity usage (b   τ t ).
Prior to the referendum, the difference in usage between aggregation and control commu-
nities is nearly constant and never significantly different from zero. We emphasize that
this result is not mechanical, as our 2008–2009 matching period predates the vast majority
of successful aggregation referenda by at least two years (see Table 1).21 Following the
referendum, relative usage in aggregation communities increases by about 0.06 log points
(6.1 percent) by the end of first year after the referendum. This difference shrinks to about
0.04 log points (4.1 percent) at month 15 because of the ComEd price decrease; it then
stabilizes. Because the aggregation prices are stable around the date of the ComEd price
drop (see Figure 2), this pattern provides persuasive evidence that both aggregation and
non-aggregation communities are responding to their respective price changes. Thus, our
           21
    Specifically, 270 of the 289 aggregation communities have virtually no overlap between the matching
period and the pre-period estimates in Figure 4.



                                                                                20
                                                Figure 5: Reduced-Form Price Elasticities

                                      (a) Monthly                                                                  (b) Biannual
                    0




                                                                                                 0
                    -.1
 Elasticity of Demand




                                                                              Elasticity of Demand
                                                                                                 -.1
                    -.2
                    -.3




                                                                                                 -.2
                    -.4




                                                                                                 -.3
                    -.5
                    -.6




                                                                                                 -.4
                          0   6           12        18        24         30                            0   6           12        18        24         30
                                  Months Since Referendum                                                      Months Since Referendum
                                  Point Estimates        95 Percent CI                                         Point Estimates        95 Percent CI


Notes: This figure plots estimates of β̂g from equation (5). Each point estimate comes from a separate regres-
sion of estimated community-specific changes in usage on the corresponding price changes for a particular
post-referendum time period g. Panel (a) reports estimates from a series of monthly regressions. Panel (b)
reports estimates from an analogous specification that groups the data into six-month intervals. The estimates
in panel (b) are also reported in Table 2. Confidence intervals are constructed via subsampling.


results are not driven merely by the salience of the price change brought about by aggrega-
tion.
    Figure 5 displays reduced-form estimates of the price elasticity of demand (equation
(5)). We present both monthly and biannual elasticities. Due to their greater precision, we
consider the biannual estimates our primary specification, and we summarize them in Table
2.22 The elasticity estimates increase in magnitude from about −0.09 in the first 6 months
following the referendum up to −0.27 two years later, indicating that consumers are much
more elastic in the long run than the short run and ruling out a constant price elasticity. In
other words, usage does not respond fully to price changes in the near term.
    The time-varying elasticity shown in Figure 5 is not due to the delay between the dates
of the referenda and the dates of the actual price changes. While it is true that usage
patterns in Figure 4 reflect the lag between referenda and implementation, so do the price
patterns. As the usage changes are scaled by the price changes, the implementation lag does
not matter when calculating elasticities. For example, if the price elasticity were in fact
constant over time, we would estimate it as such, even in the presence of implementation
   22
      Point estimates for monthly elasticity estimates can be found in Table A.4 in the Appendix. Table A.5
reports the corresponding yearly estimates. We have also estimated a specification that models the price
elasticity as a quadratic function of the number of months since the referendum. The results, displayed in
Figure A.7, are very similar.


                                                                          21
      Table 2: Matching Estimates of the Effect of Aggregation on Usage and Prices

 Post-Referendum Period       Log Usage        Log Price        Elasticity     Usage Obs.       Price Obs.

 1-6 Months                    0.014***        -0.098***       -0.094***           1692            1692
                                (0.003)         (0.003)         (0.019)

 7-12 Months                   0.050***        -0.249***       -0.155***           1668            1668
                                (0.007)         (0.007)         (0.020)

 13-18 Months                  0.043***        -0.147***       -0.228***           1516            1515
                                (0.005)         (0.002)         (0.027)

 19-24 Months                  0.039***        -0.132***       -0.272***           1155            1155
                                (0.006)         (0.003)         (0.043)

 25-30 Months                  0.043***        -0.120***       -0.275***           606              604
                                (0.007)         (0.004)         (0.039)

 Significance levels: * 10 percent, ** 5 percent, *** 1 percent. Estimates are constructed by a nearest-neighbor
 matching approach where each aggregation community is matched to the five non-aggregation communities
 with the most similar usage in 2008 and 2009. The Log Usage and Log Price columns report average effects
 as calculated by equations (3) and (4), respectively. The Elasticity column reports regression estimates of
 β̂g from equation (5). Each elasticity estimate corresponds to a separate regression. The number of price
 observations corresponds to the number of observations used for each elasticity estimate. Standard errors,
 given in parentheses, and statistical significance levels are calculated via subsampling.


delays.
    The sharp decrease in the estimated monthly elasticity at month 15 in Figure 5 corre-
sponds to the large ComEd price decrease. Because the adjustment process is dynamic,
the usage difference does not shrink as quickly as the price difference, which causes the
estimated monthly price elasticity to increase in magnitude temporarily. This demonstrates
a challenge with interpreting the reduced-form price elasticity: our estimate captures a mix
of short-run and longer-run responses to (1) the price decrease due to aggregation; (2) the
drop in ComEd prices in June 2013; and (3) the monthly variation in the ComEd rate. In
addition, consumers may respond to anticipated price changes. These caveats aside, the
growth over time in the magnitude of the estimated elasticity suggests that the long-run
effects of aggregation dominate the shorter-run responses to other price changes.
    The finding that consumers are more elastic in the long run than in the short run is
consistent with several mechanisms, including habit formation, inattention, learning, and
slow-moving investments in appliances and home insulation. For example, Brandon et al.
(2017) find that 35–55 percent of the energy reductions due to a non-price intervention (a


                                                     22
home energy report) persist even after the treated household moves out of the dwelling,
suggesting that investments in physical capital matter for energy consumption changes in
their setting. In order to gauge the potential role of appliance replacement in our setting, we
perform a simple back-of-the-envelope calculation. Suppose that new appliances bought in
non-aggregation communities used 10–20 percent less energy than new appliances bought
in aggregation communities.23 To account for the estimated 4 percent energy use differ-
ence two years after aggregation, 20–40 percent of appliances would need to be replaced
within this time period. This value is higher than the typical two-year replacement rate
for major household appliances, which ranges from 5–20 percent.24 Thus, while appliance
replacement behavior can explain some of our findings, other mechanisms—such as those
mentioned above—likely play a role. Because we do not have data on consumer behav-
ior beyond electricity consumption, we do not attempt to further distinguish among these
different adjustment channels.

                                B    Robustness Checks and Extensions

Our main identifying assumption is that the price changes caused by aggregation were un-
correlated with expected future changes in usage, conditional on our control communities.
If suppliers offered different prices based on predicted future usage, this price targeting
might generate bias in our estimates. Our nearest-neighbor controls are selected based on a
community’s historical usage data, which are the same data used by suppliers to determine
prices. Therefore, we think that systematic correlation between price and unobservable fac-
tors that affect post-referendum usage is unlikely. We also perform a simple empirical test
for price targeting by suppliers. We split the treated communities into seven equal groups
based on the price change they experienced in the first two years following their referenda.
We then calculate the average elasticity separately for each group by pooling observations
in this two-year period and estimating equation (5). If suppliers were offering prices to
communities based on expected changes in demand, then we might find a systematic rela-
  23
      This difference reflects the gap between ENERGY STAR efficiency and the minimum required efficiency.
Houde (2018) shows that appliance manufacturers tend to bunch their product offerings at these two levels.
   24
      Clothes washers, clothes dryers, and water heaters have a lifespan of about 10 years, refrigerators have
a lifespan of about 15 years, and air conditioners have a lifespan of 15–20 years. Moreover, some aggrega-
tion households are likely to continue purchasing ENERGY STAR appliances, while some non-aggregation
households purchase non-ENERGY STAR appliances, implying that an even larger replacement rate would
be necessary to generate the effects we observe. For reference, in 2009, 54 percent of clothes washers, 4 per-
cent of water heaters, 40 percent of refrigerators, 34 percent of air conditioners, and 76 percent of dishwashers
sold in Illinois were ENERGY STAR certified (Environmental Protection Agency, 2018).



                                                      23
tionship between estimated elasticities and prices. However, we find no clear relationship
between the two. Figure A.8 in the Appendix plots these estimates.
    We chose January 2008 through December 2009 as our matching period because it
allowed us to closely match controls to treated communities while also providing a fairly
long post-matching period to test for pre-trends. We have also estimated our model using
an alternative matching period of February 2007 through January 2009.25 These results are
very similar to those in the paper and are available upon request. Additionally, we show in
Table A.1 of the Appendix that we obtain similar results if we match to the single nearest
neighbor or the ten nearest neighbors, instead of the five we use as our baseline.
    As a placebo test, we estimate how usage evolves for communities that passed a refer-
endum but never implemented aggregation (see Figure A.9 in the Appendix). Although the
estimates are noisy, they suggest that there was no increase in usage due to the referendum
itself in those communities.
    We have also estimated the effect of aggregation on electricity usage using a difference-
in-differences reduced-form approach without matching. In this analysis, which we discuss
in detail in Section 3 of the Appendix, we exploit the variation of the timing of imple-
mentation among aggregation communities. The results are qualitatively similar to the
results presented in the main text. In particular, we again find a price elasticity that grows
post-referendum but no evidence of pre-trends, supporting the identifying assumption that
passage of aggregation was not prompted by expected growth in electricity usage.
    Our setting also allows us to test for pre-period changes in behavior. Following the
passage of the aggregation referendum and choice of a new supplier, all residents were
notified by mail of the new price and the exact month it took effect. In results shown and
discussed in Section 4 of the Appendix, we find that consumers responded prior to the price
change: usage increased shortly after passage of the referendum, but before the actual price
decrease several months later. Unfortunately, we lack data to identify the primary mecha-
nism driving this behavior, which could be rational anticipation or confusion. Regardless of
the mechanism, this result provides evidence that consumers begin adjusting their electric-
ity usage prior to realized price changes, suggesting that the myopic “partial adjustment”
model typically estimated in the energy literature (Hughes et al., 2008; Alberini and Filip-
pini, 2011; Blázquez et al., 2013) could be systematically biased.
  25
     We do not include January 2007 in the alternative matching period because reported usage in this month
is inexplicably low for many communities. This shortfall suggests that the usage data in the first month of the
sample are incomplete.



                                                     24
    Finally, it is worth noting that Illinois is similar to the U.S. as a whole along several
dimensions related to electricity consumption. We describe the relationship between key
U.S. and Illinois demographics in Section 5 in the Appendix. To understand how our results
generalize to geographies with different demographics, that section also explores how our
elasticity estimates vary by communities’ socioeconomic characteristics.


                                V      Accounting for Dynamics

                                               A      Framework

The presence of dynamics poses a challenge to interpreting the results in the previous sec-
tion: because relative prices are changing over time (see Figure 4), contemporaneous usage
reflects both a short-run response to recent price changes and a longer-run response to
earlier price changes. In general, dynamics in consumer behavior imply that usage is a
function of past and (potentially) future prices.26 In this section, we explicitly account
for these dynamics by regressing our community-specific matching estimates of log usage
changes, τbit , on lags and leads of log price changes:

                                             L2
                                             X
                                    τbit =           δr · ∆ ln pi(t−r) + ηit .                              (6)
                                             r=−L1

The number of leads in the regression is equal to L1 , and the number of lags is L2 . We con-
sider four specifications, constructed such that each has a different set of 31 coefficients:
(L1 , L2 ) ∈ {(18, 12), (12, 18), (6, 24), (0, 30)}. To convert these estimates to a price elas-
ticity s months after a price change, we construct the dynamic elasticity parameter
                                                          s
                                                          X
                                               βs :=            δr .                                        (7)
                                                        r=−L1


Although our usage data end in June 2014, we observe prices through 2016, allowing us
to estimate equation (6) without losing observations. To reduce sensitivity to outliers, we
estimate this model using median (minimum absolute deviation) regressions instead of least
squares.27
  26
     See the conceptual framework presented in Section 6 of the Appendix for a simple demonstration.
  27
     Point estimates from least squares regressions are similar, but the subsampling routine described in Sec-
tion III does not converge for some subsamples in the least squares specification. This reflects the sensitivity
of least squares to outliers and the relatively small size of each subsample.


                                                         25
    To reduce noise in the estimates, we also estimate a parametric specification of equation
(6). This specification still relies on our quasi-experimental variation, but it restricts the
relationships among the set {δr } in equation (6). Specifically, we assume the cumulative
elasticity can be modeled as an exponential function of lags and a linear function of leads:
             s
             X                    γ1
  βs :=            δr = (γ1 −        s · 1[s ≤ 0]) · 1[s ≥ γ2 ] + γ3 (1 − exp(γ4 s)) · 1[s >= 0], (8)
            r=−∞
                                  γ2

where s is again the number of months since a price change. Thus, negative numbers
indicate the price change has not happened yet. According to equation (8), the elasticity
corresponding to an anticipated, contemporaneous price shock is equal to γ1 , and the long-
run elasticity is equal to γ1 + γ3 . The parameters γ2 and γ4 govern the speed of adjustment.
In addition to delivering more precise estimates, the parametric specification also allows us
to calculate elasticities outside our data window. We estimate equation (8) by selecting the
parameters that minimize the mean absolute deviation between the observed usage response
and the response predicted by the model.
    Equations (6) and (8) implicitly assume that consumers have perfect foresight. Fol-
lowing Anderson et al. (2013), we have also estimated the model using status quo (“no
change”) expectations. The results are similar to the ones we present below.

                                                   B    Results

The results from the dynamic model are presented in Figure 6. The markers report dynamic
elasticities, as estimated by equations (6) and (7), for the four specifications described
earlier. Each marker represents the cumulative electricity usage change (in percent) in
response to an anticipated one-percent price change that begins in month 0 and persists.
The solid line corresponds to the parametric model specified by equation (8) and lines up
closely with the unrestricted estimates.28 Note that the period t = 0 in Figure 6 corresponds
to the date of the price change, but in Figures 4 and 5, period t = 0 corresponds to the date
of the referendum, which occurs four months earlier for the median community.
    Overall, the estimates follow a similar pattern to the reduced-form results presented
in Section IV. Following the price change, the usage response grows over time, with an
implied elasticity of about −0.1 six months post-implementation and an elasticity of about
−0.2 eighteen months post-implementation. Thus, consumer dynamics play an important
  28
       The point estimates for the parameters (b
                                               γ1 , γ
                                                    b2 , γ    b4 ) are (−0.052, −6.034, −0.296, 0.036).
                                                         b3 , γ



                                                        26
                             Figure 6: Estimated Price Elasticities: Dynamic Model




                             .1
                             0
                    Elasticity
                             -.1
                             -.2
                             -.3
                             -.4




                                   -18   -12   -6     0        6   12     18      24      30
                                               Months Since Price Change
                                               Lags Only           6-Month Leads
                                               12-Month Leads      18-Month Leads
                                               Parametric Model
Notes: This figure reports non-parametric and parametric estimates of the dynamic elasticity curve. The
plotted points are derived from equation (6). Each set of points is estimated using a different set of 30 lags
and leads, beginning with the lead displayed in the legend. For example, the “12-Month Leads” specification
includes 12 leads and 18 lags. Each point displays the estimated elasticity as a function of the number of
                                           Ps
months since a price change, calculated as r=−L1 δbr , where s is the number of months since a price change
and L1 is the number of leads included in the specification. The solid line displays estimates derived from
the parametric model specified by equation (8). Six-month average elasticities for both the non-parametric
and parametric estimates are reported in Table 3.


role in the first two years after a price change. The dynamic model also estimates that
consumers begin to respond in advance of a price change, though the pre-price-change
elasticities are small, averaging −0.02 in the six months prior to a price change.
    The first two columns of Table 3 summarize the non-parametric and parametric esti-
mates of the dynamic elasticity curve, respectively. The reported coefficients are the mean
of the point estimates in Figure 6 within each interval indicated by each row. Again, these
estimates correspond to the effect of a permanent, anticipated increase in price beginning at
time t = 0 on usage s months after. These estimates indicate an elasticity of approximately
−0.085 in months 1–6 and an elasticity of −0.21 in months 19–24.29
    For comparison, we also provide analogous reduced-form estimates in column (3) of
Table 3. To create them, we replicate the reduced-form elasticity estimates presented in
Section IV, but re-index the estimates to the date of the price change, rather than the date
  29
       Table A.8 in the Appendix shows that these results are not sensitive to the number of neighbors used.



                                                          27
                          Table 3: Estimates of the Dynamic Elasticity Curve

       Period After Price Change       Non-Parametric             Parametric           Reduced Form

       1-6 Months Prior                    -0.023**               -0.022***                  N/A
                                            (0.010)                (0.006)

       Contemporaneous                    -0.050***               -0.052***               -0.034**
                                           (0.015)                 (0.010)                 (0.021)

       1-6 Months                         -0.083***               -0.087***               -0.069***
                                           (0.013)                 (0.012)                 (0.011)

       7-12 Months                        -0.145***               -0.138***               -0.122***
                                           (0.018)                 (0.017)                 (0.017)

       13-18 Months                       -0.168***               -0.179***               -0.218***
                                           (0.022)                 (0.023)                 (0.035)

       19-24 Months                       -0.209***               -0.212***               -0.260***
                                           (0.031)                 (0.028)                 (0.038)

       Significance levels: * 10 percent, ** 5 percent, *** 1 percent. The dynamic estimates are constructed
       from a regression of log usage changes on leads and lags of log price changes. The non-parametric
       elasticities are calculated according to equation (7) and have been averaged across the four different
       specifications of equation (6) discussed in the main text. The parametric elasticities are calculated
       according to equation (8). The reported estimates represent the average cumulative effect of a per-
       manent one-percent price change on log usage over the six-month interval shown in the first column.
       The reduced-form estimates are constructed by regressing log usage changes on log price changes
       in the same period. These reduced-form estimates differ from those presented in Table 2 because the
       reference period here is time since price change, rather than time since referendum. Standard errors,
       given in parentheses, and statistical significance levels are constructed via subsampling.


of the referendum.30 To provide the closest possible comparison for the dynamic model,
we estimate this specification using median (minimum absolute deviation) regressions. The
resulting reduced-form estimates are similar to those reported in Table 2 but shifted by the
number of elapsed months between the referendum and the price change.
    The estimated elasticities in Table 3 grow steadily over time, though the dynamic model
estimates are somewhat smaller than the reduced-form estimates in later periods. Given that
municipal aggregation did not lead to a time-invariant price difference between aggrega-
tion and non-aggregation communities, it is not surprising that there are some differences
in these estimates. The decrease in ComEd prices occurring about 11 months after im-
  30
    Because the price change prior to the implementation date is zero, we cannot estimate an elasticity for the
months prior to the policy change with the reduced-form model. Additionally, this reduced-form estimator
does not account for anticipation, but this has little impact on the resulting estimates.


                                                       28
              Table 4: Long-Run Elasticity Forecasts from Dynamic Model

                    Period After Price Change              Point Estimate

                    Year 3                                   -0.268***
                                                          [-0.358, -0.195]

                    Year 5                                   -0.315***
                                                          [-0.462, -0.222]

                    Year 10                                  -0.345***
                                                          [-0.616, -0.242]

                    Long Run                                 -0.348***
                                                          [-1.007, -0.245]

                    Significance levels: * 10 percent, ** 5 percent, *** 1 percent.
                    These forecasts are an extrapolation based on the parameters es-
                    timated by equation (8). The reported coefficients represent the
                    cumulative effect of a permanent one-percent price change on
                    log usage. 95 percent confidence intervals, given in brackets, and
                    statistical significance levels are constructed via subsampling.


plementation causes the reduced-form estimates to overstate the elasticity after this point,
as contemporaneous usage still partially reflects the earlier (larger) price difference. Nev-
ertheless, the estimates are quite similar overall, which suggests that modeling municipal
aggregation as a permanent price shock is reasonable in our setting.
    Although the primary benefit of the dynamic model is that it disentangles the effects of
contemporaneous versus lagged price changes on current usage, the estimated parameters
can also be used to project the usage response beyond the two-and-a-half-year post period
in our data. As a calibration exercise, we report the long-run projections arising from our
parametric model in Table 4. We estimate a three-year elasticity of −0.27 and a five-year
elasticity of −0.32. Both the ten-year and the long-run elasticity are close to −0.35. Thus,
over 90 percent of the long-run consumer response occurs within five years of the price
change, and nearly 100 percent occurs within ten years. These estimates imply that prices
from more than ten years ago have little (direct) impact on residential electricity consump-
tion today. These dynamics are similar to those found in Allcott and Rogers (2014), who
find that the consumption effects of a home energy report decay by 10–20 percent per year
after it is discontinued, implying that consumers fully adjust after 5–10 years.




                                                  29
                                    VI     Discussion

The fact that the price elasticity of residential electricity demand grows significantly over
time has two important implications. First, regulations that increase the price of electricity
will have much larger effects on consumption in the long run than in the short run, and
policymakers who do not anticipate this will therefore underestimate the long-run effects of
such regulations. Second, the long-run share of the regulatory burden borne by consumers
will be smaller than the short-run share, at least in partial equilibrium.
     We demonstrate the quantitative magnitudes of these implications with a few simple
calculations. Because our model was estimated using Illinois data, our exercises employ
Illinois data on electricity consumption, prices, and carbon dioxide (CO2 ) emissions. The
exact data we use do not affect the primary implications of our analysis, however, as we
focus on relative comparisons (ratios) between the short- and longer-run elasticities.
     According to the U.S. Energy Information Administration (2018), in 2016 Illinois gen-
erated 187,441,635 MWh of electricity at an average retail price of $93.8 per MWh. This
in turn produced 72,226 thousand metric tons of CO2 . For simplicity, we assume that the
residential electricity market is perfectly competitive and that all generated electricity is
sold at the average retail price. Because our goal is to highlight the role of the demand
elasticity, we abstract away from supply-side issues such as changes in the composition
of generation. Finally, because there is little consensus on the magnitude of the supply
elasticity, s , we perform all calculations under two different assumptions: s = 0.5 (low
elasticity of supply) and s = 5 (high elasticity of supply).
     Our first exercise considers the implementation of a tax intended to reduce emissions.
Policymakers who wish to target a specific level of emissions must first predict how equi-
librium electricity consumption responds to changes in taxes. In perfectly competitive
markets, the fall in equilibrium quantity following a small tax increase depends on both the
demand and supply elasticities (Salanie, 2011):

                          ∂Q      s d Q         1      Q
                             =−           =−               ,
                          ∂t    s + d P    1/s + 1/d P
where Q is quantity, t is a per-unit tax, P is price, and s and d are the absolute values
of supply and demand elasticities, respectively. It is clear from this expression that un-
derestimating the demand elasticity will underestimate the demand response following a
price change. We demonstrate the significance of this point in Table 5. Employing our six-
month estimated elasticity and assuming a supply elasticity of s = 0.5, we calculate that

                                             30
         Table 5: Implications of the Demand Elasticity for Carbon Taxes and Incidence

                                                            (1)                 (2)                  (3)
                                                       D = −0.09           D = −0.27             Ratio of
                                                       (1-6 Months)       (19-24 Months)          (2) to (1)

                                           (a) Inelastic Supply (S = 0.5)

 Change in Quantity for a $1/MWh tax (MWh)               -152,414            -350,353                 2.30
 Tax to Reduce Emissions by 1% ($/ton CO2 )                31.92               13.88                  0.44
 Consumer Share of Tax Burden (%)                           85                  65                    0.77

                                            (b) Elastic Supply (S = 5)

 Change in Quantity for a $1/MWh tax (MWh)               -176,668            -511,901                 2.90
 Tax to Reduce Emissions by 1% ($/ton CO2 )                27.53               9.50                   0.35
 Consumer Share of Tax Burden (%)                           98                  95                    0.97

 This table presents calculations of the effects of an electricity tax on electricity output; the size of a carbon
 dioxide (CO2 ) tax required to reduce electricity-related emissions by 1%; and the incidence of these policies.
 Column (1) presents results employing the estimated short-run (6-month) elasticity from Table 2 (−0.09).
 Column (2) presents results using the corresponding two-year elasticity (−0.27). Calculations are based on
 2016 Illinois statistics obtained from U.S. Energy Information Administration (2018): 187,441,635 MWh of
 electricity generated; 72,226 thousand metric tons of CO2 emitted; average retail price of $93.8 per MWh.
 All calculations assume perfectly competitive markets.


electricity output falls by 152,000 MWh per dollar increase in tax. By contrast, employing
our two-year estimate results in an estimate that is over twice as large, −350,000 MWh
per dollar. Panel (b) shows that this difference becomes even larger if we instead assume a
supply elasticity of s = 5.
    Similarly, our second exercise shows that employing smaller demand elasticity esti-
mates will reduce the predicted effectiveness of a carbon tax. Assuming that all emissions
reductions must come from reduced electricity generation, a demand elasticity of −0.09
implies that a 1 percent reduction in emissions would require a tax of $27.5–$31.9 per ton
of CO2 , while a demand elasticity of −0.27 implies that a $9.5–$13.9 tax would be suffi-
cient.31 In other words, the two-year elasticity we estimate yields tax rates that are 56–65
percent smaller than our six-month elasticity would imply. It is worth noting that, because
both the six-month and two-year estimated elasticities are quite inelastic, the taxes required
  31                                                                                                   αQ
       To calculate the required CO2 tax to obtain emissions reductions of α ∈ (0, 1), we calculate   η ∂Q
                                                                                                             , where
                                                                                                        ∂t
         72,226,000
η =               = 0.385 is the Illinois emissions intensity. The corresponding carbon tax would be 3.67
        187,441,635
times larger than the CO2 tax, as 3.67 tons of CO2 contain one ton of carbon. Because carbon emission rates
depend on an electricity generator’s type (coal, natural gas, wind, etc.), calculating the required carbon tax in
practice is more complicated. Nevertheless, the influence of the demand elasticity is similar.



                                                       31
to reduce emissions through reducing the quantity of electricity consumed are large.
    Finally, our third exercise considers the partial equilibrium incidence of a tax, which
also depends on the elasticity of demand (Salanie, 2011). In perfectly competitive markets,
the share of the overall burden borne by consumers is equal to s+s
                                                                      d
                                                                        . We report the short-
                                           32
run and longer-run incidence in Table 5. If we assume a supply elasticity of s = 0.5,
then we estimate that consumers would bear 85 percent of the burden when the demand
elasticity is −0.09, but only 65 percent of the burden when the demand elasticity is −0.27.
When supply is elastic (s = 5), however, the consumer share of the tax burden is not
sensitive to our range of demand elasticity estimates.33


                                          VII       Conclusion

Electricity suppliers, market regulators, and policymakers all need to understand how elec-
tricity consumption responds to changes in price. For example, accurately predicting the
long-run effect of a carbon tax on electricity consumption (and its accompanying emis-
sions) requires a good estimate of the long-run price elasticity of demand. However, few
reliable estimates of this important parameter exist, because price changes in this market
are often endogenous, short-lived, small, or unnoticed. Our study provides the first quasi-
experimental estimate of the two-year price elasticity of residential electricity demand, and
we find that it is more than double the short-run (six-month) elasticity, although it is still
inelastic. In addition, our long-run projections suggest that it takes ten years for consumers
to fully respond, which implies that consumer behavior may depend upon price changes
that occurred up to ten years ago.
    There are several possible reasons why our estimated elasticity grows over time. It
takes time to change habits, such as turning off the lights or turning down the air condi-
tioning when away from home. Usage also depends on the energy efficiency of durables
such as dishwashers, dryers, and air conditioners, which are purchased infrequently and are
continuously replaced within a population. Some consumers may need time to learn that
  32
      Weyl and Fabinger (2013) extend the analysis of incidence to imperfectly competitive markets and show
that, while the incidence formula becomes more complicated, it is still a function of the demand elasticity.
   33
      One concern that arises when discussing incidence in the electricity sector is that residential electricity
rates are often controlled by utility regulators. As of 2016, however, fifteen states had retail choice for
electricity supply (Morey and Kirsch, 2016). Some of these states, as well as others that do not allow retail
choice, impose profit constraints on incumbent suppliers (e.g., the zero-profit condition in Illinois). Thus, the
supply component of price is tightly linked to changes in the costs of electricity generation. In such cases,
the standard incidence framework remains relevant.



                                                      32
the electricity price has changed, especially if the benefit of tracking price changes is small
relative to the cost of paying attention. Whatever the underlying mechanism, our results un-
derscore the importance of identifying settings that accurately capture longer-run responses
to price changes, as short-run data may cause the researcher to significantly underestimate
the long-run response.
    Our results also matter for the organization of electricity markets. For example, there is
some debate as to whether to use a downward-sloping or vertical demand curve in forward
capacity auctions for the Midcontinent Independent System Operator (MISO) electricity
area (Cook, 2016a,b). As the relevant time period for these auctions spans multiple years,
our findings suggest that using a downward-sloping demand curve in this setting is appro-
priate.
    Finally, we note that the natural experiment created by municipal aggregation decreased
electricity prices, whereas price-based climate policies would increase prices to reduce total
carbon emissions. It is therefore important to know whether price increases and decreases
have symmetric effects on demand. In addition, other energy policies such as a carbon tax
may be less salient or more salient to consumers than aggregation, which in turn may affect
the speed and magnitude of the consumer response. Future research along these dimensions
would be valuable.




                                              33
                                      References
Abadie, A. and G. W. Imbens (2006). Large sample properties of matching estimators for
  average treatment effects. Econometrica 74(1), 235–267.
Abadie, A. and G. W. Imbens (2008). On the failure of the bootstrap for matching estima-
  tors. Econometrica 76(6), 1537–1557.
Abadie, A. and G. W. Imbens (2011). Bias-corrected matching estimators for average
  treatment effects. Journal of Business & Economic Statistics 29(1), 1–11.
Alberini, A. and M. Filippini (2011). Response of residential electricity demand to price:
  The effect of measurement error. Energy Economics 33(5), 889–895.
Allcott, H. (2011). Rethinking real-time electricity pricing. Resource and Energy Eco-
  nomics 33(4), 820–842.
Allcott, H. and T. Rogers (2014). The short-run and long-run effects of behavioral inter-
  ventions: Experimental evidence from energy conservation. American Economic Re-
  view 104(10), 3003–3037.
Allcott, H. and N. Wozny (2014). Gasoline prices, fuel economy, and the energy paradox.
  Review of Economics and Statistics 96(5), 779–795.
Anderson, S. T., R. Kellogg, and J. M. Sallee (2013). What do consumers believe about
  future gasoline prices? Journal of Environmental Economics and Management 66(3),
  383–403.
Becker, G. S., M. Grossman, and K. M. Murphy (1994). An empirical analysis of cigarette
  addiction. American Economic Review, 396–418.
Bernstein, M. A. and J. Griffin (2005). Regional differences in the price-elasticity of de-
  mand for energy. RAND Corporation Technical Report.
Blázquez, L., N. Boogen, and M. Filippini (2013). Residential electricity demand in Spain:
  new empirical evidence using aggregate data. Energy Economics 36, 648–657.
Brandon, A., P. J. Ferraro, J. A. List, R. D. Metcalfe, M. K. Price, and F. Rundhammer
  (2017). Do the effects of social nudges persist? theory and evidence from 38 natural
  field experiments. Technical report. National Bureau of Economic Research working
  paper 23277.
Cook, A. D. (2016a). Board orders negotiation in auction disagreement. RTO In-
  sider. https://www.rtoinsider.com/miso-board-capacity-auction-imm-26870/, Accessed
  March 13, 2017.
Cook, A. D. (2016b). MISO considering changes to proposed auction design. RTO In-
  sider. https://www.rtoinsider.com/miso-auction-design-imm-26062/, Accessed March
  13, 2017.
Dergiades, T. and L. Tsoulfidis (2008). Estimating residential demand for electricity in the
  united states, 1965–2006. Energy Economics 30(5), 2722–2730.


                                            34
DeVirgilio, B. (2006). A discussion of the deregulation of the energy industry in Illinois
  and its effects on consumers. Loyola Consumer Law Review 19, 256.
Environmental Protection Agency (2018).       Energy star unit shipment and sales
  data archives. https://www.energystar.gov/index.cfm?c=partners.unit_shipment_data_
  archives, Accessed September 17, 2018.
Filippini, M., B. Hirl, and G. Masiero (2015). Rational habits in residential electricity
   demand. Working Paper.
Ford, M. A. (2013).         Five percent of Normal residents opted out of elec-
  tric aggregation.          Pantagraph.         http://www.pantagraph.com/news/local/
  five-percent-of-normal-residents-opted-out-of-electric-aggregation/article_
  48bcb79e-64f2-11e2-acb9-0019bb2963f4.html, Accessed March 13, 2017.
Fowlie, M., S. P. Holland, and E. T. Mansur (2012). What do emissions markets deliver
  and to whom? Evidence from Southern California’s NOx trading program. American
  Economic Review 102(2), 965–993.
Gruber, J. and B. Köszegi (2001). Is addiction “rationa”? theory and evidence. The
  Quarterly Journal of Economics 116(4), 1261–1303.
Houde, S. (2018). Bunching with the stars: How firms respond to environmental certifica-
  tion. E2e Working Paper 037.
Hughes, J. E., C. R. Knittell, and D. Sperling (2008). Evidence of a shift in the short-run
  price elasticity of gasoline demand. The Energy Journal 29(1), 113–134.
Illinois General Assembly (1997). Electric service customer choice and rate relief law of
   1997 (220 ilcs 5/article xvi).
Ito, K. (2014, February). Do consumers respond to marginal or average price? Evidence
   from nonlinear electricity pricing. American Economic Review 104(2), 537–63.
Ito, K. (2015). Asymmetric incentives in subsidies: Evidence from a large-scale electricity
   rebate program. American Economic Journal: Economic Policy 7(3), 209–37.
Jessoe, K. and D. Rapson (2014). Knowledge is (less) power: Experimental evidence from
  residential energy use. American Economic Review 104(4), 1417–1438.
Kamerschen, D. R. and D. V. Porter (2004). The demand for residential, industrial and total
  electricity, 1973–1998. Energy Economics 26(1), 87–100.
Karlan, D. and J. Zinman (2018). Long-run price elasticities of demand for credit: Evidence
  from a countrywide field experiment in mexico.
Lotus, J. (2011). Oak Park seals green deal on electric. OakPark.com. http://www.
  oakpark.com/News/Articles/10-18-2011/Oak-Park-seals-green-deal-on-electric/,
  Accessed March 13, 2017.
Malani, A. and J. Reif (2015). Interpreting pre-trends as anticipation: Impact on estimated
 treatment effects from tort reform. Journal of Public Economics 124, 1–17.



                                            35
Morey, M. J. and L. D. Kirsch (2016). Retail choice in electricity: What have we learned
 in 20 years? Technical report. Christensen Associates Energy Consulting, LLC.
Myers, E. (2016). Are home buyers myopic? Evidence from housing sales. E2e Working
 Paper 024.
Paul, A. C., E. C. Myers, and K. L. Palmer (2009). A partial adjustment model of us
  electricity demand by region, season, and sector. RFF Discussion Paper 08-50.
Politis, D. N. and J. P. Romano (1994). Large sample confidence regions based on subsam-
  ples under minimal assumptions. The Annals of Statistics, 2031–2050.
Poterba, J. M. (1984). Tax subsidies to owner-occupied housing: An asset-market ap-
  proach. The Quarterly Journal of Economics 99(4), 729–52.
Reif, J. (2018, August). A model of addiction and social interactions. Economic Inquiry.
Reiss, P. C. and M. W. White (2005). Household electricity demand, revisited. The Review
  of Economic Studies 72(3), 853–883.
Ryoo, J. and S. Rosen (2004). The engineering labor market. Journal of Political Econ-
  omy 112(S1), S110–S140.
Salanie, B. (2011). The Economics of Taxation. MIT press.
Spark Energy (2011, July). The history of electricity deregulation in Illinois. http://www.
  sparkenergy.com/blog/illinois-electricity-deregulation-history/.
Topel, R. and S. Rosen (1988). Housing investment in the united states. Journal of Political
  Economy 96(4), 718–740.
United States Census Bureau (2016). Quickfacts. https://www.census.gov/quickfacts/.
U.S. Energy Information Administration (2009).         Household energy use in illi-
  nois. https://www.eia.gov/consumption/residential/reports/2009/state_briefs/pdf/IL.pdf,
  Accessed September 6, 2018.
U.S. Energy Information Administration (2017). Average retail price of electricity to ulti-
  mate customers. https://www.eia.gov/electricity/data.cfm, Accessed February 2, 2017.
U.S. Energy Information Administration (2018). State electricity profiles: Illinois electric-
  ity profile 2016. https://www.eia.gov/electricity/state/illinois/index.php, Accessed Au-
  gust 20, 2018.
Wade, P. (2012).       Urbana residents to get opt-out letters on electric rates
 soon.    The News-Gazette.       http://www.news-gazette.com/news/local/2012-06-15/
 urbana-residents-get-opt-out-letters-electric-rates-soon.html.
Weyl, E. G. and M. Fabinger (2013). Pass-through as an economic tool: Principles of
 incidence under imperfect competition. Journal of Political Economy 121(3), 528–583.
Wolak, F. A. (2011). Do residential customers respond to hourly prices? Evidence from
 a dynamic pricing experiment. American Economic Review: Papers and Proceed-
 ings 101(3), 83–87.


                                             36
                               Appendix (For Online Publication)
                                   1   Municipal Aggregation Materials

After the proposed aggregation program has been registered with the state, the municipality must
hold a referendum. The wording of the referendum question is specified in the Illinois Power
Agency Act:1

       The election authority must submit the question in substantially the following form:
       Shall the (municipality, township, or county in which the question is being voted upon)
       have the authority to arrange for the supply of electricity for its residential and small
       commercial retail customers who have not opted out of such program?
       The election authority must record the votes as “Yes” or “No”.

    Figure A.1 displays an example of a letter sent to residents of a community following the
passage of an aggregation referendum and selection of a new aggregation supplier. The letter
informs residents about their new supply price for electricity, and lets them know that they will
have an opportunity to opt out of aggregation. Figure A.2 displays an example of the opt-out card
that a customer must fill out and mail if they wish to retain their current electricity supplier.
    Figures A.3 and A.4 display the front and back page of a typical electricity bill for a customer
residing in ComEd’s service territory. If a customer switches suppliers, e.g., her community adopts
aggregation and she does not opt out, then the Electricity Supply Charge rate (see Figure A.4) will
change. Otherwise her bill will remain the same.


                                              2   Data Appendix

                                           Consistent Usage Data

In the usage data provided by ComEd, several communities change definitions over time, moving
customers from one community to another or creating a new community. These changes appears
as large, discrete jumps in our community-level aggregate usage data. To eliminate this noise, we
apply two filters to search for large structural breaks. For each community, we run 89 separate
regressions of log usage on month-of-year indicators and a structural break indicator, where we
start the structural break indicator at each month in the sample. We then compare the maximum
R-squared to the minimum R-squared among a community’s set of regressions. If this difference
exceeds 0.5, then the community is dropped from the sample.
   1
     From 20 ILCS 3855/1-92, Text of Section from P.A. 98-404. Available from http://www.ilga.gov/legislation/ilcs/
fulltext.asp?DocName=002038550K1-92.


                                                        1
    For the second filter, we run a series of similar regressions with the addition of a linear time
trend. For this filter, we drop any communities for which the explanatory power of the break
increases the R-squared by more than 0.2.
    Together, these two filters remove 79 communities from our initial sample of 887 service terri-
tories. We remove an additional 29 communities from our sample because they were missing data
and/or we could not confidently assign them to our treatment or control groups. Finally, we also
drop 11 communities that passed a referendum approving aggregation but never implemented the
program, leaving us with 768 (= 887 - 79 - 29 - 11) communities in our final sample.
    One concern with the two filters that we applied is that we may eliminate actual structural
breaks arising from municipal aggregation. However, the communities that were removed in this
fashion were primarily small communities that did not implement aggregation.


                           Other Components of the Electricity Bill

All fixed fees and remaining usage rates are nearly identical across the aggregation and non-
aggregation communities in our sample. The average fixed fee for customers residing in ComEd
service territories during our sample period is $12.52 per month. We ignore the fixed fees in our
analysis, because they do not vary across communities and because our independent variable is the
difference in the (log) marginal price between aggregation and non-aggregation communities. In
rare instances the aggregation supplier charged an additional fixed fee, but these scenarios were
short-lived. Municipal tax rates do vary across communities, but the variation is small and they
rarely change over time. For our analysis, we use the median tax rate across ComEd communities
(0.557 cents/kWh). The price variable in our estimating equations is equal to the aggregation sup-
ply rate plus all other usage rates if the community has implemented aggregation; otherwise, it is
equal to the ComEd supply rate plus all other usage rates.


                                 Sources for Aggregation Rates

This section summarizes the data sources used to verify the rates obtained by aggregation com-
munities. The primary data source is Plug In Illinois. If information was unavailable from Plug
In Illinois, we tried to retrieve it from websites of the participating communities or from FOIA
requests made to the local governments.

Plug In Illinois The website https://pluginillinois.org/MunicipalAggregationList.aspx lists the
current state of aggregation programs in Illinois. If a community is currently on an aggregation
plan, the rate and the end of the contract are listed. Repeated snapshots of the website were used



                                                 2
to track the rates over time. For many of the communities, Plug In Illinois provides a link to access
the opt-out letter and a link to the terms and conditions of service.

Opt-Out Letter The opt-out letter is sent to all households following passage of the referendum.
The letter confirms the aggregation program and provides them with an opportunity to opt out and
remain with ComEd. The letter also includes the aggregation rate and the relevant time period.

Terms and Conditions of Service The terms and conditions are sent to households that do not
opt out of the aggregation program. The terms and conditions are an agreement between a house-
hold and the alternative retail electric supplier, and they indicate the aggregation rate and the rele-
vant time period.

Master Agreement The master agreement is the contract between the alternative retail electric
supplier and the local government. The agreement indicates the term of the agreement and the
agreed-upon rate. We obtained these through FOIA requests.


                      3   Difference-in-Differences Estimates without Matching

In this section, we describe how we estimate the effect of implementing aggregation on electricity
prices and usage using a standard difference-in-differences model with no matching. Our estimat-
ing equation is given by
                          24
                          X
             Ycmy =                   βτ Acτ + β25 Ac,25 + β−25 Ac,−25 + αcm + αmy + εcmy ,      (A.1)
                      τ =−24,τ 6=−1

where Ycmy is either the natural logarithm of the monthly price or the natural logarithm of total
monthly electricity use in community c in calendar month m and year y. The variable Acτ is an
indicator equal to 1 if, as of month m and year y, community c passed an aggregation referendum
τ months ago. The month before the referendum (τ = −1) is the omitted category. The main
parameter of interest is βτ .
    To ensure that βτ reflects changes relative to the omitted category, we include indicators for
aggregation having been passed 25 or more months ago (Ac,25 ) and for aggregation being passed
25 or more months in the future (Ac,−25 ). We also include month-by-year (αmy ) and community-
by-month (αcm ) fixed effects and cluster standard errors at the community level. We discuss the
robustness of our estimates to different sets of fixed effects below.
    We also estimate a second, more parametric specification that assesses the effect by six-month




                                                      3
periods and uses the entire two years prior to the referendum as the reference period:

                      Ycmy = γ1 Ac,0 to 6 + γ2 Ac,7 to 12 + γ3 Ac,13 to 18 + γ4 Ac,19 to 24
                                                                                                         (A.2)
                                    +β25 Ac,25 + β−25 Ac,−25 + αcm + αmy + εcmy .

In this specification, Ac,0 to 6 is an indicator variable equal to 1 if the community passed aggregation
in the past 6 months and 0 otherwise. Similarly, Ac,7 to 12 is an indicator equal to 1 if the community
passed aggregation between 7 and 12 months ago, and so on. The other variables are defined as in
equation (A.1).
    One could estimate the effect of implementing aggregation by comparing communities that
implemented aggregation to those that did not implement aggregation. However, the latter may not
serve as an adequate counterfactual for the former without correcting for systematic differences
via matching, as we do in the main text. We therefore restrict our estimation sample here to
communities that implemented aggregation.2 Our main identifying assumption is that, conditional
on the included fixed effects, the timing of aggregation adoption is exogenous with respect to
electricity use.
    Figure A.10 presents the change in electricity prices following aggregation, in logs, as esti-
mated by equation (A.1). Similar to our matching results, prices do not drop immediately fol-
lowing the referendum because it takes time for communities to switch to a new supplier. Un-
like the matching estimator, the pre-period price change is not exactly equal to zero in the event-
study difference-in-difference. Although treatment and control communities face identical prices
in the pre-period in calendar time, they do not face identical prices in event-study time because
ComEd’s prices fluctuate month-to-month. This distinction does not matter for the matching esti-
mator, which creates counterfactuals separately for each treated community. The second vertical
dashed line in Figure A.10 shows the point at which half of all communities have implemented ag-
gregation (4 months after passing the referendum). Prices continue to drop as more communities
switch and then eventually stabilize. Within 8 months of passing the referendum, the average elec-
tricity price has decreased by more than 0.3 log points (26 percent) in aggregation communities
relative to the control group.
    Figure A.11 shows the corresponding estimates for electricity usage. Prior the referendum,
the difference in usage between aggregation and the control communities is statistically indistin-
guishable from zero. Usage in aggregation communities then begins to increase following the
referendum. By the end of the first year, usage in aggregation communities is about 0.1 log points
(9.5 percent) higher relative to the counterfactual.
    Table A.6 shows the estimated impact of aggregation on the log of the electricity price in
   2
    We also estimated a specification that uses all non-aggregation communities as controls. Those estimates are
similar to the ones we present here, although the coefficients are much less stable.



                                                       4
these communities 0–6, 7–12, 13–18, and 19–24 months after implementation, as estimated by
equation (A.2). The results consistently show large and significant price drops, and are robust to
including different fixed effects. Our preferred specification is presented in Column 4 and includes
community-by-month and month-by-year fixed effects. This specification estimates that electricity
prices fell by 0.1 log points in the first six months, and eventually stabilizes around 0.3 log points
by the end of the first year.
    Table A.7 shows the estimated change in usage as estimated by equation (A.2) for the sample
of communities that implemented aggregation. Our preferred specification, presented in Column
4, estimates that electricity usage is 0.048 log points higher in the first 6 months following the
referendum, and this increases to 0.114 log points within one year.
    Finally, Figure A.12 shows the elasticities implied by the usage and price results. Similar to
the main text, we regress the predicted aggregation-driven log change in a community’s electricity
usage on the change in log prices. To account for uncertainty in the price and usage estimates, we
cluster bootstrap the confidence intervals using 1000 draws. The implied elasticity ranges from
−0.33 7–12 months after passage of aggregation to −0.45 two and a half years after passage. The
differences in the magnitude between these and our matching estimates may be due to the fact that
they reflect a slightly different mix of communities and a different combination of short-run and
longer-run responses.

                                      4   Anticipation Effects

Forward-looking individuals should respond to policies prior to their implementation if those poli-
cies can be anticipated and if there is a benefit of responding in advance. For example, prior
studies have documented that expectations of future policies and prices matter when purchasing
durables such as cars or houses or when making human capital investments (e.g., Poterba, 1984;
Ryoo and Rosen, 2004; Allcott and Wozny, 2014; Myers, 2016). The effect of aggregation on elec-
tricity usage is a good setting for detecting anticipation effects: the implementation of aggregation
was widely announced months ahead of time, and electricity usage depends on durable goods like
air conditioners, water heaters, and dishwashers, as well as on consumer habits and knowledge.
Though a price decrease is unlikely to cause an immediate spike in purchases of energy-inefficient
appliances, depreciated durable goods are continuously being replaced within a population, and
the efficiency of the replacement should depend, at the margin, on the price of electricity.
    Both dynamic specifications reported in Table 3 find a small but significant anticipation re-
sponse in the six months prior to a price change. To further validate this result, we re-estimate the
reduced-form specification given in equation (5), setting t = 0 to be the date that aggregation was
implemented (which corresponds to the date of the price change) rather than the date of the aggre-
gation referendum. The results are shown in panel (a) of Figure 7. The price difference between

                                                  5
                                Figure 7: Anticipation Effects of Implementing Aggregation on Log Usage

                       (a) Defining τ = 0 as the Implementation Date                                           (b) Using Pre-Implementation Observations Only
                   .08




                                                                                                           .06
 Change in Log Usage




                                                                                         Change in Log Usage
                   .06




                                                                                                           .04
                   .04




                                                                                                           .02
                   .02




                                                                                                           0
                   0
                   -.02




                                                                                                           -.02
                          -24   -18   -12    -6         0   6      12    18     24                                -24   -18   -12    -6         0   6      12    18     24
                                      Months Since Implementation                                                             Months Since Referendum
                                      Point Estimates           95 Percent CI                                                 Point Estimates           95 Percent CI

Notes: The figure displays estimates of the anticipation effects of implementing aggregation. In Panel (a), the vertical
dashed line corresponds to the month when aggregation was implemented. In Panel (b), the vertical dashed line
corresponds to the month when aggregation was passed, and the short-dashed line indicates the median implementation
period. Confidence intervals are constructed via subsampling.


aggregation communities and their matched controls is zero prior to implementation. However,
usage begins increasing three months prior to the price change.
    To explicitly isolate the anticipation effect, Panel (b) of Figure 7 displays estimates of changes
in electricity usage relative to the referendum date, using only pre-implementation data. Electric-
ity usage increases steadily and significantly 3-5 months after the referendum despite the fact that
prices have not yet changed for the observations in this sample. Specifically, usage is 0.012 log
points higher 3 months after the referendum and 0.035 log points higher 5 months after the referen-
dum, confirming the existence of non-trivial anticipation effects in our sample. We do not observe
any significant change in usage prior the referendum.
    Together, these results suggest that the referendum and/or the subsequent price change an-
nouncement alerted consumers to the impending price decrease and caused them to increase their
usage, perhaps by placing less weight on energy efficiency when replacing old appliances or by
changing their electricity usage habits (relative to their control counterparts). Alternatively, it is
possible that customers were confused about the timing of the price change, although we note that
mailers were sent to all residents informing them of the exact month of the price change. More
generally, while our estimates are consistent with a standard forward-looking model of rational
consumers, they are also consistent with confusion and other behavioral mechanisms. Regardless
of the precise mechanism, to the extent that other policies are implemented in a similar manner,
they are likely to generate pre-implementation effects similar to those we find here.



                                                                                     6
                                  5      Demographic Characteristics

                                  Illinois versus the United States

Illinois is similar to the U.S. as a whole along several dimensions related to electricity consump-
tion. Using daily station-level weather data from NOAA, we calculate that the average number of
population-weighted heating degree days between 1965–2010 in Illinois (U.S.) is 5,997 (5,115),
while the average number of population-weighted cooling degree days is 881 (1,086). Considering
that the state-level standard deviations for these two measures are approximately 2,100 and 746,
Illinois provides a close proxy for the average U.S. temperature patterns. Likewise, from 2000
to 2015, the difference between the average annual electricity price in Illinois and the U.S. as a
whole was −0.4 cents per kWh, which is only about four percent of the U.S. mean (U.S. Energy
Information Administration, 2017).
     From 2011 to 2015, Illinois had an average per capita income of $30,494 (in 2015 dollars),
which is very close to the U.S. average of $28,930. Similarly, the Illinois employment rate was
65.6 percent, while the U.S. employment rate was 63.6 percent (United States Census Bureau,
2016). The 2010 demographic characteristics of Illinois are also comparable to the U.S. average:
14.5 percent of the Illinois population is black (versus 12.6 percent for the U.S.), 12.5 percent is
over the age of 65 (versus 13 percent for the U.S.), and 24.4 percent is under the age of 18 (versus
24 percent in the U.S.).


                          Elasticities by Demographic Characteristics

Next, we investigate how much variation in the reduced-form price elasticity can be explained
by demographic characteristics. Doing so helps us understand both the distributional effects of
policies that affect electricity prices and the generalizability of our results. For this exercise, we
regress the log net usage change at time t on the contemporaneous log price change and add
interactions between the log price change and indicator variables for whether or not a community
is in the top half of the distribution for xj , a characteristic of interest:
                                         J
                                         X
                τbit = βg · ∆ ln pit +         (βj · ∆ ln pit · 1[xji > median(xj ))] + ηit .
                                         j=1


    The indicator 1[xji > median(xj )] is equal to 1 if the value of the (time-invariant) variable
xj for community i is above the median of the distribution and 0 otherwise. We estimate this
regression using J = 8 different characteristics obtained from the ACS, and report our results in
Figures A.13 and A.14. Because the estimation is done jointly, the displayed elasticities for any
given characteristic control for the other characteristics.


                                                        7
    Figure A.13 reports heterogeneity results for variables related to the housing stock. Estimates
that are statistically different from each other (at the 10 percent level) are indicated with a marker.
Communities with newer homes (as measured by “year built”) have a more elastic demand re-
sponse, conditional on the other characteristics. This difference could arise because newer homes
are more likely to have technology such as programmable thermostats, which make it easier for
consumers to control electricity consumption.
    Figure A.14 reports heterogeneity results for socioeconomic characteristics. Surprisingly, age
and race appear to matter for the elasticity of demand more than economic variables such as income
and education. Younger communities have a more elastic response, as do communities with a
greater percentage of white people. By contrast, our elasticity estimates are relatively stable across
economic characteristics.

                                 6    Framework for Consumption Dynamics
                                                         Summary

Residential electricity usage is unlikely to adjust immediately to price changes. It takes time to
change habits, such as turning off the lights or turning down the air conditioning when away from
home. Usage also depends on the energy efficiency of durables such as dishwashers, dryers, and air
conditioners, which are purchased infrequently and are continuously replaced within a population.
Finally, some consumers may need time to learn that the electricity price has changed, especially
if the benefit of tracking price changes is small relative to the cost of paying attention.
     The presence of such adjustment costs suggests that the long-run response to a price change will
exceed the short-run response. Moreover, if consumers are forward-looking, they may respond in
anticipation of future price changes. Here, we present a simple framework demonstrating that our
empirical approach in Section V is consistent with a standard rational model of a forward-looking
consumer.
     We employ the habit model of Becker et al. (1994), and provide a full derivation of these results
at the end of this appendix. Utility in each period depends on yt , the consumption of electricity in
that period, and on yt−1 , the consumption of electricity in the previous period.3 The consumer’s
problem is:                              X ∞
                                    max      Rt−1 U (yt , yt−1 , xt ) ,
                                          yt ,xt
                                                   t=1

where y0 is given, R < 1 is the consumer’s discount factor, and xt represents consumption of a
composite good that is taken as numeraire. The consumer’s budget constraint is
   3
    Similarly, one could allow utility in each period to depend on a “stock” of appliances (Filippini et al., 2015). The
resulting model will exhibit dynamics similar to what we present here.




                                                            8
                                                  ∞
                                                  X
                                         W0 =           Rt−1 (xt + pt yt ) ,
                                                  t=1

where W0 is the present value of wealth, and pt is the price of the electricity.
    We assume that consumers are forward-looking, and, for expositional purposes, we assume
they have perfect foresight. Finally, to illustrate the dynamics that can arise in our setting, we
assume utility is quadratic.4 Under these assumptions, the demand equation is:

                                       yt = α1 yt−1 + α2 yt+1 + α3 pt ,                                     (A.3)

where the coefficients in equation (A.3) depend on the parameters of the quadratic utility function.
The “adjustment cost” model frequently estimated in the energy demand literature corresponds to
the special case where consumers are myopic, in which case the demand equation simplifies to:
                                              yt = θ1 yt−1 + θ2 pt .                                        (A.4)

    In the forward-looking model (A.3), consumers adjust their consumption in anticipation of
future price changes, which are implicitly captured by yt+1 . They do not do so in the myopic
adjustment model (A.4). Prior studies have noted that one can therefore test the myopic model by
testing whether demand responds to future prices (Becker et al., 1994; Gruber and Köszegi, 2001).
    One can equivalently express demand as a function of all past and future prices by solving the
second-order difference equation (A.3):
                                            t−1
                                            X                   ∞
                                                                X
                                     yt =         δt−s pt−s +         δt+s pt+s .                           (A.5)
                                            s=0                 s=1

   The effect of a price change on consumption will depend on whether the change was anticipated
and on how long consumers expect the price change to last. Given estimates of equation (A.5), the
long-run effect of a permanent change in price, p∗ , on consumption can then be calculated as
                                                   t−1            ∞
                                         dy    X          X
                                             =     δ
                                                   bt−s +     δbt+s .                                       (A.6)
                                         dp∗   s=0        s=1

   An appealing feature of equation (A.5) is that it is more flexible than equation (A.3). For
example, it will generate a valid estimate of dy/dp∗ even if consumers do not discount the future
exponentially. This non-parametric specification is rarely estimated, however, because most studies
do not have data panels of sufficient length.
   4
    Alternatively, to analyze dynamics near a steady state, one could allow utility to be general and take a linear
approximation to the first-order conditions, which would yield identical equations.




                                                           9
                                             Derivations

As shown in Becker et al. (1994), the effect of a price change on consumption at a particular point
in time depends on whether or not the change was anticipated; when the change occurred; and
whether the change is temporary or permanent. This can be shown by solving the second-order
difference equation (A.3) to obtain:
            ∞                                                               ∞
                                      t−1
                                                                                               !
            X       −s
                                      X        s                 t
                                                                           X        −s
   y t = K1    (λ1 ) α3 pt+s−1 + K2       (λ2 ) α3 pt−s−1 + (λ2 ) y0 − K1      (λ1 ) α3 ps−1
             s=1                       s=0                                   s=1
                                                                                              (A.7)
where
                                                    λ1
                                       K1 =
                                               α2 (λ1 − λ2 )
                                                    λ2
                                       K2    =
                                               α2 (λ1 − λ2 )

with roots
                                             2α1
                                  λ1 =          √       >1
                                         1 − 1 − 4α1 α2
                                             2α
                                  λ2   =    √ 1         <1
                                         1 + 1 − 4α1 α2
See Reif (2018) for additional details.
    Equation (A.7) shows that consumption in period t is a function of all future prices, all past
prices, and the initial condition y0 . In long-run equilibrium (t → ∞), the third term in equation
(A.7) becomes zero, so that consumption no longer depends on the initial condition, y0 . The long-
run effect of a permanent change in price in all periods is
                                        ∞                    ∞
                            dy         X        −s
                                                             X
                               ∗
                                 = K 1     (λ1 )   α 3 + K 2     (λ2 )s α3
                            dp         s=1                   s=0

which corresponds to equation (A.6) as t → ∞.
   It is straightforward to show that the solution to the first-order difference equation (A.4), the
myopic “adjustment cost” model, depends only on past prices, and not on future prices.




                                                 10
                                              Appendix Tables


              Table A.1: Number of Nearest Neighbors and Reduced-Form Estimates
                                            (a) 5 Nearest Neighbors

                   Log Usage            Log Price           Elasticity         Usage Obs.          Price Obs.

1-6 Months          0.014***            -0.098***          -0.094***              1692                1692
                     (0.003)              (0.003)            (0.019)
7-12 Months         0.050***            -0.249***          -0.155***              1668                1668
                     (0.007)              (0.007)            (0.020)
13-18 Months        0.043***            -0.147***          -0.228***              1516                1515
                     (0.005)              (0.002)            (0.027)
19-24 Months        0.039***            -0.132***          -0.272***              1155                1155
                     (0.006)              (0.003)            (0.043)
25-30 Months        0.043***            -0.120***          -0.275***              606                 604
                     (0.007)              (0.004)            (0.039)


                                            (b) 1 Nearest Neighbor

                   Log Usage            Log Price           Elasticity         Usage Obs.          Price Obs.

1-6 Months          0.016***            -0.098***          -0.098***              1692                1692
                     (0.004)              (0.003)            (0.022)
7-12 Months         0.051***            -0.249***          -0.159***              1668                1668
                     (0.007)              (0.007)            (0.020)
13-18 Months        0.047***            -0.147***          -0.248***              1516                1515
                     (0.006)              (0.002)            (0.030)
19-24 Months        0.044***            -0.132***          -0.301***              1155                1155
                     (0.007)              (0.003)            (0.049)
25-30 Months        0.047***            -0.120***          -0.306***              606                 604
                     (0.008)              (0.004)            (0.046)

                                           (c) 10 Nearest Neighbors

                   Log Usage            Log Price           Elasticity         Usage Obs.          Price Obs.

1-6 Months          0.015***            -0.098***          -0.099***              1692                1692
                     (0.003)              (0.003)            (0.019)
7-12 Months         0.051***            -0.249***          -0.162***              1668                1668
                     (0.007)              (0.007)            (0.020)
13-18 Months        0.044***            -0.147***          -0.228***              1516                1515
                     (0.006)              (0.002)            (0.027)
19-24 Months        0.040***            -0.132***          -0.283***              1155                1155
                     (0.006)              (0.003)            (0.044)
25-30 Months        0.044***            -0.120***          -0.283***              606                 604
                     (0.007)              (0.004)            (0.040)

Significance levels: * 10 percent, ** 5 percent, *** 1 percent. Estimates are constructed by a nearest-neighbor
matching approach where each aggregation community is matched to non-aggregation communities with the most
similar usage in 2008 and 2009. The number of price observations corresponds to the number of observations for each
elasticity estimate, as we always observe usage where we observe a price change. Standard errors are in parentheses.
Standard error are determined by subsampling.


                                                      11
                   Table A.2: Comparison of Tuning Parameters for Subsampling

                                             Months      Months       Months      Months    Months
               R    B1    Type                1-6         7-12        13-18       19-24     25-30

                          Point Estimate     -0.0939     -0.1550      -0.2280     -0.2723   -0.2748
               1    17    Standard Error     0.0208      0.0221        0.0283      0.0476   0.0444
               2    34    Standard Error     0.0197      0.0204        0.0275      0.0471   0.0430
               3    51    Standard Error     0.0190      0.0199        0.0265      0.0430   0.0386
               5    85    Standard Error     0.0176      0.0185        0.0242      0.0388   0.0352
               7    119   Standard Error     0.0169      0.0158        0.0217      0.0364   0.0334

               Results from our bi-annual elasticity estimates are reported above. The first row re-
               ports the point estimates. The remaining rows report the standard errors calculated via
               subsampling with different values of the tuning parameter, R, and the corresponding
               subsample size in terms of treated communities, B1 . Confidence intervals throughout
               the paper are calculated with R = 3.



Table A.3: Characteristics of Aggregation, Non-Aggregation, and Matched Control Communities

                                                (1)         (2)          (3)                  (4)            (5)
                                             Aggregation   Non-      p-value of             Matched      p-value of
                                               Mean      Aggregation Difference             Controls     Difference
                                                           Mean        (2)-(1)               Mean          (4)-(1)
Per Capita Electricity Usage in 2010, kWh       4,893          5,078             0.790       4,862         0.964
Total Population (Log)                           8.63           7.20            <0.001        8.43         0.135
Percent Black                                    4.92           5.41             0.663        8.26         0.038
Percent White                                   86.54          89.06             0.055       83.49         0.087
Median Income                                  71,848         68,371             0.119      71,437         0.876
Median Age                                      38.63          40.80            <0.001       38.90         0.625
Total Housing Units (log)                        7.69           6.27            <0.001        7.45         0.083
Median Year Built                               1,969          1,965             0.006       1,972         0.023
Median Housing Value                           264,723        222,617            0.001      250,355        0.310
Percent with High School Education              29.80          36.29            <0.001       32.75         0.005
Percent with Some College Education             29.73          31.39             0.008       30.53         0.227
Percent with Bachelor Degree                    18.32          14.31            <0.001       16.71         0.087
Percent with Graduate Degree                    11.22           7.43            <0.001        9.01         0.007
Latitude                                        41.91          41.67            <0.001       41.80         0.005
Longitude                                       -88.41         -88.53            0.025       -88.20       <0.001
Number of Unique Communities                     286            385                           271
Electricity usage data come from ComEd. All other characteristics are from the 2005-2009 American Community
Survey. Number of observations in column (1) is smaller for median year built (285). Number of observations in
column (2) is smaller for median housing value (383). Estimates in columns (4) and (5) are weighted by the number
of times the control community is a match for a treated community.




                                                         12
  Table A.4: Matching Estimates of the Effect of Aggregation on Usage and Prices, Monthly

               Log Usage             Log Price              Elasticity         Usage Obs.            Price Obs.
Month 3         0.014***             -0.063***             -0.061**               286                   286
                 (0.005)               (0.007)              (0.037)
Month 4         0.020***             -0.114***            -0.081***               278                   278
                 (0.006)               (0.007)              (0.032)
Month 5         0.020***             -0.187***            -0.095***               278                   278
                 (0.006)               (0.007)              (0.028)
Month 6         0.025***             -0.224***            -0.107***               278                   278
                 (0.007)               (0.005)              (0.027)
Month 7         0.032***             -0.240***            -0.094***               278                   278
                 (0.008)               (0.010)              (0.025)
Month 8         0.041***             -0.262***            -0.114***               278                   278
                 (0.008)               (0.008)              (0.020)
Month 9         0.057***             -0.257***            -0.175***               278                   278
                 (0.008)               (0.007)              (0.024)
Month 10        0.055***             -0.243***            -0.182***               278                   278
                 (0.009)               (0.007)              (0.028)
Month 11        0.059***             -0.272***            -0.170***               278                   278
                 (0.008)               (0.008)              (0.023)
Month 12        0.054***             -0.222***            -0.227***               278                   278
                 (0.009)               (0.006)              (0.032)
Month 13        0.057***             -0.222***            -0.236***               278                   278
                 (0.009)               (0.006)              (0.033)
Month 14        0.045***             -0.228***            -0.161***               278                   277
                 (0.008)               (0.005)              (0.026)
Month 15        0.037***             -0.050***            -0.418***               240                   240
                 (0.007)               (0.003)              (0.097)
Month 16        0.038***             -0.110***            -0.321***               240                   240
                 (0.007)               (0.002)              (0.061)
Month 17        0.045***             -0.119***            -0.361***               240                   240
                 (0.007)               (0.002)              (0.058)
Month 18        0.033***             -0.128***            -0.220***               240                   240
                 (0.008)               (0.003)              (0.058)
Month 19        0.036***             -0.140***            -0.232***               240                   240
                 (0.008)               (0.004)              (0.053)
Month 20        0.036***             -0.135***            -0.248***               183                   183
                 (0.008)               (0.004)              (0.058)
Month 21        0.047***             -0.132***            -0.325***               183                   183
                 (0.008)               (0.003)              (0.055)
Month 22        0.035***             -0.133***            -0.246***               183                   183
                 (0.008)               (0.004)              (0.055)
Month 23        0.040***             -0.125***            -0.309***               183                   183
                 (0.007)               (0.003)              (0.057)
Month 24        0.040***             -0.125***            -0.308***               183                   183
                 (0.007)               (0.003)              (0.056)
Month 25        0.039***             -0.121***            -0.327***               183                   182
                 (0.007)               (0.003)              (0.058)
Month 26        0.040***             -0.097***            -0.290***               183                   182
                 (0.008)               (0.005)              (0.062)
Month 27        0.046***             -0.166***            -0.236***               183                   183
                 (0.008)               (0.006)              (0.038)
Significance levels: * 10 percent, ** 5 percent, *** 1 percent. Estimates are constructed by a nearest-neighbor
matching approach where each aggregation community is matched to the five non-aggregation communities with the
most similar usage in 2008 and 2009. Months 0–2 are not shown as no aggregation community switches suppliers
that quickly following a referenda, resulting in price changes that are identically zero and undefined reduced-form
elasticities. The number of price observations corresponds to the number of observations for each elasticity estimate,
as we always observe usage where we observe a price change. Standard errors are in parentheses. Significance is
determined by subsampling to construct confidence intervals.




                                                       13
    Table A.5: Matching Estimates of the Effect of Aggregation on Usage and Prices, Yearly

Post-Referendum Period        Log Usage          Log Price         Elasticity        Usage Obs.        Price Obs.
1-12 Months                    0.032***          -0.173***         -0.140***            3360              3360
                                (0.005)            (0.004)           (0.018)
13-24 Months                   0.041***          -0.141***         -0.243***            2671              2670
                                (0.005)            (0.002)           (0.028)
25-36 Months                   0.046***          -0.108***         -0.285***             720               718
                                (0.008)            (0.006)           (0.041)
Significance levels: * 10 percent, ** 5 percent, *** 1 percent. Estimates are constructed by a nearest-neighbor
matching approach where each aggregation community is matched to the five non-aggregation communities with the
most similar usage in 2008 and 2009. The number of price observations corresponds to the number of observations
for each elasticity estimate, as we always observe usage where we observe a price change. Standard errors are in
parentheses. Significance is determined by subsampling to construct confidence intervals.



 Table A.6: Effect of Aggregation on Electricity Prices, Communities that Passed Aggregation

                                               (1)                 (2)                 (3)                 (4)

0-6 Months Post-Aggregation                -0.119***           -0.100***           -0.123***           -0.101***
                                             (0.005)            (0.005)              (0.005)             (0.005)
7-12 Months Post-Aggregation               -0.307***           -0.313***           -0.312***           -0.320***
                                             (0.007)            (0.007)              (0.007)             (0.007)
13-18 Months Post-Aggregation              -0.297***           -0.265***           -0.303***           -0.267***
                                             (0.008)            (0.009)              (0.008)             (0.010)
19-24 Months Post-Aggregation              -0.283***           -0.285***           -0.285***           -0.287***
                                             (0.010)            (0.013)              (0.010)             (0.013)
25-30 Months Post-Aggregation              -0.281***           -0.264***           -0.296***           -0.279***
                                             (0.013)            (0.017)              (0.014)             (0.018)
Community Fixed Effects                         X                  X
Month and Year Fixed Effects                    X                                      X
Month-by-Year Fixed Effects                                        X                                       X
Community-by-Month Fixed Effects                                                       X                   X
Dep. Var. Mean                                2.202               2.202               2.202               2.202
Observations                                 25,716              25,716              25,716              25,716
Adjusted R-squared                           0.793               0.898               0.802               0.907

Significance levels: * 10 percent, ** 5 percent, *** 1 percent. Standard errors (in parentheses) clustered by community.
Outcome variable is the log of the per-kWh electricity price.




                                                        14
 Table A.7: Effect of Aggregation on Electricity Usage, Communities that Passed Aggregation

                                               (1)                 (2)                 (3)                 (4)

0-6 Months Post-Aggregation                 0.073***            0.059***           0.066***            0.048***
                                             (0.008)             (0.009)            (0.005)             (0.006)
7-12 Months Post-Aggregation                0.054***            0.095***           0.065***            0.114***
                                             (0.012)             (0.016)            (0.012)             (0.016)
13-18 Months Post-Aggregation               0.107***            0.140***           0.088***            0.114***
                                             (0.015)             (0.019)            (0.014)             (0.017)
19-24 Months Post-Aggregation               0.084***            0.073***           0.109***            0.114***
                                             (0.016)             (0.023)            (0.015)             (0.021)
25-30 Months Post-Aggregation               0.067***            0.139***           0.067***            0.133***
                                             (0.020)             (0.025)            (0.020)             (0.024)
Community Fixed Effects                         X                   X
Month and Year Fixed Effects                    X                                      X
Month-by-Year Fixed Effects                                        X                                       X
Community-by-Month Fixed Effects                                                       X                   X
Dep. Var. Mean                               14.371              14.371              14.371              14.371
Observations                                 25,716              25,716              25,716              25,716
Adjusted R-squared                           0.991               0.993               0.996               0.998

Significance levels: * 10 percent, ** 5 percent, *** 1 percent. Standard errors (in parentheses) clustered by community.
Outcome variable is the log of total electricity usage.




                                                        15
   Table A.8: Number of Nearest Neighbors and the Dynamic Elasticity Curve
                                             (a) 5 Nearest Neighbors

Period After Price Change              Non-Parametric                   Parametric                Reduced Form

1-6 Months Prior                            -0.023**                    -0.022***                        N/A
                                             (0.010)                     (0.006)
Contemporaneous                            -0.050***                    -0.052***                     -0.034**
                                             (0.015)                     (0.010)                       (0.021)
1-6 Months                                 -0.083***                    -0.087***                    -0.069***
                                             (0.013)                     (0.012)                       (0.011)
7-12 Months                                -0.145***                    -0.138***                    -0.122***
                                             (0.018)                     (0.017)                       (0.017)
13-18 Months                               -0.168***                    -0.179***                    -0.218***
                                             (0.022)                     (0.023)                       (0.035)
19-24 Months                               -0.209***                    -0.212***                    -0.260***
                                             (0.031)                     (0.028)                       (0.038)

                                             (b) 1 Nearest Neighbor

Period After Price Change              Non-Parametric                   Parametric                Reduced Form

1-6 Months Prior                            -0.024**                    -0.023***                        N/A
                                             (0.012)                     (0.007)
Contemporaneous                            -0.043***                    -0.056***                      -0.010
                                             (0.018)                     (0.012)                      (0.025)
1-6 Months                                 -0.084***                    -0.085***                    -0.071***
                                             (0.014)                     (0.013)                      (0.012)
7-12 Months                                -0.135***                    -0.131***                    -0.115***
                                             (0.020)                     (0.018)                      (0.018)
13-18 Months                               -0.162***                    -0.172***                    -0.226***
                                             (0.023)                     (0.024)                      (0.040)
19-24 Months                               -0.191***                    -0.208***                    -0.223***
                                             (0.033)                     (0.030)                      (0.046)

                                           (c) 10 Nearest Neighbors

Period After Price Change              Non-Parametric                  Parametric                 Reduced Form

1-6 Months Prior                          -0.025***                     -0.024***                       N/A
                                           (0.010)                       (0.007)
Contemporaneous                           -0.052***                     -0.057***                    -0.056***
                                           (0.016)                       (0.010)                      (0.020)
1-6 Months                                -0.086***                     -0.092***                    -0.071***
                                           (0.013)                       (0.012)                      (0.011)
7-12 Months                               -0.146***                     -0.144***                    -0.119***
                                           (0.019)                       (0.018)                      (0.016)
13-18 Months                              -0.176***                     -0.185***                    -0.244***
                                           (0.024)                       (0.024)                      (0.035)
19-24 Months                              -0.211***                     -0.219***                    -0.253***
                                           (0.033)                       (0.030)                      (0.039)
Significance levels: * 10 percent, ** 5 percent, *** 1 percent. The elasticities are interpreted as the cumulative
effect of a permanent one-percent price change on current usage. Estimates are constructed from a regression of log
usage changes on leads and lags of log price changes. The coefficients are constrained to match a four-parameter
model. Changes in log usage and log price are estimated using a nearest-neighbor matching approach where each
aggregation community is matched to the five non-aggregation communities with the most similar usage in 2008 and
2009. Standard errors are constructed via subsampling.
                                                          16
                                            Appendix Figures

                     Figure A.1: Example of an Aggregation Mailing



               Kane County
               C/O Dynegy Energy Services
               1500 Eastport Plaza Dr.
               Collinsville, IL 62234




John A. Smith
123 Main St
Anytown, IL 65432
Kane County is pleased to announce that Dynegy Energy Services, LLC (“DES”) has been selected as
the Supplier for its Municipal Aggregation program. This includes a 24-month program with a fixed price
of $0.06533 per kilowatt hour (kWh) for the first 12 months (August 2015 to August 2016) and steps down to
$0.06065 per kWh for the last 12 months (August 2016 to August 2017). DES is an independent seller of
power and energy service and is certified as an Alternative Retail Electricity Supplier by the Illinois
Commerce Commission (ICC Docket No. 14-0336).

As an eligible residential or small business customer located in unincorporated portions of Kane County,
you will be automatically enrolled unless you opt out.

HOW TO OPT-OUT
You need do nothing to receive this new fixed rate. However, if you choose not to participate, simply
return the enclosed Opt-Out Card or call DES at 844-351-7691 by July 10, 2015. For more information,
visit www.DynegyEnergyServices.com or contact DES Customer Care at 866-694-1262 from 8:00am to
7:00pm Mon- Fri or via email at DESCustCare@Dynegy.com.
There is no enrollment fee, no switching fee, and no early termination fee. This is a firm, fixed all-inclusive
rate guaranteed until August 2017. This program offers automatic enrollment in Traditionally-sourced
Power, but you have an option of purchasing Renewable Power at a rate of $0.06766 per kWh for the first
12 months (August 2015 to August 2016) which steps down to $0.06327 per kWh for the last 12 months
(August 2016 to August 2017).

ENROLLMENT PROCESS
Once your account is enrolled, you will receive a confirmation letter from ComEd confirming your switch
to DES. A sample ComEd notice is attached. Approximately 30 to 45 days after enrollment you will
receive your first bill with your new DES price. Please review the enclosed Terms and Conditions for
additional information.

Please be advised you also have the option to purchase electricity supply from a Retail Electric Supplier
(RES) or from ComEd pursuant to Section 16-103 of the Public Utilities Act. Information about your
options can be found at the Illinois Commerce Commission website: www.pluginilllinois.org and
www.ComEd.com. You may request a list of all supply options available to you from the Illinois Power
Agency.

Sincerely,                                                    See Reverse for Frequently Asked Questions…




   Christopher J. Lauzen                      Kurt R. Kojzarek
   Board Chairman                             Development Committee Chairman
   Kane County                                Kane County


                                                    17
Figure A.2: Example of an Opt-Out Card




                 18
Figure A.3: Example of a ComEd Bill (page 1 of 2)




                       19
Figure A.4: Example of a ComEd Bill (page 2 of 2)




                       20
                                              Figure A.5: Heterogeneity in Price Changes

                    (a) Distribution of Initial Prices                                                                    (b) Difference Over Time




                                                                                                        0
          150




                                                                                      Log Change in Price
                                                                                                        -.1
  Frequency
          100




                                                                                                        -.2
                                                                                                        -.3
          50




                                                                                                        -.4
          0




                4   4.5   5     5.5    6     6.5    7     7.5      8   8.5   9                                -24   -18     -12   -6   0     6     12     18        24
                              Electicity Supply Rate (cents/kWh)                                                             Months Since Referendum
                                ComEd                   Aggregation                                                        Mean         10th and 90th Percentiles




Notes: This figure displays the distribution of (log) price changes for aggregation communities relative to the contem-
poraneous ComEd price. Panel (a) provides a histogram of the initial aggregation rate and the corresponding ComEd
rate in the first month of the program for each community. Panel (b) plots the the difference between aggregation and
ComEd rates over time. The solid line displays the mean, and the dashed lines represent the 10th and 90th percentiles.




                                                                                 21
          Figure A.6: Monthly Electricity Usage in ComEd Service Territories, 2007-2014




                                      3500
                                      3000
                   Gigawatt hours
                                      2500
                                      2000
                                      1500




                                          2007m12008m12009m12010m12011m12012m12013m12014m1
                                                                         Date

Notes: Figure displays total electricity usage across the ComEd service territories in our sample.

                                           Figure A.7: Estimated Price Elasticities, Quadratic Fit
                                      0
                   Elasticity of Demand
                                      -.1
                                      -.2
                                      -.3
                                      -.4




                                             0          6           12          18        24         30
                                                            Months Since Referendum
                                                            Point Estimates          95 Percent CI


Notes: The reduced-form, time-dependent elasticity is estimated using a quadratic specification. Community-month
changes in log usage are regressed on changes in log price, where the log price changes are also interacted with
months since referendum and the square of months since referendum. These three parameters are used to construct
the estimated elasticity response curve as a function of time. Confidence intervals are constructed via subsampling.

                                                                       22
                          Figure A.8: Estimated Elasticities and Mean Log Price Change




                                      .2
                   Elasticity of Demand
                                      0
                                      -.2
                                      -.4
                                      -.6




                                            -.2            -.15           -.1                 -.05
                                                  Mean Two-Year (ln) Price Change
                                                    Point Estimates        95 Percent CI


Notes: Communities are split into seven groups based on the average two-year price change they experienced in the
first two years following their referenda. Elasticities are calculated separately for each group by pooling observations
in this two-year period and estimating equation (5). The graph shows no relationship between the estimated group
elasticity and the price change, mitigating concerns that the price change might be correlated with a community’s
elasticity of demand. Confidence intervals are constructed via subsampling.




                                                               23
Figure A.9: Effect on Log Usage: Communities that Passed but Did Not Implement Aggregation




                                     .1
                   Change in Log Usage
                                     .05
                                     0
                                     -.05




                                            -24   -18   -12   -6     0    6   12     18       24
                                                         Months Since Referendum
                                                        Point Estimates       95 Percent CI


Notes: The figure displays estimates of the mean usage effect for the eleven communities that pass aggregation but
never implement it. The effect is estimated relative to that community’s five nearest neighbors, as defined by the
difference-in-differences matching procedure outlined in the main text. The short dashed line indicates the median im-
plementation date relative to when the referendum was passed. Confidence intervals are constructed via subsampling.




                                                                   24
Figure A.10: Regression Estimates of the Effect of Aggregation on Electricity Prices, Communities
that Passed Aggregation




                                     0
                   Change in Log Price
                                     -.1
                                     -.2
                                     -.3
                                     -.4




                                           -24   -18   -12   -6     0     6   12   18    24    30
                                                         Months Since Referendum
                                                        Point Estimates        95 Percent CI


Notes: Outcome is the natural log of the electricity price. The first vertical dashed line indicates the date of the
aggregation referendum. The second dashed line indicates the date of aggregation implementation. Regressions
include month-by-year and community-by-month fixed effects. Standard errors are clustered by community. Sample
includes only communities that passed aggregation at some point during our sample.




                                                                   25
Figure A.11: Regression Estimates of the Effect of Aggregation on Electricity Usage, Communi-
ties that Passed Aggregation




                                     .3
                   Change in Log Usage
                                     .2
                                     .1
                                     0
                                     -.1




                                           -24   -18   -12   -6     0     6   12   18    24    30
                                                         Months Since Referendum
                                                        Point Estimates        95 Percent CI

Notes: Outcome is the natural log of total electricity use. The first vertical dashed line indicates the date of the
aggregation referendum. The second dashed line indicates the date of aggregation implementation. Regressions
include month-by-year and community-by-month fixed effects. Standard errors are clustered by community. Sample
includes only communities that passed aggregation at some point during our sample.




                                                                   26
          Figure A.12: Estimated Price Elasticities, Communities that Passed Aggregation




                   0
                   -.1
                   -.2
                   -.3
                   -.4
                   -.5




                         0            6            12            18            24            30
                                          Months Since Referendum
                                          Point Estimates              95 Percent CI

Notes: Sample includes only communities that passed aggregation at some point. Elasticities are calculated for each
six-month period by regressing community-month changes in log usage on the observed change in log price. Confi-
dence intervals are constructed by clustered bootstrap.




                                                        27
                               Figure A.13: Elasticities by Community Characteristics: Housing and population

                                           (a) Population                                                    (b) Housing Units per Capita
                     0




                                                                                                   0
  Elasticity of Demand




                                                                                Elasticity of Demand
                     -.1




                                                                                                   -.1
                     -.2




                                                                                                   -.2
                     -.3




                                                                                                   -.3
                     -.4




                                                                                                   -.4
                           0         6         12        18        24     30                             0     6         12        18        24         30
                                         Months Since Referendum                                                   Months Since Referendum
                                            Above Median - Population                                           Above Median - Housing per Population
                                            Below Median - Population                                           Below Median - Housing per Population


                                   (c) Percent Owner Occupied                                                        (d) Year Built
                     0




                                                                                                   0
  Elasticity of Demand




                                                                                Elasticity of Demand
                     -.1




                                                                                                   -.1
                     -.2




                                                                                                   -.2
                     -.3




                                                                                                   -.3
                     -.4




                                                                                                   -.4




                           0         6         12        18        24     30                             0     6         12        18        24         30
                                         Months Since Referendum                                                   Months Since Referendum
                                          Above Median - Owner Occupied                                               Above Median - Year Built
                                          Below Median - Owner Occupied                                               Below Median - Year Built




Notes: These panels display elasticity estimates for communities that are below and above median for the specified
characteristic. The estimates are from a reduced-form specification augmented with an interaction term for whether
the community is in the upper half of the distribution. The regressions include eight interactions simultaneously:
total population, housing units per capita, percent owner occupied, median year built, median income, percent with
bachelor’s degree, median age, and percent white. Coefficients significant at the 10 percent level are indicated by a
marker.




                                                                           28
                               Figure A.14: Elasticities by Community Characteristics: Socioeconomics

                                        (a) Income                                                            (b) Education
                     0




                                                                                              0
  Elasticity of Demand




                                                                           Elasticity of Demand
                     -.1




                                                                                              -.1
                     -.2




                                                                                              -.2
                     -.3




                                                                                              -.3
                     -.4




                                                                                              -.4
                           0     6         12        18        24    30                             0   6          12        18         24      30
                                     Months Since Referendum                                                Months Since Referendum
                                      Above Median - Median Income                                          Above Median - Bachelor's Degrees
                                      Below Median - Median Income                                          Below Median - Bachelor's Degrees


                                          (c) Age                                                                (d) Race
                     0




                                                                                              0
  Elasticity of Demand




                                                                           Elasticity of Demand
                     -.1




                                                                                              -.1
                     -.2




                                                                                              -.2
                     -.3




                                                                                              -.3
                     -.4




                                                                                              -.4




                           0     6         12        18        24    30                             0   6          12        18         24      30
                                     Months Since Referendum                                                Months Since Referendum
                                        Above Median - Median Age                                             Above Median - Percent White
                                        Below Median - Median Age                                             Below Median - Percent White




Notes: These panels display elasticity estimates for communities that are below and above median for the specified
characteristic. The estimates are from a reduced-form specification augmented with an interaction term for whether or
not the community is in the upper half of the distribution. The regressions include eight interactions simultaneously:
total population, housing units per capita, percent owner occupied, median year built, median income, percent with
bachelor’s degree, median age, and percent white. Coefficients significant at the 10 percent level are indicated by a
marker.




                                                                      29
