                             NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




THE EFFECTS OF SCIENTISTS AND ENGINEERS ON PRODUCTIVITY AND EARNINGS
                AT THE ESTABLISHMENT WHERE THEY WORK

                                         Erling Barth
                                       James C. Davis
                                     Richard B. Freeman
                                      Andrew J. Wang

                                     Working Paper 23484
                             http://www.nber.org/papers/w23484


                    NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                             1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                               Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    June 2017




Forthcoming in U.S. Engineering in a Global Economy, edited by Richard Freeman and Hal
Salzman, Chicago, IL: University of Chicago Press. This research was supported by National
Science Foundation grant 0915670. The views, opinions and conclusions expressed herein are
those of the authors and do not necessarily represent the views of the National Bureau of
Economic Research or the U.S. Census Bureau. All results have been reviewed to ensure that no
confidential information is disclosed.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2017 by Erling Barth, James C. Davis, Richard B. Freeman, and Andrew J. Wang. All rights
reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit
permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
The Effects of Scientists and Engineers on Productivity and Earnings at the Establishment
Where They Work
Erling Barth, James C. Davis, Richard B. Freeman, and Andrew J. Wang
NBER Working Paper No. 23484
June 2017
JEL No. D24,J21,J31,O3

                                         ABSTRACT

This paper uses linked establishment-firm-employee data to examine the relationship between the
scientists and engineers proportion (SEP) of employment, and productivity and labor earnings.
We show that: (1) most scientists and engineers in industry are employed in establishments
producing goods or services, and do not perform research and development (R&D); (2)
productivity is higher in manufacturing establishments with higher SEP, and increases with
increases in SEP; (3) employee earnings are higher in manufacturing establishments with higher
SEP, and increase substantially for employees who move to establishments with higher SEP, but
only modestly for employees within an establishment when SEP increases in the establishment.
The results suggest that the work of scientists and engineers in goods and services producing
establishments is an important pathway for increasing productivity and earnings, separate and
distinct from the work of scientists and engineers who perform R&D.


Erling Barth                                    Richard B. Freeman
Institute for Social Research                   National Bureau of Economic Research
P.O. Box 3233 Elisenberg                        1050 Massachusetts Avenue
0208 Oslo                                       Cambridge, MA 02138
Norway                                          freeman@nber.org
and NBER
erling.barth@samfunnsforskning.no               Andrew J. Wang
                                                National Bureau of Economic Research
James C. Davis                                  1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Boston Census Research Data Center              Cambridge, MA 02138
National Bureau of Economic Research            awang@nber.org
1050 Massachusetts Ave.
Cambridge, MA 02138
james.c.davis@census.gov
                                                Introduction

        Studies of how scientific and engineering knowledge affects the economy focus on the
impact of research and development (R&D) spending, and/or new ideas embodied in patents, on
the productivity of firms. The majority of scientists and engineers in industry, however, do not
perform research in corporate laboratories nor obtain patents that lead to commercially
successful products or processes. Most scientists and engineers work in establishments that
produce goods and services, on activities that are not classified as formal R&D. Although the
pathway that links scientific and technological knowledge to lowering production costs or
introducing new or improved products is critical to economic growth, we know little about the
contribution of production establishment-based scientists and engineers to productivity. Helper
and Kuan’s (2016) interviews and surveys of firms in the automobile supply chain show that
engineers outside of formal R&D find ways to lower costs and develop new products/ processes,
often working with customers and/or production workers.

        To see whether the employment of scientists and engineers at production establishments
contributes to productivity broadly, we create a new establishment-firm-employee data set for
manufacturing. We combine data from the quinquennial Census of Manufactures (CM) and the
Annual Survey of Manufactures (ASM) on establishments’ gross output and labor, capital, and
intermediate inputs; the Decennial Census and Current Population Survey (CPS) on individual
workers’ occupation and education;1 the National Science Foundation’s Survey of Industrial
Research and Development (SIRD) on firms’ R&D employment; and the Longitudinal Employer
Household Dynamics (LEHD) database that links every worker to their employing
establishment. Appendix A provides details on how we link workers and establishments across
data sets to construct a measure of the scientists and engineers proportion (SEP) of employment
at the establishment level, and how we construct a firm level measure of R&D employment.

        We focus on manufacturing for three reasons. First, manufacturing is a lead sector in
productivity growth. Between 1990 and 2016 the average annual rate of labor productivity
increased at 3.5% per year in manufacturing compared to 2.0% in the entire economy.2 Second,
industrial R&D and employment of scientists and engineers is disproportionately concentrated in

1
  The Census of Manufactures and the Annual Survey of Manufactures distinguish between production (blue collar)
and non-production (white collar) workers but have no information on the actual occupation of workers.
2
  Bureau of Labor Statistics, Labor Productivity and Costs, https://www.bls.gov/lpc/tables.htm
                                                       3
manufacturing. While manufacturing establishments employ 10% of the work force in industry,
they employ 20% of scientists and engineers in industry,3 and manufacturing firms employ over
60% of R&D scientists and engineers in industry.4 Third, data from the Census of Manufactures
and Annual Survey of Manufactures allow us to analyze production and total factor productivity
in manufacturing establishments.

        A key statistical issue for our analysis is that we are able to link 17% of workers in our
manufacturing establishments to Decennial Census or CPS data in order to identify their
occupation. We estimate the scientists and engineers proportion (SEP) of employment from the
sample of Decennial/CPS matched workers at each establishment. The absence of data on
occupation for most of the workforce at each establishment creates measurement error in
estimating SEP at the establishment. Measurement error is particularly severe for smaller
establishments, and can substantially bias downward estimates of the effect of SEP on
establishment outcomes in production function analysis that take each establishment as an
observation.

        We address this issue in three ways: 1) restricting our analytical sample to establishments
that have at least 10 workers that match to Decennial/CPS, and at least 50 in total employment,
thus removing establishment observations with the largest likely measurement error; 2)
estimating regressions that weight establishment observations by the number of Decennial/CPS
matched workers; and 3) adjusting estimated establishment SEPs toward the overall mean SEP
via a James-Stein type of adjustment that depends on the variance of the establishment SEP
estimate (James and Stein, 1961).

        Our main finding is that there is a substantial positive relation between the scientists and
engineers proportion (SEP) of workers at an establishment, and establishment productivity and
employee earnings. And the estimated effect is substantially larger and better identified with
corrections for measurement error.

        The paper is divided into four parts. Section 1 documents the phenomenon that motivates
our analysis – the fact that most scientists and engineers work in goods and service producing

3
  Bureau of Labor Statistics, Occupation Employment Statistics, OES Data, May 2013,
https://www.bls.gov/oes/tables.htm
4
  National Science Foundation (2016), Detailed Statistical Tables NSF 16-313. Table 57 reports 631,000 R&D
scientists and engineers in manufacturing and 1,014,000 in all industry in 2013.
                                                       4
establishments and engage in non-R&D work activities. Section 2 provides cross section and
fixed effects estimates of the production function relationship between establishment output and
the scientists and engineers proportion (SEP) of employment at the establishment. Section 3 uses
person-job level data to provide cross section and fixed effect estimates of the relationship
between the earnings of individual workers and the scientists and engineers proportion (SEP) of
employment at their establishment. Section 4 concludes.



         1. Scientists and engineers at goods and services producing establishments

        The impetus for this study is the fact that most industrial scientists and engineers work at
goods and services producing establishments, and work in activities other than formal R&D. We
document this fact with data on the number of scientists and engineers, from the person-level
Current Population Survey (CPS) and American Community Survey (ACS) and from the
establishment-level Occupational Employment Survey (OES), combined with data on the
number of R&D scientists and engineers from the firm-level Business Research Development
and Innovation Survey (BRDIS). 5 We also use data on work activities of scientists and engineers
from the person-level Scientists and Engineers Statistical Data System (SESTAT) produced by
the National Science Foundation.

        Table 1 provides our estimates of the number and proportion of scientists and engineers in
total, and working in R&D and non-R&D activities in 2013. Line 1 shows the total number of
scientists and engineers employed in industry, based on data from the person-level CPS and ACS
and from the establishment-level OES. The numbers are fairly similar. The CPS shows the
highest number of scientists and engineers, the ACS shows 8% fewer scientists and engineers,
and OES shows 3% fewer than the ACS.6 Line 2 shows the number of R&D scientists and
engineers from the firm-level BRDIS. Line 3 computes the number of scientists and engineers
working in non-R&D activities by subtracting the Line 2 number from the Line 1 numbers. Line
4 computes the ratio of the number of scientists and engineers in non-R&D activities to the total

5
  The National Science Foundation sponsored Business Research Development and Innovation Survey (BRDIS) is
the successor to the Survey of Industrial Research and Development (SIRD) which provides data on R&D
employment for the 1992-2007 period covered in our production function regression analysis.
6
  The CPS sample includes about 60,000 households per month. The ACS sample includes about 3.5 million
households in each year since 2012. The OES sample for each year includes about 1.2 million establishments from a
3-year period.
                                                        5
number of scientists and engineers – about 80 percent of industrial scientists and engineers work
outside of formal R&D activities.



[ TABLE 1 ]



        We complement these estimates with tabulated data from the Scientists and Engineers
Statistical Data System (SESTAT) on the work activity of industrial scientists and engineers.
SESTAT reports 3.808 million scientists and engineers (excluding social scientists) in industry in
20137 – a figure short of the figures in Table 1. The primary reason for the lower figure is that
SESTAT data exclude persons with less than a bachelor’s degree. SESTAT provides information
on the primary and secondary work activity of scientists and engineers, differentiating among
five activities: research and development, teaching, management and administration, computer
applications, and other. In 2013, 29% of scientists and engineers indicate that their primary work
activity is R&D, and 61% indicate that their primary work activity is non-R&D. Tabulating both
primary and secondary work activities, we find 15.3% of scientists and engineers indicate that
both their primary and secondary work activities are R&D; 15.7% indicate R&D as primary
activity and something else as secondary; 24.5% indicate R&D as secondary activity and
something else as primary; and 44.5% indicate that both their primary and secondary activities
are non-R&D.

        To compute a single statistic for scientist and engineer full-time equivalent (FTE) work
time engaged in R&D activities, we assume that three-quarters of a worker’s FTE time is
engaged in the primary work activity, and one-quarter of FTE time is engaged in the secondary
work activity. With this assumption on worker FTE time allocation to primary and secondary
work activity, we find that the average of scientist and engineer FTE time engaged in R&D
activities is 33.2%, so two-thirds of industrial scientists and engineers FTE time is engaged in
non-R&D activities. Since SESTAT data exclude persons with less than a bachelor’s degree
working as scientists and engineers, who are more likely to work in non-R&D activities



7
 National Science Foundation (2015), Characteristics of Scientists and Engineers in the United States: 2013. Table
9-1 reports 4,009,000 scientists and engineers in Business/Industry, of which 201,000 are social scientists.
                                                         6
compared to bachelor’s graduates, the proportion of FTE time for all scientists and engineers in
non-R&D activities certainly exceeds the estimate of two-thirds.

        Because the industry classification of workers are not comparable across the person-level
CPS and ACS, establishment-level OES, and firm-level BRDIS surveys, we cannot combine data
from the different surveys to estimate the proportion of scientists and engineers engaged in R&D
versus non-R&D activities in disaggregated manufacturing or non-manufacturing industries. The
person-level CPS and ACS ask the respondent to classify the industry of their employer at the
location where they work, but a worker in a large manufacturing firm may likely classify their
employer as manufacturing even if they work at a non-manufacturing establishment, such as
sales or R&D or other services. The establishment-level OES classifies the industry of the
establishment, and classifies workers as non-manufacturing if they work at a non-manufacturing
establishment. The firm-level BRDIS classifies the industry of the firm based on the business
segment where the firm conducts the most R&D, or the industry sector where the firm has the
most payroll. So the BRDIS classifies scientists and engineers in R&D establishments of
manufacturing firms as manufacturing workers, whereas the establishment-level OES classifies
such scientists and engineers as non-manufacturing workers in the Scientific Research and
Development Services industry (NAICS 5417).

        To compare estimates across surveys, we tabulate the number of scientists and engineers
in manufacturing from the CPS, ACS, and OES. The two person-level surveys gave comparable
estimates: in 2013, from the CPS we find 1.48 million scientists and engineers in manufacturing,
and from the ACS we find 1.39 million. From the establishment-level OES, by contrast, we find
only 0.95 million scientists and engineers in manufacturing establishments – just 64% of the CPS
figure and 69% of the ACS figure.8

Scientists and engineers proportion of employment at establishments

        To study the relationship between scientists and engineers, and output and productivity, at
establishments, we need to estimate the scientists and engineers proportion (SEP) of employment
at the establishment level.9 To estimate SEP at establishments, we link workers in the LEHD to

8
  Our tabulations for all workers in 2013 shows 14.2 million manufacturing workers in the CPS, 14.7 million
manufacturing workers in the ACS, and 12.0 million manufacturing workers in the OES (84% of the CPS estimate
and 82% of the ACS estimate).
9
  The best source of occupational data for establishments is the OES, but OES establishment-level microdata are not
                                                         7
the 1990 or 2000 Decennial Census, or the CPS in 1986-1997, to identify the occupation of
workers for the matched sample of workers. Our matched sample of manufacturing workers
constitutes 17% of all workers in establishments observed in the Census of Manufactures or
Annual Survey of Manufactures over the years 1992-2007. We use the matched sample of
workers to estimate the scientists and engineers proportion (SEP) of employment at each
establishment. See Appendix A for additional description of the data construction procedure.

         Our estimate of SEP at the establishment is subject to two forms of measurement error.
The first form of measurement error relates to our measure of the occupation of workers. We
identify a worker’s occupation as the occupation indicated in the year that we observe the worker
in the Decennial Census or CPS. If we observe a worker in more than one year of the Decennial
Census or CPS, we use the observation from the most recent year, and in fact, most of our
matches are from the 2000 Decennial Census. Our establishment production function analysis
covers the years 1992-2007. To the extent that workers change occupation from a
scientist/engineer occupation to some other occupation, or from some other occupation to a
scientist/engineer occupation, during the time period of our data, we may mismeasure the
occupation of workers in our sample.

         The second form of measurement error in our estimate of SEP is sampling error
associated with the number of matched workers that we have at an establishment. The fewer the
matches, the greater is the sampling error. The sampling error will be large in establishments
with few employees, but can also be substantial in establishment with a greater number of
employees. For example, an establishment with 25 employees and a worker match rate of 17%
would have information on occupation for 4 matched workers. If the establishment has one
scientist/engineer, the true SEP is 4%. But with a matched sample of 4 workers, the estimated
SEP would be 0% or 25%. For our establishment production function regression analysis, we
take three different approaches to address sampling error in our estimate of SEP at the
establishment. First, we focus our regression analysis on a restricted sample of establishments
with at least 10 matched workers10 and with total employment of at least 50 employees, thereby


available to us to link to Census establishment-level production data. Fairman et al. (2008) show that such a link is
possible.
10
   The count of matched workers from the LEHD is for a pseudo-establishment defined by EIN-state-county-
industry, so it may not be exactly comparable to total employment of the establishment from the Census of
Manufactures or Annual Survey of Manufactures.
                                                           8
purging the sample of observations with potentially huge measurement error. Second, we
estimate weighted regressions, with observations weighted by the square root of the number of
matched workers at the establishment. Third, we apply a James-Stein type adjustment to the
estimated SEP that shrinks the estimated SEP for an establishment toward the mean value of SEP
over all establishments, with the shrinkage factor depending on the variance of the estimated SEP
at the establishment.

       While we focus on SEP as our key independent variable, we also use the matched worker
sample to estimate the average years of education of workers at the establishment level. This
allows us to differentiate between the scientists and engineers proportion of workers at the
establishment, and average years of education of workers at the establishment, in our production
function regression analysis. The measurement error issues relating to estimating the proportion
of scientists and engineers also apply to the estimation of the average years of education of
workers at the establishment. Our approaches to address sampling error in estimating SEP apply
similarly to our estimate of the average years of education of workers at the establishment.

Manufacturing establishments data set

       Table 2 shows the mean value of selected variables for the full sample of all
manufacturing establishments in our CM/ASM data, for the “Matched” sample of establishments
with one or more workers matched to the Decennial/CPS, and for the “Restricted” sample of
establishments with 10 or more workers matched to the Decennial/CPS and with total
employment of 50 or more. Appendix A describes the construction of our analytical data set for
manufacturing establishments.



[ TABLE 2 ]



       The full sample includes over 1.3 million establishment-year observations over the period
1992-2007. The matched sample includes 506,800 establishment-year observations, and the
restricted sample has 215,800 establishment-year observations. The mean values of log gross
output and log employment in the matched sample are somewhat larger than in the full sample,
while these mean values in the restricted sample are substantially larger. The proportion of

                                                 9
establishments that belong to R&D performing firms, and the mean value of R&D worker share
of firm employment, are similar for the matched sample and full sample, and larger in the
restricted sample. The average production worker share of employment at the establishment level
is similar in all three samples.

        Using the matched worker sample, we produce our measure of the scientists and
engineers proportion (SEP) of employment at the establishment. The mean value of SEP is 0.038
in the restricted sample, which is our main regression sample. For comparison, we also produce a
broader measure of the scientists and engineers and science/engineering technicians proportion
of employment at the establishment. The mean value of this measure in the restricted sample is
0.061. In our regression analysis, we find that estimates using the broader measure of scientists
and engineers and science/engineering technicians are similar to our main estimates using the
SEP variable. Table 2 also presents the mean of average years of education of workers at
establishments.

        The last two columns of Table 2 compare establishments in R&D and non-R&D
performing firms. Previous studies find that R&D (usually measured as a stock of knowledge by
accumulating R&D spending over time) is associated with higher productivity (Griliches, 1998;
Hall, 2005; Hall et al., 2009). In our data, establishments in R&D performing firms have higher
gross output, higher employment, lower production worker share of employment, higher average
years of education of workers, and higher scientists and engineers proportion of employment.



             2. Scientists and engineers in the establishment production function

        If scientists and engineers at production establishments help implement technical
advances that increase productivity, through improved production processes or improved
products, then in our manufacturing establishments data set, we expect to find that the scientists
and engineers proportion (SEP) of employment at the establishment is positively associated with
establishment productivity. We estimate the following establishment production function
regression model:

(1) Ln OUTPUT = a + b SEP + c FRD + d FRDP + SFI γ + EMPL δ + YR + IND + GEO + u ,

where

                                                10
OUTPUT is annual gross output of the establishment,

SEP is the scientists and engineers proportion of employment at the establishment,

FRD is an indicator for whether the firm is an R&D performing firm,

FRDP is the R&D scientists and engineers proportion of employment at the firm,

SFI is a vector of “standard factor inputs”, including employment, capital stock in equipment,
capital stock in structures, materials, and energy (all measured in log units),

EMPL is a vector of other employer attributes, including an indicator for whether the firm is a
multi-establishment firm, establishment age, establishment age squared, production worker share
of employment at the establishment, and average years of education of workers at the
establishment,

YR is a vector of year fixed effects,

IND is a vector of industry fixed effects,

GEO is a vector of geographic region fixed effects, and

u is the error term.

With our panel data set, we also estimate an establishment fixed effects version of equation (1),
which uses time variation in SEP and other variables within establishments to estimate their
effect on establishment output.

       Table 3 presents the estimated coefficients for the establishment production function
regression model. Column 1 shows the estimate using the Matched sample of all establishments,
with no treatment for measurement error in the variables for scientists and engineers proportion
(SEP) of employment and average years of education of workers at the establishment. The
positive and significant 0.079 estimate for the effect of SEP on log gross output indicates that
even in the likely presence of large measurement error in SEP, establishments with higher
scientists and engineers proportion of employment have higher total factor productivity. The
estimated coefficients on the standard factor inputs – employment, capital equipment and
structures, materials, and energy – are all reasonable in magnitude and consistent with constant
returns to scale in the production function. The estimated effect of average years of education of
workers is positive, consistent with evidence that human capital is related to productivity.

                                                 11
[ TABLE 3 ]



           The next three columns in the table show estimates using the Restricted sample of
establishments, i.e., establishments with 10 or more workers matched to the Decennial/CPS and
with total employment of 50 or more. This addresses the issue of measurement error in the
scientists and engineers proportion (SEP) of employment, and the average years of education of
workers, by dropping observations where measurement error is likely to be exceptionally severe.
This reduces the sample size of establishments by almost 60%, but the dropped establishments
account for only 10% of the workers, because the distribution of establishments by employment
follows a power law with many establishments employing just a few workers and a smaller
number of establishments employing many workers.11 Column 2 shows that using the Restricted
sample more than doubles the estimated coefficient on SEP, and more than triples the estimated
coefficient on average years of education of workers, compared to Column 1, which indicates
that measurement error is indeed a substantive issue for analysis.

           Column 3 adds variables for whether the firm is an R&D performing firm, and the R&D
scientists and engineers proportion of employment at the firm. The estimated coefficients for
both of the firm-level R&D variables are positive. The estimated coefficient for SEP is smaller
compared to Column 2, but is still substantial at 0.132.

           Finally, Column 4 presents the estimates for the production function regression model
with establishment fixed effects. This model removes any unmeasured cross-sectional
establishment factors related to SEP and output productivity that would bias the estimate of the
effect of SEP on output. Using only within-establishment variation in the regression variables,
the fixed effects model provides our strongest test of the relation between scientists and
engineers proportion of employment and output productivity at the establishment level. In
Column 4, the estimated coefficient on SEP is 0.055, considerably smaller than in Column 3, and
the estimated coefficient on average years of education of workers is diminished by even more in
proportional terms. Given that measurement error produces smaller estimated coefficients in


11
     See Table 6, and the number of observations in Columns 1 and 2.
                                                          12
longitudinal regressions than in cross-sectional regressions (Freeman, 1984), the smaller
estimates in the fixed effects regression are not surprising, and provides additional indication of
the presence of measurement error.

Methods for Addressing Measurement Error

        The first method we use to address measurement error in SEP and average years of
education of workers is to use a weighted regression, where we weight observations in our
production function regression by the square root of the number of matched workers at the
establishment. Since the sampling error of both variables depend inversely on the square root of
the number of matched workers, this weighting procedure gives more weight to establishments
with more precise estimates of these variables, and less weight to establishments with less
precise estimates, and should thus provide a better estimate of the effect of SEP on output.

           Table 4, Column 1, presents the weighted regression estimates for the OLS model in the
Restricted sample. The estimated coefficient on SEP increases by a factor of 1.71 (= 0.226 /
0.132) compared to the unweighted regression in Table 3, Column 3. The estimated coefficient
on average years of education of workers increases by a factor of 1.13 (= 0.043 / 0.038). Table 4,
Column 2, presents weighted regression estimates for the establishment fixed effects model.
Compared to Table 3, Column 4, the estimated coefficient on SEP more than doubles from 0.055
to 0.121. The estimated coefficient on years of education of workers also doubles from 0.004 to
0.008.12



[ TABLE 4 ]



        The second method we use to address measurement error is to apply a James-Stein type
“shrinkage” adjustment to the estimated SEP for an establishment, which pulls the estimate
toward the mean SEP in the entire sample, depending on the variance of the estimated SEP.
Building on Mairesse and Greenan (1999), in our method, described in Appendix B and in Barth
et al. (2017), we calculate the ratio of the variance of estimated SEP at an establishment to the

12
  A potential issue with the weighted regression method is that if the effect of SEP is heterogeneous and larger in
establishments with more employment and more matched workers, then the weighted regression estimate of SEP
will reflect both heterogeneity in SEP with establishment size, and reduced measurement error due to sampling.
                                                          13
observed variance of SEP across all establishments. A large ratio indicates that sampling error in
estimated SEP is large relative to the variation in SEP across establishments. We use this
variance ratio to adjust the estimated SEP at an establishment toward the mean SEP over all
establishments. We replace each establishment’s estimated SEP with a weighted average of its
estimated SEP and the mean SEP over all establishments in the data. The weight given to
estimated SEP is smaller if sampling error of estimated SEP is larger, and the weight given to
mean SEP is commensurately larger. The same procedure is applied to adjust the estimated
average years of education of workers at the establishment.

       Table 4, Columns 3 and 4, present the regression estimates for the OLS model and
establishment fixed effects model, using the Restricted sample, and applying the James-Stein
shrinkage adjustment to SEP and average years of education of workers. In Table 4, Column 3,
for the OLS model, the estimated coefficient on SEP is 0.437, which is 3.31 (= 0.437 / 0.132)
times larger than the comparable estimate in Table 3, Column 3. The estimated coefficient on
average years of education of workers is 0.054, which is 1.42 (= 0.054 / 0.038) times larger than
the comparable estimate in Table 3, Column 3. For the establishment fixed effects model, in
Table 4, Column 4, the estimated coefficient on SEP is 0.373, which is dramatically larger than
the comparable estimate of 0.055 in Table 3, Column 4. The estimated coefficient on years of
education of workers is 0.005, which is only marginally larger than the comparable estimate of
0.004 in Table 3, Column 4.

       The last two columns in Table 4 present regression estimates using the Matched sample
of all establishment, and applying the James-Stein shrinkage adjustment to SEP and average
years of education of workers. The estimated coefficient on SEP in the OLS model is 0.154,
which is almost double the comparable estimate of 0.079 in Table 3, Column 1. The estimated
coefficient on SEP in the establishment fixed effects model is 0.147, which is very close to the
OLS estimate of 0.154.

       In sum, the regression estimates presented in Tables 3 and 4 show that the different
methods for addressing measurement error in the SEP variable all lead to larger estimates for the
effect of SEP on output in the establishment production function. We conclude that the scientists
and engineers proportion (SEP) of employment has a substantial positive impact on output
productivity at the establishment, in our data for manufacturing establishments in 1992-2007.

                                                14
               3. Establishment scientists and engineers, and earnings of workers

        If the scientists and engineers proportion (SEP) of employment is positively related to
productivity at the establishment, then we may expect that it is also positively related to the
earnings of workers at the establishment. A positive relation between SEP and worker earnings
would result if new technologies implemented by scientists and engineers at the establishment
complement worker skills in production,13 or if employers share economic rents from
implementing those technologies or products with workers through higher pay.

          The standard earnings equation regression model in labor economics relates individual
workers’ log earnings to their human capital and demographic attributes. To assess the effect of
SEP on worker earnings, we augment the standard earnings equation with SEP at the
establishment and R&D scientists and engineers proportion of employment at the firm. We
estimate the following workers’ earnings regression model:

(2) Ln EARN = a + b SEP + c FRD + d FRDP + WKR γ + EMPL δ + YR + IND + GEO + u ,

where

EARN is annualized earnings of the worker,

SEP is the scientists and engineers proportion of employment at the establishment,

FRD is an indicator for whether the firm is an R&D performing firm,

FRDP is the R&D scientists and engineers proportion of employment at the firm,

WKR is a vector of individual worker attributes, including years of education, years of work
experience, years of work experience squared, indicator for female, indicator for nonwhite race,
indicator for scientist or engineer occupation, and interactions of indicator for female with work
experience, work experience squared, and indicator for nonwhite race,

EMPL is a vector of other employer attributes, including log employment at the establishment,
production worker share of employment at the establishment, and average years of education of
workers at the establishment,

13
  Some technologies substitute for labor skills and reduce earnings, so complementarity of technology and labor
skills depends on the specific case.
                                                        15
YR is a vector of year fixed effects,

IND is a vector of industry fixed effects,

GEO is a vector of geographic region fixed effects, and

u is the error term.

        Table 5 describes our sample of workers in manufacturing establishments in 1992-2007.
This sample of 11,666,200 person-year observations corresponds to the 215,800 establishment-
year observations in the “Restricted” establishment sample presented in Table 2. The mean value
of SEP in the worker sample, 0.063, is greater than the mean value of SEP in the establishment
sample, 0.038, because larger establishments with more workers have higher SEP.

        The last three columns in Table 5 compare workers who in our panel have work history in
R&D firms only, in both R&D and non-R&D firms, and in non-R&D firms only. Workers with
work history in R&D firms only, have higher earnings, more years of education, and work in
establishments with more employees and higher SEP, compared to workers with work history in
both R&D and non-R&D firms, or non-R&D firms only.



[ TABLE 5 ]



[ TABLE 6 ]



       Table 6 presents the regression estimates for the log earnings equation augmented by SEP
and other establishment-level and firm-level variables. In Column 1, using the Matched sample,
the estimated coefficients on the human capital and demographic variables – years of education,
years of work experience, gender, and race – are similar to typical estimates in standard earnings
equations. The estimated coefficient on scientist or engineer occupation is 0.150, so scientists or
engineers earn 15% more than other workers. The estimated coefficient on SEP is a substantial
0.582. In Column 2, using the Restricted sample, the estimated coefficient on SEP increases to
0.638, presumably due to reduced measurement error in SEP in the Restricted sample. In the
OLS model, the 0.638 estimated effect of SEP on earnings in Table 6 is larger than the estimated

                                                 16
effect of SEP on productivity in Tables 3 and 4, which ranges between 0.132 and 0.437, in the
Restricted sample.14

         We consider the possibility that the relation between SEP and earnings may be affected
by dual causality that produces a selectivity bias in the estimate. Establishments choose which
workers to make job offers to, and workers choose which job offers to accept, so part of the
positive association between SEP and earnings could be due to selectivity in employer and
worker choices rather than the effect of science and engineering on the earnings of a given
worker. The natural way to control for this selectivity is to estimate a fixed effects model which
identifies the effect of changes in SEP on the same worker. In our data, there are two distinct
ways that SEP can change for a given worker. An employer can change SEP over time, which
affects workers who stay at the establishment. Or a worker can move between establishments
with different levels of SEP. Given the different impetus for change in these situations – an
employer-initiated change vs. a worker-initiated change – we estimate fixed effects models
separately for job stayers and for job changers.

         Table 6, Column 3, presents estimated coefficients from a fixed effects analysis of job
stayers, defined as person-year observations for a worker at an establishment in two or more
continuous years, where changes in SEP are within the establishment over time. Table 6, Column
4 presents estimated coefficients from a fixed effects analysis of job changers, defined as person-
year observations for a worker before and after a change in establishment, where changes in SEP
are due to the change in employer.

         There is a large difference between the two fixed effects estimates for the coefficient on
SEP. For job stayers the coefficient on SEP is a modest 0.010, while for job changers the
estimated coefficient on SEP is 0.184. Workers benefit mainly by changing jobs and moving to
establishments with higher scientists and engineers proportion of employment, and not from their
employer raising the scientists and engineers proportion of employment at their current work
establishment. Comparing the fixed effects estimate of the impact of SEP on earnings for job
stayers at an establishment with the fixed effects estimates of the impact of SEP on productivity
at the establishment, we find that increasing the scientists and engineers proportion at the

14
  Since labor share is around 0.35 to 0.40 in the gross output production function, an estimated effect of SEP on
earnings that is greater than the estimated effect of SEP on gross output productivity is not inconsistent with rent-
sharing of productivity gains.
                                                           17
establishment has a much greater impact on productivity than on earnings. From Tables 3 and 4,
the fixed effects estimate of the impact of SEP on productivity, in the Restricted sample, ranges
from 0.055 to 0.373, which are much larger than the 0.010 estimate of the impact of SEP on
earnings of workers who are job stayers at an establishment.



                                          4. Conclusion

       Linking data on science and engineering occupations of workers, firm R&D activity,
establishment production, worker earnings and job mobility, we find that goods producing
establishments with relatively many scientists and engineers have higher productivity and worker
earnings than those with few scientists and engineers; and that the results hold up in fixed effects
analyses that compare the productivity of the same establishment over time. A plausible
interpretation of the results is that production establishment-based scientists and engineers help
implement the adoption of new technologies and products at workplaces. In addition, we find
that earnings of workers are higher at establishments with higher proportions of scientists and
engineers, but that the positive relation between earnings and scientists and engineers proportion
of employment is mainly due to workers moving to establishments with higher numbers of
scientists and engineers, rather than existing establishments increasing the proportion of
scientists and engineers. Our estimates of the effect of scientists and engineers proportion (SEP)
of employment on productivity at the establishment are substantially strengthened when we
apply methods to address measurement errors due to sampling variance in the estimate of the
variable SEP.

       Given that most industrial scientists and engineers work at goods and services producing
establishments and that most of that work is not in formal R&D activities, our analysis suggests
that there is much to be learned from extending studies of the economic effects of R&D on the
economy to the effects of scientific and engineering work more broadly. Further study using
qualitative as well as quantitative techniques could illuminate the link between R&D and non-
R&D scientists and engineers and economic performance beyond our foray into this area:
ethnographic studies of the work activities of production establishment-based scientists and
engineers compared to those of other high-level professionals in bringing new processes and
products to the market; statistical analysis of non-manufacturing industries where scientists and

                                                 18
engineers increasingly play an important role in implementing information technology and other
new technologies; and analysis of the endogenous decisions of firms to employ more or fewer
scientists and engineers over time and to allocate them to R&D or non-R&D activities.




                                              19
                                           References

Abowd, J. M., B. E. Stephens, L. Vilhuber, F. Andersson, K. L. McKinney, M. Roemer, and S.
Woodcock. 2006. The LEHD infrastructure files and the creation of the Quarterly Workforce
Indicators. In Producer dynamics: New evidence from micro data, ed. T. Dunne, J. Bradford
Jensen, and M. J. Roberts, 149-230. Chicago, IL: University of Chicago Press.

Barth, E., J. C. Davis, R. B. Freeman, and A. J. Wang. 2017. Using person-level data to address
measurement error in establishment-level estimates. Working Paper.

Bureau of Labor Statistics, U.S. Department of Labor. Labor Productivity and Costs. LPC Tables
and Charts. [www.bls.gov/lpc/tables.htm].

Bureau of Labor Statistics, U.S. Department of Labor. Occupational Employment Statistics. OES
Data. [www.bls.gov/oes/tables.htm].

Bureau of Labor Statistics, U.S. Department of Labor. Standard Occupational Classification.
2010 SOC Crosswalks. Options for defining STEM occupations under the 2010 SOC.
Attachment B: STEM definition options. August 2012. [www.bls.gov/soc].

Doraszelski, U., and J. Jaumandreu. 2013. R&D and productivity: Estimating endogenous
productivity. Review of Economic Studies 80: 1338-83.

Efron, B. 2010. Large-scale inference: Empirical Bayes methods for estimation, testing, and
prediction. Institute of Mathematical Statistics Monographs. Cambridge, UK: Cambridge
University Press.

Efron, B., and C. Morris. 1973. Stein’s estimation rule and its competitors—An empirical Bayes
approach. Journal of the American Statistical Association. 68 (341): 117-30.

Fairman, K., L. Foster, C. J. Krizan, and I. Rucker. 2008. An analysis of key differences in micro
data: Results from the business list comparison project. U.S. Census Bureau Center for
Economic Studies Paper no. CES-WP 08-28 (September). Washington, DC.

Flood, S., M. King, S. Ruggles, and J. R. Warren. 2015. Integrated Public Use Microdata Series,
Current Population Survey: Version 4.0. (dataset). Minneapolis: University of Minnesota.
[https://doi.org/10.18128/D030.V4.0]

Foster, L., C. Grim, and J. Haltiwanger. 2014. Reallocation in the Great Recession: Cleansing or
not? NBER Working Paper no. 20427. Cambridge, MA: National Bureau of Economic Research,
August.

Foster, L., J. Haltiwanger, and C. Syverson. 2008. Reallocation, firm turnover, and efficiency:
Selection on productivity or profitability? American Economic Review 98 (1): 394-425.




                                                20
Fort, T. C. and S. D. Klimek. 2016. The effects of industry classification changes on U.S.
employment composition. Working paper.

Freeman, R. B. 1984. Longitudinal analyses of the effects of trade unions. Journal of Labor
Economics 2 (1): 1-26

Frontier Economics. 2014. Rates of return to investment in science and innovation. A report
prepared for the Department of Business Innovation and Skills. London: Frontier Economics
Limited. [www.gov.uk/government/publications/science-and-innovation-rates-of-return-to-
investment].
[www.frontier-economics.com/publications/rates-of-return-to-investment-in-science-and-
innovation].

Griliches, Z. 1998. Productivity and R&D at the firm level. In R&D and productivity: The
econometric evidence, Z. Griliches, 100-133. Chicago, IL: University of Chicago Press.

Griliches, Z., and J. Mairesse. 1995. Production functions: The search for identification. NBER
Working Paper no. 5067. Cambridge, MA: National Bureau of Economic Research, March.

Hall, B. H. 2005. Measuring the returns to R&D: The depreciation problem. Annales d'Economie
et de Statistique, 79/80: 341-81.

Hall, B. H., J. Mairesse, and P. Mohnen. 2009. Measuring the returns to R&D. NBER Working
Paper no. 15622. Cambridge, MA: National Bureau of Economic Research, December.

Hellerstein, J. K., and D. Neumark. 2007. Production function and wage equation estimation
with heterogeneous labor: Evidence from a new matched employer-employee data set. In Hard-
to-measure goods and services: Essays in honor of Zvi Griliches, ed. E. R. Berndt and C. R.
Hulten. Chicago, IL: University of Chicago Press.

Hellerstein, J. K., D. Neumark, and K. R. Troske. 1999. Wages, productivity, and worker
characteristics. Journal of Labor Economics 17 (3): 409–46.

Helper, S., and J. Kuan. 2016. What Goes on Under the Hood? How Engineers Innovate in the
Automotive Supply Chain. NBER Working Paper no. 22552. Cambridge, MA: National Bureau
of Economic Research, August.

James, W., and C. Stein. 1961. Estimation with quadratic loss. Proc. Fourth Berkeley Symp.
Math. Statist. Prob. 1: 361–379.

Mairesse J., and N. Greenan. 1999. Using employee-level data in a firm-level econometric study.
In The creation and analysis of employer-employee matched data, Contributions to Economic
Analysis, vol. 241, ed. J. C. Haltiwanger, J. I. Lane, J. R. Spletzer, J. M. Theeuwes, and K. R.
Troske, 489-512. Emerald Group Publishing Limited.




                                                21
National Science Board. 2016. Science and Engineering Indicators 2016. Arlington, VA:
National Science Foundation (NSB-2016-1). [www.nsf.gov/statistics/2016/nsb20161].

National Science Foundation, National Center for Science and Engineering Statistics. Scientists
and Engineers Statistical Data System (SESTAT). [www.nsf.gov/statistics/sestat].

National Science Foundation, National Center for Science and Engineering Statistics. 2015.
Characteristics of Scientists and Engineers in the United States: 2013.
[http://ncsesdata.nsf.gov/us-workforce/2013].

National Science Foundation, National Center for Science and Engineering Statistics. 2016.
Business R&D and Innovation: 2013. Detailed Statistical Tables NSF 16-313. Arlington, VA.
[www.nsf.gov/statistics/2016/nsf16313].

Ruggles, S., K. Genadek, R. Goeken, J. Grover, and M. Sobek. 2015. Integrated Public Use
Microdata Series: Version 6.0 (dataset). Minneapolis: University of Minnesota.
[https://doi.org/10.18128/D010.V6.0]

Stein, C. 1955. Inadmissibility of the usual estimator for the mean of a multivariate normal
distribution. Proc. Fourth Berkeley Symp. Math. Statist. Prob. 1: 197-206.




                                                22
Table 1. Number of Scientists and Engineers (in thousands), in R&D and Non-R&D Activities, All
Industry 2013

                                                CPS 2013         ACS 2013         OES 2013
                                                (person-level)   (person-level)   (establishment-level)
(1) Total Scientists & Engineers                5,319            4,886            4,751
(2) R&D Scientists & Engineers, BRDIS 2013      1,013            1,013            1,013
(3) Non-R&D Scientists & Engineers, (1) - (2)   4,306            3,873            3,738
(4) Non-R&D proportion of                       81.0%            79.3%            78.7%
    Total Scientists & Engineers, (3)/(1)

Notes:

Total Scientists & Engineers are tabulated from CPS and ACS microdata (Ruggles et al., 2015; Flood et
al., 2015), and from OES industry-occupation data (Bureau of Labor Statistics, Occupational
Employment Statistics). To make the CPS, ACS, OES figures comparable to the BRDIS figure, we
include science and engineering managers in our tabulation of Total Scientists & Engineers. Managers
are 12% of the tabulated total in the CPS and ACS, and 11% of the tabulated total in the OES.

Scientists & Engineers are defined using Bureau of Labor Statistics, Standard Occupational
Classification, Options for defining STEM occupations under the 2010 SOC, August 2012. For Table 1,
we define Scientists & Engineers as Research, Development, and Design occupations and Managerial
occupations in Life and Physical Science, Engineering, Mathematics, and Information Technology.

R&D Scientists & Engineers are from National Science Foundation, 2016, Business Research and
Development and Innovation: 2013, Detailed Statistical Tables, NSF 16-313, Tables 53 and 57. As
shown in Table 57, this figure is for R&D scientists and engineers and their managers.

See National Science Board (2016), Chapter 3, for discussion of different definitions of the science and
engineering workforce, and comparisons of the number of scientists and engineers. Our tabulated
numbers in Table 1 are comparable, but smaller, because we exclude social scientists and
postsecondary teachers, and we cover only industry (NAICS 21-81) and exclude agriculture
(NAICS 11) and government (NAICS 92).




                                                    23
  Table 2. Mean Value of Selected Variables, Manufacturing Establishments (1992-2007)

                                                                        Restricted sample of
                                           Establishment sample         establishments,
                                                                        by R&D status of firm
                                          Full       Matched Restricted R&D        Non-R&D
Number of establishment-year observations 1,305,600 506,800 215,800 128,300 87,500

Ln(Gross Output)                             8.70         8.90    10.40      10.82     9.78
Ln(Employment)                               3.74         3.93    5.18       5.42      4.83
Production worker share of employment        0.724        0.723   0.729      0.716     0.747
Establishment in R&D firm                    0.343        0.341   0.594      1         0
R&D scientists and engineers proportion of
                                             0.016        0.016   0.027      0.046     0
employment at the firm

Scientists and engineers proportion of
                                                          0.029   0.038      0.050     0.021
employment
Scientists and engineers and
science/engineering technicians proportion                0.048   0.061      0.078     0.036
of employment
Average years of education of workers                     11.8    11.9       12.2      11.5

  Notes:

  The “Full” establishment sample are all manufacturing establishments observed in the Census of
  Manufactures or Annual Survey of Manufacturers during 1992 to 2007, with total employment of five
  or more. The “Matched” establishment sample are manufacturing establishments with one or more
  workers from the LEHD that match to the Decennial Census (1990, 2000) or Current Population
  Survey (1986-1997), and with total employment of five or more. The “Restricted” establishment
  sample are manufacturing establishments with 10 or more workers from the LEHD that match to the
  Decennial Census or Current Population Survey, and with total employment of 50 or more. See
  Appendix A for additional description.

  Establishment output, employment, and production worker share of employment are from the Census
  of Manufactures and Annual Survey of Manufacturers. R&D status of the firm, and R&D scientists and
  engineers proportion of employment at the firm, are from the NSF Survey of Industrial Research &
  Development.

  Worker occupation and education are from the Decennial Census or Current Population Survey.

  Scientists and engineers, and science/engineering technicians, are defined using Bureau of Labor
  Statistics, Standard Occupational Classification, Options for defining STEM occupations under the
  2010 SOC, August 2012. We define scientists and engineers as Research, Development, and Design
  occupations in Life and Physical Science, Engineering, Mathematics, and Information Technology. We
  define science/engineering technicians as Technologist and Technician occupations in Life and Physical
  Science, Engineering, Mathematics, and Information Technology.


                                                     24
Table 3. Establishment Production Function, Manufacturing Establishments (1992-2007)

Establishment Sample                    Matched     Restricted   Restricted   Restricted
                                                                              Fixed
Regression Model                        OLS         OLS          OLS          Effects
                                        (1)         (2)          (3)          (4)

Scientists and engineers
proportion of employment                0.079***    0.180***     0.132***     0.055**
                                        (0.007)     (0.019)      (0.019)      (0.026)
R&D firm                                                         0.063***
                                                                 (0.002)
R&D scientists and engineers
proportion of employment at the firm                             0.156***     0.048***
                                                                 (0.011)      (0.011)
Standard factor inputs
Ln(Employment)                          0.358***    0.354***     0.352***     0.393***
                                        (0.001)     (0.002)      (0.002)      (0.003)
Ln(Capital equipment)                   0.061***    0.059***     0.059***     0.042***
                                        (0.001)     (0.001)      (0.001)      (0.002)
Ln(Capital structures)                  0.017***    0.020***     0.019***     0.009***
                                        (0.000)     (0.001)      (0.001)      (0.001)
Ln(Materials)                           0.449***    0.471***     0.470***     0.340***
                                        (0.001)     (0.001)      (0.001)      (0.001)
Ln(Energy)                              0.114***    0.107***     0.105***     0.119***
                                        (0.001)     (0.001)      (0.001)      (0.002)
Employer attributes
Multi-establishment firm                0.094***    0.058***     0.033***
                                        (0.001)     (0.002)      (0.002)
Establishment age                       0.005***    0.005***     0.005***
                                        (0.000)     (0.000)      (0.000)
Establishment age squared               -0.000***   -0.000***    -0.000***    -0.000***
                                        (0.000)     (0.000)      (0.000)      (0.000)
Production worker share of employment   -0.067***   -0.014**     -0.014***    0.096***
                                        (0.003)     (0.006)      (0.006)      (0.007)
Average years of education of workers   0.013***    0.042***     0.038***     0.004***
                                        (0.000)     (0.001)      (0.001)      (0.001)

Number of observations                  506,800     215,800      215,800      215,800
Adjusted R-squared                      0.955       0.914        0.915        0.958


                                              25
Notes:

Dependent variable is Ln(Gross Output).

See Table 2 for the definition of the “Matched” and “Restricted” establishment samples.

OLS models include fixed effects for year (1992-2007), industry (6-digit NAICS), and geographic
region (metropolitan or micropolitan Core Based Statistical Area (CBSA) as defined in 2009 by U.S.
Office of Management and Budget, or Economic Area as defined in 2004 by U.S. Bureau of Economic
Analysis).

Fixed effects model includes fixed effects for each establishment, and for year (1992-2007).

Regression coefficients are shown with one, two, or three stars indicating statistical significance at the
10%, 5%, or 1% level, respectively. Standard errors are shown in parenthesis.




                                                    26
Table 4. Establishment Production Function, Methods for Addressing Sampling Error in
Variables, Manufacturing Establishments (1992-2007)

Method for addressing
sampling error in variables     Weighted regression     James-Stein shrinkage adjustment

Establishment Sample            Restricted              Restricted              Matched
                                             Fixed                   Fixed                 Fixed
Regression Model                OLS          Effects    OLS          Effects    OLS        Effects
                                (1)          (2)        (3)          (4)        (5)        (6)

Scientists and engineers
proportion of employment        0.226*** 0.121***       0.437***     0.373*** 0.154***     0.147***
                                (0.021)  (0.031)        (0.034)      (0.054)  (0.020)      (0.031)
R&D firm                        0.057***                0.065***              0.080***
                                (0.002)                 (0.002)               (0.002)
R&D scientists and engineers
proportion of employment
at the firm                     0.244*** 0.092***       0.144***     0.048*** 0.122***     0.056***
                                (0.011)  (0.011)        (0.011)      (0.011)  (0.009)      (0.011)
Standard factor inputs
Ln(Employment)                  0.345***     0.381***   0.350***     0.393***   0.358***   0.388***
                                (0.002)      (0.003)    (0.002)      (0.003)    (0.001)    (0.002)
Ln(Capital equipment)           0.066***     0.047***   0.058***     0.042***   0.061***   0.044***
                                (0.001)      (0.002)    (0.001)      (0.002)    (0.001)    (0.001)
Ln(Capital structures)          0.021***     0.018***   0.019***     0.009***   0.015***   0.007***
                                (0.001)      (0.002)    (0.001)      (0.001)    (0.000)    (0.001)
Ln(Materials)                   0.481***     0.354***   0.470***     0.340***   0.447***   0.330***
                                (0.001)      (0.001)    (0.001)      (0.001)    (0.001)    (0.001)
Ln(Energy)                      0.098***     0.117***   0.105***     0.119***   0.112***   0.111***
                                (0.001)      (0.002)    (0.001)      (0.002)    (0.001)    (0.001)
Employer attributes
Multi-establishment firm        0.033***            0.035***            0.061***
                                (0.003)             (0.002)             (0.002)
Establishment age               0.005***            0.005***            0.005***
                                (0.000)             (0.000)             (0.000)
Establishment age squared       -0.000*** -0.000*** -0.000*** -0.000*** -0.000*** -0.000***
                                (0.000)   (0.000)   (0.000)   (0.000)   (0.000)   (0.000)
Production worker share of
employment                      0.020*** 0.120***       -0.008       0.096*** -0.055*** 0.046***
                                (0.006)  (0.008)        (0.005)      (0.007)  (0.003)   (0.004)
Average years of education of   0.043*** 0.008***       0.054***     0.005** 0.026*** -0.002
                                                  27
workers
                                   (0.001)    (0.002)      (0.001)      (0.002)     (0.001)     (0.001)

Number of observations             215,800    215,800      215,800      215,800     506,800     506,800
Adjusted R-squared                 0.931      0.965        0.915        0.958       0.956       0.976


Notes:

Dependent variable is Ln(Gross Output).

See Table 2 for the definition of the “Matched” and “Restricted” establishment samples.

The weighted regression method weights observations by the square root of the number of matched
workers at the establishment.

The James-Stein shrinkage adjustment method is applied to the two independent variables that are
constructed from the matched worker sample, i.e., the scientists and engineers proportion of
employment, and the average years of education of workers. For description of the method, see the text
and Appendix B.

OLS models include fixed effects for year (1992-2007), industry (6-digit NAICS), and geographic
region (metropolitan or micropolitan Core Based Statistical Area (CBSA) as defined in 2009 by U.S.
Office of Management and Budget, or Economic Area as defined in 2004 by U.S. Bureau of Economic
Analysis).

Fixed effects model includes fixed effects for each establishment, and for year (1992-2007).

Regression coefficients are shown with one, two, or three stars indicating statistical significance at the
10%, 5%, or 1% level, respectively. Standard errors are shown in parenthesis.




                                                    28
  Table 5. Mean Value of Selected Variables, Workers in Manufacturing Establishments
  (1992-2007) (Restricted sample of workers)

                                                      Workers with work history in
                                                      R&D firms Both R&D and Non-R&D firms
                                          All workers
                                                      only       Non-R&D firms only
Number of person-year observations        11,666,200 8,173,300 1,572,800          1,920,200

Worker attributes
Ln(Earnings)                              10.42         10.50       10.31            10.18
Years of education                        12.4          12.6        12.0             11.6
Years of work experience                  23.9          24.1        22.9             23.7
Female                                    0.311         0.312       0.287            0.324
Nonwhite race                             0.256         0.239       0.285            0.307
Scientist or engineer occupation          0.063         0.077       0.040            0.019

Employer attributes
Ln(Employment) at the establishment      6.21           6.50        5.83             5.30
Production worker share of employment
                                         0.714          0.699       0.744            0.755
at the establishment
Establishment in R&D firm                0.780          1           0.592            0
R&D scientists and engineers proportion
                                         0.045          0.059       0.026            0
of employment at the firm
Scientists and engineers proportion of 0.063            0.077       0.040            0.020
employment at the establishment
Average years of education of workers at
                                         12.3           12.6        12.0             11.5
the establishment

  Notes:

  The “Restricted” sample of workers are all workers in the LEHD that match to the Decennial Census
  (1990, 2000) or Current Population Survey (1986-1997), and also match to the “Restricted” sample of
  manufacturing establishments presented in Table 2.

  Worker earnings, gender, race, and age are from the LEHD. Years of work experience is constructed
  from worker age and education.

  Worker occupation and education are from the Decennial Census or Current Population Survey.

  See Table 2 for definition of scientist or engineer, and description of establishment-level and firm-level
  variables.




                                                      29
Table 6. Workers Earnings, in Manufacturing Establishments (1992-2007)

Worker Sample                                Matched     Restricted   Restricted Restricted
                                             OLS         OLS          Job Stayers Job Changers
Regression Model                             (1)         (2)          (3)         (4)

Scientists and engineers proportion of
employment at the establishment              0.582***    0.638***     0.010**     0.184***
                                             (0.003)     (0.004)      (0.005)     (0.010)
R&D firm                                     0.067***    0.057***                 0.047***
                                             (0.000)     (0.000)                  (0.001)
R&D scientists and engineers proportion of
employment at the firm                       0.119***    0.100***     -0.007***   0.018***
                                             (0.002)     (0.002)      (0.001)     (0.004)
Worker attributes
Scientist or engineer occupation             0.150***    0.150***
                                             (0.001)     (0.001)
Years of education                           0.060***    0.061***
                                             (0.000)     (0.000)
Years of work experience                     0.045***    0.044***
                                             (0.000)     (0.000)
Female                                       -0.137***   -0.141***
                                             (0.001)     (0.001)
Nonwhite race                                -0.156***   -0.148***
                                             (0.000)     (0.000)
Employer attributes
Ln Employment at the establishment           0.040***    0.036***     0.057***    0.022***
                                             (0.000)     (0.000)      (0.000)     (0.000)
Production worker share of employment at the
establishment                                -0.042***   -0.019***    0.043***    0.022***
                                             (0.001)     (0.001)      (0.001)     (0.002)
Years of education of workers at the
establishment                                0.043***    0.057***     -0.003***   0.032***
                                             (0.000)     (0.000)      (0.000)     (0.001)

Number of observations                       12,966,900 11,666,200    10,263,700 1,656,200
Adjusted R-squared                           0.553      0.563         0.902      0.818


Notes:

Dependent variable is Ln(Earnings).
                                                30
The “Matched” sample of workers are all workers in the LEHD that match to the Decennial Census
(1990, 2000) or Current Population Survey (1986-1997), and also match to the “Matched” sample of
manufacturing establishments presented in Table 2.

The “Restricted” sample of workers are all workers in the LEHD that match to the Decennial Census
(1990, 2000) or Current Population Survey (1986-1997), and also match to the “Restricted” sample of
manufacturing establishments presented in Table 2.

OLS models include fixed effects for year (1992-2007), industry (6-digit NAICS), and geographic
region (metropolitan or micropolitan Core Based Statistical Area (CBSA) as defined in 2009 by U.S.
Office of Management and Budget, or Economic Area as defined in 2004 by U.S. Bureau of Economic
Analysis).

Job Stayers model includes fixed effects for year.
Job Changers model includes fixed effects for year, industry, and geographic region.

All models also include years of work experience squared, and interactions of female with years of
work experience, years of work experience squared, and nonwhite race.

Regression coefficients are shown with one, two, or three stars indicating statistical significance at the
10%, 5%, or 1% level, respectively. Standard errors are shown in parenthesis.




                                                    31
                                         Appendix A
                        The Employer-Employee-Scientist-Engineer Data Set

        This appendix describes how we link establishment, person, and firm level data files to create
the time series cross section data set that we use in the paper. We undertook this analysis at the Boston
Census Research Data Center (RDC) where we followed all Census confidentiality requirements.

        For our establishment data we use establishments from the Census of Manufactures (CM) and
the Annual Survey of Manufactures (ASM) in 1992-2007. The CM provides quinquennial data for the
universe of establishments. The ASM provides annual data for a sample of establishments in each year,
including a certainty sample of establishments in large firms and a non-certainty sample of other
establishments. We use data constructed by Foster, Grim, and Haltiwanger (2014) to measure the real
value of output, capital stock for structures and equipment, and materials and energy use. We use the
Fort and Klimek (2016) consistent 6-digit NAICS industry coding of establishments to identify the
industry in which an establishment is located. We include only manufacturing establishments in our
data set.

        We link workers and employer reporting units observed in the Longitudinal Employer
Household Dynamics (LEHD) database to establishments observed in the Longitudinal Business
Database (LBD). This link utilizes matches at different levels of establishment, county, and industry
detail developed in a crosswalk at the Census Bureau. We are thus able to link person-level data from
the LEHD to establishment-level data from the LBD and CM/ASM. Our LEHD data are from 30 states
with varying year coverage over 1992-2007.

        We obtain data on workers within establishments from the LEHD Employment History Files
(EHF) that provide quarterly data on the wages and jobs of individuals over time. We use the EHF data
to define a person’s “main job” in a year as the job with the most quarters worked and highest
annualized earnings. We exclude jobs with real annualized earnings less than the level of a full time job
at half the minimum wage in 2002. We limit our analysis to workers between 18 and 65 years of age.
The person-level data in the LEHD contains age, gender, and race, but does not include information on
individual education and occupation.

        To identify occupation and education of individual workers, we link workers in the LEHD to the
Decennial Census in 1990 and 2000 and to the Current Population Survey (CPS) in 1986-1997. We use
a person-level crosswalk developed by the Census Bureau, to link persons in the Decennial Census
long form sample in 1990 and 2000, and persons in the Current Population Survey (CPS) over 1986-
                                                    32
1997, to persons in the LEHD over 1992-2007. We first match persons between the LEHD and the
2000 Census. For those who do not match, we match to the 1990 Census, and for those who still do not
match, we match to the CPS in 1986-1997. Using this procedure, we are able to create a matched
sample of persons in our LEHD data for 30 states with varying year coverage over 1992-2007.

       This method identifies occupation and education for 17% of all workers in LEHD employer
reporting units that link to CM and ASM establishments in 1992-2007. Since our match identifies
education and occupation of persons in 1990 or 2000 from the Decennial Census, or in 1986-1997 from
the CPS, while our LEHD persons data covers the years 1992-2007, our matched sample of persons
will miss younger workers or new entrants to the labor market to some extent. Using the matched
sample, we estimate the scientists and engineers proportion (SEP) of employment at the establishment,
and the average years of education of workers at the establishment.

       Finally, to measure the extent to which the parent firm of establishments conducts R&D we use
the Survey of Industrial Research and Development (SIRD). The SIRD is an annual survey of firms,
including a certainty sample of large R&D firms and a non-certainty sample of other firms. We use the
SIRD panel of firms in 1977-2007 to construct our measure of R&D S&E employment as a share of
total employment at the firm-level. For each firm in the SIRD panel, we fill in missing years of R&D
employment share with the nearest non-missing year available for the firm. We link the firm-level
SIRD data to the establishment-level CM/ASM data. For CM/ASM establishments in firms that do not
appear in any year of the 1977-2007 SIRD panel, the firm-level R&D employment share is set to zero.
From analysis of SIRD sample firms over the period, we conclude that we have reasonable coverage of
smaller R&D performing firms.

       Our full sample of establishments observed in CM/ASM over 1992-2007 includes all
establishments with total employment of 5 or more. Our regression sample of establishments includes
all establishments with 10 or more workers matched to Decennial/CPS, and with total employment of
50 or more. Our regression sample of workers comprises all persons working in their “main job” in
LEHD employer reporting units that link to our regression sample of CM/ASM establishments.




                                                  33
                                         Appendix B
          Shrinkage Adjustment to Address Measurement Error in Establishment-Level
 Scientist and Engineers Proportion of Employment and Average Years of Education of Workers


         Because we measure scientists and engineers proportion (SEP) of employment and average
years of education (AYE) of workers at manufacturing establishments from person-level matched data
that has an underlying match rate of 17%, these two variables are measured with considerable sampling
error. The error is greater the fewer the workers we match at an establishment, and increases for any
given number of matches as the number of employees increases at an establishment. In our regression
analysis, regardless of how we treat measurement error, or even if we ignore it, our estimates of the
effect of SEP on productivity are positive. But the magnitudes of the estimates vary considerably with
the way in which we address the measurement error. The most novel way that we deal with
measurement error is through shrinkage adjustment of the match-based variables. Building on Mairesse
and Greenan (1999), we calculate the ratio of the estimated variance of estimated SEP (or AYE) at each
establishment, associated with the number of matches and total employment, to the observed variance
in estimated SEP (or AYE) across establishments, and use this ratio to shrink estimates with relatively
large sample error to their mean value in a James-Stein type shrinkage estimator.

         Let njt be the number of matches we obtain from Decennial Census or CPS data for an
establishment j with Njt employees at time t. Let xijt be the matched variable under consideration (SEP
or AYE) for person i at establishment j at time t – either a binary variable indicating whether a matched
worker is a scientist or engineer, or a continuous variable for the years of education of a worker. We
estimate SEP (or AYE) at the establishment with the sample mean

Xjt = ∑xijt/njt .

Following Mairesse and Greenan (1999), we estimate the variance of Xjt at the establishment with

Vjt = (1 - njt/Njt) (1/njt ) V*,

where njt/Njt is the sampling probability by establishment at time t, and (1 - njt/Njt) is the correction
factor for the finite sample,15 and V* = ∑ ∑ ∑(xijt - Xjt)2 is the within-establishment sample variance of
xijt , pooling over all establishment-years.


15
  We consider X*jt , the true value of SEP (or AYE) at the establishment, to be the value we want to use in our analysis, and
we consider deviations of observed Xjt from true X*jt to be measurement error in Xjt . As the number of matches njt
approaches the number of employees Njt , the measurement error disappears. Mairesse and Greenan (1999) calculate
                                                             34
        We calculate the reliability of variable Xjt as

λ(njt, Njt) = 1 – (1 - njt/Njt) (1/njt ) (V*/V) ,

where V is the observed sample variance of Xjt over all establishment-years.16 We note that λ varies
with njt and Njt; reliability increases with the number of matches at the establishment, whereas, for a
given number of matches, reliability decreases with the employment size of the establishment.

        James-Stein estimators (James and Stein, 1961) shrink estimates based on small samples toward
some appropriate global value because the small samples have high sampling errors. Stein (1956)
proved that while this yields a biased estimator of a value it can reduce the variance of a model that
uses the estimator. The intuition for the effect can be found in the problem of predicting the future
productivity of a baseball player who has no hits in four at bats on the first day of the season while
players on average have batting averages around 0.280 (i.e., they get hits 28% of the time). Given the
small sample of four at bats it would be unrealistic to estimate the player’s future batting average as
0.000. A better prediction for the rest of the season would be to take a weighted average of the small
sample and the overall batting average of ball players or some other global average, such as the
player’s lifetime average or average over hundreds of at bats in the previous season. This approach is
related to empirical Bayesian methods (see Efron, 2010, Chapter 1).

        In our case, a James-Stein-type shrinkage estimator of Xjt is given by

Zjt = λjt Xjt + (1 - λjt) X ,

where X is the global mean and 1 – λj is a shrinkage factor that diminishes the role of the observed
value and pulls it towards the global mean. As the estimated variance of Xjt increases, the shrinkage
factor approaches unity, and the shrinkage estimator of Xjt approaches the global mean X.




variances of variables assuming the matched sample is drawn with replacement, whereas our calculation treats the matched
sample as being drawn without replacement and therefore adds a correction factor for the finite sample.
16
   More generally, in our implementation, we compute V as the variance of residuals from an establishment regression
model for Xjt that includes covariates. For our establishment fixed effects model, to account for covariance between person
observations over time, our computation of V* includes an additional term, that is, one minus the harmonic mean of k j/Kj
across establishments, where kj is the average number of years that unique persons are observed at establishment j during
the panel, and Kj is the number of years that establishment j is in the panel; and we compute V as the variance of residuals
from an establishment regression model for Xjt that includes establishment fixed effects and no other covariates. See Barth
et al. (2017) for details of the methodology.
                                                             35
