NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

CYCLICAL JOB LADDERS BY FIRM SIZE AND FIRM WAGE
John Haltiwanger
Henry Hyatt
Lisa B. Kahn
Erika McEntarfer
Working Paper 23485
http://www.nber.org/papers/w23485

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
June 2017

This paper is an integration of two working papers "Employment Cyclicality and Firm Quality"
by Kahn and McEntarfer (NBER Working Paper #20698, 2014) and "Cyclical Reallocation of
Workers Across Employers by Firm Size and Firm Wage" (NBER Working Paper #21235, 2015)
by Haltiwanger, Hyatt and McEntarfer. We cite both of these papers extensively (referring to
them as KM (2014) and HHM (2015)) for sensitivity and robustness analysis that is not included
in this integrated paper. Collectively, we thank participants at many seminars and workshops for
many helpful comments and suggestions where these working papers have been presented. We
also thank Alex Mas, Richard Rogerson, Chris Stanton, and participants at the Labor and
Employment Relations Association sessions at the Allied Social Science Associations 2017
Meeting for help with the merged paper. Any opinions and conclusions expressed herein are
those of the authors and do not necessarily represent the views of the U.S. Census Bureau. All
results have been reviewed to ensure that no confidential information is disclosed. The views
expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National
Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.
© 2017 by John Haltiwanger, Henry Hyatt, Lisa B. Kahn, and Erika McEntarfer. All rights
reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit
permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Cyclical Job Ladders by Firm Size and Firm Wage
John Haltiwanger, Henry Hyatt, Lisa B. Kahn, and Erika McEntarfer
NBER Working Paper No. 23485
June 2017
JEL No. E24,E32,J63
ABSTRACT
We study whether workers progress up firm wage and size job ladders, and the cyclicality of this
movement. Search theory predicts that workers should flow towards larger, higher paying firms.
However, we see little evidence of a firm size ladder, partly because small, young firms poach
workers from all other businesses. In contrast, we find strong evidence of a firm wage ladder that
is highly procyclical. During the Great Recession, this firm wage ladder collapsed, with net
worker reallocation to higher wage firms falling to zero. The earnings consequences from this
lack of upward progression are sizable.
John Haltiwanger
Department of Economics
University of Maryland
College Park, MD 20742
and NBER
haltiwan@econ.umd.edu
Henry Hyatt
Center for Economic Studies
U.S. Census Bureau
4600 Silver Hill Road
Washington, DC 20233
henry.r.hyatt@census.gov

Lisa B. Kahn
Yale University
School of Management
P. O. Box 208200
New Haven, CT 06520
and NBER
lisa.kahn@yale.edu
Erika McEntarfer
U.S. Census Bureau
Center for Economic Studies
4600 Silver Hill Road
ACSD HQ-5K179
Washington, DC 20233
erika.mcentarfer@census.gov

1

Introduction
The firm a worker matches to increasingly matters for earnings outcomes.1 Moreover,

there is considerable evidence that high paying firms are also more productive firms.2 How
do workers find jobs in high paying, high productivity firms? There is much evidence that
job mobility plays a critical role in earnings growth over the life cycle.3 However, less is
known about a worker’s progression up the firm pay and productivity ladder, even though
theoretical work points to this pattern of upward mobility. Indeed, in the large class of
job ladder models beginning with Burdett and Mortensen (1998), the search frictions that
inhibit workers from matching to better firms are gradually overcome through on-the-job
search. This class of models suggests that the poaching of workers away from low paying
and towards high paying firms plays an important role in career trajectories.
At the same time, recessions impede worker mobility (Davis, Faberman and Haltiwanger
2012; Hyatt and McEntarfer 2012a; Lazear and Spletzer 2012). For example, in the Great
Recession the voluntary quit rate fell by half.4 This reduced mobility may especially impact
movements up the job ladder. As hypothesized by Moscarini and Postel-Vinay (2009, 2013),
during slack markets, when there is less competition for workers, firms at the bottom of the
job ladder can more easily retain workers who ordinarily would have been poached away.5
However, little is known about the direction and cyclicality of worker flows across firms.
In this paper, we test whether workers tend to move up a firm job ladder via job-to-job
moves, and the cyclicality of such moves. We explore firm ladders along two dimensions,
size and wage, since both are linked to job quality and productivity in theory and empirical
work.6 Surprisingly, we see little evidence of a firm size ladder. Workers do not tend to
1

A substantial fraction of the rise in earnings inequality in the U.S. over the last thirty years can be
attributed to increased pay dispersion across firms (Song et al. 2016; Barth et al. 2016; Card, Heining, and
Kline 2016).
2
See, for example, Abowd, Kramarz and Margolis (1999), Dunne et al. (2004), and Abowd et al. (2005).
3
See, among others, Topel and Ward (1992), Keith and McWilliams (1999), Bjelland et al. (2011), Fallick,
Haltiwanger, and McEntarfer (2012), and Hyatt and McEntarfer (2012b).
4
See Figure 1 of Davis and Haltiwanger (2014).
5
Moscarini and Postel-Vinay (2013) develop a dynamic Burdett and Mortensen (1998) style search model
with a job ladder where firms at the top of the ladder can more easily attract hires by offering higher wages.
The implication is that in a downturn firms at the bottom of the job ladder can more easily grow since their
workers are less likely to be poached away by firms at higher rungs.
6
A key feature of the stationary equilibrium in Burdett and Mortensen (1998) is that higher wage firms
are larger. See Brown and Medoff (1989) for empirical evidence that firm size and wages are positively linked.

1

move from small to large firms. This is partly because small, young firms are a net attractor
of workers making job-to-job moves. In contrast, we find strong evidence of a firm wage
ladder in that workers tend to flow, on net, from low wage to high wage firms via direct
job-to-job moves. Furthermore, this movement is strongly procyclical, slowing to almost
zero in recessionary periods. These dynamics have important consequences for mobility and
earnings growth over the business cycle. For example, in the Great Recession, movement
out of the bottom rung of the wage ladder declined by 85 percent, with an associated 40
percent decline in earnings growth.
This paper thus contributes the first direct evidence on job-to-job moves across firm size
and firm wage ladders over the business cycle. Previous evidence on whether firms at the top
of the ladder poach from those at the bottom has been limited.7 To measure these moves, we
use matched employer-employee data from the Longitudinal Employer Household Dynamics
(LEHD) database from 1998-2011. We define a job-to-job move (or a “poaching flow”) as
one where a worker moves directly from one employer to another. The data allow us to ask
whether workers move on net from small or low wage firms to large or high wage firms. We
indeed find evidence in favor of a firm wage ladder where high wage firms grow 0.7 percent per
quarter through poaching flows. In contrast, low wage firms lose 1.2 percent of employment
per quarter. Thus, on net, more workers move up the ladder than down. However, we see
little evidence of a firm size ladder, where poaching modestly moves workers in the wrong
direction, from large to small firms.
We then investigate employment cyclicality by firm size and firm wage, using both time
series and state-time variation. Previous evidence on this question has been only indirect.
Moscarini and Postel-Vinay (2012, hereafter MPV 2012) show, across a range of countries,
that employment growth is more cyclically sensitive at large firms than at small firms. This
cyclical pattern is consistent with their poaching model where large firms have an advantage
attracting workers because they offer higher wages. This advantage is greater in tight markets
See Foster et al. (2008) for empirical evidence that firm size and productivity are positively linked.
7
Moscarini and Postel-Vinay (2009, 2016) show that large employers have a greater share of hires directly
from other firms than from non-employment, relative to small employers. However, they do not explore
whether workers tend to move, on net, from small to large firms. Bagger and Lentz (2016) and Sorkin (2016)
present evidence that firms with a high poaching rank (i.e., a firm that is high in the ranking of firms hiring
workers from others) are more likely to be high wage and high productivity firms.

2

when there is more competition for workers. Their model predicts that large firms grow more
quickly in booms via poaching, and shrink more quickly in busts, relative to small firms.
However, MPV (2012) lack the data to directly test whether overall employment changes are
driven by poaching. Furthermore, their result that large firms are more cyclically sensitive
is at odds with the conventional wisdom in a long literature (beginning with Gertler and
Gilchrist 1994) suggesting that small firms are more cyclically sensitive because of credit
constraints.
In order to address these two issues, we decompose the overall employment effect into
components accounted for by poaching and by moves to and from non-employment. We
examine the cyclicality of all three types of moves across the job ladder using two cyclical
indicators: the HP-filtered unemployment rate and the change in the unemployment rate.
The former was used in MPV (2012) as an indicator of labor market tightness, while the latter
proxies for cyclical contractions and expansions and may better align with credit crunches.8
Our results confirm the MPV (2012) finding that employment at large firms is more
sensitive to the unemployment rate than that at small firms. However, this effect is driven
in equal parts by poaching moves and moves to and from non-employment, even though the
primary theoretical driver in MPV (2012) is poaching moves. Furthermore, we find that
while large firms shrink faster than small firms in times of high unemployment, the opposite
is true in times of rising unemployment. Small firms shrink relative to large firms in cyclical
contractions. This is true for both overall employment and its two components, poaching and
moves to and from non-employment. This helps reconcile the differing views on the cyclical
sensitivity of small firms from the previous literature. Each emphasizes a different aspect
of the business cycle. Credit crunches are primarily coincident with economic contractions,
while labor market slackness is primarily coincident with periods of high unemployment that
often last long into economic expansions.
In contrast, we find strong evidence in favor of a cyclical firm wage ladder. Net poaching
moves up the job ladder significantly decline in downturns, regardless of the cyclical indicator
used. Thus the wage ladder aligns well with the implications of search theory that workers
8

The change in the unemployment rate better aligns with NBER dated recessions than the HP-filtered
unemployment rate. As is well known, the two measures have diverged in the jobless recovery era.

3

tend to make moves up the job ladder but this progress is impeded in downturns. However,
these poaching effects do not necessarily imply that overall employment is more cyclically
sensitive at high wage firms, as the Moscarini and Postel-Vinay (2013) model suggests. This
is because moves to and from non-employment tend to offset poaching effects. In particular,
low wage firms are able to grow in expansions despite losing a large share of their workers
through poaching by increasing hires from non-employed workers. These results highlight the
importance of directly examining poaching flows to test the job ladder models. Examining
overall employment changes incorrectly supports a firm size ladder and provides only mixed
evidence for a firm wage ladder.
Thus, even though the job ladder models imply a tight link between firm size and wage,
we find very different poaching patterns. Despite the well-known positive correlation between
firm wage and size (Brown and Medoff 1989; Haltiwanger et al. 2012), there are many factors
that may drive a wedge in this relationship. We explore one such factor, firm age. Firms are
born small and then exhibit an up-or-out dynamic that takes some time to unfold.9 This
pattern suggests there are young firms that are highly productive and fast growing but small.
Consistent with this notion, we find that small, young firms poach workers on net from all
along the size distribution.10 This can help explain why we see little evidence of a firm size
ladder. Most of the previous literature on the job ladder has tended to focus on firm size,
usually because of measurement issues. However, we show that because of the rich life cycle
dynamics of firms that coincide with size, firm wage is likely a much better proxy for the job
ladder. We find that once we control for firm age that there is more support for a firm size
ladder although the firm wage ladder is much more apparent.
In the final part of the paper we focus on the firm wage ladder, which is robustly consistent with the predictions of job ladder models. As we have shown, upward mobility via
poaching slows in downturns.11 The facts we uncover in this paper may then have important implications for the consequences of recessions for workers. To better understand these
9

See, e.g., Haltiwanger, Jarmin, and Miranda (2013).
These findings are consistent with Sorkin (2016) who uses a revealed preference approach to show that
workers do prefer high wage firms but also that compensating differentials accounts for a substantial fraction
of the variation in pay across firms.
11
This result is very much in the spirit of Barlevy (2002) who shows in a calibration exercise that the
decline in voluntary mobility seen in recessions has a quantitatively important negative effect on match
quality, terming this the “sullying effect” of recessions.
10

4

consequences, we first examine the causes of the slowdown in upward mobility, allowing for
both the overall rate and the direction of mobility to impact worker flows. We then ask what
this collapse in the job ladder implies for wage growth over the business cycle.
We show that cyclical variation in the firm wage ladder can be decomposed into two
distinct components: the overall pace of job-to-job moves and the propensity to move up
the ladder, conditional on changing jobs.12 We find that it is a decline in the propensity to
move up the ladder that accounts for most of the cyclical variation in the firm wage ladder.
In expansions, we find that 1.2 percent of workers at low wage firms are reallocated up the
ladder. This movement declines by 40 percent in contractions, driven almost entirely by a
decline in the probability of moving out of the bottom rung, conditional on making a move.
The Great Recession saw an 85 percent drop in this upward mobility.
This reduced upward mobility has important consequences for earnings growth. On
average, earnings increase by about one log point per quarter from job-to-job transitions,
with about 60 percent of this increase coming from directional moves up the ladder.13 The
increase in earnings from these directional moves is highly procyclical, declining by about 13
percent in contractions, relative to expansions, with both the overall pace in job-to-job flows
and the propensity for workers to move up the ladder contributing substantially. In the Great
Recession, the 85 percent drop in mobility out of the bottom rung of the ladder is associated
with a 40 percent decline in earnings growth. As is well known, job-to-job moves play an
important role in career advancement, especially for young workers (Topel and Ward 1992).
It is also well known that young workers are particularly hard hit in recessions (Hoynes,
Miller, and Schaller 2012) and bear long-lasting consequences of these early impacts (Kahn
2010; Oreopoulos, von Wachter, and Heisz 2012; Altonji, Kahn, and Speer 2016). These
earnings losses from a lack of upward mobility may be especially important and persistent
for young workers.
Overall, our findings help us understand the nature and importance of the high pace of
worker churning in the U.S. labor market. Using a newly developed database of job-to-job
flow measures, our findings show that this worker churn is associated with movement up the
12
13

The former will impact upward mobility since, as we show, job-to-job moves tend to go in that direction.
Workers also make wage gains through lateral moves.

5

firm wage ladder. Moreover, our findings show that the well-known pattern of procyclical
churning is also associated with a very procyclical firm wage ladder. Given that workers
are much more likely to move up the job ladder during booms and that movements up the
ladder are critical for earnings growth, our findings highlight the importance of tracking not
only the magnitude of labor market churn but the direction of such churn over the business
cycle.
The paper proceeds as follows. Section 2 provides a description of the data and the
methodology for measuring job-to-job flows. Section 3 presents the main analysis and results
on the firm size and firm wage ladders. We present the main findings from the national
time series, and also show patterns hold exploiting state-by-quarter variation. Given the
somewhat surprising results by firm size, we then consider sensitivity analysis of the results
by firm size, and in particular the important role of firm age. Section 4 presents analysis of
the nature of the cyclical firm wage ladder and implications for mobility and earnings gains.
Section 5 has concluding remarks.

2
2.1

Data
LEHD Overview
We use linked employer-employee data from the Longitudinal Employer-Household Dy-

namics (LEHD) program at the U.S. Census Bureau to examine the flows of workers across
firms. The LEHD data consist of a link between two data sets: (1) quarterly worker-level
earnings submitted by employers for the administration of state unemployment insurance
(UI) benefit programs and (2) establishment-level data collected for the Quarterly Census of
Employment and Wages (QCEW) program. The UI wage data are associated with “firms”
in the form of a state-level employer identification number (SEIN). SEINs typically capture
the activity of a firm within a state in a specific industry. As of this writing, 49 states, DC,
Puerto Rico, and the Virgin Islands share QCEW and UI wage data with the LEHD program
as part of the Local Employment Dynamics (LED) federal-state partnership. LEHD data
coverage is quite broad; state UI covers 95 percent of private sector employment, as well as

6

state and local government.14
The LEHD sample used in this paper is a balanced panel of 28 states spanning 1998:Q1
to 2011:Q4. We choose this start date and sample of states trading off the need for a long
time series with the desire for broad coverage across the U.S.15 Our 28 states include many
of the largest states so that our sample accounts for 65 percent of national private sector
employment.
Our goal is to measure worker flows across firm wage and size ladders. Firm size in
the LEHD data is defined using the U.S. Census Bureau’s Longitudinal Business Database
(LBD).16 Firm size is the national size of the firm in March of the previous year; we use
three size categories: “large” firms employ 500 or more employees, “medium” firms employ
50-499 employees, and “small” firms employ 0-50 employees.
MPV (2012) present indirect evidence in support of their predictions using a very similar
size definition. Indeed, firm size is often used as a proxy for productivity or profitability.
However, because this firm size measure neglects the life cycle dynamics of firms, we explore
heterogeneity with respect to firm age in some of our analyses below. Firm age is obtained
from the LBD and defined at the national level as the age of the oldest establishment in the
first year of a firm’s existence, and aging naturally afterwards. We use two age categories:
“young” firms are those up to 10 years of age, while firms who are 11 or more years of age
are “mature.”
We define our firm wage measure at the SEIN-quarter level using the average earnings
per worker of full-quarter workers.17 We classify firms into employment-weighted quintiles
and categorize firms as high wage if they are in the top two quintiles, medium wage if in the
next two quintiles, and low wage if they are in the bottom quintile. We use these categories
for expositional convenience since in unreported results we have found that the patterns for
14

For a full description of the LEHD data, see Abowd et al. (2009).
Our 28 states are CA, FL, GA, HI, ID, IL, IN, KS, ME, MD, MN, MO, MT, NC, NJ, ND, NM, NV,
PA, OR, RI, SC, SD, TN, VA, WA, WI, and WV. Other states have data series that start in subsequent
years. While we restrict our analysis to the pooled 28-state sample, we do allow our measures of job-to-job
flows to be informed by moves into and out of other states as their data become available.
16
Haltiwanger et al. (2014) describe the methodology for linking information from the LBD on firm
characteristics with the LEHD data.
17
Full quarter workers are those employed in the prior, current and subsequent quarter by the firm. We
might also be interested in using a national firm wage but such a measure is not readily available. However,
based on crosschecks with the LBD, we find that state- and national-level firm wages are highly correlated.
15

7

the quintiles within our high and medium groups are similar (see KM 2014). We use only
full-quarter earnings because we cannot measure start and stop dates in the LEHD data.
This also means that our firm wage ranking in a given quarter is independent of the quality of
entering and exiting workers. This mitigates concerns of reverse causality and other related
issues that we discuss next.
We do not explicitly control for worker heterogeneity in our ranking of firms. This
simplification may result in measurement error for our firm ranking variables. In the case of
firm wages, assortative matching or other kinds of sorting may be especially important drivers
of worker mobility in addition to the job ladder models we test. However, several features
of our analysis and results mitigate concerns in this case. First, for the firm wage analysis,
we restrict our attention to movement across firms in higher and lower paying quintiles, a
characterization that is unlikely to be reversed by this type of measurement error. Second, as
noted, our firm wage ranking is independent of the quality of transitioning workers, limiting
the scope for at least that form of worker heterogeneity to influence rankings. Third, this
type of measurement error works against our finding evidence of a firm wage ladder since,
in a pure sorting model, moves would not have a direction, on average. In addition, as
we show below, earnings gains from moving up and earnings losses from moving down the
firm wage ladder are sizable in both directions. If mobility were instead primarily driven
by workers making better matches to their type, we should see wage gains for all types of
moves, on average. Finally, KM (2014) conduct robustness exercises that suggest controlling
for worker heterogeneity is not critical in this context. They find, for example, that the
firm wage ladder results are robust to classifying wage quintiles within state and industry,
a crude way to control for heterogeneity and other omitted factors.18 They also show that
wage ladder results are robust to classifying firms based on Abowd, Kramarz, and Margolis
(1999, AKM) style firm fixed effects.19
A more general model with firm heterogeneity and worker heterogeneity is certainly
plausible and may yield additional insight for understanding worker moves by firm size and
18

There could be differences across industries in the propensity to use part-time workers, for example.
Caution is required in making too much of the robustness using the AKM fixed effects to rank firms. An
exogenous mobility assumption is required to interpret the AKM firm fixed effects as capturing differential
firm quality. Such an assumption is inconsistent with the job ladder models that motivate our analysis.
19

8

wage. However, for the most part, we leave this exploration for future work.20 Our objective
is to quantify the basic facts about the directional and cyclical patterns of job-to-job flows
by firm wage and firm size. We now turn to this objective.

2.2

Job-to-Job Flows in the LEHD data
In the LEHD, it is possible to categorize worker moves by starting point and destination.

This allows us to measure whether a worker hired by one firm appears to have been poached
away from another firm or whether they came from non-employment. This distinction is
important for understanding the cyclical job ladder model.
To identify hires and separations that reflect poaching, as in the job ladder models discussed above, we would like to isolate voluntary moves. However, a principal challenge to
doing so in the LEHD is that there is no information on why a worker left one job and began
another. Instead, we infer that a move was voluntary if a worker separates from a job and
begins work at a new job within a short time period, and involuntary if the worker faced a
lengthy period with no earnings.21 We longitudinally link workers’ job histories across firms
using the approach described in Hyatt and McEntarfer (2012b). We link the main job in
each quarter of an individual worker’s employment history. Using quarterly earnings we infer
approximately when workers left and began jobs. When a worker separates from a job and
begins work at a new job within a short time period, we classify it as a poaching (job-to-job)
flow. Transitions between jobs which involve longer spells of non-employment are classified
as flows to and from non-employment.22
Given that we do not observe precise start and end dates of jobs in the LEHD data, we
20

While progress has been made on theoretical models that contain both forms of heterogeneity in steady
state, there is a paucity of such models for cyclical dynamics – particularly models that have a meaningful
definition of firm size.
21
Using the measures described in this section, Hyatt et al. (2014) find a high correlation between separations to non-employment in the LEHD data and layoffs in the Job Openings and Labor Turnover Survey
(JOLTS), and an even higher correlation (just under one) between separations to employment in the LEHD
and quits in the JOLTS.
22
Our data universe differs slightly from that used in the public use data, which publishes quarterly worker
flows for workers employed on the first day of the quarter, see Hyatt et al. (2014). We instead use all workers
employed during the quarter, which results in higher levels of worker flows but almost identical trends as the
public use data. HHM (2015) show that results on firm size are similar in the public use Job-to-Job Flows
data, which are available for download at http://lehd.ces.census.gov/data/j2j_beta.html.

9

consider three alternative approaches to defining job-to-job flows, following HHM (2015).23
First, the most liberal approach is to identify a hire or separation as part of a job-to-job
flow when the new main job begins in the same quarter or in the quarter after a separation
from a former main job. It thus classifies a move as one to/from non-employment only if
the worker had a full quarter with no earnings. This approach, which we refer to as the
within/adjacent quarter approach, allows for the fact that workers may take breaks between
their last day on one job and their first day on a new job, even if the move was voluntary.
However, it likely misclassifies some non-employment spells as job-to-job flows.
Second, the most conservative approach we take is to identify a job hire or separation
as part of a job-to-job flow only when the separation from a former main job and hire to a
new main job occur in the same quarter. We refer to this as the within quarter approach.
This method likely results in fewer non-employment spells being misclassified, relative to
the within/adjacent approach, but does not allow for as much leeway in terms of time off in
between jobs.
The third approach begins with the within/adjacent quarter job-to-job flows and imposes
an additional restriction based on the earnings dynamics around the time of the transition.
We infer the amount of time a worker might have taken off during the transition by comparing
earnings in the transition quarter to earnings in the surrounding quarters. We classify a
move as job-to-job if earnings losses during the quarter imply at most a transition time of
one month with no work, and as a move to/from non-employment if the earnings losses are
larger. This measure categorizes 90 percent of the within quarter moves as job-to-job and
60 percent of the adjacent quarter moves.24 In what follows, we call this the no earnings gap
approach.
Figure 1 shows the different job-to-job flow series. Using each of the three approaches to
identify job-to-job flows, we then define poaching hires as the total number of hires associated
with a job-to-job flow and poaching separations as the total number of separations associated
23

In addition to these three approaches to distinguishing poaching vs. non-employment flows, HHM (2015)
also implement a continuous time correction that follows Shimer (2012) and Mukoyama (2014) and find that
results are similar using this approach.
24
Specifically, we classify a transition as a job-to-job flow for a within quarter move if the total earnings
in all jobs for a worker in the quarter of transition is at least 2/3 of the average total earnings on all jobs
in the quarter prior and the quarter after the transition, and, for an adjacent quarter move if the sum of
earnings in t and t + 1 is at least 5/6 of the sum of earnings in t − 1 and t + 2.

10

with a job-to-job flow. Conceptually, there should be a poaching hire for every identified
poaching separation and vice versa, and, for the most part, the time series track each other
closely.25 For comparison, we also include the Current Population Survey (CPS) based jobto-job flow series from Fallick and Fleischman (2004).26 We generate poaching rates by
dividing by employment and plot seasonally adjusted series (using the X-11 procedure) for
each rate. We also indicate NBER recessions with shaded regions.
The within quarter definition yields levels that are below the CPS, the within/adjacent
yields levels that are above the CPS, and the no earnings gap approach yields levels that
are about the same as the CPS. Moreover, all series are highly correlated.27 For the sake of
brevity, we proceed with the within/adjacent approach for the remainder of the paper. We
do this to remain consistent with the public domain job-to-job flows series and because this
approach is unlikely to misclassify a true poaching move as a move from non-employment.
The limitation of the within/adjacent approach is that some of the measured job-to-job flows
likely include spells of non-employment. We therefore also provide robustness using the no
earnings gap approach and note, in addition, that results are robust to the within approach
as well.28
Using the within/adjacent approach, Figure 2 presents a decomposition of total hires and
separations into their poaching and non-employment components. Hires and separations
25

For the within quarter definition, a difference across hires and separations will only arise if the move
is from or to a state outside of the 28 state sample. For the within/adjacent quarter definition and the no
earnings gap approach, there can also be differences in the exact quarter that the hire took place, relative
to the separation; they can be off by one quarter.
26
Job-to-job moves are identified in the CPS based on panel data and individuals’ survey responses. Since
the CPS sample is restricted to workers who can be tracked across months, even if a job transition is made,
the number of poaching hires in a month identically equals the number of poaching separations.
27
All pairwise correlations of LEHD series exceed 0.98 with the correlation between the within/adjacent
and the no earnings gap at 0.997. Moreover, the CPS series has a correlation of 0.91 with the within quarter
LEHD series, 0.96 with the within/adjacent quarter LEHD series, and 0.95 with the no earnings gap series.
28
Some additional measurement issues for the LEHD based job-to-job flows are discussed in more detail
in HHM (2015). For example, we will erroneously classify a job-to-job transition as a flow to/from nonemployment when we cannot observe the worker’s origin or destination. This includes flows to and from
federal employment (approximately 2 percent of employment) and to parts of the non-profit and agriculture
sectors. It also includes moves outside of our 28 state sample, if the move is to a state at a point in time
when that state was not in the LEHD. Once a state’s data becomes available, we can match moves across
states in and out of our core sample and do use these to classify whether the move was job-to-job or to/from
non-employment. By 2004 almost all states have data available so one might be concerned that the time
series patterns may be noisier in the early years of our sample. Our analysis presented below suggests
otherwise and a more thorough analysis by Henderson and Hyatt (2012) shows that the omission of states
has a discernable but small effect on job-to-job flow rates.

11

to/from non-employment are similarly turned into rates by dividing by employment.29 As
can be seen, poaching hires (solid line) and separations (dashed line) exhibit a pronounced
downward trend and evident procyclicality.30 Hires from non-employment (dot-dash line) rise
during expansions and separations to non-employment (dotted line) increase substantially
early in contractions and especially in the Great Recession. Net employment changes can
be gleaned by subtracting separations from hires in each category. Because poaching hires
approximately equal poaching separations at the aggregate level, net employment growth is
driven by net movement into and out of non-employment. In expansions, hires from nonemployment exceed separations to non-employment, resulting in overall employment growth.
In contractions, the opposite is true.

2.3

Cyclical Indicators
We consider two alternative cyclical indicators: the change in the unemployment rate

and deviations in the unemployment rate from an HP trend. Figure 3 illustrates the two
alternatives at the national level. As is evident, the change in the unemployment rate is much
more closely linked to the NBER reference cycles than is the HP-filtered unemployment rate.
During NBER contractions, the change in unemployment is positive while it tends to be zero
or negative during NBER expansions. The HP-filtered unemployment rate exhibits a related
but different pattern; it rises during contractions but remains high long after recoveries are
underway. This holds not only for the Great Recession but also for the 2001 downturn. The
correlation between the HP-filtered unemployment rate and the change in the unemployment
rate is only 0.15.
29

Employment is measured here as the number of dominant jobs in any given quarter, where for an
individual worker, the dominant job is defined as the highest paying job in that quarter.
30
The decline in job-to-job flows over this time interval has been noted by Hyatt and McEntarfer (2012a,
2012b) in the LEHD data. Hyatt and Spletzer (2013) show that this decline is also apparent in the CPS
job-to-job flows data, and that contemporaneous declines can be seen in many other measures of employment
dynamics.

12

3

Empirical Analysis of the Reallocation of Workers
Across Firm Size and Firm Wage Classes
It is useful to start with the following simple identity for net job flows (N JF ) at firm

f:
N JFf = Hf − Sf = Hfp − Sfp + Hfn − Sfn

(1)

where H is hires, S is separations, H p is poaching (job-to-job) hires, S p is poaching separations (workers that separate via a job-to-job flow), H n is hires from non-employment and S n
is separations into non-employment. Firms can grow through net reallocation of workers via
job-to-job moves (H p − S p ), which, in the spirit of MPV (2012) we will call “net poaching,”
and through net moves to/from non-employment (H n − S n ). A firm gains employment via
net poaching by hiring more workers away from other firms than it loses to other firms. A
firm gains employment through flows to/from non-employment if it hires more non-employed
workers than it separates to non-employment (e.g., through layoffs).
The job ladder models discussed above predict that net poaching should be positive and
procyclical at large, high wage firms, and negative and countercyclical at small, low wage
firms. Large, high wage firms can, by definition, more easily poach workers away from other
jobs by offering higher wages. In contrast, small, low wage firms will have difficulty both
attracting workers, and retaining incumbents. They should thus experience net employment
losses through poaching, and instead grow through hires from non-employment. Furthermore, the poaching advantage afforded firms at the top of the job ladder is larger in a tight
market when competition for workers is greater, and conversely their advantage is smaller
in a slack market.
There exists no direct evidence on the direction of net poaching, i.e., whether workers
tend to move from small, low wage firms to large, high wage firms through job-to-job moves.
Indirect evidence on the cyclicality of net poaching is presented in MPV (2012) for a range
of countries. They show that the differential net job flow rate across large and small firms
increases in times of low unemployment. That is, large firms grow relative to small firms

13

when unemployment is low, and large firms shrink relative to small firms when unemployment
is high. Their unemployment measure is the HP-filtered unemployment rate, which aligns
with periods when the poaching advantage at large firms should be greatest (tight markets)
and weakest (slack markets). The cyclical pattern they uncovered is consistent with their
poaching model, but they have no direct evidence tying net employment changes to poaching.
Their results could instead be driven by moves to and from non-employment.
In this section, we make four contributions relative to the previous literature. First,
we directly examine the direction of net poaching by firm size and firm wage in the U.S.
Second, we examine the cyclical pattern of net job flows by firm size and firm wage. We
also decompose these moves into the contributions from net poaching and moves to/from
non-employment. This analysis by firm size enables us to examine whether the MPV (2012)
result on net job flows is being driven by net poaching. Third, as part of this cyclical analysis,
we examine two cyclical indicators, the HP-filtered unemployment rate and the change in
the unemployment rate. As is well known, the stages of the business cycle are more nuanced
than a simple tight-slack dichotomy. By bringing in an additional measure that proxies for
expansions and contractions, we help reconcile the MPV (2012) findings that suggest large
firms are more cyclically sensitive with the conventional wisdom that it is actually small
firms that are more cyclically sensitive because of credit constraints. Fourth, we provide
guidance as to why the patterns of net job poaching are likely to differ by firm wage and
firm size. In the job ladder models discussed above, wage and size go hand-in-hand. But
these models do not take into account the firm life cycle dynamics: a firm may be small
because it is less productive and lower paying or because it is new.
We begin by examining the aggregate patterns in the data and then investigate cyclicality
in regression analysis.

3.1

Aggregate Patterns
Figure 4 shows the two margins of hires and separations for large and small firms in the

top and bottom panels, respectively, while Figure 5 shows the same for high wage and low
wage firms, respectively. To construct these series, we sum each type of hire and separation
within a firm size or wage category, and convert to rates by dividing by total employment in
14

the quarter in the category.31 Beginning with the top panel of Figure 4, notice first that at
large firms the poaching hire rate (solid line) is much larger than the non-employment hire
rate (dash-dotted line). Large firms do indeed make a greater fraction of their hires through
poaching than through non-employment. In contrast, small firms (lower panel of Figure
4) make a greater fraction of their hires from non-employment. Both of these patterns
are consistent with a job ladder model. Also consistent with these models, poaching is
procyclical; job-to-job moves (both hires and separations) decline in NBER dated recessions
and rebound in recoveries.
Consider next net poaching, which can be gleaned by comparing poaching hires to poaching separations. A striking finding from Figure 4 is that net poaching is modestly negative
for large firms and modestly positive for small firms in all quarters. That is, the poaching
hire rate (solid line) is slightly below the poaching separation rate (dashed line) for large
firms and the opposite is true at small firms. This is at odds with the notion that large firms
are at the top of the ladder; instead, they are roughly just as likely to lose workers from
poaching as to gain them.
Since net poaching for both large and small firms is modest in magnitude in all quarters, net employment changes are driven by worker flows in and out of non-employment.
Furthermore, both large and small firms have substantial cyclical fluctuations in hires from
non-employment and separations to non-employment. Small firms have an especially pronounced increase in separations to non-employment (dotted line) in the Great Recession.
This is a preview of the results to come where the non-employment margin plays an important role in the differential response of large and small firms over the business cycle.
In contrast to the results on firm size, Figure 5 shows patterns that are much more
consistent with the job ladder model. First, like large firms, high wage firms make a greater
fraction of hires through poaching than from non-employment; like small firms, low wage
firms exhibit the opposite pattern. However, unlike large firms, high wage firms have positive
net poaching – the poaching hires line is always above the poaching separations line. The
opposite is seen at low wage firms where net poaching is negative.
Moreover, net poaching has an evident procyclical pattern: the magnitudes of the gaps
31

All aggregate flows in this section have been seasonally adjusted using the X-11 procedure.

15

between poaching hires and poaching separations is largest late in expansions and smallest
during times of economic contractions. In fact, during the Great Recession these gaps
almost completely disappear for both high and low wage firms – high wage firms make
almost no net employment gains through poaching and low wage firms experience no net
employment losses through poaching. The figure also shows important movements into
and out of non-employment over the business cycle for both groups. Typically, the nonemployment margin generates little variation in net employment changes (net job flows) at
high wage firms (hires from non-employment usually equal separations to non-employment).
However, in downturns, they achieve net employment losses through increased separations to
non-employment. In contrast, the impact of the non-employment margin on net employment
growth at low wage firms is close to zero in recessions but large and positive in booms.
Figure 6 makes clearer the starkly different patterns of net poaching flows by firm size
and firm wage classes. Net poaching for high wage firms (solid line) is large and positive
while net poaching for low wage firms (dashed line) is large and negative. We find that high
wage firms grow 0.7 percent per quarter, on average, through job-to-job moves of workers.
This is because, on net, more workers move up the job ladder than down. In contrast,
low wage firms lose on average 1.2 percent of employment through job-to-job moves each
quarter. Movement up the firm wage ladder is thus sizable and important. Also, as evident
in Figure 6, there are strong cyclical patterns. For example, in the boom periods of 2000 and
2005, high wage firms gain nearly 1 percent in employment through poaching and low wage
firms lose 1.5 to 2 percent of employment. In recessionary periods, this movement slows
dramatically and is essentially at zero during the Great Recession. In contrast, net poaching
for large (dot-dash line) and small (dotted line) firms is small in magnitude (-0.16 percent
for large firms and 0.23 percent for small firms) and exhibits relatively little variation over
the cycle.32
32

Figure 6b of HHM (2015) which uses the no earnings gap approach shows almost identical patterns to
Figure 6. For example, the average net poaching rates using the no earnings gap approach are 0.7 percent
(-1.1 percent) for high (low) wage firms and -0.18 percent (0.28 percent) for large (small) firms.

16

3.2

Employment Cyclicality and the Job Ladder: Regression Analysis
Recall that in the Moscarini and Postel-Vinay (2013) framework, large firms have more

cyclically sensitive employment. This is because their ability to poach workers away from
smaller firms by offering higher wages becomes less important in slack markets. We can
use our decomposition to directly test the contribution of poaching (job-to-job) moves to
employment growth over the business cycle. We test the differential cyclicality of employment
at large vs. small and high wage vs. low wage firms using three specifications. First, we
present results from regressions at the national-quarter level to help quantify the cyclical
patterns evident in Figures 4, 5 and 6. In these, we regress various job flow measures on
the HP-filtered unemployment rate or the change in the unemployment rate, and control
for a linear time trend. However, because the national analysis reflects only a relatively
small number of aggregate observations, we also present two specifications using state-level
fluctuations in economic conditions and job flows. These regressions take the following form:

Yst = γs + πqt + β ∗ CY Cst + st

(2)

where s is state, t is quarter, CY Cst is the cyclical indicator at the state-by-quarter level. We
use the state-level unemployment rate to construct the two alternative cyclical indicators: the
change in the unemployment rate and the HP-filtered unemployment rate. For each cyclical
indicator, we provide two specifications. Specification 1 defines πqt so that it includes seasonal
dummies and a time trend. Specification 2 defines πqt as a full set of time dummies for every
quarter. The former permits national and state-specific variation to influence the estimated
relationships while the latter uses only state-specific variation. We cluster standard errors
at the state level.
The key left hand side variables are differential net flows – either for overall net job flows
or for the components in terms of net poaching and net non-employment flows. For the largesmall comparison, the differential net job flow is the net employment change at large firms
minus that at small firms. Just as the net job flow can be decomposed into components due
to poaching and non-employment (as in equation 1), we can decompose the differential rate
17

into a differential poaching rate and a differential non-employment rate. These variables thus
enable us to ask whether large firms grow relative to small firms over the business cycle, and
whether they achieve relative employment gains through poaching or through movements to
and from non-employment. We can make a similar comparison across high and low wage
firms. These flows are defined at the national or state level.33 All are converted to rates by
dividing by total employment in the relevant cell (e.g., by firm type either at the national
or state level as appropriate).
Regression results for the three specifications are presented in Table 1. To help facilitate
the comparison of estimates, Figure 7 shows the patterns of coefficients for each dependent
variable across specification and cyclical indicator. In the main text we focus on these
differential flows. We provide additional analyses of each of the gross flows by firm type in
online Appendix B.
We begin with the firm size comparison in the top panel of Table 1. We find that net
job flows for large firms are more sensitive to fluctuations in the HP-filtered unemployment
rate than small firms (left panel). From column 1 row 1, a one percentage point increase
in the national unemployment rate is associated with a 0.116 percentage point (17 percent)
decrease in the differential growth rate, significant at the 5 percent level. This effect holds
in both of the state specifications as well. The next two rows of the table show that both
net poaching flows and net hires from non-employment contribute to this finding. Using the
point estimates, we find that each contributes about half of the total effect, though these
are only marginally significant or insignificant. This is again true for both the national
and state specifications, though the non-employment margin is especially dominant in state
specification 2. Therefore, consistent with MPV (2012), we find employment growth at large
firms is more cyclically sensitive than that at small firms when defining the cycle based on
HP-filtered unemployment rates. However, differential poaching only modestly contributes
to this effect.
Appendix Table A.1 provides an alternative version of Table 1 that uses the no earnings
33

At the national level, we seasonally adjust variables using X-11. At the state level, we do not seasonally
adjust, as we choose a more parsimonious specification where there are common seasonal effects or common
time effects that absorb seasonality. KM (2014) shows results are robust to allowing for different seasonality
and time effects for each firm wage quintile.

18

gap approach to define job-to-job moves. Here, we find that virtually all of the differential
employment growth sensitivity is driven by the non-employment margin. Support for the
firm size ladder is thus even weaker under this alternative definition of job-to-job moves.
The remainder of Appendix Table A.1 shows that the results presented in the rest of this
section are robust to the alternative definition.
The right panel of Table 1 summarizes results using the first-differenced unemployment
rate. In stark contrast, the growth rate effect is actually in the opposite direction when
using this cyclical indicator. In a cyclical contraction, large firms grow relative to small
firms. This effect is especially pronounced using the state-level variation. This is driven by a
large increase in the net hires from non-employment at large, relative to small firms. There
are also modest effects on net poaching that are inconsistent across specifications. Thus small
firms shrink more quickly in contractions than large firms, especially on the non-employment
margin. Underlying this effect is a differential increase in separations to non-employment by
small firms, while hires fall at similar rates for large and small firms (see online Appendix
B). This indicates that small firms likely make more layoffs in contractions. Also, there is
no evidence of any gains on poaching for small firms in contractions, though the need to
shed workers could overwhelm any potential easing in poaching ability. These results thus
do suggest that small firms get hit harder in contractions than large firms (à la Gertler and
Gilchrist 1994).
Turning to the bottom panel, we find strong support for the cyclicality of the firm wage
ladder. A one percentage point increase in the national unemployment rate is associated with
a 0.269 percentage point decrease in the differential growth rate, a more than 100 percent
drop. Thus employment at high wage firms is indeed more cyclically sensitive than that at
low wage firms. This effect holds in the first state specification as well, though not in the
second where we rely solely on state deviations from the national economy. Furthermore,
from the next two rows, this effect is entirely attributed to poaching (since there is essentially
no effect on the non-employment margin). In times of higher unemployment, net poaching
by high wage firms declines relative to net poaching by low wage firms. This is true across
national and both state specifications.
The first-differenced unemployment rate results show an even stronger poaching effect.
19

In contractions, high wage firms have much lower growth through poaching, relative to
low wage firms. This mirrors Figure 6, where we showed that net poaching toward high
wage firms fell roughly to zero in the Great Recession, as did net poaching away from
low wage firms. This effect is also present at the state level, though the magnitude is
much smaller in specification 2. However, poaching effects do not necessarily generate net
increases in employment because the non-employment effect goes in the opposite direction. In
contractions, low wage firms have a greater decline in net hires form non-employment. These
effects are large in magnitude and significance. Underlying the non-employment margin is
a substantial decline at low wage firms in hires from non-employment, relative to high wage
firms, as well as a modest relative decrease in separations to non-employment at low wage
firms (see online Appendix B). Thus, in a contraction, low wage firms shift towards poaching
hires, and away from non-employment hires. This is why the overall growth rate effect is
inconsistent across specifications; it depends which margin wins out.
To summarize, cyclical net poaching patterns across high and low paying firms are consistent with job ladder models. Differential net poaching of high wage firms relative to low
wage firms declines substantially in times of high unemployment and times of increasing
unemployment. Outside the scope of job ladder models, we find that net movement to and
from non-employment at least partially offsets this effect during periods of increasing unemployment. In contrast, cyclical net poaching patterns across large and small firms are less
consistent with job ladder models. Even though differential net job flows go in the “right”
direction using the HP-filtered unemployment – as in MPV (2012) small firms grow relative
to large firms in times of high unemployment – poaching flows only modestly contribute to
this effect, while the non-employment margin makes up the difference. Furthermore, using
the first difference unemployment rate, we find that employment declines for small firms
relative to large firms in times of rising unemployment both due to net poaching (in most
specifications) and movements to/from non-employment.
These results highlight the importance of decomposing net job flows into their net poaching and net non-employment flow components. We see that poaching results for the high
wage-low wage comparison are quite robust to national and state variation and to the different cyclical indicators. However, impacts on net job flows are less consistent because of
20

offsetting effects through the non-employment margin. In contrast, the net job flows for the
large-small comparison do align well with the dynamic poaching model, but underlying these
effects is a sizable impact on non-employment. The poaching effects move in the “wrong”
direction, on average and exhibit only modest cyclicality.

3.3

Why Do the Results Differ So Much Between Firm Wage and
Firm Size?
In this subsection, we investigate why the patterns differ so much between firm size and

firm wage. We first note that there is a positive relationship between firm size and firm
wage. Estimating a simple specification relating the firm-level log real earnings per worker
to log firm size (with quarter fixed effects) yields a positive, highly statistically significant
relationship but an R-squared of only about 0.04. Firm size by itself thus accounts for little
of the overall variance in earnings per worker across firms, which is not surprising since there
are many factors that underlie differences in wages across firms.
One of the reasons firm size may be a much less good proxy for the productivity of a firm
is the role of firm age. Recent work has highlighted the importance of distinguishing between
small, young firms and small, mature firms (Haltiwanger, Jarmin, and Miranda 2013). At
least some small, young firms are highly productive and are in the process of growing to
become large firms.
Figure 8 shows net poaching rates for small, young firms, small, mature firms, and large,
mature firms.34 As already noted, large, mature firms have almost zero net poaching with
basically no cyclical pattern. Interestingly, small, young firms do exhibit positive net poaching flows: they hire more workers via poaching from other firms than they lose to other firms.
Apparently, one of the reasons that large firms exhibit zero net poaching is that workers are
on net being poached away to small, young firms. For small, mature firms we see evidence of
negative net poaching flows that move with the business cycle. The cyclical pattern and sign
actually look fairly similar to low wage firms, though magnitudes are smaller. In addition,
small, mature firms do lose more workers to poaching than large, mature firms. This is weak
34
Medium size, young firms look similar to small, young firms in unreported results. Results are not
reported for large, young firms since such firms are virtually non-existent.

21

evidence in support of a directional firm size ladder within age group, where small, mature
firms are at the bottom and large, mature firms are at a higher rung.
Table 2 reports the results of the differential net job flows and components for alternative
groupings of firms by size and age. We report state specification 1 for the state-quarter level
regressions, which allows for both national and state variation in economic conditions. The
comparison across mature firms in the top panel looks fairly similar to the overall size
comparison from Table 1. A deviation in unemployment above its trend yields a larger
decline in net job flows of large, mature firms relative to the net job flows of small, mature
firms and this is driven about equally by net poaching and net hires from non-employment
effects. In addition, since overall poaching goes in the “right” direction in comparing small,
mature to large, mature firms, we deem that there is more support for the job ladder models
here. For the large, mature vs. small, young comparison, we do still find that net job flows
are more cyclically sensitive among large, mature firms, but more of this is driven by net
hires from non-employment.
The results using the change in unemployment continue to point to factors outside the
scope of the firm size job ladder models.35 Small, mature and small, young businesses both
exhibit a greater decline in net job flows in contractions than large, mature firms and this is
driven especially by the responsiveness of net hires from non-employment. This suggests a
possible role for credit constraints across all small firms, both young and mature. In addition,
there are modest effects on net poaching showing that both small, mature and small, young
firms lose net employment through poaching in contractions, relative to large, mature firms.
Finally, a potential limitation of the firm size results is that variation in firm size across
industries may reflect differences in technology and minimum efficient scale - factors not
part of the wage posting models. Table 3 considers a robustness check using terciles of the
employment-weighted industry distribution to define relative firm size classes. Strikingly,
results using relative size within industry are very similar to those using absolute size in
Table 1.
35

There are a couple of recent exceptions to note here, which do incorporate some of these features into
models of on-the-job search. First, Coles and Mortensen (2016) incorporate business entry, growth, and exit
into a model of random labor market search. Also, Schaal (2015) introduces business dynamics into a model
of directed labor market search.

22

4

Implications for Mobility and Earnings Growth over
the Business Cycle
In the previous section we established the presence of a firm wage ladder that is strongly

procyclical. This means that career enhancing moves up the ladder will be much more likely
to take place in booms than in busts. We know that recessions have persistent impacts on
the careers of young workers, when job-to-job transitions are most important for earnings
growth.36 Some of this might be accounted for by the fact that the career progression of all
workers slows in downturns. In this section, we attempt to quantify the impacts of recessions
on mobility and earnings growth. Since we find at best weak evidence of a firm size ladder,
we restrict our attention to the wage ladder.37
Table 4 shows the time averages of job-to-job moves by origin and destination and the
time averages of the associated earnings changes.38 Several patterns are worth noting. First,
in the origin-destination (O-D) matrix, the diagonal is large – many workers transit from
job-to-job within firm groups. Second, transitions up the ladder are more likely than down
the ladder; moves from low-to-medium, medium-to-high, and low-to-high are more likely
than moves in the opposite directions. This is obviously what underlies the patterns of net
poaching flows by firm wage presented above. Third, in the earnings change matrix, workers
moving up the job ladder experience large earnings gains while those moving down the ladder
experience large earnings losses. Fourth, the earnings gains from moving up exceed the losses
from moving down. Finally, workers making lateral moves also experience earnings increases.
This pattern reflects, in part, the coarseness of the firm wage grid used for the analysis but
may more generally also reflect workers making better idiosyncratic matches.
36

See Kahn (2010), Oreopoulos, von Wachter, and Heisz (2012), and Altonji, Kahn, and Speer (2016).
For this analysis, we consider a sample restricted to job-to-job flows where we can identify the ranking
of the firm wage group by the origin and the destination of the flow. This restricts attention to workers
engaged in job-to-job flows to and from private sector jobs within our 28 state sample. We find that the
net poaching patterns by firm wage are almost identical for this slightly restricted sample (as will become
apparent). There are some very modest differences in magnitudes of the flows which we will note in our
discussion.
38
Earnings changes are defined as total earnings in the quarter after the move minus total earnings in
the quarter before the move. We omit the quarter of the move itself to limit the impact of weeks worked,
which may be lower during the transition. We include all earnings in the pre- and post- quarters, even those
that may be part of an additional transition, because that would otherwise place a too large (and selected)
restriction on the sample.
37

23

Table 4 thus indicates that job-to-job moves result in average earnings growth, especially
for workers moving up the ladder. Through impacts on mobility, recessions affect earnings
growth by both reducing the overall mobility rate and the likelihood of moving up the ladder,
conditional on moving. For the former, an overall decline in mobility will impact the job
ladder since, as we have shown, the direction of moves tends to be up the ladder. For the
latter, even if overall moves did not decline, mobility up the ladder could still be inhibited in
downturns if there were a relative shift in where workers go, conditional on making a move.
To gain a better understanding of the cyclicality of the firm wage ladder, we decompose it
into these two possible drivers: (i) the cyclicality of job-to-job moves overall; and (ii) the
cyclicality in the propensity for workers who are transitioning to move up the ladder. We
first consider mobility, then we discuss what these changes in mobility over the business cycle
imply for earnings growth.
Consider the following definitions for the number of poaching hires (Hti ) and the number
of poaching separations (Sti ) at date t (year-quarter) for wage groups i equal to high wage
(h), medium wage (m) and low wage (l) groups:

Hth = Fthh + Ftlh + Ftmh
Sth = Fthh + Fthl + Fthm
Htm = Ftmm + Ftlm + Fthm
Stm

=

Ftmm

+

Ftml

+

(3)

Ftmh

Htl = Ftll + Ftml + Fthl
Stl = Ftll + Ftlm + Ftlh
where Ftij is the number of workers who move make a job-to-job move from wage group i to
wage group j.
Total job-to-job flows Jt are given by:
Jt = Hth + Htm + Htl = Sth + Stm + Stl .

24

(4)

Net poaching hires for each group i (N etit ) are given by:

N etht = Ftlh − Fthl + Ftmh − Fthm
lm
ml
hm
N etm
− Ftmh
t = Ft − Ft + Ft

(5)

N etlt = Fthl − Ftlh + Ftml − Ftlm .
Transition probabilities can be defined as follows for these poaching flows (these are probabilities of making a move from i to j, conditional on making any move at all):
ij
λij
t = Ft /Jt .

(6)

This enables rewriting the net poaching hires for each group as:

hl
mh
N etht = Jt ∗ (λlh
− λhm
t − λt + λt
t )
lm
ml
hm
N etm
− λmh
t = Jt ∗ (λt − λt + λt
t )

(7)

lh
ml
lm
N etlt = Jt ∗ (λhl
t − λt + λt − λt ).

This generates a simple decomposition of net poaching hires into the variation in the overall
pace of job-to-job flows J vs. the differential probabilities λij . These differentials are precisely
the comparisons of the off-diagonal of the O-D matrix. This helps us see why the off-diagonals
are so important for the sign and volatility of the net poaching hires.
Note that the above is for a decomposition of net poaching hires in levels. This can be
expressed in terms of the rates of employment simply where N etrti = N etit /Eti where Eti is
the employment for wage group i and Jrt = Jt /Et with Et being total employment:

mh
hl
− λhm
N etrth = (Et /Eth ) ∗ (Jrt ∗ (λlh
t ))
t − λt + λt
ml
hm
N etrtm = (Et /Etm ) ∗ (Jrt ∗ (λlm
− λmh
t ))
t − λt + λt
lh
ml
lm
N etrtl = (Et /Etl ) ∗ (Jrt ∗ (λhl
t − λt + λt − λt )).

25

(8)

This is an exact decomposition of the net poaching hire rates into terms involving the inverse
employment shares, the overall poaching rates, and the transition probability differences.
Note that this decomposition does not require any steady state assumptions. It is a simple
accounting decomposition for each period. We can easily generate three counterfactuals for
each net poaching flow by holding two of the components constant (at their time averages
from 1998:Q2 to 2011:Q4) and allowing the third to vary with time. This highlights the
respective roles of (1) the job-to-job transition rate, (2) the likelihood of that transition
resulting in a move from one wage category into another, and (3) the share of employment
in the different employment categories. In practice we focus on effects (1) and (2); variation
in the third component is not very meaningful since by definition the share of employment
within each group will be roughly constant over time.39
The decomposition is summarized in Table 5 and Figure 9. Figure 9 provides insights
into which factors drive the level and variation in the net poaching rates. We compare the
observed net poaching series for high and low wage firms to the counterfactuals that only
40
allow the transition matrix (λij
t ) or the job-to-job flow rates (Jrt ) to vary.

As can be seen, both counterfactuals track the levels of the observed series closely. However, it is apparent that the vast majority of the cyclicality in net poaching rates is accounted
for by variation in the transition matrix. Variation in the overall job-to-job flow rate accounts for much less of the cyclical fluctuations in the net poaching series. It can account
for some because, as noted above, the majority of poaching moves are up the ladder, so a
decline in overall moves will impact upward mobility relatively more. However, it is not
nearly enough to explain these large cyclical fluctuations in net poaching. We need to also
incorporate the pattern that in busts, even though all moves are less likely, moves up the
ladder become especially unlikely.41
39
There is some variation in the third component because there is variation in the share of workers who are
not full quarter. Recall firm average wages are defined using only full-quarter workers, as are wage quintile
cut-points that define the h, m and l groupings. However, non full-quarter workers naturally factor in to the
transition probabilities.
40
The observed net poaching rates in Figure 9 exhibit very similar patterns to those in Figure 6 but differ
slightly in magnitudes given that the former is restricted to workers making transitions to/from private sector
firms within our 28 state sample. For example, net poaching from low wage firms averages -1.1 percent in
Figure 9 and -1.2 percent in Figure 6.
41
One concern might be that this shift in the transition matrix towards moves down the ladder is driven by
measurement error. Recall that we are using the within/adjacent quarter definition of job-to-job flows. One

26

Table 5 summarizes the patterns in the figure. We first present time series correlations
between the observed and counterfactual net poaching rates and then the relative contribution of each component to the overall time variation in net poaching rates. For the latter,
we use a simple bivariate regression: Cov(Observed, Counterf actual)/V ar(Observed).42 As
Figure 9 indicated, both the overall transition rate and the O-D transition matrix are highly
correlated with the observed net poaching series. However, variation in the transition matrix
explains the vast majority of variation in net poaching: 72 percent of net poaching for high
wage firms and 77 percent for low wage firms. In contrast, variation in overall job-to-job
mobility explains less, 28 percent, and 30 percent of the variation in net poaching rates at
high and low wage firms, respectively.
What do our findings imply for net reallocation of workers up the job ladder? Using the
tabulations from Figure 9, in expansions, we find that 1.21 percent of low wage workers are
reallocated up the ladder on net each quarter. In contrast, in contractions this reallocation
rate is only 0.73 percent. This implies about a 40 percent decline in the net reallocation
of workers away from low wage firms in the average contraction compared to the average
expansion. In the depth of the Great Recession in 2009:1, there is an 85 percent decline;
only 0.19 percent of workers at low wage firms were reallocated up the ladder. These sharp
declines are driven primarily by a decline in the probability of moving out of the bottom
rung, conditional on moving, rather than from impacts in the overall mobility rate. The
component due to variation in the transition matrix declines by 40 percent from the average
expansion to contraction period while the component due to variation in the overall mobility
rate declines by only 4 percent.43 The magnitude of the latter is mitigated by the declining
trend in overall mobility in combination with the fact that the expansions are on average
early in our sample period. Still, it is evident that the decline in net moves up the job
ladder seen in recessions is sharp and primarily due to variation in the transition matrix,
conditional on moving, and not the overall decline in mobility.
might be concerned that this approach catches more movements to non-employment, especially for moves
down the ladder in busts. However, as emphasized above, the overall net poaching patterns over the cycle
by firm wage are very robust to using alternative definitions.
42
See also Shimer (2012) and Hyatt and Spletzer (2017).
43
Unlike the variance accounting exercise Table 5 that takes into account covariances, these expansion-tocontraction comparisons across different counterfactuals do not have to add up to the total.

27

This reduced mobility has important consequences for earnings growth over the business
cycle. To focus on the contribution of these factors, we consider the following expression,
which allows us to quantify off-diagonal moves into components driven by the overall jobto-job flow rate and the transition matrix:

Jrt ∗

X

ij
λij
t ∗ ∆log(Earnt ).

(9)

ij,i6=j

The expression in (9) is the earnings gains from workers moving up or down the ladder.
On average, we find these moves are associated with a 0.56 percent earnings increase on a
quarterly basis. If we include “diagonal moves” (e.g., high wage-to-high wage moves) we
find that job-to-job moves are responsible for total earnings gains of about 1 percent per
quarter. Thus off-diagonal moves (the focus of our decomposition) make up more than half
of the overall earnings gains from job changes, even though they are less than half of overall
moves. This implies substantial economy-wide earnings gains from workers moving up and
down the ladder.
We can also quantify how these earnings gains vary over the business cycle. For this
purpose, we focus on the contribution of the changing pattern of job-to-job flows over the
cycle. We thus calculate a version of equation (9) that fixes earnings gains conditional on
type of move at its time average (the bottom panel of Table 4), while allowing the transition
44
matrix (λij
t ) and the probability of making any move (Jrt ) to vary.

Figure 10 plots the time series of earnings gains from moving up and down the ladder
(solid line). These are procyclical and exhibit a declining trend. We also plot two counterfactual distributions, one holding constant the overall mobility rate (dotted line) and the other
holding constant the transition matrix (dot-dash line) at their time averages. We find that
variation in both job-to-job flows and transition probabilities contribute to the procyclicality.
It is the declining trend in job-to-job flows that yields a trend decline in the earnings gains
We abstract away from changes in ∆log(Earnij
t ) over the business cycle because of measurement issues.
Hahn, Hyatt, and Janicki (2017) find that the time series variation in log earnings gains and losses from
making job-to-job transitions is procyclical but largely reflects procyclical variations in hours per worker.
They make this inference based on the small number of states where hours per worker are available in the
LEHD data infrastructure. Procyclical variation in hours as workers transit from job-to-job is interesting
but beyond the scope of the focus of this paper.
44

28

from such transitions.
Taking average earnings changes for each type of move from Table 4, reduced mobility
implies that wage growth from off-diagonal job-to-job moves is 13 percent smaller in contractions than in expansions. As with some of the calculations above, the magnitude of
this difference is mitigated by the secular decline in overall mobility in combination with
the fact that contraction years are on average later in the data than expansion years. The
Great Recession had an especially adverse impact on the earnings gains from climbing the
ladder. The quarterly earnings gains, on net, from climbing the ladder reached a cyclical
peak of 0.63 percent in early 2006. This fell by 47 percent in the trough in 2009:1 to 0.34
percent. Both the cyclicality of the transition matrix and the decline in overall mobility contributed significantly to this decline (with a slightly higher contribution due to the decline
in mobility). Most of the reduction in earnings gains from 2006:1 to 2009:1 is from a decline
in the contribution of workers moving up from the bottom rung of the ladder. Recall this
movement declined by 85 percent of this time period. The associated earnings gains declined
by 40 percent from a peak of 0.69 percent in 2006:1 to 0.39 percent in 2009:1.45

5

Conclusion
In this paper, we use LEHD data to calculate worker flows across the firm size and

firm wage distributions. We then test implications of the Burdett and Mortensen (1998) job
ladder model, as well as the dynamic implications in Moscarini and Postel-Vinay (2013). We
find strong evidence of a firm wage ladder in that job-to-job flows move on net from low wage
to high wage firms. On net, high wage firms gain 0.7 percent of employment on a quarterly
basis, and low wage firms lose 1.2 percent through poaching. Furthermore, consistent with
the dynamic implications in Moscarini and Postel-Vinay (2013), this movement is procyclical.
Net reallocation from low wage to high wage firms via poaching slows almost to zero in
recessionary periods. In contrast, we see little evidence of a firm size ladder. Workers do not
tend to move from small to large firms. This is partly because small, young firms experience
45

The overall earnings gains from directional moves is lower than that from workers climbing from the
bottom rung of the ladder. This is because, as seen in equation (9), the overall earnings gains includes the
earnings losses from workers who make moves down the ladder.

29

positive net poaching: they hire more workers from poaching than the workers they lose to
poaching.
The collapse of the firm wage job ladder in recessions is accounted for both by a decline
in the pace of overall mobility but also by a decline in the propensity of a given job-to-job
move to yield advancement up the job ladder. This second effect accounts for most of the
cyclical fluctuations in net poaching from low wage to high wage firms. Furthermore, the
job ladder yields significant earnings gains. Overall job-to-job flows yield about a 1 percent
increase in earnings per worker each quarter. Nearly 60 percent of these gains are from
workers, on net, moving from lower to higher paying firms. Interestingly, workers who make
lateral moves on the firm wage ladder also tend to obtain earnings gains that are not as large
as those climbing the ladder but are still substantial. During recessions, the earnings gains
from moving up the ladder decline substantially both due to the decline in the pace of the
overall ladder and the propensity for a given job-to-job move to yield upward movement.
We find that upward progress from the bottom rung of the job ladder declines by 40
percent in contractions, relative to expansions. In the Great Recession, this progress slowed
by 85 percent, with an associated decline in earnings growth of 40 percent. These effects may
especially impede the advancement of young workers for whom job-to-job moves are most
important (Topel and Ward 1992) and can help account for the lasting impact of recessions
on earnings for this group (Kahn 2010; Oreopoulos, von Wachter, and Heisz 2012; Altonji,
Kahn, and Speer 2016).
Our findings also highlight the importance of taking into account moves to and from nonemployment. They have a substantial impact on employment changes for both firm wage and
firm size. Hires from non-employment decline sharply and separations to non-employment
increase substantially in contractions especially for workers at low wage and small firms. The
effects for small firms are substantial enough that small firms shrink both overall and relative
to large firms in contractions. This finding is not inconsistent with recent evidence (which
we also confirm) that large firms experience greater declines in net employment during times
of high unemployment. We show that reconciling these seemingly inconsistent findings relies
on distinguishing between times of economic contractions vs times of high unemployment.
The latter are times that in the last few decades increasingly occur well after an economic
30

recovery has begun and persist. We also show that the MPV (2012) finding of more cyclically
sensitive employment at large firms than at small firms, is driven in equal parts by the nonemployment and poaching margins, though the Moscarini and Postel-Vinay (2013) model
only focuses on the latter.
Indeed, our findings on the non-employment margin are not well accounted for by cyclical
job ladder models. This is not surprising since, among other things, models of on-the-job
search usually assume a constant separation rate to non-employment. Yet we find an important role for separations to non-employment during contractions especially for small and
low wage firms. There are of course job search models that have endogenous job destruction
inducing separations to non-employment that intensify in recessions (e.g., Mortensen and
Pissarides 1994), but these usually abstract away from the job ladder. Our evidence suggests an important area for future research should be to develop models of cyclical on-the-job
search that capture the sharp decline in hires from non-employment and increase in separations to non-employment during economic downturns. Another area for future research
suggested by our findings is to integrate firm life cycle dynamics into job search models
featuring a job ladder. Our findings highlight the important role that young, small firms
play in firm dynamics including their role in the job ladder. We show that the positive net
poaching by young, small firms away from other firms is important for understanding the
job ladder.

31

References
[1] Abowd, John, Bryce Stephens, Lars Vilhuber, Fredrik Andersson, Kevin McKinney,
Marc Roemer, and Simon Woodcock. 2009. “The LEHD Infrastructure Files and the
Creation of the Quarterly Workforce Indicators.” In Producer Dynamics: New Evidence
from Micro Data, 68, Studies in Income and Wealth, ed. Timothy Dunne, J. Bradford
Jensen and Mark J. Roberts, 149-230. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
[2] Abowd, John, Francis Kramarz, and David Margolis. 1999. “High Wage Workers and
High Wage Firms.” Econometrica 67(2): 251-333.
[3] Abowd, John, John Haltiwanger, Ron Jarmin, Julia Lane, Paul Lengermann, Kristin
McCue, Kevin McKinney, and Kristin Sandusky. 2005. “The Relation among Human
Capital, Productivity, and Market Value: Building Up from Micro Evidence.” In Measuring Capital in the New Economy, 65, Studies in Income and Wealth, ed. Carol Corrado, John Haltiwanger, and Dan Sichel, 153-204. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
[4] Altonji, Joseph, Lisa Kahn, and Jamin Speer. 2016. “Cashier or Consultant? Entry
Labor Market Conditions, Field of Study, and Career Success.” Journal of Labor Economics 34(S1, Part 2): S361-S401.
[5] Barlevy, Gadi. 2002. “The Sullying Effect of Recessions.” Review of Economic Studies
69(1): 65-96.
[6] Barth, Erling, Alex Bryson, James Davis, and Richard Freeman. 2016. “It’s Where You
Work: Increases in the Dispersion of Earnings across Establishments and Individuals in
the United States.” Journal of Labor Economics 34(S2, Part 2): S67-S97.
[7] Bagger, Jesper, and Rasmus Lentz. 2016. “An Equilibrium Model of Wage Dispersion
with Sorting.” Unpublished draft, University of Wisconsin.
[8] Bjelland, Melissa, Bruce Fallick, John Haltiwanger and Erika McEntarfer. 2011.
“Employer-to-Employer Flows in the United States: Estimates Using Linked EmployerEmployee Data.” Journal of Business and Economic Statistics 29(4): 493-505.

32

[9] Brown, Charles, and James Medoff. 1989. “The Employer Size-Wage Effect.” Journal
of Political Economy 97(5): 1027-1059.
[10] Burdett, Kenneth, and Dale Mortensen. 1998. “Wage Differentials, Employer Size, and
Unemployment.” International Economic Review 39(2): 257-273.
[11] Card, David, Jörg Heining, and Patrick Kline. 2015. “Workplace Heterogeneity and
the Rise of West German Wage Inequality.” Quarterly Journal of Economics 128(3):
967-1015.
[12] Coles, Melvyn, and Dale Mortensen. 2016. “Equilibrium Labor Turnover, Firm Growth
and Unemployment.” Econometrica 84(1): 347-363.
[13] Davis, Steven, Jason Faberman, and John Haltiwanger. 2012. “Labor Market Flows in
the Cross Section and Over Time.” Journal of Monetary Economics 59(1): 1-18.
[14] Davis, Steven, and John Haltiwanger. 2014. “Labor Market Fluidity and Economic
Performance.” NBER Working Paper #20479.
[15] Dunne, Timothy, Lucia Foster, John Haltiwanger, and Kenneth Troske. 2004. “Wage
and Productivity Dispersion in United States Manufacturing: The Role of Computer
Investment.” Journal of Labor Economics 22(2): 397-429.
[16] Fallick, Bruce, Fleischman, Charles. 2004. “Employer-to-Employer Flows in the U.S.
Labor Market: The Complete Picture of Gross Worker Flows.” U.S. Federal Reserve
Board Finance and Economics Discussion Series Paper #2004-34.
[17] Fallick, Bruce, John Haltiwanger, and Erika McEntarfer. 2012. “Job-to-Job Flows and
the Consequences of Job Separations.” U.S. Federal Reserve Board Finance and Economics Discussion Series Paper #2012-73.
[18] Foster, Lucia, John Haltiwanger, and Chad Syverson. 2008. “Reallocation, Firm
Turnover and Efficiency: Selection on Productivity or Profitability?” American Economic Review 98(1): 394-425.

33

[19] Gertler, Mark, and Simon Gilchrist. 1994. “Monetary Policy, Business Cycles, and the
Behavior of Small Manufacturing Firms.” Quarterly Journal of Economics 109(2): 309340.
[20] Hahn, Joyce, Henry Hyatt, and Hubert Janicki. 2017. “Job Ladders and Growth in
Earnings, Hours, and Wages.” Unpublished draft, U.S. Census Bureau.
[21] Haltiwanger, John, Henry Hyatt, and Erika McEntarfer. 2015. “Cyclical Reallocation
of Workers Across Employers by Firm Size and Firm Wage.” NBER Working Paper
#21235.
[22] Haltiwanger, John, Henry Hyatt, and Erika McEntarfer. 2016. “Who Moves Up the
Firm Productivity Ladder?” Unpublished draft, University of Maryland.
[23] Haltiwanger, John, Henry Hyatt, Erika McEntarfer, and Liliana Sousa. 2012. “Business
Dynamics Statistics Briefing: Job Creation, Worker Churning, and Wages at Young
Businesses.” Kauffman Foundation Statistical Brief.
[24] Haltiwanger, John, Henry Hyatt, Erika McEntarfer, Liliana Sousa, and Stephen Tibbets.
2014. “Firm Age and Size in the Longitudinal Employer-Household Dynamics Data.”
U.S. Census Bureau Center for Economic Studies Working Paper #CES-14-16.
[25] Haltiwanger, John, Ron Jarmin, and Javier Miranda. 2013. “Who Creates Jobs? Small
versus Large versus Young.” Review of Economics and Statistics 95(2): 347-361.
[26] Henderson, Cody, and Henry Hyatt. 2012. “Estimation of Job-to-Job Flow Rates Under Partially Missing Geography.” U.S. Census Bureau Center for Economic Studies
Discussion Paper #CES-12-29.
[27] Hoynes, Hilary, Douglas Miller, and Jessamyn Schaller. 2012. “Who Suffers During
Recessions?” Journal of Economic Perspectives 26(3): 27-47.
[28] Hyatt, Henry, and Erika McEntarfer. 2012a. “Job-to-Job Flows in the Great Recession.”
American Economic Review 102(3): 580-583.

34

[29] Hyatt, Henry, and Erika McEntarfer. 2012b. “Job-to-Job Flows and the Business Cycle.”
U.S. Census Bureau Center for Economic Studies Working Paper #CES-12-04.
[30] Hyatt, Henry, Erika McEntarfer, Kevin McKinney, Stephen Tibbets, and Douglas
Walton. 2014. “Job-to-Job (J2J) Flows: New Labor Market Statistics from Linked
Employer-Employee Data.” JSM Proceedings 2014, Business and Economics Statistics
Section: 231-245.
[31] Hyatt, Henry, and James Spletzer. 2013. “The Recent Decline in Employment Dynamics.” IZA Journal of Labor Economics 2(3): 1-21.
[32] Hyatt, Henry, and James Spletzer. 2017. “The Recent Decline of Single Quarter Jobs.”
Labour Economics 46(1): 166-176.
[33] Kahn, Lisa. 2010. “The Long-Term Labor Market Consequences of Graduating from
College in a Bad Economy.” Labour Economics 17(2): 303-316.
[34] Kahn, Lisa, and Erika McEntarfer. 2014. “Employment Cyclicality and Firm Quality.”
NBER Working Paper #20698.
[35] Keith, Kristen, and Abigail McWilliams. 1999. “The Returns to Mobility and Job Search
by Gender.” Industrial and Labor Relations Review 52(3): 460-477.
[36] Lazear, Edward, and James Spletzer. 2012. “Hiring, Churn, and the Business Cycle.”
American Economic Review 102(3): 575-579.
[37] Moscarini, Giuseppe, and Fabien Postel-Vinay. 2009. “The Timing of Labor Market
Expansions: New Facts and a New Hypothesis.” In NBER Macroeconomics Annual
2008, Vol. 23, ed. Daron Acemoglu, Kenneth Rogoff, and Michael Woodford, 1-52.
Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
[38] Moscarini, Giuseppe, and Fabien Postel-Vinay. 2012. “The Contribution of Large and
Small Employers to Job Creation in Times of High and Low Unemployment.” American
Economic Review 102(6): 2509-2539.

35

[39] Moscarini, Giuseppe, and Fabien Postel-Vinay. 2013. “Stochastic Search Equilibrium.”
Review of Economic Studies 80(4): 1545-1581.
[40] Moscarini, Giuseppe, and Fabien Postel-Vinay. 2016. “Did the Job Ladder Fail After
the Great Recession?” Journal of Labor Economics 34(S1): S55-S93.
[41] Mortensen, Dale, and Christopher Pissarides. 1994. “Job Creation and Destruction in
the Theory of Unemployment.” Review of Economic Studies 61: 397-415.
[42] Mukoyama, Toshihiko. 2014. “The Cyclicality of Job-to-Job Transitions and Its Implications for Aggregate Productivity.” Journal of Economic Dynamics and Control 1-17.
[43] Oreoploulos, Philip, Till von Wachter, and Andrew Heisz. 2012. “The Short- and LongTerm Career Effects of Graduating in a Recession.” American Economic Journal: Applied Economics 4(1): 1-29.
[44] Schaal, Edouard. 2015. “Uncertainty and Unemployment.” Unpublished draft, New
York University.
[45] Shimer, Robert. 2012. “Reassessing the Ins and Outs of Unemployment.” Review of
Economic Dynamics, 127-148.
[46] Song, Jae, David Price, Fatih Guvenen, Nicholas Bloom, and Till von Wachter. 2015.
“Firming Up Inequality.” NBER Working Paper #21199.
[47] Sorkin, Isaac. 2016. “Ranking Firms Using Revealed Preference.” Unpublished draft,
Stanford University.
[48] Topel, Robert, and Michael Ward. 1992. “Job Mobility and the Careers of Young Men.”
Quarterly Journal of Economics 107(2): 439-479.

36

Figure 1: Comparisons of Alternative Job-to-Job Flow Series

Notes: Shaded regions indicate NBER recession quarters. Data are seasonally adjusted using X-11.

37

Figure 2: Hires and Separations: Poaching vs. Flows to and from Non-Employment

Notes: Shaded regions indicate NBER recession quarters. Data are seasonally adjusted using X-11.

Figure 3: Cyclical Indicators: HP-Filtered and First-Differenced Unemployment Rate

Notes: Shaded regions indicate NBER recession quarters. Data are seasonally adjusted using X-11.

38

Figure 4: Hires and Separations: Poaching vs. Flows to and from Non-Employment, by Size

(a) Large Firms

(b) Small Firms
Notes: Shaded regions indicate NBER recession quarters. “Small” indicates that a firm has 0-50 employees. “Large” indicates that a business has 500+ employees. Data are seasonally adjusted using
39
X-11.

Figure 5: Hires and Separations: Poaching vs. Flows to and from Non-Employment, by
Wage

(a) High Wage Firms

(b) Low Wage Firms
Notes: Shaded regions indicate NBER recession quarters. “High” indicates that the firm is in the top
two quintiles of the wage distribution across firms. “Low” indicates that the firm is in the bottom quintile
of the wage distribution across firms. Data are seasonally adjusted using X-11.

40

Figure 6: Net Poaching for Large vs. Small Firms and High vs. Low Wage Firms

Notes: Shaded regions indicate NBER recession quarters. “Small” indicates that a firm has 0-50 employees. “Large” indicates that a business has 500+ employees. “High” indicates that the firm is in the
top two quintiles of the wage distribution across firms. “Low” indicates that the firm is in the bottom
quintile of the wage distribution across firms. Data are seasonally adjusted using X-11.

41

Figure 7: Cyclical Responses of Net Differentials by Firm Wage and Firm Size

(a) Net Poaching

(b) Net Non-Employment

(c) Net Job Flows
Notes: Point estimates are taken from Table 1.

42

Figure 8: Net Poaching by Firm Size and Firm Age

Notes: Shaded regions indicate NBER recession quarters. “Small” indicates that a firm has 0-50 employees. “Large” indicates that a business has 500+ employees. “Mature” indicates that the firm is 11
or more years old. “Young” indicates that the firm is 10 or less years old. Data are seasonally adjusted
using X-11.

43

Figure 9: Net Poaching: Observed versus Counterfactuals

Notes: Shaded regions indicate NBER recession quarters. Data are seasonally adjusted using X-11.

44

Figure 10: Decomposition of Earnings Changes from Movements Up and Down the Firm
Wage Ladder

Notes: Shaded regions indicate NBER recession quarters. Data are seasonally adjusted using X-11.

45

Table 1: Differential Net Flows
Dependent Variable

Deviation from HP Trend
National
State 1
State 2

First Difference
National
State 1
State 2

By Size: Large minus Small
Net Job Flows

−0.116**
(0.054)

−0.169***
(0.038)

−0.228**
(0.108)

0.156
(0.144)

0.972***
(0.232)

1.535***
(0.332)

Net Poaching
Flows

−0.051*
(0.027)

−0.070***
(0.017)

−0.068
(0.050)

−0.132*
(0.070)

0.195**
(0.080)

0.448***
(0.116)

Net Non-Emp.
Flows

−0.065
(0.041)

−0.099***
(0.027)

−0.160*
(0.080)

0.288***
(0.103)

0.777***
(0.158)

1.075***
(0.226)

By Wage: High Wage minus Low Wage
Net Job Flows

−0.269***
(0.073)

−0.235***
(0.035)

−0.006
(0.140)

−0.557***
(0.198)

0.198
(0.162)

0.687***
(0.240)

Net Poaching
Flows

−0.253***
(0.093)

−0.251***
(0.031)

−0.080
(0.077)

−1.460***
(0.157)

−0.706***
(0.080)

−0.205**
(0.094)

Net Non-Emp.
Flows

−0.016
(0.072)

0.016
(0.027)

0.074
(0.114)

0.903***
(0.139)

0.904***
(0.120)

0.891***
(0.194)

Notes: Coefficient on the cyclical variable with standard errors in parentheses. *, **, *** indicate statistical
significance at the 10 percent, 5 percent, and 1 percent levels, respectively. “Small” indicates that a firm
has 0-50 employees. “Large” indicates that a business has 500+ employees. “High” indicates that the firm
is in the top two quintiles of the wage distribution across firms. “Low” indicates that the firm is in the
bottom quintile of the wage distribution across firms. National specification uses national-quarter level data
(55 quarters from 1998:Q2-2011Q4), controls for a time trend and uses X-11 seasonal adjustments. State
specifications use state-quarter level data (55 quarters and 28 states) and cluster standard errors at the
state level. State 1 controls for seasonal dummies and a time trend. State 2 controls for a full set of time
dummies for every quarter. Standard errors clustered at the state level.

46

Table 2: Differential Net Flows, Size-Age Interactions, State-Level Panel
Dependent
Variable

Deviation from
HP Trend

First Difference

Large, Mature minus Small, Mature
Net Job Flows

−0.190***
(0.037)

0.816***
(0.238)

Net Poaching Flows

−0.099***
(0.021)

0.202**
(0.079)

Net Non-Employment
Flows

−0.091***
(0.027)

0.614***
(0.165)

Large, Mature minus Small, Young
Net Job Flows

−0.159***
(0.041)

1.178***
(0.227)

Net Poaching Flows

−0.041**
(0.016)

0.186**
(0.083)

Net Non-Employment
Flows

−0.118***
(0.029)

0.992***
(0.1503)

Notes: Coefficient on the cyclical variable with standard errors in
parentheses. *, **, *** indicate statistical significance at the 10 percent, 5 percent, and 1 percent levels, respectively. “Small” indicates
that a firm has 0-50 employees. “Large” indicates that a business
has 500+ employees. “Mature” indicates that the firm is 11 or more
years old. “Young” indicates that the firm is 10 or less years old. All
specifications control for state effects, seasonal effects, and a linear
time trend. Standard errors clustered at the state level.

47

Table 3: Differential Net Flows, Within Industry Relative Size, State-Level Panel
Dependent
Variable

Deviation from
HP Trend

First Difference

By Within Industry Size: Large minus Small
Net Job Flows

−0.179***
(0.038)

0.736***
(0.190)

Net Poaching Flows

−0.078***
(0.019)

0.175**
(0.067)

Net Non-Employment
Flows

−0.101***
(0.025)

0.561***
(0.129)

Notes: Coefficient on the cyclical variable with standard errors in
parentheses. *, **, *** indicate statistical significance at the 10 percent, 5 percent, and 1 percent levels, respectively. “Small” indicates
that a firm is in the lowest tercile of the industry’s firm size distribution. “Large” indicates that a firm is in the upper tercile of the
industry’s firm size distribution. Industry terciles are defined at the
NAICS sub-sector (3-digit) level. All specifications control for state
effects, seasonal effects, and a linear time trend. Standard errors
clustered at the state level.

48

Table 4: Transition Probabilities and Earnings Gains from Poaching Flows, by Firm Wage
Transition Probabilities:

Origin Firm Wage

Low
Medium
High

Destination Firm Wage
Low Medium High
22.1
14.1
5
11.8
15.7
8.4
3.5
6.5
12.8

Log Earnings Changes from Job-to-Job Flows:
Destination Firm Wage
Low Medium High
Low
12.9
36.9
57.5
Origin Firm Wage Medium −11.7
9.8
26.5
High
−34.4
−7.8
7.2
Notes: “Low” indicates that a firm is in bottom quintile of firm
wage distribution, “Medium” indicates that a firm is in 2nd and
third quintiles, and “High” indicates that a firm is in top 4th
and 5th quintiles of firm wage distribution. See equation (6)
for definition of the transition probabilities.

49

Table 5: Decomposition Exercise
Allowing Only
Transition Matrix
to Vary
High
Low

0.8671

0.7158

Allowing Only
Job-to-Job Flows
to Vary
High
Low

Allowing Only
Employment Shares
to Vary
High
Low

Correlation between observed and counterfactual
0.8875
0.6394
0.6225
0.3095
-0.4627
Regression of observed on counterfactual
0.7728
0.2751
0.3039
0.0137

-0.0429

Notes: Counterfactual exercises hold all components constant at their respective averages from 1998:Q2 to 2011:Q4. Regression estimates are the
covariance of the observed value with its counterfactual, divided by the
variance of the observed value.

50

A

No Earnings Gap Results

Table A.1: Differential Net Flows, Using No Earnings Gap Approach
Dependent
Variable

Deviation from HP Trend
National
State 1
State 2

First Difference
National
State 1
State 2

By Size: Large minus Small
Net Job Flows

−0.115**
(0.055)

−0.169***
(0.038)

−0.228**
(0.108)

0.162
(0.146)

0.972***
(0.232)

1.535***
(0.332)

Net Poaching
Flows

−0.013
(0.024)

0.0001
(0.010)

−0.013
(0.026)

−0.083
(0.060)

0.112**
(0.043)

0.236***
(0.064)

Net Non-Emp.
Flows

−0.102**
(0.044)

−0.169***
(0.032)

−0.214**
(0.090)

0.245**
(0.116)

0.860***
(0.191)

1.287***
(0.273)

By Wage: High Wage minus Low Wage
Net Job Flows

−0.268***
(0.073)

−0.235***
(0.035)

−0.006
(0.140)

−0.544***
(0.273)

0.198
(0.162)

0.687***
(0.240)

Net Poaching
Flows

−0.238***
(0.070)

−0.237***
(0.024)

−0.116*
(0.067)

−1.062***
(0.135)

−0.610***
(0.054)

−0.316***
(0.070)

Net Non-Emp.
Flows

−0.030
(0.060)

0.002
(0.028)

0.110
(0.119)

0.518***
(0.139)

0.809***
(0.145)

1.003***
(0.231)

Notes: Coefficient on the cyclical variable with standard errors in parentheses. *, **, *** indicate
statistical significance at the 10 percent, 5 percent, and 1 percent levels, respectively. “Small”
indicates that a firm has 0-50 employees. “Large” indicates that a business has 500+ employees.
“High” indicates that the firm is in the top two quintiles of the wage distribution across firms. “Low”
indicates that the firm is in the bottom quintile of the wage distribution across firms. National
specification uses national-quarter level data (55 quarters from 1998:Q2-2011Q4), controls for a
time trend and uses X-11 seasonal adjustments. State specifications use state-quarter level data (55
quarters and 28 states) and cluster standard errors at the state level. State 1 controls for seasonal
dummies and a time trend. State 2 controls for a full set of time dummies for every quarter.
Standard errors clustered at the state level.

51

B

Hires and Separations by Firm Size and Firm Wage
(Not intended for publication)
In this Appendix, we dig deeper into the findings of Table 1 in the text, which focused on

net job flows, net poaching flows, and net hires from non-employment. Here we investigate
the patterns of the underlying hires and separations by firm size and firm wage over the
business cycle.
Figures B.1 and B.2 present the estimates for these margins, analogous to Figure 7 in
the text. We examine the responsiveness of poaching hires and separations to each of the
cyclical indicators in Figure B.1 for the high wage-low wage comparison (left) and the large
firm-small firm comparison (right). We also include the cyclical net differential responses
that have been discussed above for easy reference. Figure B.2 presents analogous figures
for hires to and separations from non-employment. The full set of regression estimates are
included in Tables B.1, B.2, B.3., and B.4.
Figure B.1 focuses on poaching hires and separations. A ubiquitous finding is that poaching hires and separations decline in economic slumps and times of high unemployment. This
holds for high and low wage firms and large and small firms. However, the hypothesis of
a directional job ladder towards high wage and large firms implies that we should observe
poaching hires decline more at high wage and large firms while poaching separations decline
more at low wage and small firms. For firm wage, this prediction holds up well for the most
part. Poaching hires decline much more than poaching separations at high wage firms while
poaching separations tend to decline more than poaching hires at low wage firms. These
patterns are particularly pronounced during periods of economic contractions.
Patterns by firm size generally do not support this prediction. This is not surprising since
we have already found little evidence of a procyclical firm size job ladder. Figure B.1 helps us
understand that finding with detail about the hires and separation adjustment margins. We
find that both large and small firms exhibit broadly similar declines in poaching hires and
separations during periods of economic contractions and high unemployment. These broadly
similar patterns across firm type are what not one would expect if the firm characteristic
defining type were not a good proxy for ranking of firms in terms of the job ladder. That
52

is, consider any firm characteristic that is unrelated to the direction of the job ladder. For
that characteristic, poaching hires and separations should decline in contractions and times
of high unemployment given the general decline in job-to-job flows at such times. But there
should not be a systematic pattern by that characteristic. That is what we find by firm size.
Figure B.2 shows the hires and separation responses for non-employment. It is apparent the non-employment margin is much more relevant during times of economic contractions than times of high unemployment. Focusing on the latter, the greater decline in
net non-employment flows for low wage and small firms is driven both by a general tendency for greater declines in hires from non-employment and increases in separations to
non-employment at such firms.

53

Figure B.1: Cyclical Responses of Poaching Hires and Separations by Firm Size and Firm Wage

(b) Size, HP Unemp.

(c) Wage, FD Unemp.

(d) Size, FD Unemp.

54

(a) Wage, HP Unemp.

Notes: Hp are poaching hires and Sp are poaching separations. High refers to firms in the top two pay quintiles; low refers to firms in the
bottom quintile. Large refers to firms employing 500 or more employees; small refers to firms employing 50 or fewer employees. Figures in the top
panel report responsiveness to the HP-filtered unemployment rate (HP Unemp.); the bottom panel reports responsiveness to the first-differenced
unemployment rate (FD Unemp.). Point estimates from Appendix Tables B.1 and B.2.

Figure B.2: Cyclical Responses of Non-Employment Hires and Separations by Firm Size and Firm Wage

(b) Size, HP Unemp.

(c) Wage, FD Unemp.

(d) Size, FD Unemp.

55

(a) Wage, HP Unemp.

Notes: Hn are hires from non-employment and Sn are separations to non-employment. High refers to firms in the top two pay quintiles; low refers
to firms in the bottom quintile. Large refers to firms employing 500 or more employees; small refers to firms employing 50 or fewer employees.
Figures in the top panel report responsiveness to the HP-filtered unemployment rate (HP Unemp.); the bottom panel reports responsiveness to
the first-differenced unemployment rate (FD Unemp.). Point estimates from Appendix Tables B.3 and B.4.

Table B.1: Poaching Hires and Separations and Net Differential, by Wage
Dependent Variable

Deviation from HP Trend
National
State 1
State 2

First Difference
National
State 1
State 2

56

Poaching Hires:
High Wage

−0.570***
(0.051)

−0.578***
(0.033)

−0.476***
(0.090)

−0.674***
(0.225)

−0.406***
(0.061)

−0.317***
(0.083)

Poaching Hires:
Low Wage

−0.891***
(0.065)

−0.905***
(0.050)

−0.795***
(0.110)

−0.245
(0.395)

−0.366***
(0.080)

−0.555***
(0.116)

Poaching Separations:
High Wage

−0.444***
(0.033)

−0.432***
(0.028)

−0.347***
(0.077)

0.297*
(0.176)

−0.100**
(0.040)

−0.050
(0.056)

Poaching Separations:
Low Wage

−1.019***
(0.090)

−1.010***
(0.050)

−0.745***
(0.090)

−1.328***
(0.391)

−0.765***
(0.089)

−0.495***
(0.128)

Net Poaching:
High Minus Low

−0.253***
(0.093)

−0.251***
(0.031)

−0.080
(0.077)

−1.460***
(0.157)

−0.706***
(0.080)

−0.205**
(0.094)

Notes: Coefficient on the cyclical variable with standard errors in parentheses. *, **, *** indicate statistical
significance at the 10 percent, 5 percent, and 1 percent levels, respectively. “High” indicates that the firm
is in the top two quintiles of the wage distribution across firms. “Low” indicates that the firm is in the
bottom quintile of the wage distribution across firms. National specification uses national-quarter level data
(55 quarters from 1998:Q2-2011Q4), controls for a time trend and uses X-11 seasonal adjustments. State
specifications use state-quarter level data (55 quarters and 28 states) and cluster standard errors at the state
level. State 1 controls for seasonal dummies and a time trend. State 2 controls for a full set of time dummies
for every quarter. Standard errors clustered at the state level.

Table B.2: Poaching Hires and Separations and Net Differential, by Size
Dependent Variable

Deviation from HP Trend
National
State 1
State 2

First Difference
National
State 1
State 2

57

Poaching Hires:
Large

−0.743***
(0.043)

−0.748***
(0.033)

−0.563***
(0.076)

−0.636**
(0.275)

−0.291***
(0.058)

−0.191**
(0.078)

Poaching Hires:
Small

−0.569***
(0.039)

−0.609***
(0.040)

−0.557**
(0.076)

−0.489**
(0.217)

−0.524***
(0.088)

−0.635***
(0.118)

Poaching Separations:
Large

−0.724***
(0.051)

−0.689***
(0.027)

−0.415***
(0.058)

0.745***
(0.223)

−0.355***
(0.048)

−0.223***
(0.068)

Poaching Separations:
Small

−0.601***
(0.046)

−0.617***
(0.037)

−0.478***
(0.057)

−0.761***
(0.272)

−0.392***
(0.058)

−0.218***
(0.077)

−0.051*
(0.027)

−0.070***
(0.017)

−0.068
(0.050)

−0.132*
(0.086)

0.195**
(0.080)

0.448***
(0.116)

Net Poaching:
Large Minus Small

Notes: Coefficient on the cyclical variable with standard errors in parentheses. *, **, *** indicate statistical
significance at the 10 percent, 5 percent, and 1 percent levels, respectively. “Small” indicates that a firm has
0-50 employees. “Large” indicates that a business has 500+ employees. National specification uses nationalquarter level data (55 quarters from 1998:Q2-2011Q4), controls for a time trend and uses X-11 seasonal
adjustments. State specifications use state-quarter level data (55 quarters and 28 states) and cluster standard
errors at the state level. State 1 controls for seasonal dummies and a time trend. State 2 controls for a full
set of time dummies for every quarter. Standard errors clustered at the state level.

Table B.3: Non-Employment Hires and Separations and Net Differential, by Wage
Dependent Variable

Deviation from HP Trend
National
State 1
State 2

First Difference
National
State 1
State 2

58

Non-Employment
Hires: High Wage

0.026
(0.035)

0.007
(0.020)

−0.108***
(0.035)

−0.458***
(0.066)

−0.382***
(0.047)

−0.316***
(0.078)

Non-Employment
Hires:Low Wage

−0.157*
(0.081)

−0.233***
(0.030)

−0.606***
(0.075)

−1.202***
(0.139)

−1.325***
(0.129)

−1.400***
(0.204)

Non-Employment
Separations: High Wage

0.182***
(0.038)

0.142***
(0.028)

−0.133*
(0.070)

0.672***
(0.073)

0.365***
(0.044)

0.171***
(0.060)

Non-Employment
Separations:Low Wage

−0.017
(0.081)

−0.083*
(0.048)

−0.560***
(0.148)

0.831***
(0.174)

0.324***
(0.087)

−0.022
(0.124)

Net Non-Emp.:
High Minus Low

−0.016
(0.072)

0.016
(0.027)

0.074
(0.114)

0.903***
(0.139)

0.904***
(0.120)

0.891***
(0.194)

Notes: Coefficient on the cyclical variable with standard errors in parentheses. *, **, *** indicate statistical
significance at the 10 percent, 5 percent, and 1 percent levels, respectively. “High” indicates that the firm
is in the top two quintiles of the wage distribution across firms. “Low” indicates that the firm is in the
bottom quintile of the wage distribution across firms. National specification uses national-quarter level data
(55 quarters from 1998:Q2-2011Q4), controls for a time trend and uses X-11 seasonal adjustments. State
specifications use state-quarter level data (55 quarters and 28 states) and cluster standard errors at the state
level. State 1 controls for seasonal dummies and a time trend. State 2 controls for a full set of time dummies
for every quarter. Standard errors clustered at the state level.

Table B.4: Non-Employment Hires and Separations and Net Differential, by Size

59

Dependent Variable

Deviation from HP Trend
National
State 1
State 2

First Difference
National
State 1
State 2

Non-Employment
Hires: Large

−0.128**
(0.054)

−0.144***
(0.023)

−0.238***
(0.037)

−0.824***
(0.093)

−0.534***
(0.048)

−0.342***
(0.077)

Non-Employment
Hires: Small

0.075
(0.050)

−0.007
(0.033)

−0.321***
(0.094)

−0.776***
(0.079)

−1.157***
(0.137)

−1.375***
(0.209)

Non-Employment
Separations: Large

0.026
(0.041)

0.022
(0.035)

−0.160*
(0.084)

0.559***
(0.074)

0.242***
(0.059)

0.042
(0.079)

Non-Employment
Separations: Small

0.163**
(0.073)

0.060
(0.042)

−0.403***
(0.139)

0.895***
(0.109)

0.395***
(0.066)

0.084
(0.099)

Net Non-Emp.:
Large Minus Small

−0.065
(0.041)

−0.099***
(0.027)

−0.160*
(0.080)

0.288***
(0.103)

0.777***
(0.158)

1.075***
(0.226)

Notes: Coefficient on the cyclical variable with standard errors in parentheses. *, **, *** indicate statistical
significance at the 10 percent, 5 percent, and 1 percent levels, respectively. “Small” indicates that a firm
has 0-50 employees. “Large” indicates that a business has 500+ employees. National specification uses
national-quarter level data (55 quarters from 1998:Q2-2011Q4), controls for a time trend and uses X-11
seasonal adjustments. State specifications use state-quarter level data (55 quarters and 28 states) and cluster
standard errors at the state level. State 1 controls for seasonal dummies and a time trend. State 2 controls
for a full set of time dummies for every quarter. Standard errors clustered at the state level.

