                            NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                         EXCHANGE CONTROLS, DEVALUATIONS
                            AND REAL EXCHANGE RATES:
                          THE LATIN AMERICAN EXPERIENCE




                                Sebastian Edwards




                             Working Paper No. 2348




                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                            1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                               Cambridge, MA 02138
                                   August 1987




A previous version of this paper was presented at the conference on the Twentieth
Anniversary of Columbia's Foreign Exchange Statute, Bogota, Columbia, June 15-16,
1987.  I have benefited from very helpful comments by Alejandra Cox-Edwards, Jose
Antonio Ocampo, and Miguel Savastano. David Gould, Miguel Savastano and Roglio
Arellano provided able research assistance. This research was partially financed
by UCLA's Academic Senate and by the National Science Foundation. The research
reported here is part of the NBER's research program in International Studies.
Any opinions expressed are those of the author and not those of the National Bureau
of Economic Research.
                                               NBER Working Paper #2348
                                               August 1987

        Exchange Controls, Devaluations and Real Exchange Rates:
                      The Latin American Experience

                                ABSTRACT

    This   paper deals with the anatomy of devaluation in Latin America. In

an effort to understand the economics surrounding the causes and

consequences of exchange rate crises, eighteen devaluation episodes that

took place between 1962 and 1982 are investigated in detail. The paper

focuses on: (1) the relation between (inconsistent) macroeconomics policies

and exchange rate crises; (2) the role of real exchange rate overvaluation

in the precipitation of balance of payment crises under pre-determined

nominal exchange rates; (3) the role of exchange controls, multiple exchange

rates and black markets in the period preceding devaluations; and (4) the

effectiveness of nominal devaluations as a way to restore real exchange rate

equilibrium. A distinction is made between stepwise devaluations and

crawling peg regime. It was found that historically most stepwise

devaluations have had difficulty in sustaining a real devaluation over the

medium term. Countries that adopted a crawling peg have generally been able

to maintain a higher real exchange rate. In many cases, however, this has

been achieved at the cost of substantial inflation.



                                       Sebastian Edwards
                                       Department of Economics
                                       University of California, Los Angeles
                                       405 Hilgard Avenue
                                       Los Angeles, CA 90024-1477

                                        (213) 825-5304
                                     Table of Contents

                                                                            Page

I.    Introduction                                                            1

II.   Macroeconomic Policy and Real Exchange Rates Under Alternative          2
      Nominal Exchange Rate Regimes

      11.1      Macroeconomic Policies and Real Exchange Rates Under          3
                Predetermined Nominal Exchange Rates

      11.2      Macroeconomic Policies and the RER with Dual Nominal         6
                Rates and in the Presence of Parallel Nominal Exchange Rates

      11.3      Nominal Devaluations and Adjustment                          11

III. Balance of Payments Crises, Exchange Controls and Devaluations          15
      in Latin America

      111.1 Macroeconomic Policies and Balance of Payments Crises            16

      iii.z Excnange Controis, irae Restrictions,                 Markets    ZI
             and Balance of Payments Crisis

IV.   The "Effectiveness" of Nominal Devaluations in Latin America           24

      IV.l      Nominal Devaluations and Real Devaluations                   25

      iv.z      Devajuations, xcnange uontrois ana F'ayment Restrictions     Z9

      IV.3      International    Reserves, the Current Account, and          31
                Devaluation

      IV.4      Macroeconomic Policies                                       33

V.    Concluding Remarks                                                     35

Appendix   -   Control   Countries                                           38

      References                                                             39
                                     1



I. Introduction

     This paper deals with the anatomy of devaluations in Latin America. In

an effort to understand the economics surrounding the causes and conse-

quences of exchange rate crises, eighteen devaluation episodes that took

place between 1962 and 1982 are investigated in detail. The paper focuses

on; (1) the relation between (inconsistent) macroeconomic policies and

exchange rate crises; (2) the role of real exchange rate overvaluation in

the precipitation of balance of payment crises under pre-determined nominal

exchange rates; (3) the role of exchange controls, multiple exchange rates

and black markets in the period preceding devaluations; and (4) the

effectiveness of nominal devaluations as a way to restore real exchange rate

equilibrium. Here a distinction is made between stepwise devaluations and

devaluations that are followed by a crawling peg regime.

     The empirical approach followed in this paper consists on analyzing in

detail the evolution of a number of key variables during the three years

preceding and the three years following the 18 devaluation episodes. In

doing this, an effort is made to detect regularities across countries that

will allow us to infer some general rules relating to the causes and effects

of devaluations. At the same time care is taken to point out peculiarities

that help better understand the exchange rate history of a particular

country. A control group consisting of 24 developing nations that main-

tained a fixed nominal exchange rate for at least ten years was constructed

and its behavior compared to that of the devaluing countries. In these

comparisons non-parametric tests were used. Although this episodic strategy

for empirical inquiry departs significantly from the current practice of

using almost exclusively different regression techniques, it has modern

precedents in Cooper's (1971) well-known article on devaluation and, more
                                     2




recently, on Harberger and Edwards' (1982) study on balance of payments

crises) The episodic approach adopted in this paper has both advantages

and drawbacks. On the positive side it allows us to look at each individual

case, detecting peculiarities and regularities. It also permits us to deal

with issues that are very difficult to accurately quantify and, thus,

include in any type of regression analysis, such as the evolution of

exchange controls and quantitative restrictions. On the other hand, a well

known drawback of this empirical strategy, is that by focusing on "before"

and "after," it is not always easy to detect causality among variables. For

this reason, from time to time and in order to shed additional light into

the problem at hand, the episodic approach is supplemented with a regression

analysis.

     The paper starts, in Section II, with a brief review of the analytical

aspects related to the balance of payments crises and to devaluation. This

analytical discussion sets the stage for the detailed empirical analysis of

Sections III and IV.


II. Macroeconomic Policy. Real Exchange Rates and Devaluations Under
     Alternative Nominal Exchange Rate Regimes

     A fundamental principle of open economy macroeconomics is that in order

to have a sustainable and stable macroeconomic equilibrium it is necessary

for monetary and fiscal policies to be consistent with the chosen nominal

exchange rate regime. This means that the selection of an exchange rate

system imposes certain limitations on the extent of macropolicies. If this


     1Cooper (1971), however, didn't deal with the period preceding the
devaluations. Moreover, contrary to this study, and to Harberger and
Edwards (1982), Cooper didn't use a control group for comparison. Recently,
Edwards (1985c) and Kamin (1985) have also used the episodic approach, as
have some of the studies that have analyzed the effectiveness of IMF
programs.
                                          3




consistency is violated severe disequilibrium situations, which are usually

reflected on the real exchange rate misalignment, and in an eventual balance

of payments crises, will take place. In this section we briefly discuss the

interaction between macroeconomic policies, real exchange rate behavior,

exchange controls and balance of payment crisis. We also analyze the role

of devaluations in the adjustment process. In the discussion we make a

distinction between two alternative nominal exchange rate regimes: (1)

predetermined nominal exchange rates, including fixed rates and its variants

such as crawling peg and managed rates; and (2) nonunified exchange rate

systems, including dual rates and the case where a significant parallel

foreign exchange market coexists with the official rate.

        11.1 Macroeconomic Policies and Real Exchange Rates Under
              Predetermined Nominal Exchange Rates

        Perhaps the case of a "high" fiscal deficit is the most clear example

of macro and exchange rate inconsistencies under fixed nominal rates. In

most developing countries fiscal imbalances are partially or wholly financed

by money creation. The inflation "required" to finance a fiscal deficit

equal to a fraction 6 of GDP is given by:

                                                                              (1)


where    it   is   the rate of inflation required to finance the government

deficit, and A is the ratio of high-powered money to CDP.2 If, for

example, a country has a fiscal deficit of 8% of CDP and its stock of base

money represents 20% of GDP, the required rate of inflation will be 40% per

annum. If the required rate of inflation is as high as in this example,



     2The increase in high power money required to finance a deficit equal
to a fraction 8 of CD? can be written as:     SM/P = 6G. In equilibrium
LM/M is equal to the rate of inflation, and thus equation (1) follows.
                                    4



there will generally be an inconsistency between the fiscal deficit and the

maintenance of a fixed nominal exchange rate. Since the domestic price of

nontradables increases at a rate approximately equal to the rate of infla-

tion, and the domestic price of tradables grows at approximately the rate of

world inflation,3 a real appreciation will take place every period.

     Under predetermined nominal exchange rates, all increases in domestic

credit that exceed the growth in the demand for domestic money will be

inconsistent with the maintenance of the fixed nominal rate. These excesses

of domestic credit creation above money demand growth will be translated

into an excess demand for tradable goods, nontradable goods, and financial

assets. While the excess demand of tradables will be reflected in a higher

trade deficit (or lower surplus), in a loss of international reserves, and

in an increase in (net) foreign borrowing above its long run sustainable

level, the excess demand for nontradables will be translated into higher

prices for those goods, and consequently into a real exchange rate apprecia-

tion. If there are no changes in the fundamental real determinants of the

equilibrium real exchange rate this real appreciation induced by the

expansive domestic credit policy will represent a departure of the actual

RER from its equilibrium value, or real exchange rate misalignment (i.e.,

overvaluation).

     If the inconsistent macropolicies are not reversed, the drainage of

reserves and the real exchange rate appreciation will continue. Typically,

the authorities will try to stop this process by imposing exchange controls,



     3The domestic price of tradables is equal to T EP* r, where
is the international price of tradables, E is the nomina' exchange rate
and r is one plus the tax on tradables. If the exchange rate is fixed and
there are no changes in r,       will increase at approximately the rate of
world inflation.
                                     5




hiking tariffs and imposing quantitative controls. A number of times this

will result in the emergence of black markets on foreign exchange rate. In

section 11.2 below we discuss the functioning of this kind of system. These

policies, however, will only be able to delay the crisis. Eventually, the

country will "run out" of reserves and/or its real exchange rate will reach

a lower bound, at which point a devaluation, and possibly other corrective

policies will be implemented.4

     The consistency between monetary and exchange rate policies is not only

needed under fixed rates, but also under most types of predetermined and

managed nominal exchange rates such as "active" crawling pegs, where the

economic authorities preannounce the rate of devaluation for a given period

into the future. Perhaps Argentina in the late l970s is the most notorious

recent case of an inconsistent fiscal and crawling nominal exchange rate

policies. During that period the Argentinian government implemented the by-

now famous preannounced rate of devaluation or "tablita" as a means to reduce

inflation. However, the preannounced rate of crawl was clearly inconsistent

with the inflation tax required to finance the fiscal deficit (Calvo 1986).

This inconsistency not only generated a real appreciation but also substan-

tial speculative activity, where the public basically bet on when the

"tablita" would be abandoned.

     In a "passive" crawling peg regime, the monetary authorities adjust the

parity periodically, without following written or rigid rules. The extent of

exchange rate devaluation in each period responds to pragmatic considera-

tions, including inflation differentials, level of international reserves and

the behavior of the terms of trade. In a way, under this type of crawling


     4There is a vast literature on the theoretical determinants of exchange
rate crises. See, for example, Krugman (1979) and Calvo (1987).
                                        6




peg the need for "consistency" is somewhat reduced, since the rate of crawl

can always "accommodate" the monetary policy, in a way to avoid RER over-

valuation and reserves losses. If this is done, however, other macroeconomic

objectives, like reasonable price stability, would be seriously affected.

     11.2 Macroeconomic Policies and the RER with Dual Nominal Rates and in
           the Presence of Parallel Nominal Exchange Rate Markets

    Nonunified (or multiple) nominal exchange rates have traditionally had

some appeal for the developing countries. Under this type of system

different international transactions are subject to differential nominal

exchange rates, giving rise to the possibility of having more than one real

exchange rate.5

     Under this type of regime, the relation between macroeconomic policies

and the rest of the economy will depend on the nature of the multiple rates

system. If, for example, the multiple rates regime consists of two (or more)

predetermined (i.e., fixed) nominal rates, the system will work almost in the

same way as under unified predetermined nominal rates. This is because

multiple fixed nominal exchange rates are equivalent to a unified rate system

with taxes on certain external transactions.6 In this case, as with unified

predetermined rates, inconsistent macroeconomic policies will result in loss

of international reserves, a rate of domestic inflation that will exceed

world inflation, and in real exchange rate overvaluation. This situation, of

course, will be unsustainable in the long run and the authorities will have

to introduce corrective macropolicies.




     5There is a growing theoretical literature on the effects of
macroeconomic policies under nonunified nominal rates. See Aizenman (1985),
Dornbusch (1986a,b).

     6See,   for example,   the discussion in Dornbusch (1986a).
                                       7




    A different kind of nonunified nominal exchange rates consists of a

fixed official rate for current account transactions and an (official)

freely fluctuating rate for capital account transactions. The main purpose

of this system is to delink the real side of the economy from the effects of

supposedly highly unstable capital movements. In this dual exchange rate

system, portfolio decisions are highly influenced by the differential

between the free and fixed rates or exchange rate premium. The private

sector decisions on what proportion of wealth to hold in the form of foreign

currency denominated assets is strongly affected by the expected rate of

devaluation of the free rate. The free rate, in turn, will be highly

responsive to expectations about future events.7

     Under this type of dual exchange rate system, even if no current

account transactions slip into the free rate, changes in the free nominal

rate will still exercise an indirect effect on the relative price of

tradables or real exchange rate.8 Consider, for example, the case of a

sustained increase of domestic credit exceeding the increase in the demand

for domestic money. As before this will provoke an excess demand for goods

and financial assets. As a result of this policy there will be a decline in

the stock of international reserves, an increase in the price of nontradable

goods, and consequently a real appreciation. In addition there will be an

increase in the demand for foreign assets, which will result in a nominal

devaluation of the free rate, and in changes in the domestic interest rate.

In this case, if there are no capital controls and we assume risk

     7.
      This   type of regime has been recently discussed by Dornbusch (1986b).

     8Notice that if no current account transactions are subject to the
free rate the relevant RER - - that is the appropriate measure of
competitiveness -- is the fixed rate RER. This is because this is the one
at which all goods transactions can take place.
                                    8




neutrality, the following relation will hold between domestic interest rates

(i) and foreign interest rates (i*).     =   (e/f)   i* +   (f/f)   where e is

the fixed nominal exchanger rate, f is the free rate and (i/f) is the

expected change in f. The devaluation of the freely fluctuating rate will,

in turn, have a secondary influence over the official real exchange rate via

a wealth effect (Dornbusch, 1986b). The bottom line, however, is that in

this case inconsistent macropolicies will eventually be also unsustainable,

as international reserves are drained. By isolating the current from the

capital account, all this type of dual rates system can hope to do is delay

the eventual crisis.

     The analysis is somewhat more complex if in addition to the financial

side some current account transactions are subject to the free nominal

exchange rate. In this case we will have two real exchange rates -      - in
addition to the traditional concept we will have a second RER defined as the

price of tradables subject to the free nominal rate relative to nontrad-

ables. In this case macropolicies will affect both real rates.9 For

example, an increase in domestic credit that exceeds growth of the demand

for domestic money will now result in lower reserves, higher prices on

nontradables, a higher "free" market nominal exchange rate, and increased

foreign indebtedness. The higher price of non-tradables will generate a

decline (i.e., appreciation) in the real exchange rate applicable to those

goods subject to the official foreign exchange market. What will happen to

the RER relevant to those goods subject to the free nominal rate? This will

depend on whether as a result of the higher rate of growth of domestic

credit the nominal exchange rate determined in the free market will increase



     9Dornbusch (1986b) analyzes this case in some detail.
                                         9




by more or less than the price of non-tradable goods. If the same type of

behavior as under a freely floating rate is observed, we will likely

encounter a nominal exchange rate overshooting in this market, with the free

rate nominal exchange rate increasing - -     at   least on impact - -   by   more than

the price of domestic goods. The real exchange rate applicable to this type

of good will, at least in the short run, depreciate. It is perfectly

possible, then, that under this dual exchange rate system an expansionary

monetary policy results in a real appreciation for a subset of goods --

those   subject to the official market - -,   and   a real depreciation for a

different subset of goods - -   those   subject to the free market for the

nominal exchange rate.

     Perhaps the most complex type of regime consists of an official pegged

(or predetermined) nominal exchange rate that coexists with an illegal or

quasi-illegal parallel market for foreign exchange. Although when there are

exchange controls some kind of black market for foreign exchange always

exist, there are times when this parallel market becomes very significant,

and even dominant.10 Although in some respects the combination of a fixed

official rate with a parallel market works in a way similar to the dual

rates regime discussed above, there are some important differences. First,

to the extent that the black market is illegal, the expectations and costs

of detection play an important role in determining the premium or difference

between the official and freely determined nominal exchange rates. Second,

expectations regarding political events are fundamentally important, since

they reflect possible future changes in the extent of exchange controls, and


     10The extent and importance of the black market is basically determined
by whether authorities allow some changes in international reserves. Under
complete rationing the authorities have no reserves, and legal export
proceeds are the only source of foreign exchange.
                                    10




other important policies. Third, in this case exporters have to decide in

each period what proportion of their foreign exchange earnings to surrender

legally and what proportion to bring into the country via the parallel

market) This decision, of course, will partially depend on the level of

the premium itself)2

     In the extreme case of a generalized parallel market with complete

rationing at the official rate, an increase in the rate of domestic credit

creation will result in higher domestic prices and in an increase in the

black market premium. Since the Central Bank has already lost all its

international reserves, the increase in domestic credit will not be

translated, as before, in losses of the official stock of foreign exchange.

This expansive monetary policy will result in an appreciation of the

official real exchange rate as well as in a decline of the relative price of

exports surrendered via the official market relative to those that use the

parallel market)3 As a result, a relatively smaller proportion of export

proceeds will be surrendered at the official rate, making the crisis even

worse. Eventually, the inconsistent macropolicies will become unsustain-


     111n a way exporters also face this decision under an official dual
system. In that case it will still pay to convert export proceedings at the
higher free rate.

     12An important question in the case of generalized black markets
relates to determining what is the marginal exchange rate. Under these
circumstances the black market rate will generally be the marginal rate for
the import and import competing sectors. In the case of exports, the
marginal rate will depend on the institutional arrangement and on whether
exporters "have" to surrender a certain proportion or a certain foreign
exchange amount of their export proceeds, via the official market. If a
certain proportion of these proceeds has to be surrendered, the marginal
rate for exporters is a weighted average between the official and the black
market rate. If on the contrary exporters have to surrender a given number
of dollars, the black market rate is the marginal one.

     13Depending on expectations the nominal exchange rate determined in the
parallel market can increase by more or by less than domestic prices.
                                       11




able, and corrective policies will have to be implemented. At this point

the issue of nominal exchange rate unification may become important, since

the authorities will try to devalue the nominal rate, and eliminate the

(legal or de facto) multiple rates system.

     11.3. Nominal Devaluations and Adjustment

     Unavoidably, the maintenance of inconsistent macro-policies will

eventually result in a devaluation and an attempt to generate a macroeco-

nomic adjustment. Nominal devaluations usually have a dual objective:

(a) they seek to generate a real devaluation or improvement in the degree

of international competitiveness of the country; and (b) via that RER

devaluation they seek to provoke an improvement in the external position

(i.e., level of international reserves, and/or current account) of the

country. Whether a devaluation will actually be successful will depend on a

number of factors, the most important being the initial conditions and the

accompanying macroeconomic poilcies.
                                       l4,,.
                                          voviousiy,    since i.

(where RER is the real exchange rate,       E is the nominal exchange rate, P

is tlthe world price index and N is the domestic price index) a nominal

devaluation that increases E will only be effective in moving the RER

towards its higher equilibrium value if          does not go up in the same

proportion as E.

     In theory, and under the most common conditions, nominal devaluations

will affect an economy via three main channels)5 First, a devaluation will


     14The initial conditions include whether there are distortions stemming
from the existence of parallel markets for foreign exchange. See Appendix
VIII for a brief review of alternative theories of devaluation.

          some cases, however, if there are extensive quantitative import
controls and parallel markets some of this effects will be different. See
the discussion below.
                                    12




have an exienditure reducing effect. To the extent that as a result of the

devaluation the domestic price level goes up, there will be a negative

wealth effect that will induce the real value of domestic currency denomina-

ted nominal assets, including domestic money. However, if there are assets

denominated in foreign currency, there may also be a positive wealth effect.

If the negative wealth effect dominates, there will be a reduction in

expenditure on all goods including tradables, and there will be a reduction

in the trade deficit. Second, a nominal devaluation will tend to have an

expenditure switching effect.16 If the nominal devaluation succeeds in

altering the relative price of tradables to nontradables, or real exchange

rate, there will be a substitution in expenditure away from tradables, and a

substitution in production towards tradables. The combination of these two

effects will result in an improved external situation for the country.

While the expenditure switching effect results in an increased demand for

nontradables, the expenditure reducing effect generates a decline in demand

for those goods. Depending on which of these effects dominate there will be

an increase or a decline for the demand for domestic home goods. Third, a

devaluation will result in an increase in the domestic currency price of

imported intermediate inputs. This will result in an upward shift of the

supply schedules for the final goods including nontradables)7

     An important characteristic of nominal devaluation is that, under

unified nominal exchange rates and with no quantitative restrictions, it is

not discriminatory, and increases the domestic (nominal) price of jJ.

     16        .
          say it will "tend to have" because this assumes that the nominal
          We
devaluation is translated into a real devaluation.

     17The combination of these effects may very well result in a decline of
aggregate output as a consequence of the devaluation. See Edwards, 1986.
                                     13




tradable goods, services, and assets. This, however, will not be the case

if, as it usually happens in the developing countries, there is a parallel

(or dual) market, and the devaluation refers to the official rate only. In

this case, only those transactions affected by the official rate will be

directly affected by the change in the official exchange rate. Of course,

since the parallel (or free) market will be indirectly affected by the

official devaluation, transactions conducted in that market will be subject

to an indirect effect. Notice, however, that in general it is not possible

to know a priori whether an official rate devaluation will increase or

reduce the parallel market premium. Naturally, with parallel markets there

will be additional relative price changes, with the price of transactions

subject to the official rate changing relative to those subject to the
                 18
parallel rate.

     When there are quantitative restrictions (QRs) on imports, devaluations

will also fail to generate a uniform increase in the price of tradables. In

fact, in this case nominal devaluations may have quite a different effect

than in those circumstances where tariffs are used to restrict imports.19

In the case of QRs the domestic price of the importable will be endogenous,

in the sense that it will take whatever level is required for that market to

clear, in this case a nominal devaluation will tend to have no direct

(first round) effect on the domestic price of those importables subject to


     180f course, the devaluation itself will affect the parallel rate.
Theoretically speaking an official devaluation can generate either an
increase or decline in the black market premium. The empirical evidence
indicates that following the nominal devaluation there is usually a drop in
the parallel market premium. An important question when there are parallel
markets refers to exchange rate unification. Lizondo (1986) has shown that
the equilibrium nominal rate can be either above or below the black market.

     19See Krueger (1981).
                                    14



QR rationing. However, since the price of exportables continues to be

tied, via the exchange rate, to its world price, the devaluation will

increase their price relative to rationed importables. Nonrationed import-

ables will also be affected by the devaluation and their relative price

relative both to rationed importables and nontradables will tend to change.

     Whether a nominal devaluation will be successful will depend on:   (a)

accompanying policies implemented alongside with the devaluation, and (b)

on the initial conditions prevailing prior to the devaluation.

     Let us first focus on the initial conditions. If the country imple-

ments a devaluation at a time when the real exchange rate is greatly

misaligned (i.e., overvalued) the nominal devaluation will generally be

helpful to restore equilibrium in the external sector. Under these initial

conditions, a nominal devaluation, if accompanied by the appropriate macro-

policies, will generally have a medium to long run positive effect on the

real exchange rate. In practice what the nominal devaluation will do is

help the country follow a smoother transition path toward reestablishing

equilibrium in the external sector (see Edwards 1987). If the initial

condition of real exchange rate misalignment has been generated by unsus-

tainable macroeconomic policies, a discrete once-and-for-all devaluation

will only have a lasting effect on the real rate if at the same time of the

devaluation the unsustainable policies are corrected. If, however, the

initial condition is one of equilibrium a nominal devaluation will have no

medium or long run effect.

     The second set of factors that determine the effectiveness of a real

devaluation is the accompanying policies. In order for the nominal

devaluation to achieve a real depreciation it is critical that the nominal

devaiuatior is     accompanied by expansive credit (or monetary) policies,
                                    15




expensive fiscal policies, and wage indexation policies.

     It should be noted, however, that even if the accompanying macro-

policies are restrictive, nominal devaluations will never result in

eguiproportional real devaluations in the medium to longer run. The reason

is that there are a number of forces that work towards generating (at least)

a partial offsetting increase in the price level P. The most obvious of

these forces is related to the role of imported intermediate inputs. The

nominal devaluation will result in higher domestic prices of imported

inputs, and consequently of the cost of producing domestic goods. This

effect, that partially offsets the effect of the nominal devaluation will be

more important as time passes. That is, it will generally be expected that

the effect of the nominal devaluation on the real exchange rate will be

partially eroded through time. On impact of the nominal devaluation will

result in a high (and almost equiproportional) increase in the real exchange

rate. As time passes, the prices of imported goods, and in some cases wages

react to the nominal devaluation, the effect on the real exchange rate will

be partially eroded.


III. Balance of Payments Crises. Exchange Controls and Devaluations
      in Latin America

     In this and the following section we analyze in detail 18 episodes of

balance of payments and devaluation crises in Latin America between 1962 and

1982. This investigation focuses on three important issues: (a) the role

of "inconsistent" macroeconomic policies in the precipitation of the devalu-

ation crises;   (b) the role of exchange controls before and after each of

these crises; and (c) the effectiveness of nominal devaluations as a means

to restore equilibrium and competitiveness (this is the subject of Section

IV). Table 1 contains data on the 18 devaluation episodes. All of these
                                    TABLE 1

            Devaluation Crises in Selected Latin American Countries



                                              nf   flvaluation     (Percentazel

                         Year of      One Year          Two. Years         Three Years
                Year     Deval.      After Dev.         After Dev.         After Dev.
Country

A. Steiwise    t)v 1 witions
                1970       25.000      0.000                 0,00                 0.000
Argentina
                1972       66.667      0.000                 0.00                 0.000
Bolivia
                1979       25.000      0.000                 0.00             684.000
Bolivia
                1962       34.328      0.000                 0.00                 50.000
Colombia
Colombia        1965       50.000      0.000                16 . 74                7.107
                                                             ,   ,.(\
                                                             U . VU
                                                                                   r
Costa Rica      1974       28.872      o . uuu

Ecuador         1961       20.000      0.000                 0.00                  0.000
                1970       38.889      0.000                 0.00                  0.000
Ecuador
                1979       43.034      0.000                 0.00                  0.000
Nicaragua
Peru            1967       44.403      0.000                 0.00                  0.000

Venezuela       1964       38.199       0.000                0.00                  0.000


B. Devaluations Followed by Crawling Peg
Bolivia         1982      684.000     155.102             1700.00

Chile           1982       88.282      19.202               46.51                 43.372

Colombia        1967       16.741       7.107                 5.75                 6.947

Ecuador         1982       32.600      63.198               24.17                 42 .   538

Mexico           1976      59.600      13.965               -0.05                  0.343

Mexico           1982     267.837      49.181               33 .79                93.031

Peru             1975      16.279      54.222               87 .   90             50.460


Source: See text.
                                     16




countries devalued their currencies in at least 15 percent after having

maintained a fixed (official) exchange rate with respect to the U.S. dollar

for two or more years. Eleven of them implemented a stepwise devaluation,

where after the exchange rate adjustment they attempted to once again fix

the nominal parity. Many of them did not succeed and experienced recurrent

devaluations. Seven of the countries adopted a crawling exchange rate after

devaluing.



     111.1 Macroeconomic Policies and Balance of Payments Crises

     As was pointed out in Section 11.1, under fixed nominal exchange rates

macroeconomic policies determine whether the exchange rate chosen by the

authorities can be sustained in the longer run. Under most circumstances,

if macroeconomic policies become "inconsistent", international reserves will

be eroded, the real exchange rate will experience an appreciation (i.e.,

overvaluation) and an exchange rate crises - -   that   is a devaluation -   - will
eventually occur. From an empirical point of view it is not trivial to

determine whether, for a particular country at a particular moment in time,

macroeconomic policies have indeed become inconsistent with the fixed peg.

In this section we tackle this issue by comparing the evolution of macro-

economic policy in the devaluing countries with that of the control group of

fixed rate countries.20

    Table 2 summarizes the behavior of four indicators of domestic credit

and fiscal policies for the devaluing countries and for the control group:21


     20This, of course, assumes that the policies followed by the fixers are
consistent and sustainable. This is not a very farfetched assumption.

     211n order to avoid the influence of extreme outliers in the analysis
we have summarized the data by means of the first, second (median) and third
quartile. Outliers can indeed distort the analysis if, for example,
                                    17




(1) rate of growth of domestic credit (Panel A); (2) rate of growth of

domestic credit to the public sector (Panel B); (3) percentage of credit

received by public sector as proportion of total domestic credit (Panel C);

and (4) fiscal deficit as proportion of CDP (Panel D). All the indicators

have been constructed using data from various issues of the International

Financial Statistics as well as several j types. For the devaluing

countries these indicators are reported for 3 years, 2 years, 1 year prior

to the devaluation as well as for the year of the devaluation. While Panel

A deals with monetary (or domestic credit) policy, the rest of the panels

take us beyond the monetary realm and into the fiscal side of the economy.

These panels provide three different ways of looking at fiscal pressures.

     A number of revealing facts emerge from this table. First, macro-

economic policies became increasingly expansive in the devaluing countries

as the year of the devaluation drew nearer. Indeed, there is a clear shift

to the right of all four distributions in the three years prior to the

crisis. Second, the devaluing countries as a group behaved quite

differently than the control group. This is particularly clear for the

fiscal policy indicators. For example, the year prior to the crisis half of

the devaluing countries allocated one quarter or more of total domestic

credit to the public sector; the median for the control group countries, on

the other hand, was only slightly more than 10 percent. Formal         texts

indicate that with a fairly high degree of probability, these policy

indicators for the devaluing nations come from a different population than

for the control group. The value of these x2 was 2.79 for the rate of

growth of domestic credit, 2.90 for the rate of growth of domestic credit to


averages are used. In our case, the Bolivian devaluation of 1982 is a major
outlier.
                                    TABLE 2

      Indicators of Macroeconomic Policy in Latin American Devaluing

         Countries: During the Year of Devaluation and Three Years

                            Preceding the Devaluation



                  3 Years         2 Years      1 Year
                  Prior to        Prior to    Prior to     Year of     Control
                 Devaluation Devaluation Devaluation Devaluation Group

A. Annual Rate of Growth of Domestic Credit (Percentage)
                     5.7            16.6         15.6       19.1        14.4
First Quartile
Median              25.5            28.2         22.2       27.5        17.4

                    35.4            36.5         30.3       45.3        29.9
Third Quartile


B. Annual Rate of Growth of Domestic Credit to Public Sector (Percentaze)
                     3.8         12.1         7.7         23.7       <0
First Quartile
Median              33.2            32.1         29.3       45.7        22.7

Third Quartile      58.4            62.6         53.2      113.9        33.2


C. Ratio of Domestic Credit to Public Sector to Total Domestic Credit
First Quartile       0.039       0.049        0.047        0.077     <0

Median               0.235           0.204        0.232      0.255       0.114

Third Quartile       0.327           0.345        0.343      0.456       0.279


D. Fiscal Deficit as Percentage of GDPa
First Quartile       0.2             0.5          0.2        0.6         0.7

Median                1.2            1.1          3.3        4.1         1.6

                      3.6            4.6          4.6        6.6         2.7
Third Quartile



a01 11 countries had data.



Source: See text.
                                       18




the public sector, and 6.49 for the fraction of total credit that goes to

the public sector. Although, due to the low number of observations, these

x2   tests   should be considered with some degree of skepticism, they do

suggest quite clearly that as the crisis date approached the devaluing

countries macropolicies tended to become more and more inconsistent with the

goal of maintaining a fixed exchange rate.

      Even though when taken as a group the devaluing countries behaved in a

distinctively different way than the control group, the policies of some

individual devaluing countries -   - in particular   Venezuela in 1964 - -   were

somewhat similar to those of the control group. Regarding the rate of

growth of domestic credit, in Ecuador in 1961, and Peru in 1967 tneir

behavior was not too different than that of the control group.

      Expansive macroeconomic policies will generally have an impact on the

level of reserves and on inflation, and thus on the real exchange rate.

Table 3 contains data on the evolution of:     (1) the index of the

(bilateral) real exchange rate;     (2) ratio of net foreign assets of the

monetary system to money; and (3) the current account ratio during the

three years preceding the crisis. The main differences between Tables 2 and

3 is that in the former we have summarized the behavior of four key

exogenous policy variables while Table 3 deals with endogenous variables

whose behavior responds to the policy and other shocks.

      The data in Table 3 very vividly capture the deterioration of the

external sector of these countries. In 14 out of the 16 countries with

relevant data the real exchange rate experienced a real appreciation in the

three years prior to the devaluation. Excluding the 1967 Colombian

devaluation, the average real appreciation during the 3 years preceding the

devaluation crisis was almost 9 percent. Naturally, this real appreciation
                                    TABLE 3

             Evolution of Real Exchange Rate, Net Foreign Assets,

                   And Current Account Prior to Devaluation



                                              Ratio of Net           (Current
                                                             b
                         Index of RERa        Foreign Assets       Account/GDP)c

Country         Year     -3 Yrs. -l Yr.       -3 Yrs. -l Yr.       -3 Yrs. -l Yr.

                1970     103.1     100           7.3       6.3       0.6      -1.0
Argentina
Bolivia         1972      98.3     100          12.0       8.7      -5.6      -4.8
Bolivia         1979     103.0     100          26.0       2.9      -3.9     -10.0
Colombia        1962     108.9     100           1.2      -1.8       1.6      -3.0
Colombia        1965     155.7     100         -10.7     -11.7       -2.3     -3.0
Costa Rica      1974     101.6     100          12.8      16.7      -11.9     -9.2
Ecuador         1961       n.a.    n.a.         18.9      16.4       -0.9     -2.5
Ecuador         1970     104.3     100          19.1      11.2       -5.8     -7.9
Nicaragua       1979     102.0     100          16.8     -36.0       -2.8     -1.0
Peru            1967     119.5     100          23.9      18.0        0.3     -3.7
Venezuela       1964     100.6     100          28.4      34.0        6.8      9.1

Bolivia          1982     129.9    100         -10.5     -23.3      -10.2    -10.4
Chile            1982     129.8    100          24.2      16.4       -6.2    -15.5
Colombia         1967      787e    100         -11.9      -8.8       -3.0     -4.7
Ecuador          1982     105.7    100          26.6     -17.1       -3.9     -4.5
Mexico           1976     109.2    100          14.4       9.5       -2.5     -4.4
Mexico           1982     112.9    100           7.5       6.9       -3.8     -5.2
Peru             1975      95.4    100          18.1      18.9       -0.1     -6.2

Average Change Between             -8.7%                 -40.8%               -1.9
3 and lfYear Prior to             (-2.98)                (-2.27)            (-2.41)
Crisis:



a. is a bilateral index relative to the U.S. constructed as
 (E.WPI)/CPI. The index has been set equal to 100 the year prior to the
devaluation.
bRatio of net foreign assets to the sum of net foreign assets plus domestic
 credit. (Lines 3lN over the sum of lines 31N and 32 of the IFS.)
CR. of current account to GDP x 100.
dThis is the index two years prior to devaluation.
eColombia devalued in 1965. This explains the evolution of RER.
Exc1udes Colombia 1967. The number in parentheses are t-statistics for
 null hypothesis that mean equals zero.
                                    19




was the result of domestic rates of inflation that increasingly exceeded the

world rate of inflation. A x2 test, in fact, indicates that as the crisis

date became closer the rate of CPI inflation in the devaluing countries

became more distinct, in a statistical sense, from that of the fixed rate

control group. While the 2(2) was 4.1 three years prior to the crisis

(level of probability 0.13), it was 13.7 one year before the crisis,

reflecting a probability of less than 0.001 percent of the null hypothesis

being accepted. It is interesting to notice that while, on average, these

countries experienced almost a 9% real appreciation in the two years prior

to the crisis, there is quite a difference in the individual countries'

experiences. While some of them, such as Colombia in 1965, went through a

major deterioration in competitiveness, others (i.e., Venezuela 1964) only

experienced an insignificant change in the real exchange rate index. This

recorded average real appreciation of 9% is, in many ways, an under-

estimation of the magnitude of the disequilibrium. In many cases, in the

period leading to the crisis price controls became quite pervasive,

rendering official CPIs somewhat inadequate to construct RER indexes.

     The evolution of net foreign assets and of the current account balance,

also presented in Table 3, clearly captures the effect of the inconsistent

macropolicies on the external accounts. In 14 out of the 18 countries the

ratio of net foreign assets to money, experienced a decline during this two

year period, confirming the view that devaluation crises are usually

preceded byan important rundown of international reserves. On average, for

these 18 countries, the net foreign assets ratio declined in more than 40%

during the two years prior to the devaluation. The year before the crisis

the median of this indicator was 0.091, significantly below the median for

the control group 0.201. Also, in 14 of the 18 countries the current
                                    20



account ratio experienced a decline in the two years before the crisis, with

the average deterioration amounting to almost 2 percentage points of GDP.

The year prior to the crisis the median of current account deficit was 4.5%

of GDP about a full percentage point higher than the -3.6% for the control

group.

     In addition to the deterioration of the current account, capital flight

is a crucial force underlying the weakening position of these countries'

external sector. Data not reported here clearly show that in spite of

existing, and increasing, control on capital mobility, as the devaluation

drew nearer and as a result of the heightened expectations of devaluation,

substantially larger amounts of funds flew these countries.

     The data in Table 3 clearly highlights the fact that although one can

identify a dominating pattern among these devaluations, there are nontrivial

differences across countries. In the majority of them the devaluation

clearly responded to the simultaneous depletion of international reserves

and loss in competitiveness (i.e., real exchange appreciation). In others,

however, it is not possible to detect any of these symptoms in the years

prior to the crisis. In these cases the authorities anticipated that there

was a likely crisis down the road, and decided to tackle the problem before

things got out of hand. In the case of the 1964 Venezuelan devaluation, the

exchange rate adjustment amounted to an important corrective measure, with

the devaluation really being an elimination of the lowest of three official

exchange rates.

     The lack of data on external terms of trade didn't allow us to analyze

for every country whether devaluations responded, at least partially, to an

exogenous deterioration of the external sector. However, it is clear that

at least in the Colombian devaluations of 1965 and 1967 the drastic
                                    21



deterioration in the country's terms of trade, stemming from drops in the

price of coffee in the preceding or devaluation years had much to do with

the decision to devalue.

     Quite clearly, simple mechanical rules that relate the decision to

alter the exchange rate to some unique indicator such as international

reserves, cannot explain the authorities' decisions to devalue.

Devaluations are a complex phenomenon, that responds to a combination of

factors, including, in some cases, the perceptions of future events, and the

authorities' desire to avoid the most painful aspects of balance of payments

crises.

     111.2 Exchange Controls. Trade Restrictions, Parallel Markets and
            Balance of Payments Crjs_j

     In Table 4 we present a summary for those countries that have data of

the evolution of exchange controls and trade restrictions during the two

years preceding the crisis. Table 5, on the other hand, presents data on

multiple (official) exchange rates and on parallel (black) market premia in

the period immediately preceding the crisis,

     The data presented in Table 4 on exchange controls have been classified

according to the IMF practice, distinguishes between:22 (a) payments

restrictions on current transactions, such as licenses, prior approvals,

multiple rates, prohibitions and so on;   (b) tariffs, duties and price

related measures; and (c) restrictions on capital movements in the form of

either licenses or taxes. In this table we have tried to convey information

on the conditions prevailing two years prior to the devaluation and on any

changes implemented in the degree of controls in the year immediately prior


     22See IMF's Yearbook of ExchangControls Payments Restrictions. The
information summarized in Table 2 was obtained from various issues of this
Yearbook.
                                    TABLE 4

            Evolution of Exchange Controls and Trade Restrictions

                   In The Two Years Preceding Devaluation




                 Payments
              Restrictions   on     Tariffs, Duties and       Restrictions on
Episode     Current Transactions    Cost Related Measures   Capital Transactions

Argentina   'Increasing restric-    Advanced deposits of 'No restrictions,
             tions on capital        40% for 180 days.     and no changes
(1970)
                                    'Taxes on traditional  prior to devalua-
             goods.
            Public sector pay-      exports.              tion.
             ments monitored.       .Special regimes and
            'All foreign ex-         exceptions abolished.
             change transactions
             suspended for 10
             days prior to
             devaluation.

Bolivia     Public sector pay-     'Custom charge of       Restrictive initial
(1972)       ments highly            15% is in place in      conditions. No
             controlled.             1970.                   changes.
            QRs on foodstuffs,     .20% tax on exports
             cattle, cotton.         imposed.
            'Between May and
             Aug. a number of
             imports are pro-
             hibited (1972).

Bolivia     'Payments restric-    'In 1977 most           'All capital move-
(1979)       tions are increased   imports subject to      ments requires
             for a number of       5-25%  advanced         authorization.
             items in year prior. deposit.                'Ceiling set on new
             Exchange transac -  'Exceptions for duty     foreign borrowing.
             tions suspended for payments eliminated
             8 days prior to       for essentials (Feb.)
             devaluation.         .500%  advanced deposit
                                   imposed on 600 items.

Bolivia      .Imports of indust-     In 1980 advanced       .July 1982, payments
 (1982)       rial goods produced     deposits of 5% to       restrictions
              locally are prohib-    25%.                     tightened.
              ited.                .1981: advanced
             'All sales of foreign deposits reduced;
              exchange subject to   import duties
              authorization.        reduced.
Table 4 (cont.


                Payments
             Restrictions on      Tariffs, Duties and       Restrictions on
Episode    Current Transactions   Cost Related Measures   Capital Transactions

Chile      Paynients highly      Flat import tariff    Some restrictions
(1982)      liberalized. No re-    of 10% not altered     on capital move-
            strictions imposed.    prior to devaluation. ments are in place
                                                          preceding devalua-
                                                           tion. No changes
                                                           prior to abandon-
                                                           ment of peg.

Colombia   Initial conditions   .1960: Advanced        Dual exchange rates
(1962)      highly restrictive    deposits ranging       plus active paral-
           .Large number of       from l%-130%.          lel market. No
            goods moved into      .1961: Many advanced   changes prior to
            prior license list    deposits reduced dur- crisis.
            during 1961.          ing first half of
           All but 11 items in   year.
            free list move to    .1962 (Apr.): Advanced
            prior license (Aug.) deposits raised.
           .Many items moved to
            prohibited list
            (Nov. 1962).

Colombia   Dec. 1964: Import    .Sept. 1964: 5%          .Oct. 1964: Banco de
(1965)      free list suspended. advanced deposit          la Republica ceases
            95% advanced deposit imposed.                  operations in free
            imposed.             .Dec. 1964: 95% ad-       market.
           .1965: Many goods      vanced deposit          .Siight increase in
            passed to prior       imposed on selected      tightness.
            licensing.            items.
           Dual rates imposed   .1965 more goods
            (Sept.).              subject to deposit.

Colombia   Highly restrictive    Jan. 1967: All         .Starting from con-
(1967)      payments,              advanced deposits       trols, slight
                                   increased by 50%.       increase in degree
                                  .Feb. advanced           of restrictions.
                                   deposits further
                                   increased.

Costa Rica .Dual rates (1972).   Mild restrictions on Some restrictions
(1974)     Most imports passed   trade, not increased. in place (l0%-15%
            to higher rate dur-                         tax on remittances
            ing 1973.                                   to rest of world).
           Process continues in
            1974 prior to dev.
Table 4 (cont.)

                 Payments
              Restrictions on      Tariffs, Duties and       Restrictions on
Episode     Current Transactions   Cost Related Measures   Capital Transactions

Ecuador     .1959: Multiple       .Highly restrictive    Capital movements
(1961)       rates; all imports    system, becomes        should be
             subject to licenses. tighter year prior      registered.
            .1960: Proceeds from   to devaluation.
             nontraditional       .Aug. 1962: Advanced
             exports moved to      deposits increased to
             free rate.            100% for list 2
            'Prior to devaluation imports.
             tightening of con-
             trols. Many items
             passed to restrictive
             list.

Ecuador     'Two types of import .1968: List 1 subject 'June 1970:
(1970)       lists with different to 15% duties; List 2 Increased restric-
             degrees of restric-   subject to 70% duty.   tions. Banks and
             tions.               .1969: Increased sur-   nonbanks required
            'Jan. -July 1970: In-  charges hiked.         to sell all foreign
             creased restrictions Jan. 1970: Duties      exchange holdings
             including $400 quota raised to 40% for       to central bank at
             on travelers.         List 1 and 80% for
                                   List 2.
                                  'May: Further in-
                                   creases in surcharges.

Ecuador     'Same List 1/List 2      'Feb. 1981 increase in 'Slight increase in
(1982)       structure. Multiple      coverage and rates of restrictions.
             rates.                   advanced deposits.
            .1981: Increased         'June: Import tariffs
             restrictions.            raised in 500 items.

Mexico      'Initial conditions:  'May 1981: Duties in-    'No change in
(1982)       Import licensing and creased in 374 items      capital controls in
             import quotas.       'July: Further            period preceding
            .1981: Import licens- increases in duties       devaluation.
             ing greatly           levels.
             increased.           Nov.: Duties hiked
                                   for 120 items.

Nicaragua   .2 groups of imports. 'Nov. 1979: Weekly       'Increased restric-
(1979)      'Sales of foreign      foreign exchange         tions.
             exchange at official allocation for
             rate restricted.      imports imposed.
            Licenses hiked in
             1978/79.
            'Multiple rates
             imposed (Apr. 1979).
Table 4 (cont.)

                 Payments
              Restrictions on       Tariffs, Duties and       Restrictions on
Episode     Current Transactions    Cost Related Measures   Capital Transactions

Peru        Initial condItions     .Aug. 1966: Most        .Very open initial
(1967)       (1965): No licenses     imports subject to      conditions.
             required (except        surcharge.             .Sept. 1967: A
             for 12 items).         June 1967: General-     moratorium on pay-
            In 1967 a number of     ized hike in import     ments of foreign
             restrictions were       duties.                 debt is declared.
             imposed. Exports                                Lifted after 16
             required licenses                               days.
             (Oct.). Exports                                .Slight increase in
             proceeds surrendered                            degree of restric-
             for certificates.                               tions.

Peru        Initial conditions      .Restrictive intial     .Very restrictive
(1975)       (1973): Severe          conditions. During      initial conditions.
             restrictions.           1974 degree of         No changes during
             Multiple exchange       restrictiveness is      year prior to
             rates. Licenses or      increased.              devaluation.
             prior approval         Jan. 1975: 12%
             required for almost     surcharge on all
             every item.             imports.
            No major changes
             during year prior to
             devaluation.

Venezuela   Multiple rates.        No changes in year    Almost complete
(1964)      Some restrictions       prior to devaluation. capital mobility
             initially, with                                which is maintained
             licenses required                              throughout episode.
             on some items.
            No changes in year
             prior to devalua-
             tion.




Source: See text.
                                     22




to the abandonment of the fixed peg. The table reveals that in the great

majority of the cases the devaluation was preceded by an important piling up

of exchange controls and restrictions. In some episodes, such as Colombia

in 1962 and 1967, Ecuador 1961, and Peru in 1975, the initial conditions

(two years prior to the crisis) were already extremely restrictive, and

become even tighter as the erosion of reserves became severe and/or real

exchange rate appreciation became more massive. In other cases, however, --

Venezuela 1964 and Chile 1982 for example, - -   the   period preceding the

devaluation was characterized by a fairly free environment, with little

restrictions and no attempts by the authorities to impose any additional
           23
controls

     Table 5 shows that in the majority of these episodes the period

preceding the devaluation was characterized by the existence of multiple

exchange rates. In fact, only 6 out of the 18 cases had a unified official

exchange rate one year prior to the crisis, Interestingly enough, however,

in most instances the multiple rates were in place at least three years

before the crisis, and in most countries there was no increase in the number

of official rates as the devaluation date approached. Only in Nicaragua in

1979 and in Colombia in 1967 there was an increase in the number of rates

during the three years period preceding the crisis.

     The data on parallel market premia in Table 5 are particularly

interesting.24 In 14 out of the 18 devaluation episodes there was a signi-

ficant increase in the black market premium during the 9 months preceding


            is rather deceiving in the case of Venezuela, since a multiple
rate system was in effect.

     24Depending on the country, these figures refer either to the black
market for foreign exchange or to the fluctuating rate in the "free segment".
                                     TABLE 5

              Multiple Exchange Rates and Parallel Market Premium

                          In Period Prior to Devaluation



                          Number of Official
                            Exchange Rates       Black Market Premium (Percent)

                  Year    -3 Yrs      -l Yr.     -9 Mths,   -3 Mths.   -l Mth.
Country

                  1970       1           1          0.3        0.0        0.0
Argentina
Bolivia           1972       2           2         64.0       67.1       60.0

                  1979       1           1         10.0       17.5       17.5
Bolivia
                   1962      3           3         33.4       34.7       58.0
Colombia
Colombia           1965      3            3        42.8      110.6      114.4

Costa Rica         1974      8            5        42.2       34.7       30.2

                   1961      2            2         21.9      23.3       66.7
Ecuador
Ecuador            1970      2            2         22.5      23.9       55.6

                   1979       1           2         27.1      78.6       92.9
Nicaragua
Peru               1967       1           1          2.2       2.2       43,6


Venezuela          1964       3           3         35.5      35.5       35.5

Bolivia            1982       2           2         25.0     502,3      434.1

Chile              1982       1           1         10.3      12.8       17.9

Colombia           1967       3           4         19.2        46.3     48.1

Ecuador            1982       3           3         25.0      45.0       74.4

Mexico             1976       1           1          0.0       0.0        0.0

Mexico             1982       1           1          5.4      11.7       12.5

Peru               1975       4           4         52.5      56.3       75.7


Source: Various issues of Picks Currency Yearbook and World Currency
            Yearbook.
                                            23




the crisis. This evolution of the parallel market premium reflects three

interrelated forces. First, in the presence of a freely determined black

market rate, expansive domestic credit policies will usually be reflected in

a depreciation of the free rate, at the same time as the domestic rate of

inflation increases and international reserves eroded. Second, this hike in

the premium is capturing the public's reaction to the movement towards

greater exchange controls. And third, it also reflects the generalized

expectations that the situation is increasingly unsustainable and will

result in an eventual devaluation.

       As the data on net foreign assets and on the current account in Table 3

clearly show, the imposition of these exchange controls and payments

restrictions did not succeed in putting an end to the erosion of foreign

exchange, nor did they succeed in halting the deteriorating situation in the

country's degree of international competitiveness. At most one can argue

t-hr         1,i al,r,r1             t-r,            tr. cl r,t. 4et.m th
unavoidable crisis, unleashed by the inconsistent macroeconomic policies.
       An important side effect of these trade restrictions and exchange

controls is that they introduced serious distortions that impacted on the

economic performance of the economy. Data on the evolution of real growth

of GDP shows that already one year prior to the devaluation crisis countries

were performing significantly poorer than the control group; a x(2)         8.7

indicated that the null hypothesis that the devaluing and the control groups

come from the same population is rejected.25 This finding has import conse-

quences for the "contractionary devaluation" controversy, since it suggests



     25lnterestingly enough, three years prior to the crisis it is not
possible to reect the hypothesis that both groups come from the same
population (x (2) = 0.555).
                                    24




that the observed decline in growth in periods surrounding devaluations may

in fact not respond to the crisis, but rather to the effects of the massive

imposition of restrictions.


IV. The "Effectiveness" of Nominal Devaluations in Latin America

     It is difficult to assess empirically whether a nominal devaluation has

indeed been successful. There are various possible criteria one can use to

evaluate the "effectiveness" of a devaluation, including its effect on the

real exchange rate, its impact on the current account, on the level of

international reserves, or in any of the other accounts of the balance of

payments. Moreover, since devaluations are many times, if not always,

undertaken under quantity rationing their effects will tend to differ from

the more traditional textbook cases. An additional difficulty stems from

the fact that devaluations are almost always one of many components of

stabilization packages aimed at improving the external position of a

country. It is difficult to separate the effect of the devaluation itself

from that of the accompanying macroeconomic policies and from the trade

liberalization reforms many times implemented alongside the devaluation.

This difficulty is further complicated by the fact that large and abrupt

nominal devaluations are usually fairly isolated events that occur only

sporadically.26 In that regard devaluations are not easily subject to time

series regression analysis. In fact, in any developing nation one

encounters at most 5 large devaluations since World War II; certainly not

enough for meaningful regression estimation.27'28


     26By "abrupt" we don't necessarily mean unexpected.

     27 is possible, however, to pool a number of episodes and estimate a
limited dependent variable model to analyze the determinants of devaluation.
See Edwards (forthcoming).
                                      25




     Given these conceptual difficulties and the existing data limitations,

empirical analyses of devaluation have, by necessity, to be somewhat

descriptive in nature. The data should be approached in a humble way,

trying to extract as much information as possible from them, but being aware

that in some instances it is not possible to obtain very sharp conclusions.

In this section we follow the 18 devaluation episodes of Table 1, for three

years after the nominal exchange rate adjustments.

     IV.l Nominal Devaluations arid Real Devaluations

     The 18 devaluation episodes included in this study are different in a

number of respects (see Table 1 for the list of countries and for the

characteristics of the nominal exchange rate change). In some cases the

devaluation took place after more than a decade of fixed nominal exchange

rates (i.e., Mexico, 1976). In others, such as Colombia 1967, the devalua-

tion was implemented after only two years of attempting to maintain a fixed

parity. As can be seen in Table 1, in 11 of the episodes the devaluations

were a stepwise event, preceded and followed by a fixed nominal (official)

exchange rate. In the other 7 episodes the devaluation was preceded by a

fixed nominal exchange rate, but was followed by a crawling peg. All the

episodes, however, have three characteristics in common:29 (a) in all

cases the devaluation was preceded by two or more years of exchange rate

fixity; (b) the initial nominal exchange rate adjustment was at least 15%;

and (c) in all cases the initial conditions reflected (varying) degrees of


            statement,   of course, excludes those countries with an ongoing
crawling peg. Although   under a crawling pet the nominal exchange rate is
effectively "devalued"   every period, the economics involved are different
from those of straight   large devaluations.

     29These, in fact, were the requirements we used for an exchange rate
adjustment to qualify as a "devaluation episode", and, thus, for being
included in this study.
                                             26



disequilibrium.
     Tables 6 and 7 deal with real exchange rates behavior during three

years after the devaluation. In Table 6 the index of the bilateral (with

respect to the U.S. dollar) real exchange rate one year before the devalua-

tion, the year of the devaluation, and one, two and three years after the

devaluation is presented. Table 7, on the other hand, presents data on the

ratio of the cumulative ex-post elasticity of the real exchange rate with

respect to the nominal exchange rate for the year of the devaluation, one,

two and three years after the devaluation.30 This cumulative "effective-

ness" index is computed in the following form:

                                                  A

                   Effectiveness              Pkk
                                               A
                                    Indexk
                                                  Ek

where k refers to the year of the devaluation, 1, 2 and 3 years after the

                  RRK is the percentage change in
devaluation.                                      the real exchange rate

between   the   year prior to the devaluation and k years after the devalua-

tion (k         0,1,2,3). Ek   is   the percentage change in the nominal exchange

rate during the same period. This elasticity, then, provides an index of

the degree of erosion experienced by the real exchange rate during the three

years after the devaluation. A value of one means that the nominal exchange

rate adjustment has been fully transferred into a one-to-one a ____

devaluation.      A negative value of the index, on the other hand, indicates

that more than 100% of the nominal devaluation has been eroded and that, at

that particular point, the real exchange rate is below its value one year

before the crisis.


     30Both of these indexes were constructed using data on official nominal
rates. See below for indexes constructed with parallel markets dated.
                                    TABLE 6

                    Evolution of RER Index After Devaluation



                     Year Prior     Year of      1 Year     2 Years    3 Years
Country      Year      to Dev.        Dev.       After       After      After_

             1970       100          113 .2       87.5         57.7     40.5
Argentina
Bolivia      1972       100          108 .   3      -          90.5     90.3

Bolivia      1979       100           96 .   6    90.2         74.3      86.1

Colombia     1962       100          131.4        99.2          84.4   (125.0*)

Colombia     1965       100          148 . 2     127.1      (138.0*)   (142.6*)
Costa Rica   1974       100          117.6       110.2         110.6    112.8

Ecuador      1961       100          114.9       112.0         105.7    101.6

Ecuador      1970       100          136.9       130.7         126.7    126.6

Nicaragua    1979       100          108.7        71.7          80.8     66.0

Peru         1967       100          131.7       113.5         111.4    109.0
Venezuela    1964       100          135.1       135.9         137.3    138.1


Boljvja      l9B2        Lou         ii .        .L.i.L.


Chile        1982       100          174.7       165 7  .               226.0

Colombia     1967        100         108.5       112.2         112.3    116.4

Ecuador      1982        100         116.4       129.4         129.6    139.3

Mexico       1976        100         143.4       134.6         123.3    118.0

Mexico       1982        100         236.1       176.7                  181.8

Peru         1975        100         103.2       124.4         179.6    184.6


*Indicates that a new devaluation took place that year.



Source: See text.
                                    TABLE 7

            Nominal and Real Devaluations in Latin American Ex-Post

                 RER Elasticity of Official Nominal Devaluation



                                                                   Ratio of RER
                         Year of    1 Yr. After 3 Yrs. After       3 Yrs. After
Country         Year    Devaluation Devaluation Devaluation       to 3 Yrs. Prior

Argentina       1970      0.57          <0           <0                 0.39

Bolivia         1972      0.12         0.52          <0                 0.92

Bolivia         1979       <0           <0           <0                 0.83

Colombia        1962      0.92          <0           n.a.               0.78*

Colombia        1965      0.96         0.54          <0                 n.a.

Costa Rica      1974       0.61        0.35         0.44                1.11

Ecuador          1961      0.75        0.60              .008           1.00

Ecuador          1970      0.95         0,79             .68            1.21

Nicaragua        1979      0.20         <0          <0                  0.65

Peru             1967      0.73         0.42             .22            0.91

Venezuela        1964      0.92         0.94             .99            1.37



Bolivia          1982      0.02         0.02          n.a.

Chile            1982      0.85         0.53         0.34               1.74

Colombia         1967      0.51         0.49         0.40               1.48

Ecuador          1982      0.50         0.25         0.14               1.32

Mexico           1976      0.73         0.42         0.22               1.08

Mexico           1982      0.51         0.17         0.06               1.61

Peru             1975      0.20         0.31         0.21               1.94


*Refers    to ratio of 2 years prior to 2 years after.
                                              27




       The actual value of this ex-post elasticity index, then, measures in a

very broad sense what percentage of the devaluation has been effective. The

reasons why this is only a broad and somewhat inaccurate measure of "effect-

iveness't are:          (1)   it is based on a "before" and "after" analysis, without

maintaining other relevant variables constant, and (2) it doesn't take

into account the inflation consequences of the devaluations. As is argued

below this becomes important when evaluating the effectiveness of the

crawling peg devaluations. In subsection IV.4 below, however, we make an

explicit effort to control for other variables such as domestic credit

policy,fiscal policy and foreign shocks. The last column in Table 7

includes the ratio of the real exchange rate index three years after the

devaluation to three years prior to the devaluation.

       These tables are very revealing, and provide a useful start for our

analysis. Let's first focus on the 11 cases of stepwise devaluation. These

tLL
i_._   _1____ ..1__._
       SELUW
                        __1__ LLV
               LI1L LII UI1.Ly e,___OL .i ii ii episoues - - OSLa 2__
                                     LLI                                lfl'tL __.i_....
                                                                  LS.ILd YI'4, .CUaUUL

1961 and 1970, Peru 1967 and Venezuela 1964 - -          three   years after the

devaluation the real exchange rate index was higher than its value just

before the crisis. In only three episodes, however, after three years the

RER was above its value three years before the devaluation. These data also

show that in some cases the erosion was very rapid. For example, in the

cases of Argentina, Bolivia 1972 and 1979; Colombia 1962 and Nicaragua 1979,

it took less than a year for the effect of the nominal devaluation to be

completely wiped out. Table 7 shows that only in Costa Rica 1974, Ecuador

1970 and Venezuela 1964, the index of effectiveness equal or greater to 1/3

after 3 years.

       The data on the crawling peg countries present a very different

picture. In the six cases for which there are data, three years after the
                                    28




devaluation the RER index was significantly higher than the year before.

Naturally, this was achieved by "fighting off" the real exchange rate

erosion with additional devaluations in the following years. Typically,

under this type of regime the authorities further devalue the currency in

magnitudes approximately equal to the domestic rate of inflation. Of

course, a potential problem with this policy is that it can lead to an

explosive (nonconvergent) process, where the devaluation generates

inflation, which partially erodes the effect of the devaluation; this leads

to a higher devaluation and even higher inflation and so on, ad-infinitum.

An alternative scenario, is one where the process is stabilized at some mild

rate of inflation, as in Chile in the recent period and in Colombia since

1967. Table 8 presents data on the evolution of inflation in our 18

episodes. As can be seen, of the crawling peg countries, only in Chile and

Colombia (1967) the rate of inflation 3 years after the crisis was below its

level 3 years before the devaluation. Also, these data indicate that among

the crawlers in Bolivia, Peru and Mexico (1982) the higher real exchange

rate was sustained at the cost of substantial permanent increase in the rate

of inflation.

     The real exchange rate data in Table 6 were constructed using indexes

on official nominal rates. However, as noted above, in these countries

black markets of varying degrees of importance have traditionally existed.

In Table 9 we present, for those countries that have data, indexes of real

exchange rate constructed with data on parallel market nominal exchange

rates. Table 10 contains additional information on parallel markets and on

multiple exchange rate practices during the period following the devalua-

tions. As can be seen, in most cases the parallel market premium declined

rapidly during the months immediately following the crisis (i.e., 3 months
                                      TABLE 8

             Inflation Rates in Latin American Devaluing Countries

                      Before and After The Crisis (Percent)



                          3 Years         1 Year        1 Year        3 Years
Country        Year     Before Dev.     Before Dev.   After Dev.     After Dev.

Argentina      1970        29.4             7.7          34.8           61.2
Bolivia        1972         2.2             3.7          31.5            7.9
Bolivia        1979         4.5            10.4          47.2          133.3
Colombia       1962         7.2             8.7          32.0            3.5
Colombia       1965         2.5            17.7          19.9            5.8
Costa Rica     1974         3.0            15.2           3.5            4.2
Ecuador        1961         1.3             1.7           2.9            4.0
Ecuador        1970         3.8             6.3           8.7           13.0
Nicaragua      1979         2.8             4.6          35.3           24.8
Peru           1967         9.9             9.0          19.0            5.0
Venezuela      1964        -2.4             1.2           1.7            0.0


Bolivia        1982        19.7            28.6         269.1            -
Chile          1982        33.4            19.7          27.3           30.7
Colombia       1967        17.7            19.9           5.8            6.8
Ecuador        1982        10.3            16.4          48.4           27.9
Mexico         1976        12.0            15.2          29.0           18.2
Mexico         1982        18.2            27.9         101.8           57.8
Peru           1975         7.2            16.9          33.5           57.8


Source: IFS.
                                         29




after the crisis). In a number of episodes, however, this decline was

short-lived, and after 9 months the premium had once again increased. This

evolution of the premia provides some (limited) information on the way dual

markets, with a legal and an illegal segment, react to devaluations of the

official rate. In most instances, a large nominal devaluation of the

official rate will, on impact, tend to reduce the gap between the freely

determined parallel rate and the predetermined (i.e., fixed) official rate.

As time passes, however, and other forces are unleashed, the freely

determined black market rate starts responding to these forces and to

expectations. The nine months premium data in Table 10 confirm the general

ambiguities of the theoretical analyses on the subject.

       Table 10 shows that only a handful of these official devaluations were

coupled with an exchange rate unification at a single higher official rate

-   - Bolivia   1972, Ecuador 1970, Bolivia 1982; in the case of Ecuador, how-

ever, this unification was very short-lived. In a few other episodes the

number of multiple rates was reduced - -      Costa   Rica 1974, Venezuela 1964,

Colombia 1967 - -    but   multiple rate practices were not eliminated. Interest-

ingly enough, and contrary to popular belief, instead of leading to unifica-

tion, many of these devaluations were actually followed by a more

generalized use of multiple rates, either the year of the devaluation or in

the subsequent two years.

       IV.2 Devaluations. Exchange Controls and Payment Restrictions

       As shown in the preceding section, the vast majority of our devaluation

episodes were preceded by a massive piling-up of exchange controls and trade

restrictions. As these efforts to slow down, or halt, the erosion of

international reserves failed, the economic authorities were eventually

"forced" to devalue and implement some sort of a stabilization program. As
                                 TABLE 9

              Parallel Markets Real Exchange Rate Indexes In

                    Devaluing Latin American Countries



                  3 Years    1 Year               1 Year   2 Years    3 Years
                  Before     Before    Year       After     After      After
Country    Year     Dev.      Dev.    Of Dev.      Dev.      Dev.       Dev.

Bolivia    1972     79.3      100.0    108.2        86.3       69.6      66.3

Bolivia    1979    103.0      100.0    103.2       100.3       96.4     218.5

Colombia   1962     63.6      100.0        88.6     60.0       71.0      98.9

Colombia   1965    124.9      100.0    139.4       122.6     113.5      109.1

Ecuador    1961     88.2      100.0        99.8    115.6       92.5      91.4

Ecuador    1970     92.4      100.0    122.3       116.0     117.4      104.8

Peru       1967    122.8      100.0    125.9       130.2     130.0      171.8

Colombia   1967     81.6      100.0        92.6     89.0       90.2     108.8

Mexico     1976    113.8      100.0    172.6       135.4     128.9      124.9

Peru       1975    114.8      100.0        99.2     95.8     103.1      110.9



Source: Constructed from data obtained from various issues of Pick Currency
         Yearbook.
                                      TABLE 10

                        Exchange Rate Unification and

                   Parallel Market Premium After Devaluation



                         Number of Official Rates          Black Market Premium
                        Year    Yr. of                     Month 3 Mths. 9 Mths.
CountrY         Year    Prior    Dev.    +1 Yr.   3 Yrs.   Prior Aftex    After

                1970      1       1         5        5       0      0.5     9.0
Argentina
Bolivia         1972      2       1          1       1      60.0   32.5     5.0

Bolivia         1979      1       2          2       1      17.5   15.0    20.0

Colombia        1962      3       3          3       4      57.8   11.0    14.4

Colombia         1965     3       4          4       2     114.4   35.9    19.3

Costa Rica       1974     5       3          3       3      30.2    3.5    15.2

Ecuador          1961     2       2          2       2      66.7   30.8     57.3

Ecuador          1970     2       1          2       3      55.6    16.0     9.2

                 1979     2       5          3       6      92.9    97.0   47.8
Nicaragua
Peru             1967     1       2          3       4      43.6     1.6    13.7

Venezuela        1964     3       2          2       2      35.2     0       0


Bolivia          1982     2       1          1       -     434.0   180.0   300.0
Chile            1982     1       2          3       -      17.9     2.4    10.6

Colombia         1967     4       3          2       2      48.1    30.7    15.4
Ecuador          1982     3       4          4       -      74.4    76.4   118.7

Mexico           1976     1       1          ?               -       -       -
Mexico           1982     1       2          2       -      40.9    23.5    33.3

Peru             1975     4       5          5       4      75.7    55.6    77.8


Source: Various issues of Pick's Currency Yearbook and World Currency
            Yearbook.
                                            30




can be seen in Table 11, in a large number of cases this protective tendency

was reversed almost immediately after the devaluation. After devaluing, and

(somewhat) reestablishing the degree of international competitiveness of the

country, the authorities usually felt that the controls imposed in the few

years preceding the crisis were not needed any more. The combination of

these trade liberalization programs with the devaluations make the

evaluation of the impact of the latter on the trade account somewhat

difficult. First, this reduction in the degree of trade restrictions will

result in a change - -      usually   an increase -   - of   the equilibrium real

exchange rate, making the "required't real exchange rate devaluation higher

than with the controls. Second, given this policy mix --              devaluation     with

trade liberalization -      - it   is not surprising to find that in a large number

of countries real imports grew at very fast rates during the three years

following the crisis.

     In a number of instances --        Argentina     1970, Colombia 1965, Costa Rica

1964 - -   the   liberalization of trade was short-lived, being reversed after

few months. Not too surprisingly, these are some of the countries for which

the effect of the devaluation on the real exchange rate eroded fairly

rapidly (recall Table 7). Moreover, in other cases -- Peru 1967, Nicaragua

1979 - -   the   devaluation was accompanied by a sharp increase in trade and/or

capital movements restrictions. This reflects the fact that both of these

devaluations were in fact implemented under an environment where the

authorities saw the devaluations as partial remedies, without having a real

intention to implement demand management policies alongside them. Given

that the ultimate sources of the exchange rate and balance of payments

disequilibrium - -    the   inconsistent macroeconomic policies - -      were   not

tackled there was little hope in lifting the controls.
                                   TABLE 11

              Suimnary of Evolution of Exchange Controls and

                   Trade Restrictions After Devaluation




                       Payments             Tariffs,           Restrictions
                   Restrictions on       Duties and Cost-       on Capital
            Year Current Transactions    Related Measures       Transactions
Country
            1970 .Decreasing restric- Short run liber-       .Increased
Argentina
                  tions for one year.   alization; abrupt      restrictiveness.
                  Then highly           increase in
                  restrictive,          tariffs 6 mths.
                                          after dev.

Bolivia     1972 No significant         No change for 1     No change.
                  changes.                yr. Rapid in-
                                          crease in tariffs
                                          1 yr. after.

Bolivia     1979 No significant         Mild liberaliza-    Slight liberal-
                  changes.                tion.                ization of
                                                               capital movement
                                                               ceilings.

Colombia    1962 .Decreasing.            Liberalization of No change.
                                          advanced deposits.

Colombia    1965 Short-lived            Short-lived lib-    After 14 mths.
                  liberalization.         eralization of       restrictions
                                          advanced deposits. greatly hiked.

Costa Rica 1974 Very short run          Short run liber-   eRestrictions on
                  liberalization.         alization tariffs   capital flows
                                          were later raised. introduced.

Ecuador     1961 No clear pattern.      No change in        No change.
                                          tariffs; increase
                                          in advanced
                                          deposits rates.

Ecuador     1970 .Slight liberal-        Mild reduction in eMild liberal-
                  ization.                tariffs; important ization of
                                          liberalization of  capital movement
                                          advanced deposits. restrictions.

Nicaragua   1979 .Very slight            No changes.         eVery sharp
                  liberalization.                              increase in
                                                               degree of
                                                               restrictions.
Table 11 (cont)

                       Payments            Tariffs,           Restrictions
                   Restrictions on      Duties and Cost-       on Capital
Country     Year Current Transactions   Related Measures       Transactions

Peru        1967 'Increased restrict-   'Tariffs raised.    'Sharp increase
                  iveness.                                   in restrictions.

Venezuela   1964 .Slight increase in    No change.         No change.
                  restrictiveness.

Chile       1982 'No changes for 2      'Slight increase    'Slight reduction
                  years.                 in tariffs; no      and then
                                         advanced            increase in
                                         deposits.           restrictions.

Colombia    1967 'Slow liberaliza-      Slow liberaliza-   'Mild liberal-
                  tion.                  tion.               izat ion.

Peru        1975 'No significant        'Increase in        'Slight
                  change.                tariffs levels.     liberalization.



Source: Constructed from information obtained from various issues of the
         IMF's Annual Report on Exchange Arrangements and Exchange
         Restrictions and from various issues of Pick's Yearbook and World
         Currencies Yearbook.
                                     31




     IV.3. International Reserves, the Current Account, and Devaluation

     Table 12 contains data on the evolution of gross real international

reserve (measured in TJS$ of constant value), the ratio of the current

account balance to GDP, and the ratio of foreign assets to money after the

devaluation. These indicators compare the levels of these variables one and

three years after the crisis with their levels one year before the devalua-

tion. While the data on reserves refers to percentage changes, those on the

current account ratio, and on the ratio of net foreign assets refers to

absolute changes.

     This table provides a broad summary on how the external sector of these

economies evolved during the years following the abandonment of the peg. A

first revealing fact refers to the difference in behavior in the short run

(i.e., one year) and medium run (i.e., 3 years).31 While in a number of

countries there was a deterioration in most of these indicators of the in

the short run, the situation changed through time, and after three years

there had been a substantial improvement. In fact, it is quite striking

that after three years the real level of gross international reserves had

increased significantly in 15 out of the 18 countries. Naturally, this

"before" and "after" analysis does not allow us to establish rigorously

whether the accumulation in the level of reserves over this period of three

years responds to the devaluation or to other factors.

     In some countries there was a simultaneous deterioration of the current

account and an improvement in the accumulation of gross reserves. This

apparently puzzling phenomenon is nothing but a reflection of the fact that


     31Cooper (1971) focused on one year after the devaluations only.
However, the changing behavior through time detected in this table suggests
that by concentrating in the very short run some substantial part of the
action can be missed.
                                       TABLE 12

               Behavior of External Sector Variables 1 and 3 Years

                                After Devaluation



                          Percentage
                           Change in                                          Change
                         International        Change Curren                In Ratio Net
                           Reserves_          Account Ratio_              Foreign Assets

                        1 Yr.    3   Yrs.     1    Yr.     3   Yrs.       1 Yr.      3   Yrs.
Country        Year     _____
                        After    After
                                 _______      _____
                                              After        After
                                                           _______        After
                                                                          ______     After
Argentina      1970     -0.55        1.25     -0.024        0.029         -0.03      -0.05
Bolivia        1972      0.07        1.28         0.029    -0.028         -0.04       0.14
Bolivia        1979     -0.51    -0.36        -0.010        0.014         -0.14      -0.94
Colombia       1962     -0.52     0.14        -0.047        0.026         -0.11      -0.04
     __1_.
'-.uj-uwui
.-._1          I fl C    0.07        1.85     -0.025       -0.005          0.03       0.06
Costa   Rica   1974     -0.23        1.73     -0.001        0.011         -0.13      -0.00
Ecuador        1961      0.16        0.95     -0.010       -0.005          0.000      0.04
Ecuador        1970     -0.19        2.87     -0.062        0.053         -0.06       0.21
Nicaragua      1979     -0.01        1.35     -0.205       -0.156         -0.02          0.13
Peru           1967     -0.01        1.96     -0.012        0.064         -0.04          0.09
Venezuela      1964      0.18        0.29     -0.064       -0.073             0.01       0.01


Bolivia        1982      0.55     0.89             -           -          -0.13          -
Chile          1982     -0.44    -0.28            -0.002       0.021      -0.06          -
Colombia       1967     -0.01     2.27            -0.005       0.124       0.03          0.04
Ecuador        1982     -0.01     0.09             0.001       -          -0.09          -
Mexico         1976     -0.17        0.12         0.003        0.006      -0.03       -0.02

Mexico         1982     -0.80        0.15         0.079        -              0.02       0.000
Peru           1975     -0.58    -0.68            -0.073       0.053      -0.02       -0.77

apercentage change in non-gold real reserves (in U.S. $)               with   respect to
 year prior to crisis.

bChange of ratio of current account to GDP with respect to 1 year before
 devaluation.

Source: See text.
                                    32




capital inflow, and or reversed capital flows, have played an important role

in most stabilization programs. In a number of these episodes the devalua-

tion was, in fact, part of an IMF-supported adjustment program which allowed

the country in question to obtain substantial short and medium term re-

sources; both from the international private banks and from the IMF, itself.

     A limitation of using the real level of gross international reserves as

an indicator of the external sector's behavior is that there is a strong and

generalized tendency for the level of reserves holdings to increase through

time, as countries grow and expand their level of foreign trade. In fact at

times recorded growth of reserves can be quite misleading since they have

been acquired via higher indebtedness and only to satisfy the growing demand

of the Central Bank for international 1iquidity.

     This problem can be solved by concentrating on some relative measure of

international liquidity, such as the ratio of      foreign assets to money

reported in Table 12. An alternative indicator that is sometimes useful is

the number of months worth of imports that the Central Bank holds in the

form of reserves. Looking at Table 12 we can see that the ratio of net

foreign assets provides a somewhat different story than the level of

reserves, indicating that in a nontrivial number of countries the external

situation in fact deteriorated after the devaluation, over and above the

already precarious initial conditions of one year before the crisis.

Interestingly enough, and not too surprising, many of those countries whose

external position measured by the ratio of foreign assets, experienced a

deterioration, are among those for which the effect of the devaluations on



          the determinants of the demand for reserves by the developing
countries see Edwards (1983). On the relation between foreign borrowing and
the demand for the international reserves see Eaton and Gersoritz (1980).
                                        33




the RER eroded fully before three years - -   Argentina   1970, Bolivia 1972,

Colombia 1962, Bolivia 1979.

      The Peruvian episode of 1975 provides a fascinating contrast. As was

reported in Table 7, in this episode the authorities were able to maintain,

via successive devaluations, a substantially high real exchange rate during

the three years following the crisis. However, as Table 12 shows, this was

of no avail, and that the external sector continued to deteriorate, to the

point that in 1979 the Peruvian government was forced to reschedule its

massive foreign debt. This was largely the result of generalized expecta-

tions that the policies undertaken by the authorities were not consistent

with a return to stability.

       IV.4. Macroeconomic Policies

      Theoretically, whether nominal devaluations succeed or not in helping a

country regain international competitiveness will largely depend on the

accompanying macroeconomic policies. If the economic aithorities don't put

a check on the ultimate cause of the crisis that triggered the devaluation

--   that   is, the inconsistent macroeconomic policies --   the effects of the
exchange rate adjustment will indeed be very short-lived.

      Table 13 contains data on three of the indicators of domestic credit

and fiscal policies considered in Section III (Table 2):        (a) rate of

growth of domestic credit; (b) rate of growth of domestic credit to the

public sector; and (c) proportion of total domestic credit received by the

public sector. It is very educational to compare the evolution of these

data with the behavior of these indicators for the control group of 24 fixed

exchange rate countries. In fact, if we consider the control group policies

as a broad characterization of those policies "consistent" with maintaining

a fixed rate, this comparison can shed additional light on successful and
                                      TABLE 13

            Macroeconomic Policies in Period Following Devaluation



                                           Rate of Growth of          Fraction
                     Rate of Growth        Domestic Credit        Of Total Credit
                     Domestic Credit       To Public Sector       To Public Sector

             Year    +1 Yr.    +3 Yrs.     +1 Yr.     +3 Yrs.     +1 Yr.   +3 Yrs.
Country

             1970     41.9       94.7       14.3*      133.3        2.1*      4.8*
Argentina
Bolivia      1972     31.2       38.5        4.1*      186.0       45.8      23.3

Bolivia      1979     38.1      343.2       62.3       411.8       44.8      53.1

Colombia     1962     16.7*      23.0       12.3*       45.7       24.1      31.3

Colombia     1965     17.9       16.4*       <   0*      < 0*      24.9      21.5

Costa Rica 1974       45.2       31.0      161.5       126.5       14.1      21.4

Ecuador      1961      1.9*      10.8*       2.2*        < 0*      10.9*      4.8*

Ecuador      1970     13.0*       7.8*      18.7*        < 0*      27.8      16.0

Nicaragua     1979     n.a.      31.5        n.a.       54.9        3.43     34.7

Peru          1967    12.0*      13.2*      18.5*        <   0*    36.3      25.0

Venezuela     1964    10.7*       8.9*       < 0*        <   0*     < 0*      <   0*

Bolivia       1982    171.3    5126.3      217.2         -         62.0
Chile         1982     10.9*      -          36.7        -          94*       -


Colombia      1967     16,4*     17.2*        < 0*       <   0*    21.5      14.2
Ecuador       1982     59.2       -                      -          -         -

Mexico        1976    142.1      34.9        94.7       33.0       50.5      46.2
Mexico        1982     49.4      67.9        47.4       87.1       57.4      55.1
Peru          1975     54.3      54.1       114.0       55.4       33.5      35.3



First Quartile         12.5      14.0        12.5       14.0       10.6       7.2

Median                 31.2      31.2        31.2       31.2       26.4      27.0
Third   Quartile       12.5      14.0        51.8       64,5       45.1      35.2-


*
 Means that the value is less or equal to the median of the same variable
 for the control group of fixers.

Source: See text.
                                           34



unsuccessful devaluations. In only 5 of the 18 devaluation episodes the

rate of growth of domestic credit was lower than the median for the control

group (17.4%) both one and three years after the devaluation -- Ecuador

1961, Ecuador 1970, Peru 1967, Venezuela 1964, Colombia 1967. When the

other two indicators of macroeconomic policy are considered, the situation

is very similar. In only a handful of countries the demand management

policies immediately following the crisis can be considered to be tight.

     In order to investigate in a more rigorous way the form in which

macroeconomic policies and devaluations interacted during these episodes,

and the way in which they affected the behavior of the real exchange rate, a

number of cross section regressions were estimated. These equations took

each devaluation episode as the observation unit, and considered the rate of

change of the real exchange rate as the dependent variable. The independent

variable included the nominal devaluation, the rate of growth of domestic

credit, the change in the rate of growth of domestic credit to the public

sector, and the change in the ratio of the fiscal deficit to GDP. The

equations estimated were the following:


                  RRk a1 + a2Ek + a2C + a3FISk + U

where RR.K is the percentage change in the real exchange rate between the

year prior to the devaluation and k years after the devaluation (for

k 1,2,3 years), for country (episode) n.             is the percentage change

of the nominal exchange rate during the same period, for country n. Given

the nature of the data set used, in most step-wise devaluation cases

    ft2
          = ft3 = ft   initial   devaluation.   is the rate of growth of

domestic credit between year k and the year prior to the devaluation.

FISk is the change in the particular index of fiscal policy used. The
                                       35




results from this equation allow us to have an idea on the average effects

of the nominal devaluations on the RER maintaining (most) other things

constant. The results obtained from the estimation of this equation are

presented in Table 14. Given the very small numbers of observations, these

results should be interpreted cautiously; in spite of this the results are

quite revealing. In all but one case the coefficients had the expected

signs, confirming that expansive macroeconomic policies will generally

result in an erosion of the real exchange rate. Moreover, these results

clearly show that nominal devaluations coupled with rapid rates of growth of

domestic credit or of the fiscal deficit will be self-defeating.

Additionally, these results provide some idea on the "effectiveness" of

nominal devaluations with other things constant. To the extent that

governments are able to control their fiscal and monetary policies they will

be able to significantly enhance the short to medium run effects of nominal

devaluations on the real exchange rate.


V. Concluding Remarks

     In this paper we have investigated in some detail the anatomy of

devaluations in Latin American. The analysis proceeded from the causes and

close determinants of devaluations, to their consequences. Data on 18 major

devaluation episodes were followed for a seven year period that spanned from

3 years prior to the crisis up to three years after the crisis. The

methodology used was to a large extent descriptive, and made extensive use

of non-parametric tests in comparing the behavior of the devaluing countries

to that of a control group of 24 developing nations that maintained a fixed

exchange rate for at least 10 years.
                                        TABLE 14

       Nominal Devaluations and Real Devaluations In Latin America:

                          Cross Section Regressions (OLS)




                                   ek               CSk        DEF

Panel A: k  1 year

                 0.556           -0.181                       -0.007     0.756
                (4.079)         (-2.380)                      (-0.581)

                 0.213           -0.015                                  0.707
                (3.737)         (-0.165)

                 0.212           -0.025            -0.022                0.717
                (3.674)         (-0.315)           (-0.773)

Panel B: k    2 Years

                 0.747           -0.228                        -0.005    0.770
                (3.914)         (-3.475)                      (-0.331)

                 0.467           -0.138                                  0.666
                (4.746)         (-2.616)

                 0.464           -0.031             -0.075
                (5.011)         (-0.372)           (-1.608)

Panel C: k  3 Years

                 0.091           -0.091                        -0.009    0.214
                (0.851)         (-1.012)                      (-0.366)

                 0.122           -0.079                         -        0.245
                (1.781)         (-1.537)

                 0.147           -0.064             -0.082      -        0.438
                (2.394)          (0.783)           (-2.117)



Notes: Numbers in parentheses are t-statistics.
                                    36




     The empirical analysis forcefully indicates that historically the

immediate causes of devaluations have been a rapid depletion of the stock of

international reserves and a substantial real appreciation (i.e., over-

valuation) of the real exchange rate. The ultimate causes of the balance of

payments crises, however, were expansive domestic credit and fiscal policies

that became inconsistent with maintaining a fixed peg. The analysis also

shows that in the period leading to a devaluation countries have generally

piled up exchange controls and trade restrictions in an effort to stop the

imminent crisis. Black market premia goes up, but the drainage of reserves

is not stopped; at most it is somewhat slowed.

     The impact of a devaluation will depend on a number of factors,

including the specific institutional environment and exchange rate system.

In particular, in the realistic case of quantity rationing, multiple rates

and parallel markets, devaluations will have different consequences than

what the textbook model suggests.

     What makes a "successful" devaluation? This is not an easy question to

answer. Not only are there many ways to assess success, but devaluations

are only one component of larger macroeconomic packages. In spite of the

intrinsic difficulties related to evaluating this issue, the empirical

analysis in this paper provides a number of important clues and leads, In

particular, it is possible to classify our episodes into three broad groups

of: successful devaluations, unsuccessful devaluations, and those devalua-

tions for which it is not possible to provide a categorical verdict.

Looking at the definite cases of success and failure provides important

lessons.

     Let's look at the record, on the effect of the devaluations on the

behavior of the RER. The data in Tables 6 and 7 indicate that in only 3 of
                                     37




the 11 stepwise devaluations we can talk of "success" - -   Ecuador   1970,

Venezuela 1964 and Costa Rica. On the other hand, one can easily detect six

(out of eleven) clear failures where after only one or two years the real

exchange rate was already way below its already overvalued level of one year

prior to the crisis.33

     The picture is very different when one looks at the crawlers. In all

six cases for which there are data, after three years the real exchange rate

index was way above its predevaluation level. One should be careful,

however, to jump to the easy and naive conclusion that all crawling pegs are

successful! Indeed, in many ways the definition of a crawling peg is a

system geared at avoiding RER overvaluation. In order to assess the real

degree of success of the crawlers it is necessary to ask ourselves at what

cost the higher RER was maintained. From Table 8 it is clear that, in many

episodes, the main cost is related to a rapid increase in inflation. The

severe cost related to high (i.e., over 50% per annum) rates of inflation

are too well known to be repeated here. What is clear, however, is that it

is not possible to refer to a "successful devaluation" when a 30% real

devaluation is accomplished by provoking a 150% rate of inflation.

    As in the case of step-wise devaluers, successful crawlers require to

implement consistent demand management policies along side the devaluation.

The scrutiny of the data presented in this paper allows us to indicate one

clear successful crawler: Colombia in 1967. The Chilean devaluation in

1982 comes in an honorable second place.



     33Argentina, both Bolivian devaluations, Colombia 1962 and 1965, and
Nicaragua. The data in Table 13 is quite categorical. In successful
countries devaluations have been only one component of broader programs
aimed at demand management; failure countries maintained the inconsistent
macroeconomic policies.
                            38




                         APPENDIX

                     Control Countries


Country                 IFS Country Code   Year of Study
Cote d'Ivoire                    662         1965-1977

Dominican Republic               243         1960-1980

Ecuador                          248         1971-1980

Egypt                            469         1960-1971
El Salvador                      253         1960-1980

Ethiopia                         644         1960-1970
Greece                           174         1960-1973

Guatemala                        258         1960-1980

Honduras                         268         1960-1980

Iran                             429         1960-1971

Iraq                                         1960-1971
Jordan                           439         1960-1971

Malaysia                         548         1960-1970
Mexico                           273         1960-1974

Nicaragua                        278         1960-1977

Nigeria                          694         1960-1970
Panama                           283         1960-1980

Paraguay                         288         1960-1982

Singapore                        576         1960-1970
Sudan                            732         1960-1976
Thailand                         578         1960-1971
Tunisia                          744         1960-1970
Venezuela                        299         1965-1971
Zambia                           754         1960-1971
                                          39




                                    Bibliography



Aizenman, 3., "Adjustment to Monetary Policy and Devaluation Under Two Tier
   and Fixed Exchange Rate Regimes," Journal of Development Economics
   (1985).

Balassa, B., Development Strategies in Semi-Industrial Economics, Oxford
   University Press, 1978.

            "Reforming the System of Incentives in Developing Economies," in
   B. Balassa (ed.), Development Strategies in Semi-Industrial Economies,
   Oxford University Press, 1982.

Calvo, G., "Fractured Liberalism," Economic Development and Cultural Change
   (Apr. 1986).

Calvo, G., "Balance of Payments Crises in a Cash in Advance Economy,"
   Journal of Money. Credit and Banking (Feb. 1987).

Conolly, M., and D. Taylor, "The Exact Timing of the Collapse of an Exchange
   Rate Regime," Journal of Money. Credit and Banking, (May 1984).

Corbo, V., "Chilean Economic Policy and International Economic Relations
   Since 1970," in G.M. Walton (ed.), The National Economic Policies of
   Chile, Greenwich CT: JAI Press, 1985.

_________ and J. de Melo, "What Went Wrong in the Southern Cone" in S.
   Edwards and S. Teitel (Eds.), Growth. Trade and Debt in Latin America,
   special issue of Economic Development and Cultural Change (April 1986).

Cooper, R., "Exchange Rate Devaluation in Developing Countries," Princeton
   Essays on International Finance (1971).

Diaz-Alejandro, C., Exchange Rate Devaluation in a Semi-Industrialized
   Economy: Argentina 1955-1961, MIT Press, 1986.

_________   "Southern Cone Stabilization Plans," in W.R. Cline and S.
   Weintraub (eds.), Economic Stabilization in Developing Countries,
   Brookings, 1981.

_________   "Comment on Harberger," in S. Edwards and L. Ahamed (eds),
   Economic Adjustment and Exchange Rate in Developing Countries, University
   of Chicago Press, 1986.

Dornbusch, R., "Tariffs and Nontraded Goods," Journal of International
   Economics (May 1974): 117-85.

___________ "The Theory of Flexible Exchange Regimes and Macroeconomic
   Policy," Scandinavian Journal of Economics, 78 (May 1976): 255-75.

_________     Open Economy Macroeconomics, New York: Basic Books, 1980.
                                    40




            "Remarks on the Southern Cone," IMF Staff Papers, (Mar. 1983).

_________   "Special Exchange Rates for Capital Account Transactions," World
   Bank Economic Review (September l986a).

__________ "Special Exchange Rates for Commercial Transactions," in S.
   Edwards and L. Ahamed (Eds.), Economic Adjustment and Exchange Tastes in
   Developing Countries (13. of Chicago Press 1986b).

Eaton, J. and M. Gersovitz, "LDC Participation in International Financial
   Markets: Debt and Reserves," Journal of Development Economics (Mar.
   1980)

Edwards, S., "The Demand for International Reserves and Exchange Rate
   Adjustments: The Case of LDCs," Economica (August 1983).

_________   "The Order of Liberalization of the External Sector," Princeton
   Essays on International Finance, Nl56, 1984.

__________ "Stabilization and Liberalization: An Evaluation of the Years
   of Chile's Experiment with Free Market Policies, 1973-1983," Economic
   Development and Cultural Change, January 1985a.

            "Money, the Rate of Devaluation and Interest Rates in a Semi-
   Open Economy," Journal of Money. Credit and Banking (February 1985b).

            "Exchange Rate Misalignment in Developing Countries: Analytical
   Issues and Empirical Evidence" CPD Working Paper, The World Bank, 1985c.

________    "Are Devaluations Contractionary?", Review of Economics and
   Statistics (August 1986).

__________ "Economic Liberalization and the Real Exchange Rate in
   Developing Countries," forthcoming in Debt. Growth and Stabilization:
   Essays In Memory of Carlos-Diaz-Alejandro, forthcoming (Blackwell, 1987).

_________"Tariffs, Terms of Trade and Real Exchange Rates in Intertemporal
   Models of the Current Account," NBER Working Paper, 1987.

_________   Real Exchange Rates. Devaluation and Adjustment, forthcoming,
   MIT Press.

_________   and A. Cox Edwards, Monetarism and Liberalization: The Chilean
   Experiment, Ballinger, 1987.

_________   and S. van Wijnbergen, "The Welfare Effects of Trade and Capital
   Market Liberalization," International Economic Review (Feb. 1986).

Gomez, H.J., "The Colombian Illegal Economy: Size, Evolution,
   Characteristic and Economic Impact," unpublished, 1987.

Hanson, J., and J. de Melo, "External Shocks, Financial Reform and
   Liberalization Attempts in Uruguay," World Development, 1985.
                                        41



Harberger, A., "The Dutch Disease: How Much Sickness and How Much Boom?"
   Resources and Energy (1983).

_________       "Economic Adjustment and the Real Exchange Rate," in S. Edwards
   and L. Ahamed (eds.), Economic Adjustment and Exchange Rates in
   Developing Countries, University of Chicago Press, l986a.

_________       "A Primer on the Chilean Economy," in A. Choksi and D.
   Papageorgious Economic Liberalization in Developing Countries, Oxford:
   Blackwell l986b).

__________ and S. Edwards, "Lessons of Experience Under Fixed Exchange
   Rates," in M. Gersovitz (et al.) (eds.), The Theory and Experience of
   Economic Development (London: Allen and Unwin, 1982).

Johnson, H.G., "A Model of Protection and the Exchange Rate," Review of
   Economic Studies (Apr. 1966).

Kamin, S.B., "Devaluation, External Balance, and Macroeconomic Performance,"
   unpublished manuscript, M.I.T., December 1985.

Khan, M., and R. Zahier, "The Macroeconomic Effects of Changes in Barriers
   to Trade and Capital Flows: A Simulation Analysis," IMF Staff Papers,
   June 1983.

___________ *
            "Trade and Financial Liberalization in the Context of External
   Shocks and Inconsistent Domestic Policies," IMF Staff Papers, March 1985.

_________ and J.S. Lizondo, "Devaluation, Fiscal Deficits and the Real
   Exchange Rate," The World Bank Economic Review (January 1987).

Krueger, A.O., Foreign Trade Regimes and Economic Development:
   Liberalization Attempts and Consequences, Cambridge, MA: 1978.

                Exchange Rate Determination (Cambridge U. Press, 1981).

Krugman, P., "A Model of Balance of Payments Crises," Journal of Money.
   Credit and Banking (Aug. 1979).

Lizondo, J.S., "Exchange Rate Reunification," paper presented at Econometric
   Society Meetings, Cordoba, Argentina 1986.

McKinnon, R.I., Money and Capital in Economic Development, Washington:
   Brookings Institution, 1973.

Michaely, M., "The Sequencing of a Liberalization Policy: A Preliminary
   Statement of Issues," unpublished ms., 1982.

Razin, A., and L.E.O. Svenson, "Trade Taxes and the Current Account,"
   Economics Letters, (1983).

Svensson, L.E.O., and A. Razin, "The Terms of Trade and the Current Account:
   The Harberger-Laursen-Metzler Effect," Journal of Political Economy
                                       42




   (1983).

van Wijnbergen, S., "Capital Controls and the Real Exchange Rate," CPD WP
   #1985-52, World Bank 1985.

_________    "Tariffs,Employment and the Current Account," International
   Economic Review, forthcoming.

Williamson, J. , The Exchange Rate System (Institute of International
   Economics, Washington D.C. 1983).
