NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

REDUCING INEQUALITY THROUGH DYNAMIC COMPLEMENTARITY:
EVIDENCE FROM HEAD START AND PUBLIC SCHOOL SPENDING
Rucker C. Johnson
C. Kirabo Jackson
Working Paper 23489
http://www.nber.org/papers/w23489

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
June 2017, Revised February 2018

Jackson and Johnson are equal authors on this paper. We wish to thank the PSID staff for access
to the confidential restricted-use PSID geocode data. We are grateful to Edward Zigler and
seminar participants at the NBER education/children’s meetings, the University of Michigan,
UC-Berkeley, Penn, Brown, Vanderbilt University, University of Wisconsin/IRP Summer
Workshop, and UC-Davis for helpful comments; and thank Martha Bailey & Andrew GoodmanBacon, and Doug Miller & Jens Ludwig, for sharing data on 1960 county poverty rates and data
from the National Archives & Records Administration. This research was supported by the
National Institutes of Health and the Russell Sage Foundation (to Johnson), and the National
Science Foundation (to Jackson). The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not
necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.
© 2017 by Rucker C. Johnson and C. Kirabo Jackson. All rights reserved. Short sections of text,
not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Reducing Inequality Through Dynamic Complementarity: Evidence from Head Start and Public
School Spending
Rucker C. Johnson and C. Kirabo Jackson
NBER Working Paper No. 23489
June 2017, Revised February 2018
JEL No. I20,I24,I28,J20,J68
ABSTRACT
We explore whether early childhood human-capital investments are complementary to those
made later in life. Using the Panel Study of Income Dynamics, we compare the adult outcomes of
cohorts who were differentially exposed to policy-induced changes in pre-school (Head Start)
spending and school-finance-reform-induced changes in public K12 school spending during
childhood, depending on place and year of birth. Difference-in-difference instrumental variables
and sibling- difference estimates indicate that, for poor children, increases in Head Start spending
and increases in public K12 spending each individually increased educational attainment and
earnings, and reduced the likelihood of both poverty and incarceration in adulthood. The benefits
of Head Start spending were larger when followed by access to better-funded public K12 schools,
and the increases in K12 spending were more efficacious for poor children who were exposed to
higher levels of Head Start spending during their preschool years. The findings suggest that early
investments in the skills of disadvantaged children that are followed by sustained educational
investments over time can effectively break the cycle of poverty.

Rucker C. Johnson
Goldman School of Public Policy
University of California, Berkeley
2607 Hearst Avenue
Berkeley, CA 94720-7320
and NBER
ruckerj@berkeley.edu
C. Kirabo Jackson
Northwestern University
School of Education and Social Policy
2040 Sheridan Road
Evanston, IL 60208
and NBER
kirabo-jackson@northwestern.edu

An online appendix is available at http://www.nber.org/data-appendix/w23489

I. Introduction
Children born to less-advantaged households and communities typically experience lower
levels of educational attainment, employment, earnings, health, and well-being as adults than
children born to more-advantaged ones (Chetty, Hendren, and Katz, 2016). Differences between
individuals from more- and less-advantaged backgrounds manifest early in childhood and tend to
grow as children age (Fryer and Levitt, 2006; Currie and Thomas, 1999; McLeod and Kaiser, 2004;
Heckman and Mosso, 2014). Accordingly, remediating the ill-effects of childhood poverty may
require early investments in the skills of disadvantaged children that are followed by sustained
investments over time. To examine this issue, we study whether early childhood investments
designed to promote school readiness among disadvantaged children that are followed up with
increases in public school spending are particularly effective at improving their long-run outcomes.
While the policy question is important in its own right, we test the long-standing hypothesis
in economics that, because skills beget skills, children who benefit from early human capital
investments may benefit more from later investments (Cunha and Heckman, 2007). If such
dynamic complementarities exist, it is argued, policies that promote early human capital formation
can (a) make subsequent policies to promote human capital more productive, and (b) may be
ineffective if not followed by subsequent investments.1 To examine this question, some studies
examine whether the effect of human capital intervention varies by pre-intervention skill level (e.g.
Garcia and Gallegos, 2017; Lubotsky and Kaestner, 2016; Aizer and Cunha, 2012). Because these
studies do not use exogenous variation in prior skills, they do not speak directly to whether early
and late human capital policies exhibit dynamic complementarity. Addressing this critique, other
studies examine whether the benefits of human capital investments vary among those who were
exposed to non-investment skill shocks such as hurricanes, or rainfall during gestation (e.g.
Adhvaryu, Molina, Nyshadham and Tomayo, 2017). Because these studies do not rely on human
capital investments per se for variation in initial skills, they do not examine whether human capital
investments made at different stages of the life course exhibit dynamic complementarity.2 To test
for dynamic complementarities in human capital investments (in the policy sense, as suggested by
If early childhood investments for disadvantaged youth make subsequent investments in these children more
productive, one can justify policies that redistribute resources toward disadvantaged children during their early years
on efficiency grounds without any appeal to equity issues, fairness, or social justice (Heckman and Mosso, 2014).
2
These studies, however, are informative about whether investments are more or less productive for individuals who
are exposed to some previous human capital shock. In Section II, we discuss how this is related to the idea that human
investments may exhibit dynamic complementarity, but point out that they are not the same thing.
1

1

Heckman and colleagues) requires an examination of the marginal effect of one human capital
investment among individuals who were exposed to a previous human capital investment. While
dynamic complementarities may not exist between any two human capital investments, they are
most likely to exist between two education-related interventions in which one (a school-readiness
program) is designed to help children benefit from the other (public K-12 schools). As such, our
setting is particularly well-suited for studying dynamic complementarities.3
To test for dynamic complementarity we examine the interaction between two exogenous
and independent human capital investment “shocks.” The first exogenous shock to human capital
investment is the rollout of Head Start, the largest early childhood intervention program in the US,
which increased access to early childhood education and pediatric care for low-income children.
The second exogenous shock to human capital investment is the implementation of court-ordered
school finance reforms (SFRs) which (a) reduced differences in public K12 school spending
between affluent and poor neighborhoods within states, and (b) increased (on average) the level of
per-pupil spending at public K12 schools.4 To isolate the effects of these two major policies, we
exploit temporal and geographic variation in exposure to these policy-induced investment
“shocks” and analyze the life trajectories of individuals born between 1950 and 1976, and followed
through 2015 using the Panel Study of Income Dynamics (PSID). Identifying the interaction
effects between two human capital investments requires that (a) one credibly identify the effects
of each investment individually on the same individuals, and (b) that each of the human capital
investments is independent of the other (Almond and Mazumder, 2013). We present numerous
tests to show that these conditions are likely satisfied in our setting. While test scores have been
the traditional focus of evaluations of Head Start and K12 spending, the effects of interventions on
long-run outcomes may go undetected by test scores.5 Consequently, we explore effects on an
Investments are “broadly defined as actions specifically taken to promote learning” in Heckman and Mosso
(2014). As such, it is reasonable that some interaction between education-related interventions are what the
theory is really about. A few concurrent working papers also rely on two investments. In the only other paper to
examine two education-related interventions, Gilraine (2016) finds that the benefits of accountability due to NCLB in
later grades are larger among students exposure to accountability in earlier grades. Looking at a health and an
education intervention, Rossin-Slater and Wust (2017) find that the effects of access to pre-school was smaller among
those who had access to home visits during infancy. In related work with a health intervention, Bhalotra and
Venkataramani (2017) find that the benefits of antibiotic treatment for blacks decline in measures of the severity of
institutionalized segregation. Also Malamud, Pop-Eleches and Urquiola (2016) examine whether the benefits of
attending a better school vary by parental access to abortion near the time of conception.
4
See Card and Payne, 2002; Murray, Evans, and Schwab, 1998; Hoxby, 2001; Jackson, Johnson, and Persico, 2014
for a more complete disucssion of the effects of SFRs on public school spending.
5
E.g. Heckman, Pinto, and Savelyev, 2014; Jackson, forthcoming; Chetty et al., 2011; Ludwig and Miller, 2007.
3

2

array of adult outcomes including educational attainment, earnings, poverty, and incarceration.6
To identify the causal effect of early childhood investments, we exploit geographic
variation in the timing of the rollout of Head Start across counties. In our difference-in-difference
models, we compare the adult outcomes of individuals who were from the same childhood county
but were exposed to different levels of Head Start spending, because some were four years old
when Head Start spending levels were low (or non-existent) while others were four years old when
Head Start spending levels were higher. To validate our models, we show that (a) the identifying
variation in Head Start spending is unrelated to family, community, and other policy changes, (b)
our estimated Head Start effects are robust to instrumental variable models that use only variation
in Head Start spending due to the timing of Head Start rollout in the childhood county, (c) our
estimated Head Start effects are robust to using within-family, across-sibling variation in Head
Start spending exposure, (d) Head Start spending in a child’s county during non-Head Start eligible
ages (ages 1 through 3 and 5 through 10) is unrelated to student outcomes conditional on Head
Start spending during the target age (age 4), and (e) Head Stat spending has no effect on non-poor
populations that were largely ineligible for the program.
To identify the causal effects of public K12 school spending, we exploit geographic
variation in the timing of court-ordered SFRs. Following Jackson, Johnson, and Persico (2016),
we predict the spending change that each district would experience after the passage of a courtmandated SFR based on the type of reform and the characteristics of the district before reforms.
Using instrumental variables models, we examine whether SFR-exposed cohorts (young enough
to have been in school during or after a SFR) have better outcomes relative to SFR-unexposed
cohorts (those who were too old to be affected by a SFR) in districts predicted to experience larger
reform-induced spending increases. We present several empirical tests showing that the withindistrict variation in per-pupil spending induced by SFRs is exogenous to other family, community,
and policy changes in the district. We also show that our K12 school spending effects are robust
to using within-family, across-sibling variation in SFR-induced K12 public-school spending, and
that SFR-induced spending changes during non-school age years are unrelated to outcomes.
To explore the relationship between early- and later-childhood human capital investments,

In a recent related study, Carneiro and Ginja (2014) study the long-run effects of Head Start participation on health
and behavioral problems. We explore a wider array of adult socioeconomic outcomes. A key focus of our paper is on
how the effectiveness of Head Start spending varies by the quality of the public schools students subsequently attend.
6

3

we combine both identification strategies to estimate the effects of the interaction between Head
Start spending and public K12 spending. We can test for dynamic complementarities based on two
sources of variation. Namely, some districts experienced increases in school spending due to a
SFR when Head Start was available in the county, while other districts experienced similar K12
spending increases when Head Start was not available. This fact allows one to test if the effects of
K12 spending increases due to SFRs are higher with greater public pre-K investments than without
them. Similarly, Head Start was rolled out in different counties both before and after the local
school districts experienced increases in K12 spending due to SFRs. This fact allows one to test if
the effects of Head Start spending are larger in areas that have higher levels of K12 spending due
to the passage of a court-ordered SFR. For this interaction effect to be identified, it requires that
individuals that are exposed to both a SFR and Head Start are not somehow different from those
that are exposed to only a SFR or only exposed to Head Start. One can only be confident that this
condition is satisfied if both policy changes are independent of each other. We argue that because
SFRs occurred at the state level (affecting all public schools in a state at the same time), while
Head Start (a federal program) was introduced in certain counties within states at different times,
these two policies are largely independent of each other. More formally, we show that (a) the raw
correlation between the two policy instruments is only 0.15, (b) conditional on controls there is no
association between Head Start spending and SFR-induced changes in K12 spending, and (c) using
partial F-statistics, there is sufficient policy variation in Head Start spending and K12 spending
for the effect of each to be identified and for the interaction between the two to be identified.
For children from low-income families, on average, increases in Head Start spending
increased educational attainment and adult earnings and reduced the likelihood of both poverty
and incarceration in adulthood. We find no effect of Head Start spending on the outcomes of nonpoor children. Consistent with Jackson, Johnson, and Persico (2016), increases in public school
K12 spending improved this same array of outcomes in adulthood. We also find strong and robust
evidence of dynamic complementarity. Among poor children exposed to a 10% reduction in K12
spending, exposure to a typical Head Start center has small statistically insignificant effects on
educational attainment, wages, incarceration, and adult poverty. However, even in our
conservative models, among poor children exposed to a 10% increase in K12 spending, exposure
to a typical Head Start center leads to 0.59 additional years of education, being 14.8 percentage
points more likely to graduate high school, 17% higher wages, being 4.7 percentage points less
4

likely to be incarcerated, and being 12 percentage points less likely to be poor as an adult. The fact
that the long-run benefits of Head Start spending depend on the subsequent level of K12 spending
may help explain why some studies find positive effects of Head Start and others do not.7 Looking
at the marginal effects of K12 spending, for low-income children, increasing public K12 spending
by 10% has small effects on educational attainment, adult wages, and incarceration when not
preceded by Head Start. However, among low-income children exposed to Head Start, that same
10% increase in K12 per-pupil spending increases educational attainment by 0.4 years, increases
earnings by 20.6 percent, and reduces the likelihood of incarceration by eight percentage points.
The positive interaction effects between Head Start and K12 spending are robust across several
models (including sibling comparisons) and are only present among poor children (who were
eligible for Head Start). The effect of K12 spending was unrelated to the level of Head Start
spending among non-poor children, for whom increasing K12 spending by 10% increased years
of education by 0.2 and earnings by 11.7 percent.
We find long-run benefits of public early childhood investments and robust evidence of
complementarities between early and later human capital investments for low-income children.
The complementarities imply that one could increase both equity and efficiency by redistributing
spending from well-funded K12 schools toward Head Start programs targeted at poor children.
Generally, our results are the first to show that early and sustained complementary investments in
the skills of low-income children can be a cost-effective strategy to break the cycle of poverty.
The rest of the paper is organized as follows. Section II outlines our theoretical framework.
Section III describes the Head Start program and court-ordered school finance reforms. Section IV
presents the data used. Section V describes the empirical strategy. Section VI presents the results.
Section VII presents conclusions and a summary discussion.
II. Theoretical Framework
Research in developmental neuroscience highlights the importance of the preschool years
in establishing the building blocks of subsequent human capital formation and the
interconnectedness of cognitive, non-cognitive, and health formation (Shonkoff and Phillips,
2000). Informed by this research, Cunha and Heckman (2007), theorize that skill development is
For positive effects see Deming (2009), Ludwig and Miller (2007), Garces, Currie, and Thomas, (2002), Carneiro
and Ginja (2014). For mixed effects see Zigler et al., (2011), Lipsey, Farran and Hofer (2015).
7

5

an interactive, multistage process in which the marginal effect of investments today is higher
among those with a greater stock of previously acquired skills. We refer to this characteristic of
skills production as dynamic complementary in skill development.8 When this condition holds,
investments that increase skills early in life make subsequent skill investments more productive,
or “skills produced at one stage raise the productivity of investment at subsequent stages”
(Heckman and Cunha 2007). We refer to such synergies between investments as dynamic
complementary in human capital investments.9 If Head Start increases skills and therefore
improves school readiness, Head Start may facilitate better learning in the K12 system. If so,
insofar as increased spending improves school quality, spending on Head Start and public K12
schools would exhibit dynamic complementarity. This is what we seek to test in this paper.
Note that complementarity is not a given. Compensatory interventions or interventions
designed to bring all children up to some basic standard of skill, may, by design, have smaller
benefits for more highly-skilled children.10 Also, note that human capital investments may exhibit
dynamic complementarity for reasons other than dynamic complementary in skill development.11
To apply these insights to our setting, we outline two ways through which Head Start and K12
spending may interact. The first is a direct channel that operates through dynamic complementary
in skill development. The second channel is indirect and may operate through spillovers to other
students, and adjustments by actors in the schooling system (Malamud et al., 2017).

This is what is identified by researchers who examine the effect of interventions for individuals with differing
incoming levels of skills (e.g. Garcia and Gallegos, 2017; Lubotsky and Kaestner, 2016; Aizer and Cunha, 2012).
9
Following the notation from Heckman (2007), the technology of skills production is dynamic. Skills acquired when
a child is t years old is [a] below
[a]
𝜃𝑡+1 = 𝑓𝑡 (ℎ𝑡 , 𝜃𝑡 , 𝐼𝑡 )
where t=1,2,...T, 𝜃𝑡 is a vector of skills at time t, parental capabilities are connoted by ℎ𝑡 , and investments during time
t are connoted by 𝐼𝑡 . Investments in time t (𝐼𝑡 ) are construed broadly to include parental investments, schooling inputs
(i.e., peers, teachers, etc.), and neighborhood and community inputs. For analytical convenience, 𝑓𝑡 is assumed to be
strictly increasing in 𝐼𝑡 . Dynamic complementarity in human capital investments arises when the stocks of capabilities
acquired by period t-1 (𝜃𝑡 ) make investments in period t (𝐼𝑡 ) more productive, i.e.,
[b]
(𝜕 2 𝜃𝑡+1 )/(𝜕𝜃𝑡 𝜕𝐼𝑡 ) > 0.
Consider that 𝜃𝑡 = 𝑓𝑡−1 (ℎ𝑡−1 , 𝜃𝑡−1 , 𝐼𝑡−1 ). Because 𝜕𝑓𝑡 /𝜕𝐼𝑡 > 0, if [b] holds, then [c] below must also hold.
[c]
(𝜕 2 𝜃𝑡+1 )/(𝜕𝐼𝑡−1 𝜕𝐼𝑡 ) > 0.
In words, dynamic complementarity in skill development implies that there is dynamic complementarity in human
capital investments. However, if early investments increase the efficacy of later investments through mechanisms
other than increasing skills, the converse does may not hold. We show that this is not the case in our setting.
10
Such pattern may explain Rossin-Slater and Wust (2017) who find that preschool is less effective for children who
received home health visits as infants.
11
Formally, if equation [b] holds it implies that [c] will also hold. However, the converse is not always true.
8

6

The direct channel operates through what we call “alignment.” The alignment mechanism
is predicated on the idea that the sequence of when skills are taught matters (Knudsen et al., 2006;
Newport, 1990; Pinker, 1994) and the fact that K12 systems target students with a specific
incoming skill level. Students above the target skill level may benefit less from the K12 system
(the K12 system may spend valuable instructional time teaching skills they have already mastered),
and students below this target incoming skill level may benefit less from the K12 system (the
instruction may require skills they do not possess). Given that poor children, on average, are less
likely to be school-ready at kindergarten entry (Fryer and Levitt, 2004; Magnuson and Waldfogel,
2005), Head Start spending, by increasing their skills, may bring them closer to the target such that
they benefit more from subsequent investments experienced in the K12 education system.
Furthermore, access to pediatric care (provided to Head Start participants) may promote this skill
development (Levine and Schanzenbach, 2009; Cohodes, Grossman, Kleiner, Lovenheim, 2015).
Through alignment, Head Start spending increases may not improve outcomes to the same
degree in all contexts. In fact, in poorly-funded schools that may align instruction to a low-target
skill level, Head Start participation could reduce alignment with the target level by increasing
students’ incoming skills above the target. In such a scenario, relative to their peers who did not
attend preschool, any advantage in skill created by Head Start will diminish over time as children
who attended Head Start receive redundant instruction, and their peers who lack access to
preschool catch up in elementary school grades. That is, there may be fadeout and lower long-run
Head Start effects for program participants who attend poorly-funded K12 schools. In sum,
through this channel, on average, the effects of Head Start spending on poor children may be larger
in well-funded K12 districts and could be negligible in poorly-funded public school districts.
The first indirect channel is through “spillovers.” Research has found that higher shares of
low-performing peers or disruptive peers may have deleterious impacts on students (see Sacerdote,
2014). By increasing the human capital of poor children, increases in Head Start spending may
affect the subsequent peer composition of the K12 classrooms for all children in the county. This
could make it easier for the K12 school system to translate resources into better outcomes.12 The
second indirect channel is through “adjustments.” The first is an “alignment adjustment.” If
teachers in the K12 system alter the alignment of their instruction toward an incoming higherNeidell and Waldfogel (2010) provide evidence of this channel by documenting spillover effects from preschool
between Head Start and non-Head Start children on math and reading achievement.
12

7

ability student (in light of a lower share of low-achieving students due to Head Start), the quality
of K12 instruction could be affected for all students. Importantly, because these adjustments can
move some students closer to the target and others farther from it, the “alignment adjustment”
effect could be positive or negative for any given student.13 There could also be “budget allocation
adjustments” that can affect students in different classrooms. For example, lower shares of students
requiring remediation or special services (due to Head Start) may allow schools to allocate
resources to other productive inputs, which may affect all students in the school.14
This is not an exhaustive list of all possible adjustment effects. However, the key takeaways
are that (a) policy complementarities reflect both the direct effect due to the technology of skill
formation and also some spillover and adjustment effects, and (b) adjustment and spillover effects
could lead the interaction between the two interventions to be either positive or negative such that
the overall interaction effect is ambiguous in sign. Through the direct channel, both the potential
direct effects of Head Start spending and dynamic complementarity will be experienced only by
Head Start participants. Through the spillovers channel (without adjustments) all children in the
classroom with Head Start participants will have larger K12 spending effects when there is greater
Head Start spending. However, through the adjustment channels, all children in K12 schools with
former Head Start participants may be affected (even if not in the same classrooms). We present
empirical evidence to shed light on what mechanisms are most likely at play in our setting.
III.

BACKGROUND AND OVERVIEW OF HEAD START AND SCHOOL FINANCE REFORMS

III.A. Background on Head Start
Head Start was established in 1964 as part of Lyndon B. Johnson’s “War on Poverty,” and
is a national, federally-funded, early-childhood program with the aim of improving the human
capital of poor children. The Head Start curriculum aims to enhance literacy, numeracy, reasoning,
For example, if the K12 system adjusted the target skill level higher in response to Head Start, low skilled children
who did not participate in Head Start may now be even more poorly aligned with the new target and may benefit less
from the K12 system than if Head Start were not available to their peers.
14
One of the program components of Head Start is teaching parenting skills; thus, another possible indirect channel
is changes in parental quality. However, existing evidence suggests the primary mechanisms operate through the
programmatic elements targeted at participating children: (a) enhancing literacy, numeracy, reasoning and problemsolving, and decision-making skills; (b) access to pediatric care; and (c) improved nutrition (Zigler, 2010; Currie and
Neidell, 2007). Moreover, we present a test of this using within-family variation. In such tests, we find no indication
that siblings of those exposed to higher levels of Head Start spending have improved outcomes (Appendix I). This
runs counter to the parental quality mechanism.
13

8

problem-solving, and decision-making skills. Head Start includes educational efforts for both
parents and children to enhance nutrition in the home and provides nutritious meals for the
children. Participating children receive development screenings, and programs connect families
with medical, dental, and mental health services.15,16 Head Start also provides first-time parents
with parenting strategies (Zigler et al., 2011). Head Start currently operates more than 19,200
centers and serves more than 900,000 children.17 Current Head Start expenditures average about
$8,700 per enrolled child (in 2015 dollars). This level of per-pupil spending is much lower than
those at model preschool programs such as Perry Preschool or Abecedarian (Blau and Currie,
2006).18 However, per-pupil Head Start spending levels are on the same order of magnitude as the
average public K12 per-pupil spending, which is currently about $11,000 (in 2015 dollars).19
Because we seek to explore the effects of Head Start spending on longer-run adult
outcomes (among those who are adults today), we study the effects of Head Start at the inception
of the program (1965 through 1980). Head Start was initially launched as an eight-week, summeronly program in 1965 and then became a primarily part-day, nine-month program in 1966. Head
Start is mainly funded federally.20 To open a new Head Start center, local organizations (typically
non-profit organizations, for-profit agencies, or school systems) apply to the federal government
for grant funds. Grantees provide at least 20% of the funding. After approval, Head Start grants
are awarded directly to applying organizations subject to three-year grant cycles.21 Each grantee
must comply with student-to-teacher ratio guidelines and other standards outlined in the Head Start
Act. During the first 15 years of the program, the average student-to-teacher ratio in a Head Start
classroom was roughly 17:1 (Zigler, 2010).22 During this early era of the program, the majority of
http://www.acf.hhs.gov/programs/ohs/about/head-start
An OEO report of 1967 documents Head Start accomplishments in the first two years on child health that include
98,000 eye defects treated; 900,000 cases of dental problems addressed (5 cavities per child); 740,000 without polio
vaccinations received vaccines; and 1,000,000 were given measles vaccinations.
17
See Appendix Figure A1 for the national, annual enrollment in Head Start between 1965 and 2013.
18
Head Start spending per enrollee is about 60% of spending levels observed in model preschool programs.
19
There is considerable variability around this national average in individual states. States spending the least per-pupil
included Utah ($6,555), Idaho ($6,791), Arizona ($7,208), Oklahoma ($7,672) and Mississippi ($8,130).
20
Head Start funds were allocated to states proportionately based upon each state’s relative number of children living
in families with income below the poverty line and the relative number of public assistance recipients in each state.
Head Start in collaboration with the Medicaid Early Pediatric Screening, Diagnosis, & Treatment Program (EPSDT)
provided comprehensive prevention and treatment services to preschool children.
21
As documented in Ludwig and Miller (2007), the poorest 300 counties initially received grant assistance to apply
for funding at the program's inception.
22
This student-to-teacher ratio is higher than the prevailing student-to teacher ratios in the model preschool programs
of the Perry Preschool (5.7 children per teacher), the Abecedarian Project (6 children per teacher), and Chicago Child
Parent Center and Expansion Program (8-12 children per teacher) (Cunha, Heckman, Lochner and Masterov, 2006;
15
16

9

Head Start children were enrolled in part-day centers (as opposed to full-day programs, which are
6 or more hours per day such as Abecedarian), and often part-year (GAO report, 1981).23
Head Start was targeted at pre-school age children (3 through 5) and this target changed
somewhat over time. While most Head Start enrollees were four years old at enrollment, this was
not strictly the case. The early Summer programs enrolled older preschool children, while fullyear programs were primarily for younger preschool children three years of age or older up to the
age when they are eligible for kindergarten or first grade (OCD, 1970). At each center, at least
90% of enrollees had to be from families whose income was below the federal poverty line, and at
least 10% of children had to have a disability.24 The top panel of Figure 1 plots the raw national
Head Start enrollments between 1960 and 1994. Between 1965 and 1970, most of the enrollment
in Head Start was in summer-only programs. However, from 1972 and after that, most enrollment
was in full-year Head Start. As such, the early rollout of Head Start represented both increases in
Head Start participation and enhancements in the Head Start programs themselves. Another
notable pattern is the decline in Head Start enrollments between 1969 and 1972. During this period,
full-year Head Start programs enrollment was increasing at the same time that summer-only
program enrollment was declining (somewhat more rapidly). To relate these enrollments to
participation rates at the individual child level, for each kindergarten entry cohort we computed
the cumulative likelihood across all age-eligible years that an income-eligible child would enroll
in Head Start.25 To avoid double-counting individuals who enrolled in both the summer program
Fuerst and Fuerst, 1993; Carneiro and Ginja, 2014). Note also the much smaller scale of these model programs as the
Perry and Abecedarian programs each served just over 100 disadvantaged children.
23
We are unable to identify which of these options a local Head Start center offered children who attended (part-day
vs full-day; part-year vs. full-year). Summer-only programs were phased out by 1981 (Gibbs et al., 2011).
24
Children who are 4 years old and whose family income is below the federal poverty guidelines (or is on public
assistance programs AFDC or SSI) are eligible for the program. Beginning in 1972 (as part of the Economic
Opportunity Act Amendment) at least 10% of children per center must have a disability (irrespective of the family
income of these children). In 1969, a provision was added allowing children from families above the poverty level to
receive Head Start services for a fee. A fee schedule for non-poor participants in Head Start was required; fees were
prohibited for families below the poverty line. The eligibility criteria was mostly unchanged during the period of the
program we analyze (Source: 45 CFR (Code Federal Regulations), Parts 1301 to 1311, Early Childhood Learning and
Knowledge Center: http://eclkc.ohs.acf.hhs.gov/hslc; www.eric.ed.gov; Zigler and Valentine, 1979).
25
The ratio of enrolled students to the income-eligible age-eligible population in a given year is not the same as a
specific cohort's participation rate by kindergarten entry. To illustrate this point, suppose for simplicity that Head Start
had only the summer program. For example, the annual enrollment rate in summer programs was about 22 percent
between 1965 and 1967. The cohort of income-eligible children entering kindergarten in 1965 could only have
enrolled at age 5 and would have a 22 percent participation rate. However, the cohort of income-eligible children that
entered kindergarten in 1966 could have enrolled at age 4 or 5, so (assuming that participants enroll for one year and
not multiple years) their cohort's participation rate by kindergarten entry would be 44 percent (i.e., the sum of the
likelihood of participation during ages 4 or 5: 22 + 22). All subsequent cohorts could have enrolled at ages 3,4, or 5,

10

and the full-year programs, we assume that 40 percent of full-year enrollees were previously in a
summer program. The lower panel of Figure 1 depicts our estimated likelihood of Head Start
enrollment (across all age-eligible years) by kindergarten entry cohort. The likelihood of Head
Start enrollment among poor children reached 86% for income-eligible cohorts entering
kindergarten in 1969, fell in the early 1970s, and stabilized around 63% by 1990. This is similar
to the Garces et al (2002) estimate of two-thirds. Our participation rates of between 63 and 85
percent are important to keep in mind as we interpret the magnitudes of our intent-to-treat estimates
(in Section VI). Figure 1 (top panel) also plots the share of 3- and 4-year-olds enrolled in full-time
daycare over time (as reported in the Current Population Survey). This figure highlights that Head
Start rollout coincides with a period in which most children were not in formal, full-time preschool, and also coincides with a general increase in the proportion of children ages 3 to 4 enrolled
in full-time pre-school. In the context of the estimated effects of Head Start during this rollout
period, the counterfactual option in the early years is primarily home care, as opposed to some
other full-time pre-K program (as might be the case with present-day public pre-K expansions).
We use Head Start spending as a way to measure both the presence of the program and also
the quality, size, and extent of the program. While Head Start spending per enrollee may seem like
a natural proxy for quality, such a measure fails to capture changes in spending that work through
expansions in access.26 Because the target population for Head Start is poor pre-schoolers and most
enrolles are 4 years old, our measure of Head Start spending is federal Head Start spending per
poor four-year-old in the county. Between 1965 and 1980, the average county with a Head Start
center spent about $4,000 per poor child and about $5,300 per enrollee (in year 2000 dollars).

so that post-1966 cohorts' participation rate by kindergarten entry (across all age-eligible years) is the running total
annual summer enrollment ratio for the three years preceding kindergarten entry. Similarly, assuming that participants
enroll for one year and not multiple years, a specific cohort's full-year participation rate by kindergarten entry is the
running total annual full-year enrollment ratio for the two years preceding kindergarten entry.
26
The expansion of Head Start involved both increases in the number of enrolled children and increases in spending
per enrolled child. Head Start spending per enrollee increases do not capture increases in the total number of children
affected by Head Start, so that spending per poor four-year-old in the county is a more appropriate measure. To
illustrate this point, we collected data on Head Start spending per enrollee and Head Start spending per poor 4-year
old at the state level between 2003 and 2014 (years for which both sets of data are available). Using within-state
changes in spending over time, a 10% increase in spending per poor four-year-old is associated with only a 0.243%
increase in spending per enrollee, on average. However, it is also associated with a 1.2% increase in the number of
Head Start participants, and a 6.5 percentage-point increase in the percentage of poor four-year-olds enrolled
(Appendix Table B1). While spending per poor 4-year-old is sensitive to both increases in funding per enrollee and
increases in total enrollment, increases in spending per enrollee are unrelated to increases in enrollment. These patterns
make clear that for studying the rollout of Head Start, spending per enrollee would be an inappropriate measure, and
that spending per poor 4-year old is a much better measure.

11

There is considerable variation in timing of the establishment of Head Start centers. However, in
most counties, the first Head Start center was established between 1965 and 1970.27 The
geographic variation in the timing of the rollout of Head Start is central to our empirical strategy
to isolate exogenous variation in Head Start spending across birth cohorts within a county.
III.B. Background on School Finance Reforms
The other major human capital interventions we study are the increases in public K12
school spending caused by court-ordered school finance reforms (SFRs). In most states, before the
1970s, local property taxes accounted for most resources spent on K12 schooling (Howell and
Miller, 1997). Because the local property tax base is typically higher in areas with higher home
values, and there are high levels of residential segregation by socioeconomic status, heavy reliance
on local financing contributed to affluent districts’ ability to spend more per student. In response
to large within-state differences in per-pupil spending across wealthy/high-income and poor
districts, state supreme courts overturned school finance systems in 28 states between 1971 and
2010. Because of these court decisions, many states implemented legislative reforms that led to
important changes in public education funding.28 Most of these court-ordered SFRs changed the
parameters of spending formulas to reduce inequality in school spending and weaken the
relationship between per-pupil school spending and the wealth and income level of the district.
As pointed out in Hoxby (2001), the effect of a SFR on school spending depends on (a) the
type of school funding formula introduced by the reform and, (b) how the funding formula
introduced interacts with the specific characteristics of a district. To capture some of this
complexity, we follow Jackson, Johnson, and Persico (2016) and categorize reforms into four
types. Foundation plans guarantee a base level of per-pupil spending and are designed to increase
per-pupil spending for the lowest-spending districts. Spending-limit plans prohibit per-pupil
Figure A2 presents each county in the United States color-coded by the year of its first Head Start center.
The first of these successful cases is the California case, Serrano v. Priest, decided in 1971. Challenges to state
school finance systems were argued on either equity or adequacy grounds. The early challenges (1971- mid 1980s)
were won on equity grounds. For “equity cases,” local financing was found to violate the responsibility of the state to
provide a quality education to all children. “Equity cases” sought to weaken the relationship between the quality of
educational services and the fiscal capacity of the district. The more recent challenges (late 1980s onwards) were
mounted on adequacy grounds. “Adequacy cases” rely on the fact that most states have a constitutional provision
requiring the state to provide some minimum “adequate” level of quality schools for all children (Lindseth, 2004).
They were argued on the grounds that low per-pupil spending levels in certain districts meant that the state had failed
to meet its obligation. Between 1970 and 1990, 10 and 4 states had court-ordered reforms argued on equity and
adequacy grounds, respectively.
27
28

12

spending levels above some predetermined amount. Such plans tend to reduce spending for high
spending districts and may reduce long-run spending for all districts. Reward-for-effort plans
match locally-raised funds for education with additional state funds (often with higher match rates
for lower-income areas). Such plans tend to increase spending for all districts with larger increases
in low-income districts. Equalization plans typically tax all districts and redistribute funds to
lower-wealth and lower-income districts. These reform/formula types are not mutually exclusive.
In existing work Card and Payne (2002), Jackson, Johnson, and Persico (2016) and Hoxby
(2000) find that court-ordered SFRs that lead to the implementation of different funding formulas
had different effects on district spending by pre-reform income and spending levels. 29 In particular,
Jackson, Johnson and Persico (2016) find that reforms that lead to “reward-for-effort” formulas
tended to increase per-pupil K12 spending in all districts; spending limits led to pronounced
spending reductions in high-spending districts; foundation plans led to the largest spending
increases in low-income districts; and equalization plans were more equalizing by pre-reform
spending levels than by pre-reform income levels. These already established systematic patterns
allow us to predict how much K12 school spending increases in each district as a function of the
reform type introduced (by the state) and the pre-reform characteristics of the district. Because
these relationships are unrelated to decisions made by individual districts or demographic shifts
that may affect public school spending levels, we can use this prediction to isolate the causal
relationship between reform-induced K12 spending increases and students’ longer-run outcomes.
IV. DATA
We compiled data on annual Head Start spending at the county level, and public K12 school
spending at the school district level. The Head Start spending data come from the National
Archives Record Administration, Inter-university Consortium for Political and Social Research,
To illustrate how the introduction of different formula types affected districts by pre-reform income and spending
levels, we replicate the analisis in Jackson Johnson and Persico (2016) in Appendix C. Appendix Figures C1 and C2
present event-study plots of the natural log of per-pupil spending at the district level (after removing both district and
year fixed effects). Year 0 is the first year of the first court order in the state, year “-5” is five years before the first
court order, and year “5” is five years after the initial court order. For each court order, we link all formula changes
that occurred within three years to that court-ordered SFR. Figure C1 shows the evolution of per-pupil spending for
districts in the bottom and top quartiles of per-pupil spending in 1972 (the year preceding the first court-ordered SFR)
after court orders that led to the implementation of different kinds of funding formula plans. Figure C2 presents similar
plots for districts in the top and bottom quartiles of the state income distribution in 1963. Figures C1 and C2 show that
court-ordered SFRs that lead to the implementation of different funding formulas had different effects on districts by
pre-reform income and spending levels.
29

13

and Surveillance, Epidemiology, and End Results population data. These are combined to form a
county-level panel of Head Start spending per poor 4-year-old in the county between 1965 and
1980.30 Public K12 education funding data come from several sources that are combined to form
a panel of per-pupil spending for US school districts in 1967 and annually from 1970 through 2000
and are linked to a database of SFRs from Jackson, Johnson, and Persico (2016).31 To avoid
confounding nominal with real changes in spending, we convert both Head Start and K12 school
spending across all years to 2000 dollars using the Consumer Price Index (CPI).
Our individual-level data on long-run outcomes come from the Panel Study of Income
Dynamics (PSID, 1968-2015), and our analysis sample includes individuals born between 1950
and 1976 who were followed into adulthood. These PSID cohorts straddle both the rollout of Head
Start programs across the country and the implementation of the early waves of court-ordered
SFRs.32 We include all information on PSID individuals between 1968 and 2015.33 We linked
persons in the PSID using their census blocks during childhood to school spending data, SFR data,
and Head Start spending data.34 We then match the earliest available childhood residential address
to the school district boundaries that prevailed in 1969 to avoid complications arising from
endogenously changing district boundaries over time. We detail the algorithm in Appendix D.
Among potentially treated cohorts, almost all (97%) of the earliest address information we use is
Further details on the PSID data are in Appendix D.
The Census of Governments has been conducted every five years since 1972 and records school spending for every
school district in the US. The Historical Database on Individual Government Finances (INDFIN) contains annual
district finance data for a sub-sample of districts from 1967, and 1970 through 1991. After 1991, the Common Core
data (CCD) School District Finance Survey (F-33) includes data on school spending for every school district in the
US. Details on how these databases were compiled and the coverage of districts in these data are in Appendix E.
32
The share of individuals potentially exposed to Head Start expenditures at age 4 increases significantly with birth
year over the 1950-1976 birth cohorts analyzed in the PSID sample. Two-thirds of the sample grew up in a state that
was subject to a court-mandated SFR between 1971 and 2000 (the first court order was in 1971).
33
The PSID maintains high wave-to-wave response rates of 95-98%. Studies have concluded that the PSID sample of
heads and wives remains representative of the national sample of adults (Fitzgerald, Gottschalk, Moffitt, 1998a,b;
Becketti et al, 1988). Additionally, we perform a supplementary analysis of sample attrition in the PSID, and find no
evidence of selective attrition among our study sample (Appendix Table D1). In particular, among original sample
children, baseline 1968 family and county characteristics do not jointly significantly predict the likelihood of attrition
or the likelihood of being observed as an adult.
34
The PSID began interviewing a national probability sample of families in 1968. These families were re-interviewed
each year through 1997, when interviewing became biennial. All persons in PSID families in 1968 have the PSID
“gene,” which means that they are followed in subsequent waves. When children with the “gene” become adults and
leave their parents’ homes, they become their own PSID “family unit” and are interviewed in each wave. The original
geographic cluster design of the PSID enables comparisons in adulthood of childhood neighbors who have been
followed over the life course. Moreover, the genealogical design implies that the PSID sample today includes
numerous adult sibling groupings who have been members of PSID-interviewed families for more than four decades.
We include both the Survey Research Center component and the Survey of Economic Opportunity component,
commonly known as the “poverty sample,” of the PSID sample.
30
31

14

from before the policies we study were enacted so that bias due to residential sorting in response
to the policies is negligible. We verify this empirically.35 We also merge in county-level
characteristics from the 1960 Census, and information on the timing of other key policy changes
during childhood (e.g., school desegregation, hospital desegregation, Title I, rollout of other “War
on Poverty” initiatives and expansion of safety net programs—described in Section V) from
multiple data sources.36
We define low-income children as those whose average parental income (between ages 12
and 17) fell in the bottom quartile.37 Among cohorts born between 1963-1976 for whom parental
income at age four is observed, roughly 80% of those whom we classify as low-income were below
the federal poverty line at age four, and 93% of those who were below the poverty threshold at age
four are classified as low-income by our definition. The analytic sample includes 15,232
individuals from 4,990 childhood families, 1,427 school districts, 1,120 counties, across all 50
states. From this point forward, we refer to children who are low income as “poor” children, and
those not from low-income families (as defined above) as “non-poor” children. We examine a
broad range of adult outcomes. These include 1) educational outcomes—whether graduated from
high school, years of completed education; 2) labor market and economic status outcomes (in real
2000 dollars)— log wages, family income, annual incidence of poverty in adulthood38 (ages 2050); and 3) criminal involvement and incarceration outcomes—whether ever incarcerated (jail or
prison) and the annual incidence of incarceration in adulthood. Table 1 contains descriptive
statistics for various childhood measures and adult outcomes in our analytic sample.

As a check on endogenous mobility (in Appendix H), we re-estimated all models limiting the analysis sample to
those who lived at their (earliest) childhood residence prior to the enactment of Head Start programs in their respective
county or SFR in their district. As expected, we find similar results to those with the full sample, so that endogenous
residential mobility is not a source of bias in our analysis.
36
The data we use include measures from 1968-1988 Office of Civil Rights (OCR) data; 1960, 1970, 1980, and 1990
Census data; 1962-1999 Census of Governments (COG) data; Common Core data (CCD) compiled by the National
Center for Education Statistics; Regional Economic Information System (REIS) data; county-level Title I/ESEA
spending (NARA); the comprehensive case inventory of court litigation regarding school desegregation over the 19551990 period (American Communities Project), and major plan implementation dates in large districts (compiled by
Welch/Light); and American Hospital Association’s Annual Survey of Hospitals (1946-1990) and the Centers for
Medicare Provider of Service data files (dating back to 1960s) to identify the precise date in which a Medicare-certified
hospital was established in each county of the US (an accurate marker for hospital desegregation compliance).
37
Because the earliest year in which parental income is available is 1967 due to when the PSID data collection started,
we cannot observe family income at age four for those born before 1963. However, we can observe average family
income during adolescence (ages 12 through 17) for all individuals in our analytic sample, which serves as a good
permanent income measure. We use this to form our group of likely Head Start eligible individuals.
38
Based on the family income-to-needs ratio and federal poverty thresholds by family structure and household size.
35

15

V. EMPIRICAL STRATEGY
V.A.

Identifying the effects of Head Start Spending
Our measure of Head Start spending is total federal Head Start spending in a county per

poor four-year-old (in 2000 CPI-adjusted real dollars). Our research design takes advantage of the
staggered introduction across geographic areas of Head Start programs and the resulting spending
increases during the program’s rollout. Before the rollout of Head Start to an area, there is no
spending on Head Start. However, after the introduction of Head Start in a county, spending levels
typically increase for several successive years. Figure 2 shows an event-study plot of Head Start
spending per poor-four-year-old before and after rollout in areas that had high and low Head Start
spending in 1980 (the end of the sample period under study). Note that year “zero” is the year of
the establishment of the first Head Start center in a county.
In the high-spending counties, once the first center is established, spending per poor fouryear-old increases rapidly. As expected, the increase is much larger in the high-spending counties
(from zero to about $5,000 per poor 4-year old) than the low-spending counties. However,
spending is highest during the first year and then falls after that. This initial increase and
subsequent fall is an artifact of the large national enrollment in summer-only programs that were
phased out in the following years (Figure 1). The initial increase in Head Start spending due to the
summer-only programs is also evident in counties with low Head Start spending in 1980. In
essence, almost all counties experienced a transitory increase in Head Start spending, due to the
ubiquitous introduction of summer-only programs that falls over time. However, high-spending
counties expanded enrollment (and spending) in full-year programs that was sustained over time,
while the low-spending counties did not increase spending on full-year programs and reverted to
near zero Head Start spending within four years.
The left panel of Figure 2 reveals that, among children born within a few years of each
other in the same county, some were four years old when there was no Head Start spending in their
county, and others were four years old at the end of the phase-in stage when spending levels were
high. If higher levels of Head Start spending improve outcomes, one should observe that (a) the
post-rollout cohorts should have better outcomes than the pre-rollout cohorts, and (b)
improvements between pre- and post-rollout cohorts should be larger in counties with larger
sustained increases in Head Start spending. Figure 2 reveals exactly this pattern for years of
educational attainment (measured in adulthood) among poor children. The event study shows that
16

areas with small increases (middle panel) and those with large increases in Head Start spending
(right panel) were on the same trajectory among cohorts who were older than four years old when
the first Head Start center was established (i.e., years -5 through year 0). However, the post-rollout
cohorts have much better outcomes in high Head Start spending counties than in low-spending
counties. This provides a graphical representation of our empirical strategy.
Our preferred difference-in-difference (DiD) strategy uses all this variation in timing and
dosage. That is, we compare the differences in long-run outcomes across birth cohorts from the
same childhood county that experienced larger increases in Head Start spending at age 4, to the
differences in outcomes across the same birth cohorts within other childhood counties that
experienced small (or no) increases in Head Start spending at age 4. These DiD type comparisons
are implemented in a regression framework by estimating [1] by Ordinary Least Squares (OLS).
[1]

𝑎𝑔𝑒 4

𝑌𝑖𝑐𝑏 = 𝛽𝐷𝑖𝐷 ∙ 𝐻𝑆𝑐𝑏

+ 𝛾 ∙ 𝐶𝑖𝑐𝑏 + 𝜃𝑐 + 𝜏𝑏 + 𝜀𝑖𝑐𝑏 .

In [1], 𝑌𝑖𝑐𝑏 is the outcome of individual i, from childhood county c, in birth cohort b. The variable
𝑎𝑔𝑒 4

of interest (𝐻𝑆𝑐𝑏

) is Head Start spending per poor four-year-old in county c (in year 2000

dollars), when birth cohort b was age 4. To rely only on within-county variation in Head Start
spending across cohorts, [1] includes childhood county fixed effects (𝜃𝑐 ); and to account for cohort
effects we include birth-year fixed effects (𝜏𝑏 ). We also include an extensive set of childhoodfamily and individual characteristics, and county-level coincident policy changes as control
variables (𝐶𝑖𝑐𝑏 ) that we detail in Section V.C. The idiosyncratic error term is 𝜀𝑖𝑐𝑏 .
There are two identifying assumptions. First, counties that experienced increased Head
Start spending over time (where most of the variation occurs at rollout) were not already on a
trajectory of improving or deteriorating outcomes over time. Second, counties that saw larger or
smaller increases in Head Start spending did not also undergo other unobserved changes that would
also affect outcomes. Figure 2 suggests that the first condition is satisfied. To show that the second
assumption is likely satisfied, we examine whether areas that had higher levels of Head Start
spending may have also introduced policies and programs that may have improved child outcomes.
To test this, we estimated the marginal effect of Head Start spending levels that prevailed
when individuals were different ages, conditional on the level of Head Start spending when they
were four (shown in the left panel of Figure 3 and Table H8). Higher levels of Head Start spending
at age four are associated with improved adult outcomes, while the spending levels at ineligible

17

ages (age 1 through 3 or 5 through 10) are not.39 If areas with high levels of Head Start spending
also implemented other policies that would promote better outcomes, then Head Start spending at
age 5, 3, or 7 would systematically be associated with better outcomes. This is clearly not the case.
As another check on this variation, we regress each person’s years of education and wage on our
rich set of individual, family, and neighborhood characteristics and other social safety net
programs. The fitted values from these regressions are effect-size weighted indices of childhood
family and community socioeconomic factors (Appendix Table H2). Conditional on schooldistrict and birth-year fixed effects only, there is no association between Head Start spending and
these predicted outcomes. Taken together, this is compelling evidence that our variation is valid.
However, to assuage any lingering worries, we also implement a second strategy.
Because local areas with high versus low levels of Head Start spending may differ in ways
that could confound our comparisons, our second identification strategy relies only on the variation
in the availability of any local Head Start center at age four. To do this, we instrument for Head
𝑎𝑔𝑒 4

Start spending per poor four-year-old in county c (𝐻𝑆𝑐𝑏

), with an indicator variable of whether
𝑎𝑔𝑒 4

a Head Start center existed in one’s childhood county at four years old (𝐸𝑥𝑝𝑜𝑠𝑒𝑑_𝐻𝑆𝑐𝑏

).

Formally, we estimate the following system of equations by two-stage-least-squares (2SLS)
[2]

𝑎𝑔𝑒 4
𝑎𝑔𝑒 4
̂ 𝑐𝑏
𝐻𝑆
= 𝜋ℎ𝑠,1 ∙ 𝐸𝑥𝑝𝑜𝑠𝑒𝑑_𝐻𝑆𝑐𝑏 + 𝜋ℎ𝑠,1 ∙ 𝐶𝑖𝑐𝑏 + 𝜃𝑐 + 𝜏𝑏 .

[3]

̂ 𝑐𝑏
𝑌𝑖𝑐𝑏 = 𝛽2𝑆𝐿𝑆 ∙ 𝐻𝑆

𝑎𝑔𝑒 4

+ 𝛾 ∙ 𝐶𝑖𝑐𝑏 + 𝜃𝑐 + 𝜏𝑏 + 𝜀𝑖𝑐𝑏 .

The identifying assumptions in this 2SLS model are weaker than those for the DiD model.
This model is identified if (a) counties that establish a Head Start center were not already on a
trajectory of improving or deteriorating outcomes over time, and (b) counties that established a
Head Start center did not also undergo other unobserved changes that would also affect outcomes.
The right panel of Figure 3 (and Table H9) shows the effect of rollout (as opposed to spending) by
age on years of education for poor children.40 Reassuringly, there is an effect of having access to
Head Start at age 4 but no effect of having access to Head Start for any other age (conditional on
access at age 4). Figures 2 and 3 suggest that the identifying conditions are satisfied. Furthermore,
in Section VI.B we present further evidence to support a causal interpretation of our estimates.

39
40

Appendix Figure H1is an analogous figure for adult wages.
Appendix Figure H1is an analogous figure for adult wages.

18

V.B.

Identifying the effects of K12 School Spending
5−17
Our measure of K12 public school spending during childhood, 𝑝𝑝𝑒𝑖𝑑𝑏
, is the natural log

of average public K12 school spending per-pupil (in real 2000 dollars) during school-age years
(ages 5 through 17) in an individual’s childhood school district.41 We refer to this as K12 spending.
Individuals who turned 17 years-old during the year of the passage of a court-ordered SFR in their
state should have completed secondary school by the time reforms were enacted. Such cohorts
(and older cohorts) are “SFR unexposed”. Individuals who turned 16 years old or younger during
the year of the passage of the first court-ordered SFR in their state would likely have attended
primary or secondary school when reforms were implemented. Such cohorts are “SFR exposed.”
One can estimate the SFR exposure effect on outcomes for individuals from a particular district
by comparing the change in outcomes between SFR-exposed and SFR-unexposed birth cohorts
from that district. Some districts experienced larger spending increases due to a court-ordered SFR
than others. We exploit this fact and test for a causal effect of per-pupil spending during childhood
by testing whether the difference in outcomes between SFR-exposed and SFR-unexposed cohorts
from the same school district (i.e., the SFR exposure effect) tends to be larger for those districts
that experienced larger reform-induced K12 spending increases (i.e., a SFR dose-response effect).
Our identifying assumption is that the spending changes caused by the reforms within districts
were unrelated to other district-level changes that could have affected adult outcomes directly.
Following Jackson, Johnson, and Persico (2016), we quantify the relationship between K12
spending and adult outcomes by using only the variation above in school spending associated with
the passage of a court-mandated SFR. Specifically, using the PSID, we estimate equation [4] by
2SLS. All common variables are defined as in [1].
[4]

5−17
𝑌𝑖𝑑𝑐𝑏 = 𝛽 ∙ 𝑝𝑝𝑒
̂ 𝑖𝑑𝑏
+ 𝛾 ∙ 𝐶𝑖𝑑𝑐𝑏 + 𝜃𝑑 + 𝜏𝑏 + 𝜀𝑖𝑑𝑐𝑏 .

To rely only on variation across birth cohorts within districts, we include school district fixed
effects (𝜃𝑑 ); to account for time trends and cohort effects, we include birth-year fixed effects (𝜏𝑏 );
and to account for life cycle effects, we include flexible controls for age (cubic). Our endogenous
5−17
5−17
regressor is 𝑝𝑝𝑒𝑖𝑑𝑏
, and 𝑝𝑝𝑒
̂ 𝑖𝑑𝑏
are fitted values from a first stage.

The excluded instruments in the first stage are measures of exposure to a SFR interacted
The average level of district per-pupil spending across all school-age years provides a summary measure of the level
of financial resources available in the individual’s childhood school district during all their school-going years (ages
5 through 17 corresponding to expected grades K12). We use the natural log of this average measure to capture the
fact that school spending likely exhibits diminishing marginal product.
41

19

with measures of dosage (to account for the fact that some districts have larger reform-induced
spending increases than others). Our exposure measure, 𝑆𝐹𝑅𝐸𝑥𝑝𝑖𝑑𝑏 , is the number of years
individual i in birth cohort c from childhood district d is expected to have been in school after the
passage of the first court-ordered SFR in their home state. This exposure measure varies at the
state birth-cohort level and goes from 0 (for those who were age 17 or older the year of the state’s
first court ordered SFR) to 12 (for those who were ages 5 and younger the year of the state’s court
ordered SFR). To capture variation in dosage conditional on exposure, in the first stage we also
include the two-way interaction between 𝑆𝐹𝑅𝐸𝑥𝑝𝑖𝑑𝑏 and a district-level predictor of the spending
̂ 𝑑 ). More formally, the first
change caused by the state court-ordered SFR in that district (𝑑𝑜𝑠𝑒
stage regression is as in [5] below
[5]

5−17
̂ 𝑑 ) + 𝜋2 (𝑆𝐹𝑅𝐸𝑥𝑝𝑖𝑑𝑏 ) + 𝛾1 ∙ 𝐶𝑖𝑑𝑐𝑏 + 𝜃𝑑1 + 𝜏𝑏,1 .
𝑝𝑝𝑒
̂ 𝑖𝑑𝑏
= 𝜋1 (𝑆𝐹𝑅𝐸𝑥𝑝𝑖𝑑𝑏 × 𝑑𝑜𝑠𝑒

̂ 𝑑 is unrelated to endogenous decisions made by districts
By construction, our measure 𝑑𝑜𝑠𝑒
̂ 𝑑 , is a weighted average of reform type (implemented at the state
after reforms. Specifically, 𝑑𝑜𝑠𝑒
level), pre-reform district income levels, pre-reform district spending levels and their interactions.
̂ 𝑑 , we use the full universe of school districts and regress per-pupil spending on (a)
To form 𝑑𝑜𝑠𝑒
indicators for years of SFR exposure, interacted with reform type, interacted with pre-reform
spending levels in 1972; and (b) indicators for years of SFR exposure, interacted with reform type,
interacted with pre-reform median income levels in 1963, and region-specific year fixed effects.
This regression models how per-pupil spending evolves in a district after the passage of a courtordered SFR as a function of the funding formula introduced in the state, the school spending level
in the district, and the economic characteristics of the district prior to reforms. We take the fitted
values from this regression to obtain a predicted reform-induced spending change for each district
̂ 𝑑 is estimated
(based on these exogenous variables). See Appendix F for details. Because 𝑑𝑜𝑠𝑒
using all school districts while we estimate effects using districts represented in the PSID sample,
̂ 𝑑 , Table H2 shows
our approach is a two-sample-2SLS.42 To assuage any concerns regarding 𝑑𝑜𝑠𝑒
that the estimated point estimates obtained when using only variation in SFR exposure are almost
identical (albeit less precise) than those that use both exposure and exposure times dosage.
̂ 𝑑 captures meaningful variation in K12 spending caused by courtTo show that 𝑑𝑜𝑠𝑒

This approach was popularized by Angrist and Krueger (1992) and has been used in several other settings (e.g.,
Bjorklund and Jantti, 1997; Currie and Yelowitz, 2000; Dee and Evans, 2003).
42

20

mandated SFRs, Figure 4 shows the evolution of K12 spending among individuals in the PSID
̂ 𝑑 >0 ) and those with no predicted
sample from districts with high predicted dosage (i.e. 𝑑𝑜𝑠𝑒
̂ 𝑑 ≤ 0).43 We create “event-time” indicator variables denoting the year an
increases (i.e. 𝑑𝑜𝑠𝑒
individual turned 17 minus the year of the first court order in the childhood state of individual i.
The “-5” cohort are individuals who were 22 years old at the passage of a court-ordered SFR, the
“-1” cohort was 18 years old at the passage of a court-ordered SFR, and the “5” cohort was 12
years old at the passage of a court-ordered SFR in their state. We then estimate a regression model
predicting school-age K12 spending as a function of year fixed effects, district fixed effects, and
the event-time indicators interacted with whether the district is predicted to have increased K12
spending due to the passage of a court-ordered SFR. Because the outcome is in logs, the values
represent percent changes in average school-age spending relative to the cohort from the same
district that was 17 the year of the first court-ordered SFR.
Consistent with the timing of court-ordered SFRs being exogenous to underlying trends in
school spending, both districts with lower and higher predicted dosage were on similar pre-reform
̂ 𝑑 isolating real variation
trajectories as similar districts in non-reform states. Consistent with 𝑑𝑜𝑠𝑒
in dosage, cohorts that turned 5 years old during the year of the initial court order (cohort 12) in
̂ 𝑑 > 0 experience a 19% increase in school-age per-pupil spending, while the
districts with 𝑑𝑜𝑠𝑒
̂ 𝑑 ≤ 0 experience a 5% increase. The timing of the initial courtsame cohorts in districts with 𝑑𝑜𝑠𝑒
ordered SFR in the state interacted with the predicted reform-induced spending increase for the
district (based on state reform type interacted with pre-reform district characteristics) isolates
exogenous variation in school spending.
If our identification strategy is valid and K12 spending affects outcomes, outcome
differences across exposed and unexposed cohorts should follow similar patterns to those of K12
spending. The right panel of Figure 4 shows this for years of educational attainment. Areas that
had small (gray line) and large (black line) reform-induced increases in K12 spending were on
similar trajectories among the unexposed cohorts (years -8 through year 0). However, the post-

Roughly two-thirds of districts in reform states are predicted to experience spending increases in the first 8 years
due to court-ordered SFRs. As one can see from Figure 4, because K12 spending tended to increase in states following
court-ordered SFRs in general, there are small increases in K12 spending within 12 years post reform even in districts
with predicted initial decreases. As such, we refer to all districts as having high- or low-predicted increases.
43

21

SFR cohorts (years 0 through 12) experienced much larger increases in years of education in the
high-predicted K12 spending increase districts than in the low-predicted K12 spending increase
districts. This figure depicts graphically the variation that undergirds our identification strategy.
The key identifying assumptions are that (a) districts that experienced spending increases
due to a SFR were not on different trajectories before reforms, and (b) there were no coincident
district-level policies or changes that confound our analysis. Figure 4 shows that this first condition
is likely satisfied. We also test the second condition. If other coincident policies were driving the
results (that were not targeted to school-age children), increased school spending might improve
outcomes of those who were in the same district but not of school-going age. To test this, we
instrument for the K12 spending levels that prevailed in an individual’s childhood district when
they were between the ages of 18 to 22 (i.e., non-school-going age), and we find no effect on adult
outcomes (Appendix Table H1). Also, we regress each person’s years of education and adult wages
on our rich set of individual, childhood family and neighborhood characteristics, and other social
safety net programs. The fitted values from these regressions are effect-size weighted indices of
childhood family and community socioeconomic factors (Appendix Table H3). Conditional on
school-district and birth year fixed effects only, there is no association between instrumented K12
spending and these predicted outcomes – further evidence that our identifying variation is valid.
This suggests that the effects are not driven by confounding policies; rather, any effects likely
emerge through the hypothesized channels. While these tests are not dispositive, they support a
causal interpretation of the main findings. To assuage lingering concerns, we present additional
tests in Section VI.
V.C.

Testing for Dynamic Complementarity
To test whether the marginal effect of increased Head Start spending varies by the level of

K12 spending and vice versa, we estimate the effects of public pre-K and K12 spending on adult
𝑎𝑔𝑒 4

outcomes with the inclusion of the interaction between Head Start spending at age 4 (𝐻𝑆𝑖𝑐𝑏 ) and
5−17
the natural log of public K12 spending between the ages of 5 and 17 (𝑝𝑝𝑒𝑖𝑑𝑏
). All models are

estimated separately for poor and non-poor children, as we do not expect to find significant effects
of Head Start spending nor evidence of dynamic complementarity among non-poor children (at
least through direct channels as they are not income-eligible for Head Start). We define INT𝑖𝑑𝑏 =
𝑎𝑔𝑒 4

(𝐻𝑆𝑖𝑐𝑏

5−17
× 𝑝𝑝𝑒𝑖𝑑𝑏
). We estimate two different models in our analysis.

22

The DiD-by-2SLS model. In the first model we use the within-county, across-cohort DiD
𝑎𝑔𝑒 4

variation in Head Start spending (𝐻𝑆𝑖𝑐𝑏 ). We instrument for the log of public K12 spending,
5−17
̂ 𝑑 ). We instrument for, INT𝑖𝑑𝑏 with
𝑝𝑝𝑒𝑖𝑑𝑏
, with (𝑆𝐹𝑅𝐸𝑥𝑝𝑖𝑑𝑏 ) and (𝑆𝐹𝑅𝐸𝑥𝑝𝑖𝑑𝑏 × 𝑑𝑜𝑠𝑒
𝑎𝑔𝑒 4

(𝐻𝑆𝑖𝑐𝑏

̂ 𝑑 ) and (𝐻𝑆 𝑎𝑔𝑒 4 × 𝑆𝐹𝑅𝐸𝑥𝑝𝑖𝑑𝑏 ).44 Because a school district may
× 𝑆𝐹𝑅𝐸𝑥𝑝𝑖𝑑𝑏 × 𝑑𝑜𝑠𝑒
𝑖𝑐𝑏

be a smaller unit of observation than a county, all models include district fixed effects (which
5−17
̂ 𝑖𝑑𝑏 are fitted values
subsumes county effects). The resulting model is [6], where 𝑝𝑝𝑒
̂ 𝑖𝑑𝑏
and 𝐼𝑁𝑇

from first-stage regressions.45
[6]

𝑎𝑔𝑒 4

𝑌𝑖𝑐𝑏 = 𝛽𝐻𝑆 ∙ 𝐻𝑆𝑐𝑏

5−17
̂ 𝑖𝑑𝑏 ) + 𝛾 ∙ 𝐶𝑖𝑐𝑏 + 𝜃𝑑 + 𝜏𝑏 + 𝜀𝑖𝑑𝑏 .
+ 𝛽𝑘12 ∙ 𝑝𝑝𝑒
̂ 𝑖𝑑𝑏
+ 𝛽𝑖𝑛𝑡 ∙ (𝐼𝑁𝑇

The 2SLS-by-2SLS model. In the second model, we instrument for all spending variables.
𝑎𝑔𝑒 4

We instrument for Head Start spending (𝐻𝑆𝑖𝑐𝑏 ) using exposure to any Head Start center at age
𝑎𝑔𝑒 4

4 (𝐸𝑥𝑝𝑜𝑠𝑒𝑑_𝐻𝑆𝑐𝑏

5−17
). We instrument for the log of public K12 spending, 𝑝𝑝𝑒𝑖𝑑𝑏
, with

̂ 𝑑 ). We instrument for, INT𝑖𝑑𝑏 with (𝐸𝑥𝑝𝑜𝑠𝑒𝑑_𝐻𝑆 𝑎𝑔𝑒 4 ×
(𝑆𝐹𝑅𝐸𝑥𝑝𝑖𝑑𝑏 ) and (𝑆𝐹𝑅𝐸𝑥𝑝𝑖𝑑𝑏 × 𝑑𝑜𝑠𝑒
𝑐𝑏
̂ 𝑑 ) and (𝐸𝑥𝑝𝑜𝑠𝑒𝑑_𝐻𝑆 𝑎𝑔𝑒 4 × 𝑆𝐹𝑅𝐸𝑥𝑝𝑖𝑑𝑏 ). The resulting model is as in [7],
𝑆𝐹𝑅𝐸𝑥𝑝𝑖𝑑𝑏 × 𝑑𝑜𝑠𝑒
𝑐𝑏
𝑎𝑔𝑒 4
5−17
̂ 𝑐𝑏
̂ 𝑖𝑑𝑏 and 𝐻𝑆
where 𝑝𝑝𝑒
̂ 𝑖𝑑𝑏
and 𝐼𝑁𝑇
are all fitted values from first-stage regressions. 46

[7]

𝑎𝑔𝑒 4
5−17
̂ 𝑐𝑏
̂ 𝑖𝑑𝑏 ) + 𝛾 ∙ 𝐶𝑖𝑐𝑏 + 𝜃𝑑 + 𝜏𝑏 + 𝜀𝑖𝑑𝑏 .
𝑌𝑖𝑐𝑏 = 𝛽𝐻𝑆 ∙ 𝐻𝑆
+ 𝛽𝑘12 ∙ 𝑝𝑝𝑒
̂ 𝑖𝑑𝑏
+ 𝛽𝑖𝑛𝑡 ∙ (𝐼𝑁𝑇

The interaction effect between pre-K and K12 spending can be identified because (a)
among counties that faced similar increases in Head Start spending (or had any Head Start center),
some were located in school districts that experienced larger (or smaller) increases in K12 spending
due to the passage of a court-ordered reform, and (b) among cohorts from districts that faced
similar increases in K12 spending due to the passage of a court-ordered reform, some grew up in
counties that had higher (or no) levels of Head Start spending when those cohorts were age 4. We
𝑎𝑔𝑒 4 ̂
While intuition would lead one to expect us to use all the two-way interactions between 𝐻𝑆𝑖𝑐𝑏 , 𝑑𝑜𝑠𝑒
𝑑 , and
𝑎𝑔𝑒 4
̂
̂
𝑆𝐹𝑅𝐸𝑥𝑝𝑖𝑑𝑏 , we do not use (𝐻𝑆𝑖𝑐𝑏 × 𝑑𝑜𝑠𝑒𝑑 ) as an excluded instrument because 𝑑𝑜𝑠𝑒𝑑 cannot affect outcomes
unless it is interacted with SFR exposure. This would simply introduce noise and weaken the first stage. The variable
̂ 𝑑 only ever enters our models when interacted with 𝑆𝐹𝑅𝐸𝑥𝑝𝑖𝑑𝑏 .
𝑑𝑜𝑠𝑒
45
5−17
̂ 𝑖𝑑𝑏 , and 𝑤 ∈ {1,2},
Where 𝑋̂1 = 𝑝𝑝𝑒
̂ 𝑖𝑑𝑏
and 𝑋̂2 = 𝐼𝑁𝑇
̂ 𝑑 ) ∙ 𝐻𝑆 𝑎𝑔𝑒 4 + 𝜋𝑤4 (𝑆𝐹𝑅𝐸𝑥𝑝𝑖𝑑𝑏 ) ∙
𝑋̂𝑤 = 𝜋𝑤1 (𝑆𝐹𝑅𝐸𝑥𝑝𝑖𝑑𝑏 × 𝑑𝑜𝑠𝑒𝑐 ) + 𝜋𝑤2 (𝑆𝐹𝑅𝐸𝑥𝑝𝑖𝑑𝑏 ) + 𝜋𝑤3 (𝑆𝐹𝑅𝐸𝑥𝑝𝑖𝑑𝑏 × 𝑑𝑜𝑠𝑒
𝑐𝑏
𝑎𝑔𝑒 4
𝐻𝑆𝑐𝑏 + 𝛾𝑤 𝐶𝑖𝑑𝑏 + 𝜃𝑤𝑑 + 𝜏𝑤𝑏 .
𝑎𝑔𝑒 4
46
5−17 ̂
̂ 𝑐𝑏
̂ 𝑖𝑑𝑏 , 𝑋̂3 = 𝐻𝑆
Where 𝑋̂1 = 𝑝𝑝𝑒
̂ 𝑖𝑑𝑏
, 𝑋2 = 𝐼𝑁𝑇
and 𝑔 ∈ {1,2,3},
𝑎𝑔𝑒 4
̂
𝑋𝑔 = 𝜋𝑔1 (𝑆𝐹𝑅𝐸𝑥𝑝𝑖𝑑𝑏 × 𝑑𝑜𝑠𝑒𝑐 ) + 𝜋𝑔2 (𝑆𝐹𝑅𝐸𝑥𝑝𝑖𝑑𝑏 ) + 𝜋𝑔3 (𝑆𝐹𝑅𝐸𝑥𝑝𝑖𝑑𝑏 × 𝑑𝑜𝑠𝑒𝑐 × 𝐸𝑥𝑝𝑜𝑠𝑒𝑑_𝐻𝑆𝑐𝑏 ) +
𝑎𝑔𝑒 4
𝜋𝑔4 (𝑆𝐹𝑅𝐸𝑥𝑝𝑖𝑑𝑏 × 𝐸𝑥𝑝𝑜𝑠𝑒𝑑_𝐻𝑆𝑐𝑏 ) + 𝛾𝑔 𝐶𝑖𝑑𝑏 + 𝜃𝑔𝑑 + 𝜏𝑔𝑏 .
44

23

show in Section V.C.1. that the interaction can be identified in our data.
To further reduce the possibility of confounding effects, vector Cidb includes a variety of
individual, childhood family, and childhood county controls. These include parental education and
occupational status, parental income, mother’s marital status at birth, birth weight, child health
insurance coverage, gender; and the adult economic and incarceration outcomes include flexible
controls for age (cubic). Cidb also includes birth-year fixed effects by region and race, birth-cohort
linear trends interacted with various 1960 characteristics of the childhood county (poverty rate,
percent black, average education, percent urban, and population size). Also, to avoid confounding
our effects with that of other policies that overlap our study period, Cidb includes controls for
childhood county-by-birthyear measures of school desegregation, hospital desegregation,
community health centers, state funding for kindergarten, Title I school funding, imposition of tax
limit policies, average childhood spending on food stamps, Aid to Families with Dependent
Children, Medicaid, and unemployment insurance (Johnson, 2013; Chay, Guryan, & Mazumder,
2009; Hoynes, Schanzenbach, and Almond, 2016). Standard errors are clustered at the state level.
To provide visual evidence of complementarity, Figure 5 plots the estimated changes in
years of educational attainment for cohorts before and after a court-ordered SFR for districts with
̂ 𝑑 >0) and those with no predicted increases (i.e.,
high predicted spending increases (i.e., 𝑑𝑜𝑠𝑒
̂ 𝑑 ≤ 0), separately for children with and without a local Head Start center at age 4. Note that
𝑑𝑜𝑠𝑒
this is the variation used in the 2SLS-by-2SLS models. The left panel shows that SFR-treated
cohorts and SFR-untreated cohorts experienced similarly small changes in educational attainment
in districts that had small increases in K12 spending and were not exposed to Head Start at age
four (grey line). However, among cohorts that had county Head Start spending at age four, schoolage years of exposure to SFRs led to increases in educational attainment relative to those who were
not exposed to SFRs. This pattern is consistent with Head Start making even small increases in
K12 spending effective for poor children. However, if the two policies are complementary, one
should see similar patterns and greater increases in completed education for large increases in K12
spending. This is precisely what we document in the right panel of Figure 5. Here we see that in
districts that experienced large increases in K12 spending after a SFR, exposed cohorts achieve
more years of education than unexposed cohorts, and there is a dose-response relationship with
the number of school-age years of exposure to larger reform-induced spending increases.
Importantly, the relative increase in years of education is larger among those SFR-exposed cohorts
24

that were from counties with a Head Start center at age four than among those SFR-exposed
cohorts that did not have a Head Start center at age four. Furthermore, if one compares the effects
across the two panels, one can see that the benefits of Head Start spending (the difference between
the grey and black line in each panel) are larger among exposed cohorts that experience larger K12
spending increases. In sum, Figure 5 presents flexible semi-parametric evidence that Head Start
and K12 school spending exhibit dynamic complementarity. The lack of any differential pretrending in either panel illustrates that the parallel trends assumption likely holds, not just for each
policy (Figures 2 through 4), but also for the interaction between the two policies.47
V.C.1. Testing for Sufficient Variation to Identify the Interaction Effects
Identification of our key parameter of interest is based on the interaction between the two
policy instruments. For our inference to be valid, these policy instruments need to be largely
independent of each other. This is necessary for two reasons. First, if there were a high correlation
between the two policy instruments, a model predicting both the base effects and the interaction
effect could be under-identified. In such a scenario, there would be a weak first stage for the
interaction, conditional on the instruments for the base effects. Second, if those areas that were
most likely to have high levels of Head Start spending were also likely to have experienced
increased K12 spending due to a SFR, then areas that were exposed to high levels of both may
differ from areas that were only exposed to only one, or none in unobserved ways. Because our
interaction is essentially a comparison of Local Average Treatment Effects (LATEs), if there is
treatment heterogeneity, the resulting interaction effect may simply reflect a difference in LATEs
rather than a true interaction effect.
We show that this is not a problem in our setting. First, the correlation between Head Start

If the alignment channel is at play, complementarity would be largest for cohorts that were exposed to a SFR in
kindergarten (right after Head Start) than for those exposed later. In our setting, cohorts exposed to an SFR at younger
ages were also exposed for a longer period, and experienced larger average increases in K12 spending. As such, we
cannot credibly decouple treatment age, duration, and dosage effects. However, the visual patterns in Figure 5 are
consistent with greater complementarities when the SFR occurs in the early schooling years. Specifically, the cohorts
that are exposed to an SFR for more years benefit much more from Head Start than those exposed to a SFR for fewer
years (e.g., 8-10 years vs 2-6 years). We take this as suggestive evidence of the alignment channel. To present another
suggestive test, we estimate our main models and interact all of our K12 spending variables with indicators measuring
the age at which the SFR was implemented in one’s childhood state. This is by no means a conclusive test, but the
results (Appendix K) suggest that the dynamic complementarity effects we observe are driven by those cohorts that
were exposed to an SFR before the age of 9. Specifically, for those who were older than 8 at the time of the passage
of an SFR the coefficient on the interaction with Head Start spending is not statistically significant. However, the
point estimates on the interaction remain positive for those groups so that we cannot rule out complementarities for
this later-treated population. We take this as suggestive evidence in support of our hypothesized mechanism.
47

25

spending and instrumented ln(K12 spending) is only 0.15, and conditional on our controls, there
is no association between Head Start spending and SFR-induced changes in K12 spending
(Appendix Table H6). This suggests that our interaction effects are not based on populations
different from that used for the base effects; thus, we are not comparing two different LATEs.
Also, following Angrist and Pischke (2009), we compute a series of first-stage F-statistics for each
set of excluded instruments, conditional on the other excluded instruments. The first-stage Fstatistic on the excluded instruments for K12 spending (i.e., predicted SFR dosage times years of
SFR exposure) is 22.41 and 23.01 in models without and with Head Start variables included,
respectively (Appendix Table H7). Additionally, the first-stage F-statistic on the excluded
instruments for Head Start spending (i.e., the existence of a Head Start center at age 4) is 59.17
and 60.76 in models without and with the K12 instruments included, respectively. Finally, the
first-stage F-statistic on Head Start Exposure times SFR dosage times SFR exposure is 42.46,
conditional on Head Start Exposure, SFR exposure, and SFR dosage times SFR exposure. In sum,
there is sufficient variation in Head Start spending and SFR-induced changes in K12 spending for
the effect of each to be identified and for the interaction between the two to be identified.
VI. RESULTS
We present results from specification [6] that exploits all the within-district, across-cohort
variation in Head Start spending and instruments for K12 public school spending using the SFR
instruments, and specification [7] that instruments for both Head Start spending and K12 spending.
To facilitate interpretation of the base effects of K12 spending and Head Start spending when the
interaction between the two is included, both K12 spending and Head Start spending are centered
on their respective means. Thus, the coefficient on Head Start is the marginal effect of Head Start
spending at the average level of K12 spending, and the coefficient on K12 spending is the marginal
effect of K12 spending at the average level of Head Start spending. To organize our discussion,
we first discuss the base effects of K12 spending (in logs) and Head Start spending, present
empirical evidence that these estimated base effects are unbiased, and then discuss the estimated
interaction effects. We present our estimated effects on education outcomes, followed by adult
economic outcomes, and finally incarceration.
VI.A. Estimating the Base Effects of Head Start and K12 Spending
Table 2 presents the estimates for poor (bottom income quartile during childhood) children.
26

Column 1 presents the DiD-2SLS estimates of the effects on the probability of graduating from
high school. The coefficient on Head Start spending per poor four-year-old is 0.025 (pvalue<0.01). That is, increasing Head Start spending per poor 4-year-old in the county by $1,000
(roughly a 25% increase) increases the likelihood of graduating from high school by 2.5 percentage
points for a poor child exposed to the average level of K12 spending. Given that the average level
of Head Start spending, conditional on having any Head Start program in the county, is about
$4,230, this implies that, for poor children, having access to the average Head Start program
increased the likelihood of graduating from high school by roughly 10 percentage points. Column
2 presents effects for the 2SLS-2SLS design that instruments for all spending variables. The
coefficient on Head Start spending per poor four-year-old is 0.0408 (p-value<0.1). In this model,
one cannot reject that the DiD-2SLS models and the 2SLS-2SLS models yield different results.
However, in the fully instrumented model, the effect of Head Start spending is slightly larger and
less precisely estimated. Importantly, in both cases, one can reject that the effect of Head Start
spending is zero. Because the DiD-2SLS estimated Head Start effects tend to be smaller, and the
results are similar to the fully instrumented model, we take a conservative approach and focus on
the DiD-2SLS results. However, we do report all results from the 2SLS-2SLS models.
Increases in Head Start spending can affect outcomes through increases in Head Start
participation, increases in the quality and scope of Head Start services, and can also indirectly
affect outcomes through peer effects in the K12 system due to having better-prepared schoolmates.
While existing studies have focused on the effect of enrolling in Head Start as participants, we
estimate the effect of Head Start spending on all eligible children. Because there are multiple
channels through which spending effects may emerge, we provide a sense of how our spending
effects relate to the participation effects in the extant literature.
We estimate that the rollout of Head Start increased Head Start participation for poor
children by about 75 percentage points. We come to this conclusion in two ways.48 First, using
national data, for cohorts entering kindergarten after 1966, the likelihood of Head Start enrollment
(full-time or part-year) among income-eligible children was 63% (Figure 1). Because centers can
enroll 10% of non-poor children, the participation rate among income-eligible children could have

The PSID survey data employed in Garces, Currie, and Thomas (2002) are retrospective data collected in the 1995
wave. There are some concerns about potential measurement error and recall bias in using this retrospective survey
information about Head Start participation and some missing information. See Appendix G for further discussion.
48

27

been as low as 57 percent. Roughly 80% of poor children born after 1962 in the PSID resided in a
county with a Head Start center at age four during this period (this is consistent with national
figures). Assuming that only children with a Head Start center in their local area at age four will
participate, this implies a Head Start participation rate of 0.57/0.8=0.71 (i.e. 71 percentage points),
conditional on having a Head Start center in the county at age 4. We arrive at a similar estimate
using retrospective survey questions from the PSID. In the 1995 survey wave as part of a special
module on early childhood, adults were asked about whether they had ever participated in a Head
Start program. These data may have a number of limitations such as recall bias (See Appendix G).
However, in these data, Head Start rollout increases Head Start participation among poor children
by about 80 percentage points. We use 75 percentage points as our “ballpark” estimate of the
increase in the likelihood of Head Start participation (among poor children) due to the rollout of
the average Head Start center in the county during our study period.
If all of our estimated effect of having Head Start access was due to Head Start enrollment
(and there were no spillover effects to other poor children), our participation margin effect implies
a treatment-on-the-treated effect of 0.1/.75=0.129, or 13.3 percentage points. This is similar to the
estimated enrollment effect of Head Start in existing studies.49 However, most existing studies of
Head Start focus on full-year Head Start programs. If one makes the conservative assumption that
there is no effect of summer-only programs or part-time programs, a back-of-the-envelope
calculation yields an implied treatment-on-the-treated effect of full-year Head Start on the
likelihood of high school graduation of 15.3 percentage points.50 This estimate is in line with the
larger of the participation margin effects in the literature. However, we cannot rule out that some
modest portion of our effects are driven by (a) improvements in the quality and scope of Head
Start centers (full day versus half day, full time versus summer only, better teachers, etc.), and (b)
spillovers from Head Start participants to poor non-participants in the K12 school system.
For example, Garces, Currie, and Thomas (2002) find that participating in Head Start increases the high school
graduation rates for white by 20 percentage points, with no statistically significant effect for blacks. Deming (2009)
finds that Head Start participation increases high school graduation by 11 percentage points for blacks with a small
effect for whites, and increases high school graduation by 16 percentage points for those with low maternal test scores.
Weikart, Marcus and Xie (2000) find that the average effect is 14 percentage points.
50
The average enrollment rate among eligible children was 52% after the initial ramp up period (for cohorts entering
kindergarten after 1966). This implies a full-year Head Start participation rate of about 0.52/0.8=0.65 conditional on
having a Head Start center in the county at age 4. If one makes the conservative assumption that there is no effect of
summer only programs or part-time programs so that all of our estimated intention-to-treat effect was due to full-year
Head Start enrollment, an assumed upper-bound full-year Head Start participation margin effect implies a treatmenton-the-treated effect on the likelihood of high school graduation of 0.1/.65=0.153.
49

28

As expected, the coefficient estimates for K12 spending are very similar to those presented
in Jackson, Johnson, and Persico (2016). The coefficient on the log of K12 spending during the
school-age years is 1.10 (p-value<0.01). Increasing K12 school spending (across all 12 school-age
years) by 10% increases the likelihood of high school graduation by about 11 percentage points
for a poor child exposed to the average level of Head Start spending (Column 1). Relative to
baseline, this is about a 15% increase. The estimates indicate that increasing Head Start spending
by $4,000 would have roughly the same effect on high school graduation as increasing K12
spending by 10% across all school-age years (for poor children).51
Columns 3 and 4 present a similar pattern for completed years of education for poor
children. The more conservative DiD-2SLS estimates reveal that increasing Head Start spending
per poor 4-year old in the county by $1,000 increases the years of educational attainment by 0.077
years (p-value<0.01) for a poor child exposed to the average level of K12 spending. At average
Head Start spending levels, a Head Start center is estimated to increase years of education by
roughly a third of a year. As discussed above, the 2SLS-2SLS estimate is larger and less precise
and indicates that increasing Head Start spending per poor 4-year old in the county by $1,000
increases the years of educational attainment by 0.2255 years (p-value<0.1) for a poor child
exposed to the average level of K12 spending. Increasing school-age K12 spending by 10%
increases the number of years of completed education by about 0.4 years for a poor child exposed
to the average level of Head Start spending.
Results for non-poor children (top 3 income quartiles during childhood) are in Table 3. The
estimated K12 spending effects on the education outcomes are positive, sizable, and statistically
significantly different from zero. This indicates that increases in K12 spending improve the
educational outcomes of not only the poor but also the non-poor. The more conservative DiD2SLS point estimates indicate that increasing K12 spending in the district by 10% increases the
likelihood of high school graduation by 2.3 percentage points, and increases years of educational
attainment by about 0.24 years for a non-poor child exposed to the average level of Head Start
spending. These estimated K12 spending benefits are smaller for more affluent children than for
poor children, but they are positive, statistically significant, and economically important. In
contrast to the positive K12 spending effects, for children from non-poor families, increasing
During the sample period, a 10% increase in K12 spending is roughly equal to increasing per-pupil K12 spending
by $480 each year over 12 years (about $4300 in present value terms assuming a 7% interest rate).
51

29

county Head Start spending has very small, insignificant effects. For both education outcomes,
one cannot reject that the effect on the non-poor is zero, and one can reject that the Head Start
effect is the same for both poor and non-poor children.52 This suggests that (a) there are no spillover
effects of Head Start spending on non-poor children and that (b) increases in Head Start spending
are not associated with other broad policies that improve the outcomes of non-poor children.
The fact that we find no effect of Head Start spending for non-poor children is important.
If local areas that increased Head Start spending introduced other policies that improve outcomes
of all children, one would observe positive Head Start spending effects for the non-poor children.
We find no such pattern. Our result, instead, implies that neither our variation in Head Start
spending nor the rollout of Head Start is associated with any policies that improved the outcomes
of local children who were ineligible to participate in Head Start. This coupled with the fact that
Head Start spending only influences outcomes for those who were four years old at the time shows
that we only see effects for children who were both income- and age-eligible for Head Start. This
serves as another falsification test, of sorts, and bolsters the credibility of the research design.
The adult economic outcomes we examine are wages and the annual incidence of poverty
between the ages of 20 and 50. Our models use all available person-year observations for ages 20–
50 and control for a cubic in age to avoid confounding life cycle and birth cohort effects. Columns
5 through 8 in Table 2 present these results for children from poor families. Looking at wages, in
the more conservative DiD-2SLS models (column 5) the coefficient on the log of public K12
school spending is 2.056 (p-value<0.1) and that on Head Start spending per poor 4-year-old is
0.023 (p-value<0.01). That is, for children from poor families exposed to average levels of Head
Start spending, increasing K12 spending by 10% is associated with about 20.5% higher adult
wages. Similarly, for these same children, at average public K12 spending levels, increasing Head
Start spending by $4,230 per poor 4-year-old (the average spending amount) is associated with
9.87% higher wages for poor children. The results in the 2SLS-2SLS (where both Head Start
spending and K12 spend are instrumented for) are similar; increasing K12 spending by 10% is
associated with about 12.6% higher adult wages, and increasing Head Start spending by $4,230
per poor 4-year-old is associated with 15.29% higher wages for poor children. These effects (DiDWe pooled the samples and estimated a single model where we interacted all variables with poverty status, and
tested for equality of coefficients between poor and non-poor children for our key explanatory variables. We present
the results of this test for our two main adult outcomes in the conservative DiD-2SLS models in Appendix Table J1.
Our tests reject that the estimates are the same for the two populations.
52

30

2SLS vs 2SLS-2SLS estimates) are not statistically distinguishable from each other.
Columns 5 and 6 of Table 3 present the effects on adult wages for non-poor children.
Similar to the educational outcomes, there are positive effects of K12 spending, but no effect of
Head Start spending on the wages in adulthood of those from non-poor families. In the DiD-2SLS
models, the coefficient on the log of K12 public school spending is 0.7351 (p-value<0.05), and
that on Head Start spending per poor 4-year-old is 0.0069 (p-value>0.1). That is, for children from
non-poor families exposed to average levels of Head Start spending, increasing K12 spending by
10% is associated with 7.35% higher earnings between the ages of 20 and 50, while increasing
Head Start spending is associated with no difference in earnings. The 2SLS-2SLS results (column
6) tell the same basic story as the DiD-2SLS models.
The pattern of estimates for the annual incidence of poverty in adulthood in columns 7 and
8 of Tables 2 and 3 mirror those for adult wages. A family is poor if their income-to-needs ratio is
below the federally-determined threshold for poverty. Furthermore, while adult poverty is related
to family income and wage, it is a measure of hardship. Among poor children, Head Start spending
is associated with large, statistically significant reductions in the annual incidence of poverty in
adulthood (Table 2); while Head Start has small, insignificant effects on the adult outcomes of
non-poor children (Table 3). However, increases in public K12 spending are associated with
significant reductions in the likelihood of poverty in adulthood for all children, on average.
The final outcome we examine is the probability that an individual has ever been
incarcerated (Column 9 and 10 of Tables 2 and 3). In the DiD-2SLS model, for poor children
(Table 2), a $1,000 increase in Head Start spending reduces the likelihood of being incarcerated
by 0.6 percentage points (p-value<0.01). This implies an average Head Start rollout effect (i.e., an
increase of $4,320) of 2.5 percentage-points lower likelihood of adult incarceration (at average
public K12 spending level). If one were to ascribe all of this effect to the participation margin for
full-year Head Start, it would imply a Head Start participation effect of a five-percentage-point
reduction in the probability of ever being incarcerated. Effects of this magnitude are in line with
the results from Garces, et al. (2000). Column 9 also shows that increasing K12 per-pupil spending
by 10% (at average Head Start spending levels) reduces the likelihood of adult incarceration by
eight percentage points (p-value<0.05). The magnitude of this effect is in line with the estimated
reductions in incarceration associated with increased schooling (Lochner and Moretti, 2003), and
reductions in crime associated with attending a better school (Deming, 2011). Note, however, that
31

this is the first paper to document a causal relationship between increased public school K12
spending and reduced risks of adult incarceration. The 2SLS-2SLS models in column 10 yield
similar patterns, but with somewhat larger Head Start effects and wider confidence intervals.
Looking at non-poor children (Table 3), we find no effect of either Head Start or K12 spending on
the likelihood of adult incarceration among non-poor children. We attribute this to the low levels
of incarceration among non-poor children. Importantly, as with the other outcomes, Head Start
spending has no impact on those who were not income-eligible to participate.53
VI.B. Testing for Bias due to Unobserved Family Differences
While we have presented much evidence that our variation is exogenous to other policies
that may have been implemented in a locality, we have not yet ruled out the possibility that our
results are driven by unobserved differences across treated and untreated families within local
areas. To do this, we rely on variation within families and compare the outcomes of siblings who
were different ages at Head Start rollout or at the time of a court-ordered SFR, but were raised in
the same household with the same parents. This approach accounts for observed and unobserved
shared family characteristics that predict outcomes. We achieve this by augmenting [6] and [7] to
include sibling fixed effects (see Appendix Table H4). In such models, effects are similar to those
in Table 2 so that unobserved family differences cannot explain the main pattern of results.
VI.C. Evidence of Dynamic Complementarity Effects
Before presenting the magnitudes of any complementarity effects, we first establish
whether such effects exist. Specifically, in the estimation of [6] and [7], we test whether the
coefficient on the interaction is positive and statistically significantly different from zero. In Table
2, for children from poor families, across both the DiD-2SLS models and the 2SLS-2SLS models,
the coefficient on the interaction is positive for high school graduation, years of education, and
adult wages. The positive interaction effect in the DiD-2SLS models is statistically significant at
the 10% level for high school graduation, the 1% level for years of completed education and the
5% level for adult wages. In the 2SLS-2SLS models, the positive interaction effect is statistically
significant at the 1% level for high school graduation, the 10% level for years of completed
education and the 1% level for adult wages. For the two adverse outcomes, adult poverty and ever

Because schools tend to be segregated by parental socioeconomic status, any indirect spillover effects of Head Start
on non-Head Start enrollees will likely be experienced by poor children.
53

32

being incarcerated, the coefficients on the interaction terms are negative and statistically
significant at, at least, the 10% level in any of the models. Across all outcomes for poor children,
and across all specifications, increases in Head Start spending raise the marginal effect of K12
spending and vice versa. In contrast, there is no such relationship for children from non-poor
families (Table 3). For none of the outcomes is the coefficient on the interaction term statistically
significant, and the signs of the coefficients across outcomes do not go in the same direction.54
That is, Head Start spending had no direct or indirect effect on the outcomes of non-poor children.
To show the impact of these interaction effects, we present the marginal effects of each
intervention evaluated at different levels of the other. Specifically, using the regression estimates,
we compute the marginal effect of increasing Head Start spending per poor four-year-old by
$4,230 when there is a 10% decrease, no increase, and a 10% increase in K12 spending
(conditional on the direct effect of the change in K12 spending). Similarly, we compute the
marginal effect of increasing K12 spending by 10% where there is no Head Start in the county and
counties with average Head Start spending ($4,230). The estimated marginal effects for each
model is presented in the lower two panels of Tables 2 and 3.
Looking at high school graduation among poor children, the DiD-2SLS models indicates
that having a Head Start center with a 10% decrease in K12 spending increases high school going
by a statistically insignificant 6.3 percentage points. However, having a Head Start center with a
10% increase in K12 spending increases high school going by a 14.87 percentage points (pvalue<0.01). The 2SLS-2SLS results are similar and suggest that having a Head Start center with
a 10% decrease or 10% increase in K12 spending increases high school going by 7.6 and 26.9
percentage points, respectively. In both models, the marginal effect of Head Start is more than
twice as large when followed by a 10% increase in K12 spending than when followed by a 10%
decrease. Also, in both models, the marginal effect of Head Start when there is a 10% decrease in
K12 spending (though economically meaningful) cannot be distinguished from zero is a statistical
sense. We now quantify the interaction concerning the marginal effect of K12 spending. The DiD-

We formally test that the marginal effects of Head Start and the “HeadStart*K12” interaction are different for poor
children and non-poor children for years of education and adult wages. We do this by stacking the data and testing for
equality of the coefficients. We present this test for years of education and wages in Appendix K. We can reject that
the estimates are the same for the two populations at the 5% level for years of education and the 10% level for adult
wages. The tests for the other outcomes are not in the Table; however, the p-value on the hypothesis that the effects
are the same for poor and the non-poor is 0.043 for years of education, 0.155 for high school graduation, 0.0596 for
adult wages, 0.011 for adult poverty, and 0.46 for adult incarceration.
54

33

2SLS results indicate that increasing K12 spending across all school-age years by 10% increases
the likelihood of graduating high school by 6.7 and 11 percentage points, with and without Head
Start, respectively. Similarly, the 2SLS-2SLS results indicate that increasing K12 spending across
all school-age years by 10% increases the likelihood of graduating high school by 4.55 and 14.16
percentage points, with and without head Start, respectively. Similar comparisons for children
from non-poor families reveal that the effect of K12 spending on the outcomes of the non-poor is
similar irrespective of the level of Head Start, and Head Start has no effect on the outcomes of the
non-poor irrespective of the level of K12 spending. Because these are similar to, but more
conservative than the 2SLS-2SLS estimates, we focus on these models for the remaining outcomes.
The pattern of results for years of completed education is similar to those for high school
graduation. The DiD-2SLS results are presented graphically in Figure 6 (the underlying estimates
are in Table 2 and 3). For poor children (left panel), access to the average Head Start center
increases completed education by 0.0533 years with a 10% reduction in K12 spending, increases
education by 0.32 years with no change in K12 spending, and increases education by 0.599 years
with a 10% increase in K12 spending. While the effect of Head Start with a reduction in K12
spending cannot be distinguished from zero, the effect when coupled with a 10% increase in K12
spending is statistically significant at the 1% level. For non-poor children (right panel), there is no
effect of Head Start irrespective of the increase in K12 spending. Looking at the effect of K12
spending, for poor children, increasing K12 spending by 10% increase the years of education by
0.13 and 0.4 years, without and with Head Start, respectively. The effect of K12 spending is more
than twice as large among poor individual exposed to Head Start than those who are not. For
children from non-poor families (who are not eligible for Head Start), increasing K12 spending by
10% lead to about a 0.23 more years of education irrespective of the Head Start exposure.
In sum, these patterns suggest important dynamic complementarity between early
childhood education spending and public K12 spending for the educational outcomes of poor
children. In fact, due to the dynamic complementary for poor children, the pattern of results
indicate that in areas with Head Start programs, increases in K12 spending both increased
outcomes for all students and simultaneously reduced educational attainment gaps. The fact that
there is no evidence of complementarity for non-poor children is important. It suggests that our
main effects are not simply picking up some strange LATE for those places that happen to be
exposed to both high K12 spending levels and Head Start. If our effects were due to this, one would
34

observe positive interaction effects for all children in such districts. Instead, we find no interaction
effects for the non-poor – indicating that our diagnostic tests were likely valid and further supports
that our empirical strategy credibly identifies the interaction effects.
Commensurate with the educational outcomes, there is evidence of complementarity
between Head Start spending and public K12 spending in the production of adult economic
outcomes for children from poor families. Because for non-poor children there are no interaction
effects for any outcome, we focus the remainder of the discussion on the results for poor children.
Figure 7 presents the marginal effect on adult wages of K12 spending by Head Start access (and
vice-versa). For poor children (left panel), access to Head Start (with average funding levels)
increases adult wages by 2.7% (p-value>0.1) when coupled with a 10% K12 spending decrease,
increases it by 9.8% when there is no change in K12 spending (p-value<0.01), and increase wages
by 17% when coupled with a 10% increase in K12 spending (p-value<0.01). As shown in Table
2, the 2SLS-2SLS estimates are similar. The dynamic complementarities are sufficiently large that
the marginal effect of the same increases in Head Start spending on the adult wage is about 70%
larger when K12 spending increases by 10% than with no change. Looking at the effects of K12
spending increases, a 10% increase in K12 spending leads to 13% higher wages without Head
Start, and 20% higher wages with Head Start (both effects are significant at the 1% level). The
2SLS-2SLS estimates are somewhat smaller, but show the same pattern of much larger marginal
impacts of K12 spending among cohorts who are exposed to Head Start.
The effects on the annual incidence of adult poverty are consistent with those on education
and wages (Columns 7 and 8 of Table 2). For poor children, increasing Head Start spending from
zero to average levels reduces the annual incidence of poverty in adulthood by about 3 percentage
points (p-value>0.1) when coupled with a 10 reduction in K12 spending, a 7.6 percentage point
reduction when coupled with no change in K12 spending (p-value<0.01), and reduces adult
poverty by 12 percentage-points when coupled with a 10% increase in K2 spending (pvalue<0.01). As with the adult wage, the 2SLS-2SLS estimates are similar, and the marginal effect
of the same increases in Head Start spending on the adult wage is about 60% larger when K12
spending increases by 10% than with no change. The marginal effects of K12 spending tell the
same story. A 10% increase in K12 spending leads to 3.3 and 7.96 percentage-points lower adult
poverty without and with Head Start, respectively. The effect of the K12 spending increase with
Head Start is significant at the 1% level and is more than twice as large as the effect with no Head
35

Start. The marginal effects from the 2SLS-2SLS model are almost identical (columns 7 and 8 of
Table 2) so that these patterns are quite robust.
As with the other adult outcomes, the reduction in the lifetime risks of incarceration
associated with improvements in access to early education is larger when there are greater
subsequent K12 school investments and vice versa. The marginal effects are presented in
(Columns 9 and 10 of Table 2). For poor children, increasing Head Start spending from zero to
average levels has no effect on the likelihood of incarceration when coupled with a 10% reduction
in K12 spending. However, this same increase in Head Start exposure leads to a 2.5 percentage
point reduction when coupled with no change in K12 spending (p-value<0.1), and a 4.73
percentage point reduction when coupled with a 10% increase in K2 spending (p-value<0.01).
Looking to the effect of K12 spending on the likelihood of being incarcerated, the marginal effects
are larger with Head Start than without. A 10% increase in K12 per-pupil spending reduces the
likelihood of being incarcerated by 5.8 percentage points with no Head Start spending (pvalue<0.05), and by eight percentage points with Head Start (p-value<0.01).
VI.D. Is Parenting Quality Part of the Story?
In Section II, we posited that the Head Start effects are driven by the components targeted
to children. Because parent counseling was a component of Head Start, it is possible that these
dynamic complementarities emerge through improvements in parenting quality. Because we have
data on siblings with the same parents, we can test for improvements in parenting quality. We use
only the sample of older siblings who were not themselves exposed to Head Start and test whether
those with younger siblings who were exposed to Head Start have improved outcomes. If
improvements in parenting quality is a part of the story, the older siblings of exposed younger
siblings should have better outcomes than the older siblings of unexposed younger siblings.
However, if the Head Start effects are driven by the services provided to the children, there should
be no effect. In these models (Appendix I), we find older siblings are unaffected by Head Start
exposure of the younger sibling. This suggests that (a) parenting quality is not part of the story, (b)
our Head Start spending effects reflect real investments in the human capital of poor children and
(c) our effects are not due to other confounding policies aimed at poor children.
VI.E. Are the Complementarity Effects Driven by Other Coincident Policies?
Even though our estimation equations control for several coincident polices directly, one
may worry that our main results are driven by some complementarity between K12 spending and
36

some other policy. To test for this directly, we augment our main model in equation [6] to also
include (a) interactions between food stamp spending in one’s county between ages 0 to 4 with
K12 spending, and (b) county-level spending on Medicaid between ages 0 and 4 interacted with
K12 spending. In these models, the point estimates on the interaction between Head Start spending
and K12 spending are virtually unchanged.55 This provides further evidence that our estimated
effects are not confounded by dynamic complementarities with other policies.
VII. BENEFIT-COST CONSIDERATIONS: PUTTING THE MAGNITUDES IN PERSPECTIVE
It is helpful to consider how the presence of dynamic complementarity affects the optimal
allocation of resources to the K12 system versus to early childhood education (for poor children).
In any given location, if average outcomes are maximized, the marginal dollar spent on Head Start
will yield the same effect on outcomes as an equivalent expenditure on K12 education.
It is helpful to define some parameters. The proportion of poor children in a county is p.
The average per-student cost of rolling out the average Head Start center is the cost of increasing
Head Start spending per poor-4-year old by $4,320. The average cost of this increase is simply
4320*p. The marginal effect of rolling out the average Head Start center for a county (𝜋𝐻𝑆 ), is a
poverty-weighted average of the effect of a $4,320 increase in Head Start spending on low-income
children (δHS, poor), and that for non-poor children (δHS,non). Because Head Start has no effect on
non-poor children, this simplifies to [8] below.
[8]

𝜋𝐻𝑆 = 𝑝𝛿𝐻𝑆,𝑝𝑜𝑜𝑟 .

To equate the marginal effects of spending on Head Start to that of spending on the K12 system,
we need to define the change in K12 spending that would lead to the same expenditure as an
increase of $4,320 in Head Start spending per poor-4-year old. During our sample period, K12
spending was roughly $4,000 per student per year on average. Assuming a 7% interest rate,
spending $4,000 for 12 years is equivalent to $34,000 in present value terms. Thus, an equivalent
expenditure at the student level would be a 4320p/34000=(p*12.7)% increase in K12 spending.
We define 𝛿𝐾12,𝑝𝑜𝑜𝑟 and 𝛿𝐾12,𝑛𝑜𝑛 as the effect of increasing K12 spending by one% on poor and

We take this evidence as suggestive. While we have subjected our estimated Head Start spending and K12 spending
effects to extensive specification checks of validity, we have not done so for Food Stamp or Medicaid spending. For
this reason, we take this only to indicate the robustness of our main effects and not as any indication regarding the
interaction between these other policies and K12 spending. Exploration into these issues is outside the scope of this
paper.
55

37

non-poor children, respectively. The marginal effect of the equivalent increase in K12 spending
on the average child in the county is therefore
[9]

𝜋𝐾12 = (𝑝𝛿𝐾12,𝑝𝑜𝑜𝑟 + (1 − 𝑝)𝛿𝐾12,𝑛𝑜𝑛 )(12.7𝑝)

The ratio shown in [10] between these two equations 𝜋𝐻𝑆 /𝜋𝐾12 is the relative effectiveness of
rolling out Head Start (from having no center) and spending the same amount across all children
from that same cohort in the county in the K12 system.
[10]

𝜋𝐻𝑆
𝜋𝐾12

=

𝑝𝛿𝐻𝑆,𝑝𝑜𝑜𝑟
(𝑝𝛿𝐾12,𝑝𝑜𝑜𝑟 +(1−𝑝)𝛿𝐾12,𝑛𝑜𝑛 )(12.7p)

=

𝛿𝐻𝑆,𝑝𝑜𝑜𝑟 /(12.7)
𝑝(𝛿𝐾12,𝑝𝑜𝑜𝑟 −𝛿𝐾12,𝑛𝑜𝑛 )+𝛿𝐾12,𝑛𝑜𝑛

The relative marginal effect of Head Start rollout and the equivalent spending in the K12 system
is a function of the poverty rate p as long as 𝛿𝐾12,𝑝𝑜𝑜𝑟 ≠ 𝛿𝐾12,𝑛𝑜𝑛 . Specifically, if 𝛿𝐾12,𝑝𝑜𝑜𝑟 >
𝛿𝐾12,𝑛𝑜𝑛 , then this ratio is falling in p, and if 𝛿𝐾12,𝑝𝑜𝑜𝑟 < 𝛿𝐾12,𝑛𝑜𝑛 this ratio is increasing in p.
Intuitively, if non-poor children are more responsive than poor children to increases in K12
spending (i.e. 𝛿𝐾12,𝑝𝑜𝑜𝑟 < 𝛿𝐾12,𝑛𝑜𝑛 ), then the marginal benefit of increased K12 spending declines
with the poverty rate so that the relative effectiveness of Head Start spending increases with the
poverty rate. The converse is also true.
To show the relationship between this ratio and the poverty rate at the average level of K12
spending, in Figure 8 we plot this ratio against the poverty rate, where this ratio is evaluated at the
mean level of K12 (i.e., using the empirical estimates from Table 2). We show this for adult wages
(effects are similar for other outcomes). Because our empirical model is linear in Head Start
spending but linear in the log of K12 spending, the marginal effect of K12 spending will fall
relative to that for Head Start at higher levels of K12 spending even without any complementarity.
To show this relationship, on the left, we impose the condition that there is no interaction effect
and then plot the resulting 𝜋𝐻𝑆 /𝜋𝐾12 against the poverty rate where the present value is evaluated
at the average K12 spending levels, 10% above this average and 10% below this average.
As one would expect, on the left panel, this ratio is falling with the poverty rate. This
reflects the fact that K12 spending has a larger effect on poor children so that the average benefits
of K12 spending are larger in higher poverty areas. Also as expected, (even where there is dynamic
complementarity) the ratio is higher when evaluated at higher levels of K12 spending.
Interestingly, with no dynamic complementarity, the relative marginal benefit of rolling out a Head
Start center lies below that of K12 spending so long as the poverty rate is above about 20 percent.
With no dynamic complementarity, this is true even in areas that spend 10% above average in the
38

K12 system. To illustrate how dynamic complementarity affects these ratios, we allow for dynamic
complementary (i.e., using the empirical estimate of the interaction term from Table 2) and then
evaluate and present these same ratios (right panel). As one can see, evaluated at the average, the
basic pattern is the same. However, with dynamic complementarity, the ratios are very different at
K12 spending levels 10% above and below the average. Where complementarities exist, in areas
that spending 10% higher than average in the K12 system, this ratio lies above 1 at all poverty
levels, so that the marginal impact of rolling out Head Start on average wages is larger than the
effects of spending that same money in the K12 system. The flipside of this result is that in areas
that spend less than 10% lower than the average, this ratio lies below 1 for all poverty levels. This
means that in areas with low levels of K12 spending, the marginal dollar is better spent in the K12
system than on Head Start.
In essence, these patterns support the idea that, when such dynamic complementarities exist
between early and late human capital investments, in some locations, there may be no equityefficiency tradeoff when shifting resources toward compensatory early education programs
(Cunha and Heckman, 2007). More specifically, our estimates indicate that, for a district that
spent $4,500 per-pupil (about 10% above the average K12 spending level), the marginal dollar
spent on Head Start led to between 1.5 and 2.5 times the improvement in adult outcomes as that
spent on K12 education. Accordingly, at such spending levels, one could redistribute money from
the K12 system towards Head Start and have both better average outcomes and a more equitable
distribution of adult outcomes. Overall, the patterns in Figure 8 suggests that during our sample
period, the marginal dollar had a roughly equal effect on adult outcomes overall at levels close to
the national averages that prevailed at that time. The patterns also indicate that, when resources
are allocated efficiently, localities with higher levels of Head Start spending should have higher
levels of K12 spending and vice versa. Empirically, the correlation between per-pupil spending
and Head Start spending is roughly 0.35. This implies that, in general, localities may be taking
advantage of these complementarities, but that further optimization is likely possible.
VII.A SUMMARY AND CONCLUSIONS
This study provides new evidence on the life-cycle effects of Head Start and K12 school
spending. We explore dynamic complementarities between human capital investments made in
pre-school and those that subsequently occur in the K12 system. We use children’s differential
39

exposure to Head Start spending (at age 4) and court-ordered school finance reforms (SFRs)
(between the ages 5 through 17), depending on place and year of birth, to examine whether the
marginal effect of Head Start spending on children’s adult outcomes are larger among individuals
who were subsequently exposed to SFR-induced K12 spending increases. We present extensive
tests to document that the policy-induced variation in Head Start spending and K12 public school
spending we exploit is unrelated to other childhood family, community, or policy changes.
For non-poor children, SFR-induced K12 spending increases led to significant
improvements in educational and economic outcomes, while increases in Head Start spending had
no effect. However, for poor children, both Head Start spending increases and SFR-induced K12
spending increases led to significant improvements in educational outcomes, economic outcomes,
and reductions in the likelihood of incarceration. Importantly, the long-run effects of increases in
Head Start spending are amplified when followed by attending schools that experienced SFRinduced increases in K12 per-pupil spending. Across all the outcomes, the marginal effect of the
same increase in Head Start spending was more than twice as large for students from K12 school
districts that spent at the 75th percentile of the distribution than those from K12 school districts
that spent at the 25th percentile. Similarly, the benefits of K12 school-spending increases on adult
outcomes were larger among poor children who were exposed to higher levels of Head Start
spending during their pre-school years. For poor children, the combined benefits of growing up in
districts/counties with both greater Head Start spending and K12 per-pupil spending are
significantly greater than the sum of the independent effects of the two investments in isolation.
There are two important caveats to our work. First, because the counterfactual childcare
and pediatric care may be better today than in the late 1960s and 70s, the marginal effect of Head
Start may be smaller today than in the earlier period that we study.56 Second, public school
spending levels during the period we study were lower than current levels. If school spending
exhibits diminishing marginal product, the effects presented here may be larger than one would
observe with similar spending increases today. These caveats do not minimize the importance of
the findings or their profound implications for policy. However, they do suggest that the
In the early period of Head Start, most poor children would have received home care, while today, as many as onethird of Head Start participants may have attended some other form of formal childcare (Kline and Walters, 2016;
Feller et al., 2016). The proportion of three- and four-year-olds in school has increased from roughly 10 percent in
1964 to almost 40 percent by 1995 (source: US Census Bureau, CPS October Supplement, 1964-2010; see Figure 1).
Also, while most poor children currently receive pediatric care through Medicaid and SCHIP, during the period under
study many children would only have received such care through Head Start.
56

40

contemporary magnitude of the effects may be smaller than those we present here. At the same
time, the returns to education have increased, so the consequences of access to high-quality human
capital investments from preK-12 are large.
The cumulative nature of skill development is likely responsible for the pattern of results.
Our findings highlight the importance of modeling early and later educational investments jointly
and may explain some disparate results on the effects of Head Start. Indeed, our finding that the
long-run effects of Head Start are larger among individuals who attended better-resourced schools
may provide an explanation for why Head Start may have been more successful for more
socioeconomically-advantaged populations (Currie and Duncan, 1995) and why there is a fade out
of the effects of Head Start on test scores as students age (Currie and Duncan, 2000). The key
policy implication of our findings is that human capital investments made in, and sustained
throughout, child developmental stages (pre-school; elementary/middle school; adolescence) may
yield greater returns than separate, isolated, short-lived reforms not sustained beyond the year in
which they are implemented. The findings point to the critical role early-life investments can play
in narrowing long-run gaps in well-being, and they also highlight the importance of sustained
investments in the skills of disadvantaged youth.

41

References
Aizer Anna, and Cunha, Flavio (2012) The Production of Human Capital: Endowments, Investments and
Fertility” NBER Working Paper No. 18429.
Almond, Douglas and Janet Currie (2010). Handbook of Labor Economics, chapter “Human Capital
Development Before Age Five”, edited by Orley Ashenfelter and David Card.
Almond, Douglas, Hilary Hoynes, and Diane Whitmore Schanzenbach (2011). “Inside the War on Poverty:
The Impact of the Food Stamp Program on Birth Outcomes”. Review of Economics and Statistics, Vol. 93,
No. 2: 387-403.
Angrist, Joshua D. and Alan B. Krueger. 1992. “The Effect of Age at School Entry on Educational
Attainment: An Application of Instrumental Variables with Moments from Two Samples.” Journal of the
American Statistical Association 87(418):328–336.
Ben-Shalom, Yonatan, Robert Moffitt, and John Karl Scholz. An Assessment of the Effectiveness of Anti
Poverty Programs in the United States. No. 17042. National Bureau of Economic Research, Inc,
2011.Becketti, Sean, William Gould, Lee Lillard, and Finis Welch. 1988. The PSID after Fourteen Years:
an Evaluation. Journal of Labor Economics 6, no. 4: 472-92.
Blau, David, and Janet Currie. "Pre-school, day care, and after-school care: who's minding the
kids?." Handbook of the Economics of Education 2 (2006): 1163-1278.
Bjorklund, A. and M. Jantti, Intergenerational Income Mobility in Sweden Compared to the United States,
American Economic Review, 87, 5, December 1997.
Card, David, and Krueger, Alan B. "Does School Quality Matter? Returns to Education and the
Characteristics of Public Schools in the United States." Journal of Political Economy, February 1992,
100(1), pp. 1-40.
Card, D., and A. A. Payne. "School Finance Reform, the Distribution of School Spending, and the
Distribution of Student Test Scores." Journal of Public Economics, 83(1) (2002): 49–82.
Carneiro, Pedro, and Rita Ginja. 2014. "Long-Term Impacts of Compensatory Preschool on Health and
Behavior: Evidence from Head Start." American Economic Journal: Economic Policy, 6(4): 135-73.
Cascio, Elizabeth (2009). “Do Investments in Universal Early Education Pay Off? Long-term Effects of
Introducing Kindergartens into Public Schools”. NBER working paper #14951.
Chay, K. Y., J. Guryan, and B. Mazumder. "Birth Cohort and the Black-White Achievement Gap: The
Roles of Access and Health Soon After Birth." NBER Working Paper No. 15078 (2009).
Chetty, Raj, John N. Friedman, Nathaniel Hilger, Emmanuel Saez, Diane Whitmore Schazenbach, and
Danny Yang (2011). “How Does Your Kindergarten Classroom Affect Your Earnings? Evidence From
Project STAR”. Quarterly Journal of Economics (2011) 126 (4): 1593-1660.
Cohodes, Sarah., Grossman, Daniel,. Kleiner, Samuel., Lovenheim, Michael 2015 “The Effect of Child
Health Insurance Access on Schooling: Evidence from Public Insurance Expansions” Journal of Human
Resources August 1, 2016 51:556-588

42

Currie, Janet and Duncan Thomas (1995). “Does Head Start make a difference?” American Economic
Review 85(3): 341-364.
Currie, Janet and Mathew Neidell (2007). “Getting Inside the "Black Box" of Head Start Quality: What
Matters and What Doesn't”. Economics of Education Review 26(1): 83-99.
Currie, Janet and Duncan Thomas (2000). “School Quality and the Long-term Effects of Head Start.”
Journal of Human Resources 35(4): 754-774.
Currie, Janet and Yelowitz, Aaron, (2000), Are public housing projects good for kids?, Journal of Public
Economics, 75, issue 1, p. 99-124
Cunha, Flavio & James Heckman, 2007. "The Technology of Skill Formation," American Economic
Review, American Economic Association, vol. 97(2), pages 31-47, May.
Cunha, Flavio, James J.Heckman, Lance J.Lochner, and Dimitriy V. Masterov. 2006. “Interpreting the
Evidence on Life Cycle Skill Formation.” In Handbook of the Economics of Education, ed. Eric A.
Hanushek and Frank Welch, 697–812. Amsterdam: North-Holland: Elsevier.
Cutler, David and Adriana Lleras-Muney (2008). "Education and Health: Evaluating theories and
evidence". Published in Making Americans Healthier: Social and Economics Policy as Health Policy,
Robert F. Schoeni, James S. House, George Kaplan and Harold Pollack, editors, New York: Russell Sage
Foundation.
Dee, Thomas S. and William N. Evans Journal of Labor Economics Vol. 21, No. 1 (January 2003), pp.
178-209.
Deming, David. “Early Childhood Intervention and Life-Cycle Skill Development: Evidence from Head
Start.” American Economic Journal: Applied Economics 1, no. 3 (July 1, 2009): 111–34.
Deming DJ. Better Schools, Less Crime?. Quarterly Journal of Economics. 2011;126 (4) :2063-2115.
Dobbie, Will, and Roland G. Fryer, 2011, “Are high-quality schools enough to increase achievement
among the poor? Evidence from the Harlem Children’s Zone,” American Economic Journal: Applied
Economics, Vol. 3, No. 3, July, pp. 158–187.
Lipsey, M. W., Farran, D.C., & Hofer, K. G., (2015). A Randomized Control Trial of the Effects of a
Statewide Voluntary Prekindergarten Program on Children’s Skills and Behaviors through Third Grade
(Research Report). Nashville, TN: Vanderbilt University, Peabody Research Institute.
Feller, Avi, Todd Grindal, Luke Miratrix, and Lindsay Page, 2016. “Compared to what? Variation in the
impacts
of
early
childhood
education
by
alternative
care
type”
Annals of Applied Statistics. 2016. 110(3): 1245-1285.
Fitzgerald, John, Peter Gottschalk, and Robert Moffitt. 1998. An Analysis of the Impact of Sample Attrition
on the Second Generation of Respondents in the Michigan Panel Study of Income Dynamics. The Journal
of Human Resources 33, no. 2: 300-344.
Fitzgerald, John, Peter Gottschalk, and Robert Moffitt. 1998. An Analysis of Sample Attrition in Panel
Data. The Journal of Human Resources 33, no. 2: 251-99.

43

Fryer , Roland G. & Steven D. Levitt, 2004. "Understanding the Black-White Test Score Gap in the First
Two Years of School," The Review of Economics and Statistics, MIT Press, vol. 86(2), pages 447-464, 06.
Fryer, Roland, and Steven Levitt (2006). “The Black-White Test Score Gap Through Third Grade.”
American Law and Economic Review, 8(2): 249-281.
Fuerst, J.S. and D. Fuerst. (1993). Chicago Experience with an Early Childhood Program: The Special Case
of the Child Parent Center Program. URBAN EDUCATION 28(1, Apr): 69-96. EJ 463 446.
Garces, Eliana, Duncan Thomas and Janet Currie (2002). “Longer-term Effects of Head Start.” American
Economic Review 92(4): 999-1012.
García, Jorge Luis and Gallegos, Sebastian, Dynamic Complementarity or Substitutability? Parental
Investment and Childcare in the Production of Early Human Capital (February 1, 2017). Available at
SSRN: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2910167 or http://dx.doi.org/10.2139/ssrn.2910167
Gibbs, Chloe and Ludwig, Jens and Miller, Douglas L., Does Head Start Do Any Lasting Good? (September
2011). NBER Working Paper No. w17452.
Gilraine (2016) “School Accountability and the Dynamics of Human Capital Formation” University of
Toronto Mimeo.
Hanushek, Eric A. Spending on Schools. Stanford, Calif.: Hoover Press, 2001.
http://hanushek.stanford.edu/sites/default/files/publications/Hanushek%202001%20PrimerAmerEduc.pdf.
_______., "School Resources and Student Performance," in Gary Burtless, ed., Does Money Matter? The
Effect of School Resources on Student Achievement and Adult Success,
Brookings Institution, Washington, D.C., 1996, pp. 43-73
_______. “The Economics of Schooling: Production and Efficiency in Public Schools.” Journal of
Economic Literature, 1986, 1141–77.
Heckman, James J. (2008). "Schools, Skills, and Synapses," Economic Inquiry, vol. 46(3), pages 289-324.
_______. (2007). The economics, technology, and neuroscience of human capability formation. PNAS,
104(33):13250–13255.
Heckman , James J. and Stefano Mosso “The Economics of Human Development and Social Mobility”
Annual Review of Economics 2014. 6:689–733.
Heckman, J., R. Pinto, and P. Savelyev. "Understanding the Mechanisms Through Which an Influential
Early Childhood Program Boosted Adult Outcomes." American Economic Review (forthcoming).
Hoxby, C. M. "All School Finance Equalizations Are Not Created Equal." The Quarterly Journal of
Economics (2001): 1189–1231.
Hoynes, Hilary, Marianne Page, and Ann Stevens (2011). “Can Targeted Transfers Improve Birth
Outcomes? Evidence from the Introduction of the WIC Program”, Journal of Public Economics, 95: 813–
827.

44

Hilary Hoynes & Diane Whitmore Schanzenbach & Douglas Almond, 2016. "Long-Run Impacts of
Childhood Access to the Safety Net," American Economic Review, vol 106(4), pages 903-934.
Jackson, Kirabo, Rucker C. Johnson, Claudia Persico (2016). “The Effects of School Spending on
Educational & Economic Outcomes: Evidence from School Finance Reforms”. The Quarterly Journal of
Economics, vol 131(1), pages 157-218.
_______. The Effect of School Finance Reforms on the Distribution of Spending, Academic Achievement,
and Adult Outcomes. NBER Working Paper 20118, May (2014).
Jackson, C. Kirabo. 2012, "Non-Cognitive Ability, Test Scores, and Teacher Quality: Evidence from 9th
Grade Teachers in North Carolina", NBER Working Paper No. 18624
Jackson, C. Kirabo. (forthcoming) "What Do Test Scores Miss? The Importance of Teacher Effects on NonTest Score Outcomes" Journal of Political Economy.
Johnson, Rucker C. (2015). “Follow the Money: School Spending from Title I to Adult Earnings”. Special
edited volume, ESEA at 50, forthcoming in The Russell Sage Foundation Journal of the Social Sciences.
_______. 2015. "Can Schools Level the Intergenerational Playing Field? Lessons from Equal Educational
Opportunity Policies". Forthcoming in Federal Reserve volume on mobility.
_______. “Long-run Impacts of School Desegregation & School Quality on Adult Attainments.”NBER
Working Paper No. 16664 (2011) , updated August 2015.
_______. (2010). “The Health Returns of Education Policies: From Preschool to High School & Beyond.”
American Economic Review Papers and Proceedings (May), 100(2): 188-94.
Kline, Patrick & Christopher R. Walters, 2016. "Evaluating Public Programs with Close Substitutes: The
Case of Head Start," The Quarterly Journal of Economics, vol 131(4), pages 1795-1848.
Knudsen, Eric I., James J. Heckman, Judy Cameron and Jack P. Shonkoff. 2006. “Economic,
Neurobiological and Behavioral Perspectives on Building America’s Future Workforce.” Proceedings of
the National Academy of Sciences 103 (27): 10155–62.
Levine, Phillip B. & Diane Schanzenbach, 2009. "The Impact of Children's Public Health Insurance
Expansions on Educational Outcomes," Forum for Health Economics & Policy, Berkeley Electronic Press,
vol. 12(1).
Lochner, Lance, and Enrico Moretti. 2004. "The Effect of Education on Crime: Evidence from Prison
Inmates, Arrests, and Self-Reports." American Economic Review, 94(1): 155-189.
Loeb, Susanna, and John Bound. “The Effect of Measured School Inputs on Academic Achievement:
Evidence from the 1920s, 1930s and 1940s Birth Cohorts.” The Review of Economics and Statistics 78,
no. 4 (November 1, 1996): 653–64. doi:10.2307/2109952.
Lubotsky, Darren
and Robert Kaestner, “Do ‘Skills Beget Skills’? Evidence on Dynamic
Complementarities in Cognitive and Non-Cognitive Skills in Childhood,” Economics of Education Review
Volume 53, August 2016, Pages 194–206.

45

Ludwig, Jens, and Douglas L. Miller. “Does Head Start Improve Children’s Life Chances? Evidence from
a Regression Discontinuity Design.” The Quarterly Journal of Economics 122, no. 1 (February 1, 2007):
159–208. doi:10.1162/qjec.122.1.159.
Magnuson, Katherine A. and Waldfogel, Jane “Early Childhood Care and Education: Effects on Ethnic
and Racial Gaps in School Readiness” Future of Children VOL. 15 NO. 1 SPRING 2005.
Malamud, Ofer., Pop-Eleches, Christian., and Urquiola, Miguel “Interactions Between Family and School
Environments: Evidence on Dynamic Complementarities?” (2016) NBER Working Paper No. 22112.
Murray, S. E., W. N. Evans, and R. M. Schwab. "Education-Finance Reform and the Distribution of
Education Resources." American Economic Review, 88(4) (1998): 798–812.
Newport, Elissa L. (1990). “Maturational constraints on language learning.” Cognitive Science 14: 1128.
Neidell, Matthew and Jane Waldfogel. “Cognitive and Non-Cognitive Peer Effects in Early Education,”
Review of Economics and Statistics, 92(3), 2010.
Oden, S., Schweinhart, L. J., Weikart, D. P., Marcus, S. M., & Xie, Y. (2000). Into adulthood: A study of
the effects of Head Start. Ypsilanti, MI: High/Scope Press.
Pinker, Steven. (1994). The Language Instinct. New York, NY: Harper Perennial Modern Classics.
Office of Child Development. 1970, “Project Head Start 1968; the Development of a Program” Office of

Child Development (DREW), Washington, D.C.

Office of Economic Opportunity. 1967. Project Head Start. The Quiet Revolution: Second Annual Report
of the Office of Economic Opportunity. Washington, D.C.: Government Printing Office.
Rossin-Slater Maya, and Wust Miriam “What is the Added Value of Preschool? Long-Term Impacts and
Interactions with a Health Intervention” (2016) †University of California at Santa Barbara mimeo.
Sacerdote, Bruce. 2014. “Experimental and Quasi-experimental Analysis of Peer Effects: Two Steps
Forward?” Annual Review of Economics, volume 6: 253-272.
U.S. Department of Education, National Center for Education Statistics. Public School Finance Programs
of the United States and Canada: 1998–99. NCES 2001–309; Compilers Catherine C. Sielke, John Dayton,
and C. Thomas Holmes, of the University of Georgia and Anne L. Jefferson of the University of Ottawa.
William J. Fowler, Jr., Project Officer. Washington, DC: 2001.
Zigler, Edward & J. Valentine (Eds.). 1979. Project Head Start: A legacy of the war on poverty. New York:
Free Press.
Zigler, Edward. 2010. “Putting the National Head Start Impact Study into a Proper Perspective.” National
Head Start Association (NHSA) 13 (1): 1–6.
Zigler, Edward, Gilliam, & W., Barnett, W.S. (Eds.) (2011). Current debates and issues in prekindergarten
education. Baltimore, MD: Paul H. Brookes.

46

Table 1:
Summary Statistics of the Analytic Dataset
All
(N=15,232)

Poor Child
(N=6,373)

Non-Poor
Child
(N=8,859)

0.85
13.29
2.49
$48,655
0.08
0.05

0.71
12.29
2.24
$35,372
0.18
0.08

0.89
13.61
2.56
$52,448
0.05
0.04

30.8
1962
0.44
0.87

30.3
1962
0.43
0.66

31.0
1962
0.44
0.93

Childhood school variables:
Any Head Start Center in county, age 4
Post rollout: Head Start spending per poor 4-year old, age 4

0.33
$4,103

0.33
$4,204

0.34
$4,072

Child attended Head Start*
Child attended any pre-school program
School District Per-pupil spending (average, ages 5-17)
Any court-ordered school finance reform, age 5-17
Cond'l on any: # of exposure yrs. to school finance reform
1960 District Poverty Rate (%)

0.04
0.23
$4,366
0.13
7.37
21.52

0.19
0.31
$4,031
0.11
6.90
28.25

0.02
0.23
$4,470
0.14
7.50
19.35

Childhood family variables:
Income (average, ages 12-17)
Income-to-needs ratio (average, ages 12-17)
Mother's years of education
Father's years of education
Born into two-parent family
Low birth weight (<5.5 pounds)

$54,488
3.05
11.84
11.82
0.90
0.07

$22,520
1.31
10.61
10.04
0.74
0.07

$65,130
3.62
12.24
12.36
0.95
0.07

Adult Outcomes:
High School Graduate
Years of Education
Ln(Wages), at age 30
Adult Family Income, at age 30
In Poverty, at age 30
Ever Incarcerated
Age (range: 20-50)
Year born (range: 1950-1976)
Female
White

Note: All descriptive statistics are sample weighted to produce nationally-representative estimates of means. Dollars are
CPI-U deflated in real 2000 $. "Poor kid" is defined here as children whose parents were in the bottom quartile of the
income distribution (approximately 80% of whom were below the poverty line). Analysis sample includes 15,232
individuals (218,594 person-year observations ages 20-50), from 4,990 childhood families, 1,427 school districts, 1,120
childhood counties and all 50 states.
*
Child-specific pre-K attendance & Head Start program participation info collected retrospectively in 1995 survey IW.

47

Table 2: Marginal Effects of Head Start Spending and Public Per-Pupil Spending and Their Interaction: Poor Children
(1)

(2)

Prob(High School Grad)

(3)
(4)
Years of Completed
Education

(6)

Ln(Wage), ages 20-50

(7)
(8)
Annual Incidence of
Poverty, age 20-50

(9)

(10)

Prob(Ever Incarcerated)

2SLS-IV
DiD-2SLS
2SLS-IV
DiD-2SLS
2SLS-IV
DiD-2SLS
2SLS-IV
DiD-2SLS
2SLS-IV
0.04089*
0.07721***
0.2255*
0.02334*** 0.03615*
-0.01808*** -0.02576*
-0.006002*
-0.02024*
(0.02453)
(0.01992)
(0.1212)
(0.004503)
(0.01956)
(0.005302)
(0.01385)
(0.003494)
(0.01082)
(SFR) Instrumented Ln(PPE)(age 5-17)
1.4163***
4.0399**
4.0218**
2.0561*** 1.2596***
-0.7923*** -0.7971***
-0.8080**
-1.1822***
(0.3390)
(1.6751)
(1.7856)
(0.4348)
(0.2690)
(0.2969)
(0.2903)
(0.3397)
(0.4550)
Head Start Spending(age 4)*ln(PPE)(age 5-17)
0.2273***
0.6460***
0.8345*
0.1698**
0.2561***
-0.1079**
-0.1852***
-0.05169*
-0.1808*
(0.06518)
(0.2354)
(0.4824)
(0.06985)
(0.07191)
(0.04267)
(0.05038)
(0.02777)
(0.1076)
Marginal Effects of 10% increase in K12 Spending by Head Start access:
No Head Start(age 4)
0.0673***
0.0455
0.1307
0.0492
0.1338***
0.0176
-0.0336
-0.0014
-0.0589**
-0.0418**
(0.0236)
(0.0316)
(0.1274)
(0.1064)
(0.0349)
(0.0219)
(0.0301)
(0.0153)
(0.0283)
(0.0193)
Head Start Center access(age 4)
0.1102*** 0.1416***
0.4040***
0.4022**
0.2056*** 0.1260***
-0.0792*** -0.0797***
-0.0808*** -0.1182***
(0.0327)
(0.0339)
(0.1675)
(0.1786)
(0.0435)
(0.0269)
(0.0297)
(0.0290)
(0.0340)
(0.0455)
Marginal Effects of Head Start with 10% increase or decrease in K12 Spending:
w/10% decrease
0.0630
0.0768
0.0533
0.6010
0.0269
0.0446
-0.0308
-0.0306
-0.0035
-0.0092
(0.0481)
(0.1169)
(0.1393)
(0.5937)
(0.0284)
(0.0921)
(0.0206)
(0.0568)
(0.0229)
(0.0487)
Average
0.1059***
0.1730*
0.3266***
0.9540*
0.0987***
0.1529*
-0.0765***
-0.1090*
-0.0254*
-0.0856*
(0.0294)
(0.1038)
(0.0843)
(0.5129)
(0.0190)
(0.08275)
(0.0224)
(0.0586)
(0.0148)
(0.0457)
w/10% increase
0.1487*** 0.2691***
0.5999*** 1.3070***
0.1706*** 0.2613***
-0.1221*** -0.1873***
-0.0473*** -0.1621***
(0.0217)
(0.0968)
(0.1209)
(0.5068)
(0.0408)
(0.0841)
(0.0351)
(0.0674)
(0.0138)
(0.0772)
Number of Person-year Observations
----55,706
55,706
88,124
88,124
--Number of Children
5,419
5,419
5,419
5,419
5,613
5,613
6,373
6,373
4,536
4,536
Robust standard errors in parentheses (clustered at childhood state level)
*** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1
Data: PSID geocode Data (1968-2015), matched with childhood school and neighborhood characteristics. Sample includes all individuals born 1950-1976 whose parents were in the bottom quartile of
the income distribution, and who have been followed into adulthood.
Models: (non-Instrumented & Instrumented) Head Start Spending per poor 4-year old at age 4 in the county and instrumented ln(school district per-pupil spending during ages 5-17) are centered around
their respective means, to facilitate interpretation of the main effects evaluated at roughly the mean; the average SFR-induced increase in school-age spending is about 10%. Results are based on 2SLSIV models that include: school district fixed effects, race-specific year of birth fixed effects, race*census division-specific birth year trends; controls at the county-level for the timing of school
desegregation*race, hospital desegregation*race; controls for 1960 county characteristics (poverty rate,% black, education,% urban, population size, each interacted with linear cohort trends; controls for
county-level per-capita gov't safety net expenditures average during childhood; and controls for childhood family characteristics (parental income/education, mother's marital status at birth, birth weight,
gender), and age (cubic). The first-stage model includes as predictors the school-age years of exposure to school finance reform interacted with the quartile of the respective school district's predicted
reform-induced change in school spending based on the timing and type of court-ordered reform interacted with 1970 (within-state) district income and spending percentile categories. The instrument
used for Head Start spending per poor 4-year old is an indicator for whether there was any Head Start center in the county at age 4 (based on the program's rollout timing variation only). There exists a
significant first-stage. The marginal effects related to Head Start access are based on the average county Head Start spending when there is a center (~$4,230 (in real 2000 dollars))--i.e., marginal effects
are evaluated for roughly a $4K increase in Head Start spending (to contrast impact of having access vs no access to Head Start center).
Head Start Spending(age 4)

DiD-2SLS
0.02503***
(0.006942)
1.1016***
(0.3268)
0.1012*
(0.05454)

(5)

48

Table 3: Marginal Effects of Head Start Spending and Public Per-Pupil Spending and Their Interaction: Non Poor Children
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
(7)
(8)
(9)
(10)
Prob(High School
Years of Completed
Annual Incidence of
Grad)
Education
Ln(Wage), ages 20-50
Poverty, age 20-50
Prob(Ever Incarcerated)
DiD-2SLS 2SLS-IV
DiD-2SLS 2SLS-IV
DiD-2SLS 2SLS-IV
DiD-2SLS
2SLS-IV
DiD-2SLS
2SLS-IV
Head Start Spending(age 4)
0.000014
-0.02227
0.008866
-0.05426
0.006901
0.01932
-0.000085
-0.008452
-0.001274
0.000937
(0.003432) (0.01864)
(0.01635)
(0.1071)
(0.005408) (0.02433)
(0.001716) (0.005692)
(0.001705) (0.006974)
(SFR) Instrumented Ln(PPE)(age 5-17)
0.2386**
0.4671**
2.4192**
2.1565+
0.7351**
0.4155*
-0.1383**
-0.1868+
-0.09837
0.1298
(0.1197)
(0.2351)
(1.1645)
(1.5314)
(0.3035)
(0.2366)
(0.06316)
(0.1304)
(0.2161)
(0.2758)
Head Start Spending(age 4)*ln(PPE)(age
0.01688
0.09666
0.02972
0.4144
0.02577
-0.01603
0.005707
-0.000716
-0.02568
-0.01128
5-17)
(0.02347) (0.08062)
(0.1937)
(0.3706)
(0.03090)
(0.1020)
(0.01459)
(0.04094)
(0.02271)
(0.06604)
Marginal Effects of 10% increase in K12 Spending by Head Start access:
No Head Start(age 4)
0.0167+
0.0058
0.2294+
0.0404
0.0626*
0.0483
-0.0162*
-0.0184
0.0010
0.0177
(0.0123)
(0.0252)
(0.1427)
(0.1534)
(0.0360)
(0.0408)
(0.0091)
(0.0148)
(0.0147)
(0.0122)
Head Start Center access(age 4)
0.0239**
0.0467**
0.2419**
0.2157+
0.0735**
0.0416*
-0.0138**
-0.0187+
-0.00984
0.01298
(0.0120)
(0.0235)
(0.1165)
(0.1531)
(0.0303)
(0.0237)
(0.00632)
(0.0130)
(0.0216)
(0.02758)
Marginal Effects of Head Start with 10% increase or decrease in K12 Spending:
w/10% decrease
-0.0071
-0.1351
0.0249
-0.4048
0.0183
0.0885
-0.0028
-0.0355
0.0055
0.0087
(0.0228)
(0.0921)
(0.1189)
(0.4858)
(0.0150)
(0.1253)
(0.0058)
(0.0290)
(0.0138)
(0.0334)
Average
0.00006
-0.0942
0.0375
-0.2295
0.0292
0.0817
-0.00036
-0.0358
-0.0054
0.0040
(0.0145)
(0.0788)
(0.0692)
(0.4531)
(0.0229)
(0.1029)
(0.0073)
(0.0241)
(0.0072)
(0.0295)
w/10% increase
0.0072
-0.0533
0.0501
-0.0543
0.0401
0.0749
0.0021
-0.0361
-0.0163
-0.0008
(0.0099)
(0.0792)
(0.0941)
(0.4730)
(0.0341)
(0.0960)
(0.0122)
(0.0303)
(0.0099)
(0.0467)
Number of Person-year Observations ----90,771
90,771
130,470
130,470
--Number of Children
7,983
7,983
7,983
7,983
8,195
8,195
8,859
8,859
5,140
5,140
Robust standard errors in parentheses (clustered at childhood state level)
*** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1
Data: PSID geocode Data (1968-2015), matched with childhood school and neighborhood characteristics. Sample includes all individuals born 1950-1976 whose parents were NOT in the
bottom quartile of the income distribution, and who have been followed into adulthood.
Models: (non-Instrumented & Instrumented) Head Start Spending per poor 4-year old at age 4 in the county and instrumented ln(school district per-pupil spending during ages 5-17) are
centered around their respective means, to facilitate interpretation of the main effects evaluated at roughly the mean; the average SFR-induced increase in school-age spending is about 10%.
Results are based on 2SLS-IV models that include: school district fixed effects, race-specific year of birth fixed effects, race*census division-specific birth year trends; controls at the countylevel for the timing of school desegregation*race, hospital desegregation*race; controls for 1960 county characteristics (poverty rate,% black, education,% urban, population size, each
interacted with linear cohort trends; controls for county-level per-capita gov't safety net expenditures average during childhood; and controls for childhood family characteristics (parental
income/education, mother's marital status at birth, birth weight, gender), and age (cubic). The first-stage model includes as predictors the school-age years of exposure to school finance
reform interacted with the quartile of the respective school district's predicted reform-induced change in school spending based on the timing and type of court-ordered reform interacted
with 1970 (within-state) district income and spending percentile categories. The instrument used for Head Start spending per poor 4-year old is an indicator for whether there was any Head
Start center in the county at age 4 (based on the program's rollout timing variation only). There exists a significant first-stage. The marginal effects related to Head Start access are based
on the average county Head Start spending when there is a center (~$4,230 (in real 2000 dollars))--i.e., marginal effects are evaluated for roughly a $4K increase in Head Start spending (to
contrast impact of having access vs no access to Head Start center).

49

Figure 1: National Enrollment in Head Start Over Time

a.

b.

Notes: National counts of 3,4, and 5-year-olds are derived from Integrated Public Use Microdata Series (IPUMS)
decennial censuses from 1960 to 1990. Counts for non-census years are completed using linear interpolation. The
percentage of children ages 3 and 4 who are enrolled in full-year daycare are as reported in the Current Population
Survey (link: http://www.census.gov/hhes/school/data/cps/historical/.) Head Start enrollment figures are from the
Head Start fact sheet (link: https://eclkc.ohs.acf.hhs.gov/hslc/data/factsheets/2015-hs-program-factsheet.html). In
panel b, the participation rate is the cumulative probability of enrolling in Head Start across all age-eligible years prior
to Kindergarten entry (note: this is not the same as the fraction of eligible enrollees in a given year, but is the sum of
these annual probabilities across age-eligible years prior to kindergarten entry. The upper bound assumes that each
enrollee in full years and summer only programs is unique (no overlap). The lower bound assumes that all full-year
enrollees, were possible, were also in a summer program (full overlap). The informed estimates assume that, where
possible, 40 percent of the full year enrollees were previously summer enrollees.

50

Figure 2: Evolution on Head Start Spending and Educational Attainment at Rollout (Poor Children)
Educational Attainment:
Low Head Start Spending

High Head Start
Spending in 1980

5

4

3

High Head Start
Spending in 1980
2

1

2.25

2.25

1.75

1.75

1.25

.75

.25

-.25

-.75

-4

-2

0

2

4

6

8

10

Year Age 4 - Year of Initial County Head Start Center

1.25

.75

.25

-.25

-.75

-1.25

0

Educational Attainment:
High Head Start Spending

Change in
Completed Years of Education

6

Change in
Completed Years of Education

Cnty Head Start Spending per Poor 4 yr old
At age 4, in 000s (real 2000 $)

Head Start Spending:
By Head Start Spending in 1980

-1.25

-4

-2

0

2

4

6

8

10

Year Age 4 - Year of Initial County Head Start Center

-4

-2

0

2

4

6

8

10

Year Age 4 - Year of Initial County Head Start Center

Data: Analysis sample includes PSID individuals born 1950-1976 who have been followed into adulthood. "High Head Start spending" is defined here as counties
in the top quartile of Head Start spending among all US counties after rollout; "Low Head Start spending" defined here as bottom quartile of Head Start spending
among all US counties after rollout or no spending.
Models: Results are based on event study models of educational attainment on children's exposure to county Head Start spending per poor 4-year-old at age 4 as a
function of the timing of the rollout of the program in the county. The figures present the event-study plots for both high and low spending counties (in 1980). The
shaded grey region in the event study plots for years of education depict the 90% confidence interval for each event-year. The models include childhood county
fixed effects, race*census division-specific birth year trends; controls for 1960 county characteristics (poverty rate,% black, education,% urban, population size)
each interacted with linear cohort trends; and controls for childhood family characteristics (parental income & education, mother's marital status at birth, birth
weight, gender).

51

Figure 3:
Effects of Head Start Spending and Access: by Age of Spending and Access (Poor Children)
Effects of County Head Start Center Access
By Child Age on Educational Attainment

Effects of $1,000 Increase in Head Start Spending
By Child Age on Educational Attainment
1.5
1.25

Change in Years of Education

Change in Years of Education

.4
.2
0
-.2
-.4

1
.75
.5
.25
0
-.25
-.5
-.75
-1
-1.25

1

2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
Child's Age at Head Start Spending Increase

10

0

1

2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
Child's Age at Head Start Center Access

10

These figures present the marginal effects of Head Start spending in an individual’s childhood county at different ages, conditional on the level of Head Start
spending in the childhood county at age 4 (when such spending should have an effect). The shaded grey region in the event study plots depict the 90% confidence
interval for each rollout age estimate. The sample is poor children only. Models include the full set of controls as in Tables 2 and 3. The coefficients on the noneligible years 1 through 3 and 5 through 10, are all conditional on spending at age 4. The coefficient for spending at age 4 is based on a model with no other ages
included. For the regression estimates underlying this model for years of education attained, see Appendix Table H6.

52

Figure 4: Evolution of K12 Spending and Educational Attainment after SFR Reform (All Children)

Per-Pupil K12 Spending: By Predicted Dose

Years of Education: By Predicted Dose
1.5

Large Predicted
Spending Increase

1.25

Change in
Completed Years of Education

Change in
Ln(avg school-age per-pupil spending)

.15

.1

.05

0
No Predicted Spending Increase

1

Large Predicted
Spending Increase

.75
.5
.25
0

-.05
-.25
-8 -6 -4 -2
0
2
4
6
8
10 12
Year Age 17 - Year of Initial School Finance Reform

No Predicted Spending Increase

-8 -6 -4 -2
0
2
4
6
8
10 12
Year Age 17 - Year of Initial School Finance Reform

Models: The event study figures use school district's predicted reform-induced change in spending based on the timing and type of court-ordered reform interacted
with 1970 (within-state) district income and spending percentile categories—the solid black line shows estimated effects for districts with a predicted reform̂ 𝑑 > 0) whereas the solid grey line shows the corresponding effects for districts with low predicted reform-induced K12
induced K12 spending increase (𝑑𝑜𝑠𝑒
̂ 𝑑 ≤ 0. Roughly two-thirds of districts in reform states had predicted spending increases. The event study models include:
spending increases or a decrease 𝑑𝑜𝑠𝑒
school district fixed effects, race-specific year of birth fixed effects, race*census division-specific birth year trends; controls at the county-level for the timing of
school desegregation*race, hospital desegregation*race, rollout of "War on Poverty" & related safety-net programs (community health centers, food stamps,
Medicaid, AFDC, UI, Title-I (average during childhood years)), timing of state-funded Kindergarten introduction and timing of tax limit policies; controls for 1960
county characteristics (poverty rate,% black, education,% urban, population size) each interacted with linear cohort trends; and controls for childhood family
characteristics (parental income/education, mother's marital status at birth, birth weight, gender).

53

Figure 5: Effect of K12 Spending on Year of Completed Education: by Head Start Exposure Status (Poor Children)

Models: The event study figures use school district's predicted reform-induced change in spending based on the timing and type of court-ordered reform interacted
with 1970 (within-state) district income and spending percentile categories--right panel shows estimated effects for districts with a predicted reform-induced K12
̂ 𝑑 > 0) whereas the left panel shows the corresponding effects for districts with low predicted reform-induced K12 spending increases or a
spending increase (𝑑𝑜𝑠𝑒
̂
decrease 𝑑𝑜𝑠𝑒𝑑 ≤ 0. Roughly two-thirds of districts in reform states had predicted spending increases. These estimated effects are presented both for children whose
county had no Head Start center at age 4 (grey line), and those who were exposed to any county Head Start spending at age 4 (black line), to highlight the role of
dynamic complementarity. The event study models include: school district fixed effects, race-specific year of birth fixed effects, race*census division-specific birth
year trends; controls at the county-level for the timing of school desegregation*race, hospital desegregation*race, rollout of "War on Poverty" & related safety-net
programs (community health centers, food stamps, Medicaid, AFDC, UI, Title-I (average during childhood years)), timing of state-funded Kindergarten introduction
and timing of tax limit policies; controls for 1960 county characteristics (poverty rate,% black, education,% urban, population size) each interacted with linear cohort
trends; and controls for childhood family characteristics (parental income/education, mother's marital status at birth, birth weight, gender).

54

Figure 6: Effect of Head Start Spending by K12 spending Levels and vice versa on Educational Attainment

Interactive Effects of Head Start and K12 Spending on Educational Attainment (w/ 90% CI)
Poor Children

Non-Poor Children

.8

1
With 10% K12 Increase

Change in Years of Education

Change in Years of Education

1

With Head Start

.6
At K12 Average
No Head Start

.4

With 10% K12 Decrease

.2
0

Head Start Access

K12 10% Spend Increase

.8
.6
.4

No Head Start
With Head Start
With 10% K12 Decrease
With 10% K12 Increase

.2

At K12 Average

0

Head Start Access

K12 10% Spend Increase

Note: The reported marginal Effects based upon 2SLS-Difference-in-Difference model results are presented in columns 3 from Tables 2 and 3. The reported
marginal effects and the standard errors were computed using the delta method.

55

Figure 7: Effect of Head Start Spending by K12 spending Levels and vice versa on Wages

Interactive Effects of Head Start and K12 Spending on Adult Wages (w/ 90% CI)
Poor Children

Non-Poor children
With Head Start

.25

With 10% K12 Increase
No Head Start

.2

.15
.1

Change in Ln(Wages) ages 20-50

Change in Ln(Wages) ages 20-50

.25

.2

.15

At K12 Average

With 10% K12
Decrease

.05

With Head Start
With 10% K12 Increase

.1
At K12 Average

.05

0

No Head Start

With 10% K12 Decrease

0
Head Start Access

K12 10% Spend Increase

Head Start Access

K12 10% Spend Increase

Note: The reported marginal Effects based upon 2SLS-Difference-in-Difference model results are presented in columns 5 from Tables 2 and 3. The reported
marginal effects and the standard errors were computed using the delta method.

56

Figure 8: Ratio between the Effect of Head Start Spending and K12 spending Levels by Poverty Level in the County

Without Dynamic Complementarity

Relative PreK to K12 Spending Effects
on Years of Education

Relative PreK to K12 Spending Effects
on Years of Education

Marginal Effect of Head Start Rollout/Marginal Effect of Equivalent Spending on K12
5
4.5
4
3.5
3
2.5
2
1.5
1
.5
0
0

.1

.2

.3 .4 .5 .6 .7
County Poverty Rate

.8

.9

1

1st Head Start Ctr; 10%BelowAvg K12
1st HeadStart;Avg K12
1st Head Start Ctr; 10%AboveAvg K12

With Dynamic Complementarity
5
4.5
4
3.5
3
2.5
2
1.5
1
.5
0
0

.1

.2

.3 .4 .5 .6 .7
County Poverty Rate

.8

.9

1

1st Head Start Ctr; 10%BelowAvg K12
1st HeadStart;Avg K12
1st Head Start Ctr; 10%AboveAvg K12

Note: The reported marginal Effects based upon 2SLS-Difference-in-Difference model results presented in columns 2 and 3 from Tables 2 and 3. The solid grey
lines plot the ratio between the marginal effect of spending on Head Start and the effect of spending that same amount on the K12 system (in present value-terms).
This ratio presented in the solid grey line is evaluated at average levels of Head Start spending and K12 spending during the sample period. The dashed grey line
presents this same ratio evaluated at $1000 above the average K12 spending levels assuming no dynamic complementarity, while the solid black line presents this
ratio evaluated at $1000 above the average K12 spending levels using the estimated interaction effects. The difference between the solid black lines and the dashed
grey lines reflect the marginal contribution of dynamic complementarity to changes in this ratio as one increases K12 spending above the average.

57

