                            NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                        IMPUTING CORPORATE TAX LIABILITIES
                             TO INDIVIDUAL TAXPAYERS




                                Martin Feldstein




                             Working Paper No. 2349




                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                            1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                              Cambridge, MA 02138
                                  August 1987




The research reported here is part of the NBER's research program in Taxation
and project in Government Budget. Any opinions expressed are those of the author
and not those of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
                                                  NBER Working Paper #2349
                                                  August 1987




           Imputing Corporate Tax Liabilities to Individual Taxpayers




                                   ABSTRACT



     This paper presents a method of studying the distributional consequences
of corporate tax changes by imputing to individual tax returns the net effect
of changes in effective corporate tax rates. Particular attention is given to
the difference between nominal and real capital income, to the problem of
corporate pension funds, and to the automatic effect of corporate tax changes
on dividends and retained earnings.

     Application of this imputation method to the tax changes enacted in 1986
shows that the actual distribution of the total tax change was very different
from the traditional distribution of only the personal income tax change. The
net imputed corporate tax increase was equivalent to a rise of 6 percentage
points in the personal income tax among taxpayers with 1988 incomes over
$200,000 and 4 percentage points among taxpayers with incomes between $100,000
and $200,000. The corporate income tax increase also added the equivalent of
an 8 percent rise in the income tax for taxpayers with incomes between $10,000
and $20,000. By contrast, for middle income taxpayers (with incomes between
$30,000 and $75,000) the corporate tax increase was equivalent to an income
tax rise of only 1 or 2 percent. The analysis shows that the higher corporate
tax represents a particularly large increase for taxpayers over the age of 65;
on average, tax returns with at least one taxpayer over age 65 will pay 12
percent more tax under the 1986 tax legislation than they would otherwise have
paid.

     Distributional considerations will continue to play a large role in the
public and Congressional discussions of future tax reforms. The present study
shows that it is very important to include the distributional consequences of
corporate as well as personal tax changes in the analysis of any proposed tax
reforms.




                                         Martin Feldstein
                                         National Bureau of Economic Research
                                         1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                         Cambridge, MA 02138
         Imputing Corporate Tax Liabilities to Individual Taxpayers

                              Martin Feldstein*


     The distributional consequences of any proposed tax change are always a

central focus of attention and debate among policy officials and the general

public. The staffs of the Treasury and the Congressional Joint Committee on

Taxation use microeconomic simulation models based on individual tax return

data to calculate the effect of any proposed change on the distribution of

average tax burdens by income class, the numbers of gainers and losers in each

income class, etc. A major shortcoming of such analyses, however, is that

they always focus exclusively on the changes in the personal income tax. The

distributional consequences of changes in the corporate income tax are

completely ignored.1

     The 1986 tax reform provides a clear example of the importance of

ignoring corporate tax changes in analyzing the distributional consequences of

tax reform. The intended effect of the tax reform is to raise corporate

income tax liabilities by approximately $25 billion a year and to reduce

individual tax liabilities by an equal amount. Although the distribution of

the proposed personal tax changes was a primary concern of the legislators as

they modified tax rates and tax rules, no attention was given to the

distributional consequences of the change in corporate taxation. This

procedure had the anomalous (and politically convenient) implication that the

individuals at each income level were projected to receive a tax reduction

even though the tax bill as a whole was designed to be revenue neutral. As

the ana1ysis of the present paper indicates, including the changes in the
                                        —2—


corporate income tax as well as the changes in the personal income tax results

in a very different picture of the distributional consequences of the 1986 tax

bill.

        There has been surprisingly little attention in the public finance

literature to the problem of imputing the corporate income tax to individual

taxpayers in order to evaluate the distributional consequences of alternative

corporate tax rules. Neither the Treasury nor the staff of the Joint

Committee on Taxation ever includes corporate tax changes in calculating the

distributional consequences of proposed tax legislation. Some private

analysts (e.g., Pechman, 1985; Browning and Johnson, 1979) have reflected the

corporate income tax in assessing the distribution of current tax burdens but,

as explained below, there are a number of serious problems with the methods

that they use. Other private analysts have made no attempt to reflect

corporate tax changes when evaluating the effects of past tax law changes on

the taxes paid by households at different income levels (e.g., Ott and

Dittrich, 1981).

        There has, of course, been no shortage of sophisticated analysis of the

more general problem of the incidence of the corporate income tax between

capital and labor. Ever since Harberger (1962), economists have recognized

that the incidence question is a problem in general equilibrium analysis.

Subsequent work has shown how this general equilibrium approach can be made

computational with a quite disaggregated and dynamic economic model; see,

e.g., Shoven and Whalley (1972) and Kotlikoff and Summers (1986). The general

equilibrium problem of tax incidence can also be extended to a portfolio

approach that explicitly incorporates the effects of taxation on the net

riskiness of different assets (see Feldstein and Slemrod (1980)).
                                      —3—


     No attempt will be made in the current paper to contribute to this

general analysis of corporate tax incidence. Nor will the present analysis

try to reflect the complex industry—specific characteristics of the 1986 Tax

Reform Act that distinguish it from a general across-the-board increase in

corporate tax liabilities. Instead, the focus will be on the technical

problems of imputing an assumed or calculated increase in the tax on capital

income to a representative sample of individual tax returns that can then be

aggregated by income class (or other attributes) to calculate the

distributional consequences of the change in capital income taxation.

     One interpretation of the current analysis is that it shows how to impute

to individuals an increase in the corporate income tax on the assumption that

100 percent of the corporate tax increase is borne by capital and that all

capital bears that tax increase equally. This assumption is the basic

conclusion of Harberger (1962) for a two—sector economy in which the

elasticities of substitution between capital and labor are the same in both

sectors and equal to the elasticity of substitution between the two goods in

consumption. Harberger argues that the conclusion is at least approximately

valid under a wider range of conditions and it is probably true that this has

become the conventional wisdom among most public finance specialists.

Feldstein and Slemrod (1980) show that the introduction of risk and a

portfolio framework for analyzing tax incidence does not alter the conclusion

that an-increase in the corporate income tax would be borne exclusively by

capital income under Harberger's elasticity assumptions even though in the

Feldstein-Slemrod portfolio framework the expected rates of return are not the

same in all sectors and the change in tax does not affect all types of capital

income equally.
                                      -.4—




     Those who do not believe that a change in the corporate income tax is

borne exclusively by the owners of capital can interpret the current paper as

analyzing the question of how any given increase in the tax on capital income

in general is distributed among individuals. For example, if the corporate

income tax is assumed to be borne half by capital and half by labor, the

current analysis indicates how the half borne by capital should be imputed to

individual taxpayers.

     The analysis uses the NBER TAXSIM model to calculate changes in

individual tax liabilities. TAXSIM is a computer model that incorporates a

large stratified random sample of individual tax returns provided by the

Internal Revenue Service and a computer program that can calculate the tax

liability for each individual tax return for a variety of alternative tax

rules and alternative assumptions about tax incidence or taxpayer behavior.

The TAXSIM model used in the present paper incorporates 30,723 individual tax

returns for 1983, a 25 percent random sample of the stratified random sample

provided by the Internal Revenue Service.

     Each tax return has been modified to make the sample an estimate of the

population of taxpayers in 1988. This involves modifying each dollar amount

in the tax return to an estimated 1988 level and reweighting the sampleto

reflect the likely growth in the number of tax returns during that interval.

The 1988 individual income tax liability for each tax return is then

calculated using the tax rules and tax rates enacted by Congress in September

1986. This serves as a base to which the corporate tax liabilities and the

change in corporate tax liabilities can be added.

     Section 1 of this paper comments on the methods used by previous analysts

to impute corporate income tax liabilities. The next four sections then
                                      —5—


discuss the key issues involved in using information from the national income

and product accounts and the flow of funds accounts to impute corporate tax

changes to individual tax returns. The emphasis throughout is on finding

methods that can actually be implemented with available data.

     The analysis is used in Sections 6 and 7 to impute to individual tax

returns the estimated 1988 corporate tax liability under the pre—1987 tax law

and the effect of the increase in corporate tax liabilities embodied in the

1986 legislation. These imputations are then used to compare the

conventionally measured changes in personal tax liabilities with the changes

in the combined personal and corporate tax liabilities.



1.   Previous Methods of Imputing Corporate Tax Burdens

     Although the analyses of the Treasury and of the Joint Committee on

Taxation do not impute corporate income tax changes to individual taxpayers,

several academic studies have presented such calculations. The work of Pechman

(1985) is perhaps the most fully developed and widely used of these

calculations.2 It is useful therefore to start with Pechman's work and then

to comment on the work of other economists who have made imputations in

order to assess the distributional consequences of changes in corporate

taxation.

     Pechman emphasizes the uncertain incidence of the corporate income tax

and therefore presents imputations based on alternative assumptions about how

the incidence of the corporate income tax is divided among dividends,

property income in general, employees' compensation, and consumption.

Although my concern in the present paper is not with this general problem of
                                      -6-


tax incidence, some comments on the incidence assumptions underlying Pechman's

more detailed imputation calculations is appropriate in the current context.

     It is difficult to see the rationale for allocating any portion of the

corporate tax burden on the basis of each taxpayer's total consumption. Since

no attempt is made to distinguish between the consumption of corporate and

noncorporate goods, allocation in proportion to consumption is essentially

equivalent to allocating in proportion to the labor and capital incomes that

finance that consumption. As such, it is redundant to have an imputation

based on an allocation that attributes some fraction of the corporate tax

burden to labor income, some portion to capital income and the remainder to

consumption.

     Any allocation based on total consumption must ultimately rest on some

notion that the corporate income tax is embodied in the price of the product

and therefore borne by consumers. Since the theory of incidence is

essentially a theory of relative prices and factor rewards, this notion of

forward shifting only makes sense if it is assumed that an increase in the

corporate tax is accompanied by a change in monetary policy that permits the

overall price level to increase. Even if it is accepted that a rise in the

corporate income tax leads to an increase in the price level, it is difficult

to see why this should be analyzed as a tax on consumers rather than as a

reduction in real wages and real capital income.

     To justify an imputation on the basis of consumption, it might be argued

that the propensity to consume is not the same at all income levels and that

the higher prices affect income that is consumed but not income that is saved.

Such an argument would be fallacious because the savings are merely postponed
                                      —7—


consumption and therefore should be assigned tax on the same basis as current

consumption.

     A second possible argument for imputing a corporate tax increase on the

basis of consumption rather than capital and labor incomes is that a

significant fraction of all consumption is now financed by Social Security and

other government transfer payments rather than by factor earnings. If an

increase in the corporation tax causes the overall price level to rise,

recipients of transfer payments would ceteris paribus see their real incomes

fall. Such an analysis is misleading because Social Security benefits are

explicitly indexed to the level of consumer prices while other types of

transfer payments are likely to be adjusted by Congress in response to a rise

in the price level.

     In short, it seems best to analyze the change in the corporate income tax

as a change in real factor incomes and not to be confused by a possible change

in the price level.

     Pechman's allocation on the basis of dividends and of property income in

general is central to the analysis of the current paper. The assumption that

the tax rests more heavily on dividends than on other types of capital income

implies that net of tax rates of return to portfolio investors are not the

same in the corporate and noncorporate sectors. Although an assumption of

unequal net rates of return is unusual in conventional general equilibrium

incidence analysis, it is consistent with a portfolio model of tax incidence

of the type developed in Feldstein and Slemrod (1980). However, in such a

portfolio model, an increase in the corporate tax reduces the riskiness as well

as the yield on corporate securities. With a wide class of utility functions,
                                      -8-


the combination of lower risk and lower yield increases the demand for corporate

securities. The reduced net income does not adequately measure the effect of the

tax on the different types of capital income because the reduced risk of

corporate equity is a significant compensation for the reduced yield. On

balance, it is very difficult to know how to interpret an incidence assumption

that assigns a greater reduction in net yield to corporate equity than to other

types of capital income.

     My concern in the current paper is not, however, with the

inappropriateness of using consumption or dividends as a base for imputing the

corporate income tax. Rather it is with the technical problems involved in

imputing to individual taxpayers the corporate tax liabilities that are

assumed to be borne by capital income in general. The method used by Pechman

for allocating the portion of the tax that he assumes is borne by capital

income in general begins by redefining the capital income of each individual

taxpayer by imputing retained earnings on the basis of that individual's

dividend income. An est4mate of the accrued capital gain in noncorporate

assets (changes in the value of business inventories, of farm assets and of

nonf arm real estate) is also imputed to each tax return. The capital income

received by nonprofit institutions and by pension funds is explicitly ignored.

The proportion of the corporate income tax that is assumed to be borne by

capital income in general is then imputed to individual tax returns on the

basis of each return's net—of-tax total capital income.

     There are several serious problems with this method. First, it is wrong

to exclude the capital income received by pension funds. The vast bulk of

these funds are the assets of defined benefit plans.3 The retirement benefits
                                      —9—


received by retirees and by current employees who participate in a defined

benefit plan do not depend on changes in the rate of return earned by the

assets of the pension plan. Variations in the return on plan assets inure to

the benefit (or detriment) of the corporations that sponsor the defined

benefit plans since a rise in the net income of the plan permits the corporate

sponsor to reduce its contributions while a fall in the plan's net rate of

return requires the corporate sponsor to increase its contributions. With

benefits independent of plan assets, the corporate tax borne by the capital

income received by defined benefit pension funds is actually borne by the

sponsoring corporations and should be allocated to individuals on the basis of

their ownership of those corporations.4 For the minority of pension funds

that are of the defined contribution type, the individual pension plan

participants would bear the increase in the corporate tax. Since pension

assets are now more than 1.7 trillion dollars, excluding their share of the

corporate tax burden is a serious omission.

     A second important problem with the method of Pechman and others is that

it does not distinguish between real capital income and nominal capital

income. The basic theory of incidence tells us that the rate of return is

equal on all types of capital and that an increase in the corporate income tax

reduces real income in proportion to the real capital income of each taxpayer.

This has several important implications. Net interest income must be

redefined as real interest income. The retained earnings that are imputed to

individual taxpayers should be the real retained earnings of corporations,

defined in a way that reflects the inventory valuation adjustment, the capital

consumption adjustment and the inflation—induced erosion of the net corporate
                                      -10—


debt. The imputation of changes in the value of inventories, farm assets and

nonf arm real estate should be purged of their inflation component. When that

is done, the remaining year to year fluctuations in asset values are only

transitory changes that should not be included in the definition of capital

income for the current purpose.

     A third issue is that an increase in the tax paid by corporations

automatically reduces dividends and other types of income taxable at the

personal level. To the extent that dividends are reduced, shareholders pay

less personal tax. To the extent that retained earnings are reduced, accrued

capital gains decline and subsequent personal capital gains taxes fall. These

automatic reductions in personal tax payments offset in part the higher

corporate tax burden imputed to these individuals. These changes in personal

tax burdens must be reflected in the calculations of the distribution of the

changes in total tax burdens.

     Finally, it is not clear what justification there is for Pechman's

procedure allocating the general tax on capital income on the basis of the

net-of-personal-tax capital income rather than on the pre-personal-tax capital

income. Conventional incidence analysis would say that two individuals with

the same capital assets would bear the same amount of the corporate income tax

regardless of any difference in their personal tax rates. Pechman's method

would apparently give an individual in the 50 percent personal tax bracket

only two-thirds of the corporate tax burden assigned to an individual in the

25 percent tax bracket even though both individuals owned the same amount of

capital assets.

     I have discussed the method of Pechman and his collaborators because it

has produced some of the most important and often-cited figures on the
                                        —11—


distribution of tax burdens and effective tax rates. It is clear however from

these criticisms that the Pechman method may be seriously misleading.

     The shortcomings of the Pechman method are not avoided in the other

studies of the distribution of tax liabilities. Browning and Johnson (1975)

also fail to distinguish between real and nominal capital income, disregard

the capital income of pension plans, and do not reflect the fact that

increased corporate tax liabilities lower the personal tax base.

     Although there are other studies of the distribution of the corporate tax

liabilities,5 none of these deals with the problems raised here in a

satisfactory way. The remainder of the present paper is an attempt to improve

on the current methods.



2.   Imputation of a Tax on Capital Income: A First Approximation

     It is useful to begin by ignoring the issues of corporate pensions,

inflation adjustments and the second—round response of dividends and capital

gains. With these simplifying assumptions, imputing a change in capital

taxation involves three calculations. First, the total capital income

attributable to individuals in a base year must be calculated. The

calculations in this paper use 1985, the most recent year for which national

income data are now available. Second, this must be extrapolated to 1988, the

year for which the tax increase is to be analyzed. Finally, a rule must be

adopted for imputing corporate retained earnings to individual tax returns.

2.1 Total Attributable Capital Income

     The most recent National Income and Product Accounts (as of July 1986)

estimate that total corporate profits before tax, with the inventory
                                      —12—


valuations adjustment (IVA) and the capital consumption adjustment (CCA), were

$280.7 billion in 1985. This figure includes $16.8 billion of "prof its" made

by the Federal Reserve Bank. When these are excluded, the total private

corporate profits before tax are $263.9 billion. Further adjustments in this

figure will be made in subsequent sections but this $263.9 billion will

represent total pre-tax profits for the present section.

     The relevant concept of interest income for our current purpose is the

net interest income of persons. The national income accounts indicate 1985

personal interest income of $476.2 billion. Against this must be offset the

$145.1 billion interest paid on mortgages and the other personal interest paid

to business of $82.6.billion. The net interest income of households is

therefore $248.5 billion. Subsequent sections will adjust this for the

effects of inflation and for the fraction of "individual" interest income that

actually goes to private pensions.

     A third component of the capital income of individuals is rental income.

The national income accounts estimate the 1985 net rental income of

individuals as $7.6 billion (with the capital consumption adjustment),

including the imputed rental income on owner-occupied housing. Any rental

income of corporations is treated as part of corporate profits. Since this

net rental income is net of the $145.1 billion of mortgage interest that

has already been subtracted in calculating net interest income, that

amount must be added back to calculate the proper rental figure (and to avoid

subtracting the interest paid twice): the relevant rental income amount is

therefore $152.7 billion.

    There is a final remaining category of individual income that represents

a mixture of labor income and capital income: proprietors' incomes in farm
                                           —13—


and nonf arm establishments. Approximately ninety percent of the $254 billion

of proprietors' income is attributed by the Commerce Department to nonfarm

establishments. These include professional practices (law, medicine,

dentistry, etc.), small unincorporated service businesses (restaurants,

drycleaning firms, etc.), and other types of establishments with very low

capital requirements relative to their labor costs. It is difficult to

estimate what fraction of the total proprietor's income should be classified

as capital income and even more difficult to impute this relative small amount

to individual tax returns. The present analysis makes the simplifying

assumption of ignoring the capital income in these establishments.6


2.2 Extrapolation to 1988

     The three categories of capital income received by individuals either

directly or as corporate shareholders --     private   corporate profits, net

interest, and rental income -—   totaled   $665.1 billion in 1985. This total

must be extrapolated to 1988 in a way that is at least approximately

consistent with the Treasury's estimate of the corporate tax liability under

the old and new tax laws. The items that appear on the personal income tax

form must also be extrapolated in a comparable way.

     This extrapolation from 1985 to 1988 is based on the mid-year review

forecasts prepared by the Reagan administration in August 1986 (Executive

Office of the President, 1986). Unfortunately, the published detail is not

adequate to permit a full item—by—item extrapolation of the 1985 income and

expenses to 1988. Instead, the present analysis follows the August 1986

off ical mid-year review and assumes that aggregate corporate profits and
                                      -14-


dividends rise by 59.6 percent between 1985 and 1988 and that aggregate

interest and rental income income increases by 16.6 percent. The implied 1988

total private pretax capital income is $889.0 billion. The individual tax

return items in the TAXSIM return are first extrapolated from 1983 (the year

of the actual tax returns) to 1985 (the most recent year for which national

account data are available) on the basis of the observed changes in aggregate

figures and the assumption that the number of tax returns increases by 1.9

percent per year. These 1985 figures are then extrapolated to 1988 by using

the mid-year review forecasts of the administration.7

     The estimated corporate income tax in 1988 and the corresponding proposed

increase is based on the published projections of the Treasury. These

published Treasury projections are for fiscal years rather than the calendar

years needed for integration with the individual income tax simulations.

Adjusting from fiscal to calender years implies an estimate of approximately

$95 billion of "baseline" 1988 corporate tax revenue under the pre-reform tax

law and an increase of $25 billion due to the tax reform.


2.3 Imputing the Corporate Income Tax to Individuals

     The projected $95 billion corporate tax liability for 1988 is equivalent

to 10.7 cents of tax liability per dollar of the $889.0 billion of total

private pretax capital income. This figure, which is the increase in the

effective tax rate on all capital income caused by the corporate income tax,

will be central in imputing the baseline old-law corporate tax liability.

     Subtracting the $95 billion baseline tax liability from the projected

$889 billion total pretax capital income implies a total net capital income of
                                      —15—


$794 billion net of the baseline corporate tax but before the personal tax.

The $25 billion projected increase in the corporate income tax is equal to

3.1 cents per dollar of this net capital income. Imputing the $25 billion

increase in the corporate income tax is equivalent to assigning this tax rise

of 3.1 cents per dollar of total net capital income to each individual

taxpayer.

     Note that this method implies that the baseline corporate income tax is

allocated among individuals on the assumption that in the absence of the

corporate income tax all forms of capital income would have the same rate of

return and that the corporate income tax reduces that rate of return equally

on all types of investments. The imputation of the increase in the corporate

income tax therefore starts with the assumption that the net-of-corporate tax

return to corporate equity is the same as the return to debt and to real

property.8

     Although a tax of 10.7 cents can be imputed per dollar of capital income

in general and of interest income in particular, the tax to be imputed per

dollar of dividend income must be adjusted to reflect the tax borne by the

associated retained earnings. The national income accounts indicate that in

1985 dividends were $81.6 billion and pretax corporate profits were $263.9

billion. Extrapolating these to 1988 yields dividends of $130.2 billion and

pretax private corporate profits of $421.2 billion. Thus in imputing the tax

to individual returns on the basis of dividends, each dollar of dividends

represents $3.23 of pretax corporate profits. Similarly, each dollar of

dividend income represents $2.50 of post-corporate-tax corporate profits.

These figures can be used to allocate the corporate tax liabilities on the

basis of the dividend income reported on individual tax returns.
                                      -16-


     More specifically, since the $95 billion of corporate tax liability under

current law is equivalent to 10.7 cents per dollar of pretax capital income,

the tax borne by corporate equity capital is equivalent to 0.107 x $3.23 =

0.346 dollars of tax liability per dollar of dividend income. Moreover, since
the $25 billion tax increase is equivalent to 3.1 cents per dollar of

corporate profits net of the corporate income tax, the proposed increase in

corporate tax liabilities that is borne by corporate equity is equivalent to

0.031 x $2.50 = 0.078 dollars of increased tax liability per dollar of

dividend income.

     These calculations, summarized in column 1 of Table 1, provide the

figures required for the "first approximation" imputation of the $95 billion

baseline current—law corporate tax liability in 1988 and of the $25 billion

increase in the tax on capital income. To represent the baseline corporate

tax, for each individual tax return in the TAXSIM model, a tax   of   34.6 cents

would be imputed per dollar of dividend and 10.7 cents per dollar of net

interest and of rental income.9 Similarly, the "first approximation"

imputation of the $25 billion corporate tax increase requires imputing a tax

of 7.8 cents per dollar of dividend income and a tax of 3.1 cents per dollar

of net interest income and net rental income.

    Although this would provide the basis for a "first approximation"

imputation of the corporate tax, I will not pursue these figures but turn

instead to developing an imputation that deals more appropriately with

pensions, inflation and the automated response of dividends to corporate tax

liabilities.
                                      —17—


3.   The Income of Corporate Pension Plans

     The national income accounts treat corporate pension plans as part of the

household sector. As such, the dividends and interest received by corporate

pension plans are treated as if they are received by individuals. Since that

income is not taxable, the method of imputation described in Section 2

essentially ignores the tax burden that falls on the capital income of these

pension plans. This is equivalent to assuming that the pensions do bear their

proportionate share of the increased tax on capital income but that it is not

assignable to any individuals.

     As I noted in Section 1, this procedure, which is explicitly adopted by

Pechman (1985), is not appropriate. The correct procedure depends on the

nature of the pension plan. In a defined contribution plan, employers make

prescribed annual contributions but the employees' ultimate level of benefits

depends on the yield earned on the accumulated plan assets. The TIAA-CREF

plan and other plans used at most academic institutions are defined

contribution plans. In a defined benefit plan, employers promise a specific

retirement benefit (typically related to years of service and earnings in

final years before retirement); fluctuations in the yield on the pension

assets influence the amount that the employers have to contribute to finance

those promised benefits but do not affect the level of benefits that employees

receive.'0

     The taxes borne by the assets of defined contribution plans should be

imputed to the employees for whom those assets have been accumulated.

Individual retirement accounts, self-employment retirement accounts (Keogh

plans) and 401k employee saving plans should all be treated in this same way.
                                      —18—


Unfortunately, no information about any of these assets is available on

individual tax returns.

    The present analysis will therefore treat all pension assets as if they

were the assets of defined benefit plans. Although about two-thirds of total

pension assets are in fact in defined benefit plans,11 this simplification will

distort the imputation of the taxes borne by pension assets. It is

nevertheless better to treat all pensions as defined benefit plans than to

ignore the taxes borne by pension assets.

    The tax that is attributable to pension assets in defined benefit plans

is thus assumed here to be borne by the corporate sponsor of those plans. To

impute this to individual taxpayers, the calculations of Section 2 must be

modified by increasing the private corporate profits by the amount of the

interest income attributable to the pension assets and by modifying the amount

of retained earnings per dollar of dividends actually received by

individuals.

     More specifically, in 1985 private pension plans received $11.2 billion

of dividends and $51.8 billion of interest.'2 The dividend income of pension

funds is already counted as part of total private corporate profits. To

estimate adjusted corporate profits, it is therefore only necessary to add the

$51.8 billion of interest to the previously calculated $263.9 billion profits

to obtain adjusted corporate profits of $315.7 billion. In addition, the

dividend income of individuals is reduced by $11.2 billion (from $81.6

billion to $70.4 billion) and the net interest income is reduced by $51.8

billion (from $248.5 billion to $196.7 billion).

     Extrapolating these amounts to 1988 implies total capital income of

$911.2 billion, adjusted corporate profits of $503.9 billion and personal
                                          -19—


dividends of $112.4 billion. Based on these figures, the $95 billion of

baseline corporate income tax is equivalent to 10.4 cents per dollar of pretax

capital income and the $25 billion 1988 tax increase is equivalent to a tax

increase of 3.1 cents per dollar of net capital income.

     The reduction in "personal dividend income" (i.e., dividends not paid to

corporations or to pension plans) raises both the baseline tax per dollar of

true personal dividend income and the tax increase per dollar of true dividend

income. The adjustments imply that there are $503.9 billion of corporate

profits and $112.4 billion of adjusted dividends or $4.48 of adjusted private

pretax corporate profits per dollar of personal dividends. Similarly,

adjusted net-of—tax private corporate profits are $503.9 billion minus $95

billion or $408.9 billion, implying $3.64 of net profit per dollar of

dividends.

     With a baseline corporate tax of 10.4 cents per dollar of total capital

income, the implied tax burden attributable on the basis of personal dividends

received is 10.4 x 4.48 =   46.6   cents of baseline corporate tax per dollar of

personal dividend income. Similarly, with a $25 billion tax increase

corresponding to 3.1 cents of additional tax per dollar of capital income, the

tax burden per dollar of dividends received by individuals rises by 3.1

cents x 3.64 = 11.3 cents per dollar of dividends instead of the 7.8 cents

reported in the previous section. These figures are summarized in column 2 of

Table 1.
                                       Table 1

                  Imputation of the Corporate Tax and Tax Increase


                                                    (1)            (2)          (3)
                                                                           With Pension
                                                                   With     Imputation
                                                  First           Pension and Inflation
                                              Approxi mat ion   Imputation   Adjustment

                                                          Billions of 1988 Dollars


(1) Total pretax private capital income           889.0          911.2         707.5

(2) Baseline corporate tax liability               95.0            95.0          95.0

(3) Total baseline net private capital income     794.0          816.2         612.5

(4) Projected corporate tax increase               25.0           25.0           250
(5) Pretax corporate profits                      421.2          503.9         498.6

(6) Personal dividends                            130.2           112.4        112.4

                                                                  Dollars


(A) Baseline tax per dollar of total
    pretax capital income E(2)+(1)]               0.107           0.104         0.134

(B) Corporate tax increase per dollar
    of baseline net capital income ((4)+(3)]      0.031           0.031         0.041

(C) Pretax corporate profits per
    dollar of dividends ((6)+(5)]                 3.23            4.48          4.44

(0) Corporate profits net of baseline tax
    per dollar of dividends [(6)÷{(5)—(2)}]       2.50            3.64          3.59

(E) Baseline corporate tax per dollar of
    dividends [(A)x(C)]                           0.346           0.466         0.594

(F) Corporate tax increase per dollar of
    dividends [(B)x(D)]                           0.078           0.113         0.147



See text for more complete definitions and for description of methods of
calculation. All figures refer to 1988 projection.
                                      -20-


4.   Inflation Adjustments and Real Capital Income

     The calculations of Sections 2 and 3, as well as the imputations

presented by all previous researchers, fail to distinguish between real

capital income and nominal capital income. More specifically, although the

capital consumption adjustments make the profit and rent estimates reflect

inflation-adjusted depreciation, the interest income and expenses are nominal

amounts. Since the theory of incidence clearly requires the calculations to

be done in terms of real capital incomes, the past procedure is incorrect. It

distorts the measurement not only of the net interest income of individual

taxpayers but also of corporate profits (by overstating net interest costs)

and of pension income (by overstating interest income).

     The present section shows how to correct the different components of

interest income and expenses for inflation in order to obtain a more

appropriate imputation of changes in capital income. Consider first the

interest income and expenses of the household sector.13 The interest income

can be converted from a nominal amount to the corresponding real amount by

multiplying the nominal interest income by the ratio of the effective real

interest rate to the nominal interest rate implicit in the reported interest

income. The implicit nominal interest rate can be estimated on the basis of

the composition of the household sector's taxable interest bearing assets.'4

The Flow of Funds tables report that in 1985 the household sector held 61.8

percent of these assets in traditional savings accounts, small time deposits

or NOW accounts, 15.6 percent in money market mutual funds or in other forms

that would pay a short—term market rate of interest, 7.9 percent in long—term

corporate bonds and 14.7 percent in long-term government bonds; no attempt has
                                       —21—


been made to reflect differences in the composition of these assets among

income classes.

     In 1985, the yield on short-term money market accounts (represented by

the six month commercial paper rate) was 8.0 percent. Corporate Baa bonds had

a yield of 12.7 percent while government 10 year bonds had a yield of 10.6

percent. The typical rate on traditional savings accounts was five percent.

When these interest rates are combined using the portfolio weights described

in the previous paragraph, the nominal interest rate on household taxable

interest bearing assets was 6.9 percent.

     Since the consumer price index rose 3.7 percent between December 1984 and

December 1985, the corresponding real interest rate was (1.069/1.037) - 1 =

0.03.15   This implies that the ratio of the real interest rate to the nominal

interest income in 1985 was 0.031/0.069 =   0.45.   This is the factor that is

used to convert nominal interest income to real interest income. It implies

that the nominal personal interest income of $476.2 billion in 1985

corresponds to real interest income of only $214.3 billion.

     A corresponding calculation must be done to convert the nominal personal

interest payments to business into a real amount. The Flow of Funds accounts

indicate that 63.3 percent of the personal debt consists of nonf arm mortgages,

27.7 percent is consumer credit and the remaining 9.0 percent is a

miscellaneous collection that includes loans, trade credit and unpaid

insurance premiums. The interest rate for outstanding home mortgages, taken

to be an average of the new home mortgage rates for each of the past 15

years,16 was 10.4 percent for 1985. The interest rate on consumer credit in

1985 is assumed to average 18 percent. Finally, the remaining category of
                                      —22—


loans and other personal liabilities is taken to carry an interest rate equal

to 2 percent over the prime rate or 12 percent. The combined average rate of

interest on the personal debt including mortgage debt was therefore 12.6

percent.

     Applying the 3.7 percent rate of inflation in the same way here as

applied to nominal interest rates on household interest bearing assets implies

that the real pretax interest rate on household debt was 8.5 percent and

therefore that the ratio of the real interest yield to the nominal coupon

interest rate on household sector debt in 1985 was 0.67. Applying this factor

to the $227.7 billion of interest that individuals paid to businesses and on

mortgages in 1985 implies a corresponding real interest expense of only $152.6

billion.

     Combining the estimated real interest income and real interest expenses

for 1985 implies that the net interest income of the household sector in 1984

was not the $248.3 billion used in the previous sections but only $61.7

billion.

     An inflation correction also changes the estimated value of the interest

income of corporate pensions. Since the fixed income assets of pensions are

generally long—term securities (bonds and mortgages), it is reasonable to

estimate the nominal yield on these securities as the rate on Baa corporate

bonds, 12.7 percent. With an inflation rate of 3.7 percent, only 68 percent

of the interest income of pensions was real interest income. Applying this

ratio to the interest income of pension funds implies that their real interest

income was not the $51.8 billion reported in the previous section but only

$35.2 billion. Subtracting this from $61.7 billion of total household net
                                      —23—


real interest income leaves $26.5 billion of net real interest income received

by individuals.

     Finally there is the problem of adjusting corporate profits for the

inflationary effects on nominal corporate assets and liabilities. The IVA and

CCA already adjust inventory gains and depreciation for changes in the price

level. The immediately previous paragraph describes how pension interest

income that is included in the adjusted corporate profits must be decreased.

What remains to be taken into account is the inflation erosion of the

corporate debt.17 The inflation erosion of the corporate net debt is estimated

for this purpose as 0.037 times the net fixed-income liabilities of the

corporate sector measured at market value.18 The estimated net debt erosion of

$13.3 is then added to the previously measured corporate profits..

    With the adjustments described in this section and the previous ones, the

final estimate of the adjusted pretax corporate profits for 1985 becomes:

(1) the private corporate profits with the IVA and CCA, $263.9; plus (2) $35.2

billion of inflation adjusted interest income received by corporate pension

plans; plus (3) $13.3 billion of decline in the market value of corporate debt

caused by inflation. The total adjusted real corporate profits is thus $312.4

in 1985.

     Adding to this the $152.7 billion net rental income of the household sector

(which is already adjusted for inflation) and the $26.5 billion net real

interest income of individuals yields a total adjusted real capital income of

$491.6 billion for 1985.

     Extrapolating these real income figures to 1988 implies total real

capital income of $707.5 billion, real adjusted corporate profits of $498.6
                                      —24—


billion and real net interest income of $30.9 billion. 1988 dividends remain

unchanged from the previous section at $112.4 billion.

     These figures, summarized in column 3 of Table 1, imply that the baseline

$95 billion tax is equivalent to 13.4 cents per dollar of real capital income.

Since there are $4.44 of profits per dollar of dividends, the baseline

corporate tax burden on shareholders is equivalent to 59.4 cents per dollar of

dividends (13.4 x 4.44).

     Similarly, since net capital income is $612.5 billion (i.e., $707.5

billion minus $95 billion of tax), the $25 billion tax increase is equivalent

to 4.1 cents per dollar of net capital income. With $3.59 of net profits per

dollar of dividends, the corporate tax increase on shareholders is equivalent

to 14.7 cents per dollar of dividends (4.1 x 3.59).

     Before looking at the implications of these adjustments for the

distribution of the increased tax burden, the next section considers a final

problem: the response of dividends and retained earnings to the increase in

the corporate tax.



5. Automatic Changes in Taxable Personal Income

    A rise in corporate tax payments automatically reduces taxable personal

income. To the extent that the higher corporate tax payments are borne by

corporate capital, firms must reduce dividends or retained earnings or both.

Whatever the response, it implies an automatic reduction in the personal taxes

paid by individuals. A reduction in dividends reduces personal taxable income

directly and therefore the personal tax on that income. A reduction in

retained earnings lowers the value of the share price and therefore ultimately
                                      —25—


reduces capital gains and the taxes on those gains. To the extent that higher

corporate tax payments are borne by other types of capital, they reduce the

return on that capital and therefore the corresponding income at the personal

level.

    The conventional revenue estimation procedure ignores the effect of

corporate tax increases on personal tax liabilities and therefore overstates

the revenue effect of raising corporate taxes. As the calculations below

indicate, the magnitude of this effect can be quite substantial.

    To make this adjustment operational, the reduction in capital income due

to the corporate income tax must be divided between corporate capital income

and noncorporate capital income. The simplest assumption, and the one adopted

here, is that the gross of tax capital incomes of the corporate and

noncorporate sectors remain constant (as they would in the classical Harberger

unit elasticity economy), implying that corporate sector net capital income

falls by the full amount of the corporate tax. Note that this does not imply

that the tax is borne just by corporate shareholders. The rate of return

falls by the same amount on all types of capital. But the shift in the

capital stock from the corporate sector to the noncorporate sector is just

enough (given the assumption of Unit elasticities) to maintain the capital

income of the noncorporate sector and to reduce the corporate sector capital

income by the full amount of the corporate tax.

     The decline in corporate sector net income must also be divided between a

reduction of dividends and a reduction of retained earnings. Econometric

studies of dividend behaviour (e.g., Lintner (1956) and Feldstein (1970))

imply that dividends adjust to net profits gradually but with a long—run
                                      —26—


response that maintains the same ratio of dividends to net earnings unless the

changes in tax rules alter the relative cost of dividends and retained

earnings. Although the 1986 reduction in marginal personal income tax rates

and the accompanying rise in capital gains rates both increase the relative

attractiveness of dividends, reflecting the likely corporate response to this

change would go beyond the nonbehavioural character of the current analysis.

But a reduction of dividends and, retained earnings is forced upon firms by

their reduction in net earnings and cannot be ignored even in an analysis that

does not attempt to include the response of economic agents to changes in

relative prices.

    In this spirit, it is appropriate to assume that firms adjust dividends

and retained earnings in a way that maintains an unchanged ratio of dividends

to real retained earnings. For this purpose, retained earnings must be based

on economic profits with the capital consumption adjustment and the

inventory valuation adjustment. In addition, these profits must be adjusted by

adding the product of the inflation rate and the outstanding net corporate

debt. When this calculation is done for each year in the decade from 1976

through 1985, the ratio of dividends to the sum of dividends and adjusted

retained earnings is 0.475.

    Dividing the $95 billion 1988 baseline corporate tax liability into

dividends and retained earnings in this ratio implies that the baseline

corporate tax reduces 1988 dividends by $45.1 billion and retained earnings by

$49.9 billion. Similarly, the $25 billion rise in corporate tax receipts

would reduce dividends by $11.9 billion and retained earnings by $13.1

billion.
                                      —27—


     Since the total projected dividends at the 1988 level are $112.4 billion,

the preexisting tax reduces dividends at the rate of 401 cents per dollar of

projected 1988 dividends and reduces retained earnings by 44.4 cents per

dollar of projected 1988 dividends. Similarly, the projected $25 billion rise

in corporate taxes imply that dividends will be reduced by 10.6 cents per

dollar of dividends and that retained earnings would be reduced by 11.6 cents

per dollar of dividends.

     The remaining difficulty in calculating the resulting change in personal

tax liabilities is deciding how much tax to associate with the change in

retained earnings. There are two issues. Each dollar of retained earnings

may raise the share value by less than a dollar (as emphasized by Bradford

(1981) and others). Moreover, the delay in realizing capital gains and the

possibility of avoiding taxable realization alto9ether by bequeathing the

appreciated stock mean that the effective tax rate is less than the statutory

rate on capital gains. The calculations in this paper assume that each

individual's effective rate of tax on the dollars of retained earnings is

equal to one half of that individual's capital gains tax rate.



6. Imputing the Baseline Corporate Income Tax

    It is now possible to summarize the effects of the $95 billion 1988

corporate income tax and to present the simulation results on the effect of

that tax on the distribution of tax liabilities.

   The calculations that have been presented imply that the $95 billion

baseline corporate income tax in 1988 has four effects:
                                        —28-


(1)    It reduces dividends by 40.1 cents per dollar of dividends reported by

individual taxpayers;


(2) It reduces retained earnings by 44.4 cents per dollar of dividends

reported by individual taxpayers;


(3)    It implies an additional corporate tax liability of 59.4 cents per dollar

of dividends; and


(4) It implies an additional corporate tax liability of 13.4 cents per dollar

of real interest income.


      These estimates are now used in conjunction with the TAXSIM program to

calculate the effect of the baseline $95 billion corporate tax on each

individual in the TAXSIM sample. This analysis calculates two basic measures:

the effect of the corporate income tax on personal tax liabilities and the

extra imputed burden of the corporate tax.

      The calculation of the effect of the corporate income tax on individual

tax liabilities starts with a projection of 1988 personal income tax

liabilities for each individual in the TAXSIM sample under the tax law enacted

in 1986 ("the new tax law"). Recall that, as noted in Section 2.2, for this

purpose the TAXSIM sample of tax returns is reweighted to represent the growth

in the number of potential tax returns by 1988 and the dollar amounts are

rescaled to reflect the projected growth in nominal GNP and its components

between 1985 and 1988. The TAXSIM program contains the rate schedule and tax

rules (as far as possible) of the new tax law enacted in 1986.

      The effect of the corporate tax on personal income tax liabilities is

calculated by adding to each individual's reported dividend income an amount
                                       -29—


equal to 40.1. cents -per dollar of reported dividend income and to each

individual's long-term capital gain an amount equal to 44.4 cents per dollar

of reported dividend income. The individual's total tax bill is then

recalculated for this expanded measure of income using the rules and rates of

the new tax law. The difference between this enlarged tax bill and the

baseline tax bill for 1988 is an estimate of the extent to which the baseline

corporate tax reduces personal tax liabilities.

     In the aggregate the $95 billion corporation income tax reduces personal

tax liabilities by $13.4 billion. That is, without the corporate income tax,

1988 personal tax liabilities would be $13.4 billion higher than with the

baseline $95 billion corporate tax.

     Each individual's share of the $95 billion corporate tax burden is

calculated by attributing to the individual an imputed burden of 134 cents

per dollar of real net interest income19 and 59.4 cents per dollar of

dividends. For this purpose, what matters is not the interest and dividends

that individuals report for tax purposes but the actual amount of interest and

dividends that they receive. Studies by the Department of Commerce (Park,

1986) indicate that individuals include in adjusted gross income only about 82

percent of the nominal interest income that they receive and about 71 percent

of the dividends that they receive. The imputation therefore begins by

grossing up dividends and nominal interest by dividing reported dividends by

0.71 and reported interest by 0.82. The imputed burden of 59.4 cents per

dollar of dividends is then calculated using this more accurate measure of

true dividend income. Similarly the imputation of 13.4 cents per dollar of

real net interest income is imputed on the basis of the real income estimated

using the more accurate measure of total nominal interest income.20
                                      -30—


     In the aggregate, the amount of corporate tax imputed to individuals by

the present method is $60.7 billion or 64 percent of the total $95 billion

corporate tax liability. The remaining 36 percent is borne primarily by

nontaxable owners of capital, by trusts and other fiduciary accounts, and by

foreign investors.

    Table 2 shows the distribution of these imputed changes in personal tax

liabilities and total tax burdens. The individual tax returns in the TAXSIM

model are weighted by the estimated 1988 weights and then grouped according to

adjusted gross income under the rules of the new tax law. Column 1 shows the

estimated number of returns in each category. Column 2 shows the average

personal income tax liability at each income level under the new tax law.

Column 3 shows the additional personal tax liability that would have been

borne had the corporate income tax not reduced dividends and retained

earnings. Column 4 shows the imputed tax burden that represents each

individual's share of the $95 billion tax on capital income.

     Column 5 summarizes these impacts by showing the net effect of the

corporate tax (column 4 minus column 3) as a percentage of the tax burden that

would have existed in the absence of the corporate income tax (column 2 plus

column 3). The numerator of column 5 is thus the unobserved tax burden on

capital income caused by the corporate income tax minus the savings in

personal taxes that result from the reduced dividends and capital gains. The

denominator is the tax that would have been paid in the absence of the

corporate tax, i.e., the sum of the actual personal tax and the reduction in

personal taxes caused by the existing corporate tax. The result for the

lowest income class is not shown because the percentage change is distorted by

returns with tax liabilities near zero.21
                                                    Table 2
                       Distributional Effects of the 1988 Baseline Corporate Income Tax


                                    Average 1988 Dollars Per Return

Adjusted           Number                                                             Average Percentage
Gross                of         Personal     Reduction in Personal    Imputed Share       Increase in
Income             Returns     Income Tax    Income Tax Liability      of Baseline       Tax Liability
Class               (000)      Liability     Due to Corporate Tax     Corporate Tax   Due to Corporate Tax
                     (1]          [2]                (3]                   [4]               (5]



To $10,000         31,128               44             4                    113

$10,000 -           26,284          958                25                   278              26

           —                                           50                   292
$20,000             17,933        2,425                                                      10

           -                                           91                   332               6
$30,000             13,785        3,816

$40,000 -            8,809        5,402               117                   242               2

           -                                          235                   667               5
$50,000              8,758        8,800

$75,000 —            2,274       15,500               610                 2,210              10

               -
$100,000             1,603       28,300             1,300                 5,124              13

$200,000 +             540      122,400             7,100                34,900              21

All
Returns            111,116        3,546               120                   546              12



Total Dollars
All Returns           --          394.0              13.4                  60.7              —-
(billions)
                                      -31—


     The impact. of the corporate tax on individual tax burdens is relatively

greatest among taxpayers in the lowest and highest income groups. The

relatively substantial impact among higher income taxpayers is easy enough to

understand since it is this group that holds the preponderance of corporate

equity and fixed income securities. Among taxpayers with more than $200,000

of 1988 income, the average personal tax liability is $122,400 and the

baseline corporate tax increases that liability by an average of $27,840. The

individual percentage increases in tax liabilities averaged 21 percent among

this group of taxpayers. Even in the next two income groups, the corporate

tax increased tax liabilities by more than 10 percent.

     Middle income taxpayers have relatively little capital income and

therefore experience only modest increases in tax liability because of the

corporate income tax. The taxpayers with incomes between $30,000 and $75,000

have increases that averaged less than 5 percent of their personal tax

liabilities.

     Although the avera9e corporate tax burden per taxpayer is smaller in the

lower income groups, the percentage increase in the tax burden is greater

because of the progressive character of the personal income tax. Indeed, the

figures in Table 2 understate the relative increase in the tax burden among

lower income taxpayers because the calculation of the percentage increases in

column 5 excludes taxpayers with zero or negative individual income tax

burdens. It is nevertheless striking that among taxpayers with incomes of

$10,000 to $20,000 the corporate income tax raises the net tax burden per

taxpayer by $278 or 26 percent of the average personal tax liability of $958.

Among those with incomes less than $10,000, the corporate tax burden averages

$113 or more than twice times the average individual income tax liability.
                                      -32-


     The aggregate estimates shown in the last line of the table indicate that

the corporate taxes imputed to individual tax returns totals $60.7 billion or

64 percent of the $95 billion to be allocated. The remainder is borne by

foreign investors and nontaxable institutions since the portion borne by

pension funds has been attributed back to shareholders.



7.   Imputing the Increase in Corporate Taxes

     A calcu'ation similar to that of the previous section permits an analysis

of who bears the increased corporate tax liability and how recognition of the

corporate tax alters the measured distributional effects of the 1986 tax

legislation.

     The calculations presented in sections 4 and 5 imply that the $25 billion

increase in the 1988 corporate income tax has the following effects: First,

it reduces dividends by 10.6 cents per dollar of dividends received by

individual taxpayers and retained earnings by 11.6 cents per dollar of

dividends received by individual taxpayers. Second, it implies an additional

corporate tax liability of 14.7 cents per dollar of dividends and 4.1 cents

per dollar of real interest income.

     The reduction of dividends and retained earnings implies that the

increase in the corporate tax liabilities reduces personal tax liabilities by

$2.8 billion. Taken by itself, this would imply that the tax package would

not be revenue neutral if the $25 billion of corporate income tax increase was

matched by $25 billion cut in personal tax revenue as conventionally

calculated but would instead cause a revenue shortfall of $2.8 billion.

     Table 3 compares the distribution of the imputed changes in corporate tax

liabilities with the predicted 1988 personal tax liabilities. These differ
                                                            Table 3
                                Distributional Effects of the 1988 Corporate Income Tax Increase


                                        Average 1988 Dollars Per Return
                                               Reduction in                        Average Percentage     Average Percentage
Adjusted            Number                  Personal Income Tax                   Increase in Personal   Increase in Personal
 Gross               of       Personal       Liability Due to     Imputed Share     Tax Liability        Plus Corporate Tax
 Income            Returns   Income Tax       Corporate Tax       of Corporate     Due to Increased       Due to Increased
 Class              (000)     Liability          Increase          Tax Increase      Corporate Tax          Corporate Tax
                     (1]         (2]                (3]                 (4]               (5]                    (6]


To $10,000          31,128             44                 1               30

$10,000 —           26,284         958                    7               71              7                       5

           -
$20,000             17,933      2,425                 13                  70              2                       2

$30,000 —           13,785      3,816                 11                  72              2                       1

$40,000 -            8,809      5,402                     8               44              1                       1

           -
$50,000              8,758      8,800                45                  142              1                      1
           -
$75,000              2,214     15,500                144                 519              2                      2

$100,000       —                                    328
                     1,603     28,300                                 1,230               3                      3

$200,000       +       540    122,400              1,693              8,596               6                      4


Returns            111,116      3,546                25                 130               3                      3



Total Dollars
All Returns                     394.0               2.8                14.5              --                     —-
                      --
(billions)
                                     —33—


from those of Table 1 for several reasons: they are based on net post-tax

capital income, they reflect the induced changes in dividends and retained

earnings, etc.

     Column 1 repeats the number of returns in each income class and column 2

repeats the projected 1988 personal tax liability at each income level based

on the new personal income tax law but ignoring the effect of the change in

corporate taxes. Column 3 shows the reduction in that personal tax liability

that results from the decrease in dividends and retained earnings caused by

the $25 billion rise in corporate tax liabilities. This is calculated by

reducing dividend income by 106 cents per dollar of received dividend income

(and adjusting this amount for the average extent of underreporting) and

reducing capital gains by one half of 11.6 cents per dollar of dividend

income.

     Column 4 shows the increase in the imputed tax burden that is caused by

the $25 billion rise in corporate taxes. This is calculated for each return

as 5.6 cents per dollar of real net interest income received and 20.2 cents

per dollar of dividend income received. The net impact of these two effects

as a percentage of personal tax is reported in column 5 (i.e., the average of

the figures summarized in column 4 minus those of column 3 divided by

column 2).

     The corporate tax increase has only a small impact among middle income

taxpayers but has a larger impact at both ends of the distribution. This

pattern follows that of Table 2. Among top income taxpayers, the corporate

tax change is equivalent to a 6 percent rise in personal tax liabilities,

virtually the same as the proportionate tax increase among taxpayers with
                                      -34—


incomes between $10,000 and $20,000. In the lowest income group the increase

in the corporate tax is almost as large as the remaining personal tax.

     The figures in column 5 are a correct representation of the corporate tax

increase as a percentage of the personal tax liability but not of the

percentage increase in the individual's total tax liability. Column 6

therefore relates the extra tax due to the 1988 corporate tax increase to the

combined personal and baseline corporate tax. The effect is to reduce the

percentage increases due to the corporate tax (since the denominator is always

larger) but not to change the overall implication of a substantial

proportional tax increase with the largest increases at the top and bottom of

the income distribution.

     The present analysis also makes it possible to compare the conventionally

estimated changes in personal tax liabilities with the estimated changes in

total tax burdens that takes into account the changes in the corporate as well

as the personal taxes. This is done in Table 4.

     Column 2 of Table 4 shows the personal tax liability in 1988 under the

"old law" (i.e., the law prevailing through December 1986). Column 3 presents

the corresponding personal tax liability in 1988 under a fully phased—in

specification of the "new law" as it would be conventionally calculated with

no allowance for the effect of the change in the corporate tax. The fourth

column shows the conventional average tax change at each income level, column

3 minus column 2. This is restated as a percentage of the "old law" tax

liability in column 5.

     The total tax changes reported in the final row of the table show that

the TAXSIM calculations imply that the fully phased-in 1986 changes in
                                                       Table 4
                                  Changes in 1988 Tax Liabilities by Income Class*


                                                                    Combined Personal and Cor porate Tax Liabilities
                                                                                               Change as Percentage of:
              Number        Personal Income Tax Liability                                                  Old Personal
                of                                    Average                                     Old          Plus
Income        Returns                                Percentage                                 Personal    Corporate
Class         (000)     Old Law   New Law   Change     Change     Old Law   New Law   Change    Liability   Liability
               [1]         (2)      (3]          (4]        (5]      (6]       (7]       (8]      (9]         (10]


To $10,000     31,128       114           44       -70       —-        227                -40
                                                                                 187

          —                           958
$10,000        26,284     1,102                   -144      —15     1,380      1,301      —79     —7           —6
          —
$20,000        17,933     2,555     2,425         —130       —5     2,847      2,774      -73      —3          —2

$30,000 -      13,795    4,008      3,816         —192       —5     4,340      4,209     -131     -3           -3

$40,000   -     8,809     5,701     5,402         -299       —6                          —262     -5           -4
                                                                    5,943      5,681

$50,000 —       8,758    8,654      8,800         +146       +2     9,321      9,564      243       3           3

          -
$75,000         2,274    14,760    15,500         +740       +5    16,970     18,083    1,113       7           6

$100,000 -      1,603   25,860     28,300       +2,440       +9    30,984     34,319    3,335     13           11

$200,000 +        540   110,500   122,400      +11,900      +10   145,400    164,170   18,770      17          13

All
Returns       111,116    3,549      3,546              -3     0     4,095      4,197      102       3           2

Total
Dollars
All Returns      --      394.3      394.0         —0.3       --                                     -—          ——
                                                                    455.0      466.4     11.4
(billions)

*Al1 dollar amounts are estimated 1988 dollars.
                                      -35—


personal tax rules and rates reduces projected 1988 personal tax liabilities

by only $300 million, nothing like the $25 billion personal tax cut estimated

by the staffs of the Treasury and the Joint Committee on Taxation. There are

several possible reasons for this difference. A primary reason may be that

the current TAXSIM estimates are based on the 1983 individual taxpayer file

while the Treasury and Joint Committee estimates were based on individual tax

returns for 1981. Between 1981 and 1983 individual taxpayer behavior was

changed significantly as a result of the 1981 Economic Recovery Tax Act. Two

important behavioral changes were the substantial increases in tax shelter

activities and realized capital gains. By virtually eliminating such tax

shelter activities and raising the tax rate on capital gains, the 1986 tax

changes therefore represent a larger increase in potential tax revenue than

would appear using the 1981 individual tax returns. Another possible source

of the difference is that the government revenue estimates reflect unspecified

behavioral changes attributable to the new tax rules. For example,

individuals may be assumed to shift borrowing from nondeductible to deductible

forms and to cut the realization of capital gains. Such behavioral changes,

which would increase the effective tax cut implied by the 1986 legislation,

are not reflected in the TAXSIM analysis.    This may be particularly important

since the TAXSIM calculations are based on a fully phased-in version of the

new tax law.

     The proportional tax changes shown in column 5 indicate that the TAXSIM

estimates are similar to the government projections for taxpayers with incomes

under $50,000 but then differ substantially. TAXSIM calculations imply that

the average tax liabilities of taxpayers with incomes between $50,000 and
                                       -36-


$75,000 are essentially unchan9ed while the average tax liabilities of

taxpayers with incomes over $75,000 are actually increased. This is

consistent with the explanatior of the reasons for the a9gregate differences

discussed in the previous paragraph.

     The substantial difference between the TAXSIM and government estimates of

the tax reduction clearly deserves more attention than is possible in the

current study.22 The emphasis here will be on the difference between the

estimated personal tax changes and the estimated changes when corporate as

well as personal tax changes are imputed to individual tax returns.

     Column 6 combines the personal tax under the "old law" from column 2 with

the additional personal tax induced by the baseline corporate tax (column 4 of

Table 2). Thus column 6 is the TAXSIM estimate of the total personal plus

corporate tax under the "old law".

     Column 7 is the corresponding estimate under the new law. It combines

the individual income tax liability under the new law (column 3) with the

baseline corporate tax (column 4 of Table 2) and the net change in the

corporate tax (column 4 minus column 3 of Table 3).

     The net change in the combined personal and corporate tax liabilities is

reported in column 8. For taxpayers with incomes up to $50,000, the combined

effect of the income tax change and the corporate tax change is a reduction in

total tax liabilities. But for taxpayers with incomes over $50,000, the

average tax change in each income class is an increase. Column 9 expresses

these changes as a percentage of the old personal tax liability and column 10

as a percentage of the combined personal plus baseline corporate tax

liability.
                                      —37—
            -


     The figures in column 9 imply that the 1986 tax reform actually increased

total tax liabilities of individuals 'in the top income class by 17 percent of

the baseline personal tax liability. For those with incomes between $100,000

and $200,000, the average increase was 13 percent.

     A comparison of columns 5 and 9 is perhaps the best indication of the

effect of ignoring the corporate tax changes when evaluating the impact of the

tax reform legislation. The tax reduction in the lowest income class is cut

sharply, from the $70 per return reduction in personal taxes to a combined

reduction equal to only $40 of the initial personal tax liability. Among

those with incomes between $10,000 and $20,000, the tax reduction was cut in

half. In the highest income group, recognizing the change in the corporate

tax implies an additional tax increase equal to 6 percent of the initial

personal tax liability. Among taxpayers with incomes between $100,000 and

$200,000, recognizing the change in the corporate tax implies an additional

tax increase equal to 4 percent of the initial personal tax liability.

     Although a comparison of the figures in columns 5 and 9 is the best way

to see the extent to which ignoring the corporate tax increases distorts the

estimated tax change at each income level, the figures in column 9 are

themselves an overstatement of the absolute change in the combined personal

and corporate tax liabilities because the percentage change is based on the

initial personal tax liability alone. Column 10 therefore presents the

combined changes in the personal and corporate tax liabilities as a percentage

of the initial level of the combined personal and corporate tax liabilities.

These percentage changes are absolutely smaller than those of column 9 because

the denominator is always larger. But even with this expanded base for
                                                            Table 5
                                Changes in Tax Liabilities for Taxpayers Over and Under Age 65

                       Joint Returns With Both Taxpayers Under 65         All Returns With At Least One   Taxpayer Over 65
                  Number                           Change in Personal   Number                            Change in Personal
                    of        Change in Personal      and Corporate       of       Change in Personal        and Corporate
Income            Returns         Income Tax           Income Tax       Returns        Income Tax             Income Tax
                                                                                                          __________________
Class              (000)      Amount     Percent   Amount     Percent   (000)      Amount     Percent     Amount      Percent
___________________ill        [21         [3]      [4]          [5]      [61        [7]          [8]          ____________
                                                                                                              ___1i
To $10,000          3,460      -113        --        -89        -—                    -2         -—                          --
                                                                         4,805                              109
          -                    —200
$10,000             7,145                 -33       —203        —25      4,263        32          4         380              17

$20,000 -           8,692       —29        —1        —50        —2       2,022        79          3         612              13

          -                    -232        —7                    —8
$30,000             9,398                           —291                 1,080        97          2       1,226              13

          -                    -425
$40,000             7,078                  -8       —493        —9         572      312           5       1,389              13

          -                         85
$50,000             7,513                   1            41       0        539       460          5       2,216              12

          -
$75,000             1,907       571         4        680          5        204    1,230           6       3,923              12

              -                             8
$100,000            1,268     2,298                2,652         10        218    2,846           9       6,677              14

$200,000 +            381    13,980        12     17,890        15         111    1,299          11    18,520                 8

All
Returns           46,842            57      1            72       1     13,094      140           4         834              12

Total
Dollars
All Returns          ——         2.7        ——        3.4        —         ——                      ——                         —-
                                                                                     1.8                   10.9
(billions)
                                      —38-


comparison, the top two income groups are seen to experience increases of 11

and 13 percent.

     The importance of capital income among the lower income tax groups

reflects the importance of older retired or partially retired individuals in

these income classes. It is useful therefore to consider the analysis of the

tax changes separately for older taxpayers and others. Table 5 presents data

for two groups of taxpayers: the first group consists of married taxpayers

filing join returns with neither individual over age 64. The second group

consists of all tax returns with at least one taxpayer age 65 and older.

     For joint returns with both taxpayers under age 65 shown in columns 1

through 5 of Table 5, the combined change in personal and corporate income

taxes (column 5) is quite similar to the traditional change in the personal

tax alone (column 3). But for taxpayers over age 65, shown in columns 6

through 10, the two measures of the tax change differ dramatically.

     Note first that even the traditional measure of the personal

tax change indicates a tax increase for every income class except the very

lowest one. -This may reflect the absence of an increase in the personal

exemption for those. over age 65 and the greater importance of capital gains in

this age group. Although a more thorough analysis of the effects of the 1986

tax change by age and other demographic characteristics would clearly be

desirable, it lies beyond the scope of this analysis. The emphasis here is on

the contrast between the traditional change in the personal income tax

(columns 7 and 8) and the change in the combined value of the personal and

corporate income taxes (columns 9 and 10).

     Column 10 shows that the total tax increase (the combination of the

personal and corporate tax changes) is on average equivalent to a 12 percent
                                         -39—


rise in the personal income tax. The combined tax increase ranges from 17

percent in the $10,000 to $20,000 income group to 8 percent for taxpayers in

the highest income group. The net effect of the corporate tax change alone is

equivalent to an increase of about 8 percent of personal income tax

liabilities.



8.   Conclusion

     This paper has presented a method of imputing to individual tax returns

the net effect of changes in effective corporate tax rates. Particular

attention is given to the difference between nominal and real capital income,

to the problem of corporate pension funds and to the automatic effect of

corporate tax changes on dividends and retained earnings. The analysis is

limited, however, by the static equilibrium assumption, by the lack of a

general portfolio framework of asset demand and by inadequate data on the real

estate assets of individual taxpayers.

     Application of this imputation method to the tax changes enacted in 1986

shows that the actual distribution of the total tax change was very different

from the traditional distribution of only the personal income tax change The

net imputed corporate tax increase was equivalent to a rise of 6 percentage

points in the personal income tax among taxpayers with 1988 incomes over

$200,000 and 4 percentage points among taxpayers with incomes between $100,000

and $200,000. The corporate income tax increase also added the equivalent of

an 8 percent rise in the income tax for taxpayers with incomes between $10,000

and $20,000. By contrast, for middle income taxpayers (with incomes between

$30,000 and $75,000) the corporate tax increase was equivalent to an income
                                      -40-


tax rise of only 1 or 2 percent. The analysis shows that the higher corporate

tax represents a particularly large increase for taxpayers over the age of 65.

     Distributional considerations will continue to play a large role in the

public and Congressional discussions of future tax reforms. The present study

shows that it is very important to include the distributional consequences of

corporate as well as personal tax changes in the analysis of any proposed

tax reforms.




Cambridge, Massachusetts
July 1987
                                      —43-


same assets.

9.   Unfortunately, no information is available on the individual taxpayers'

implicit net rental income of owner occupied housing.

10. This is clearly true with respect to existing vested benefits. Benefits

that accrue in the future may be modified to reflect the changed return on

pension assets or wages may be adjusted. Eventually the tax on pension assets

will be borne by labor but the transition period may last several decades.

11. Kotlikoff and Smith (1983) indicate that 75 percent of employer plan

pension assets are in defined contribution plans. Total pension assets also

include IRA, Keogh are 401K plans.

12. This excludes the dividends and interest received by state and local

pension plans since taxes borne by those plan assets inure to the detriment of

the state and local governments and their taxpayers rather than to owners of

corporate capital. It is not possible to impute that increase in the tax

burden on state and local governments to individual taxpayers since only 30

percent of the taxpayers itemize tax returns.

13. This includes the interest income and expenses of households and of

pensions and other tax exempt entities.

14. Nontaxable state and local bonds are ignored in the present paper even

though an increase in the tax on capital income would alter the interest rate

on these securities since there is no information about them on individual tax

returns.

15. Note that for the current analysis what matters is the    post real

interest rate and not the anticipated ex ante real rate.

16. The interest rates are the Federal Home Loan Bank Board series for new
                                      -44-


home mortgage yields.

17. Note that this is not equivalent to the household sector's inflationary

loss on the value of its assets because household debt includes federal

government bonds while corporate sector liabilities are net of assets that

include government securities.

18. The method of estimating the market value of all outstanding corporate

debt is an extension of the method used in Feldstein and Jun (1987) to

estimate the value of the debt of the nonfinancial corporate sector.

19. As explained in Section 3, real net interest income is calculated as the

difference between 43 percent of nominal interest income and 67 percent of

nominal interest expenses.

20. Note that a similar adjustment is not necessary for calculating the

effect of the corporate tax on the personal tax liabilities since the effect

on personal tax liabilities depends only on the amount of interest and

dividends that the individual reports and not on the amount of interest and

dividends that the individual actually receives.

21. The small number of tax returns that have a negative tax liability

because of the rebatable earned income credit are ignored in calculating the

percentage change.

22. Lawrence Lindsey -is currently preparing an analysis of this problem.

23. The contrast between those under 65 and those over 65 also reflects the

greater importance of mortgage debt among those under 65. Since the corporate

tax reduces real interest rates, it actually benefits those under age 65.
                                       —45-


                                   References


Ballentine, J. Gregory, "The Short-run Distributional Effect of Tax Reform"

     (1986), Tax   Notes, June 9, 1986: 1035—39.
Bradford, David (1981), "The Incidence and Allocation Effects of a Tax on

     Corporate Distributions, Journal of Public Economics 15 (1): 1—22.

Browning, Edgar and William Johnson (1979), The Distribution of the Tax

     Burden. Washington, D.C.: American Enterprise Institute.

Executive Office of the President (1986), Midsession Review, August 1986.

     Washington, D.C.: Executive Office of the President.

Feldstein, Martin (1970), "Corporate Taxation and Dividend Behavior," Review

     of Economic Studies.

Feldstein, M. and J. Jun (1987), "The Market Value of Corporate Debt and the

     Changing Debt-Capital Ratio," forthcoming.

Feldstein, Martin and Joel Slemrod (1980), "Personal Taxation, Portfolio

     Choice and the Effect of the Corporation Income Tax," Journal of

     Political Economy 88 (5).

Feldstein, Martin, ed. (1983), Behavioural Simulation Methods in Tax Policy

     Analysis. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.

Harberger, Arnold (1962), "The Incidence of the Corporation Income Tax,"

     Journal of Political Economy 70: 215—40.

Kotlikoff, Laurence and Donald Smith (1983), Pensions and the American

     Economy. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.

Kotlikoff, Laurence and Lawrence Summers (1986), "Tax Incidence." NBER

    Working Paper No. 1864, forthcoming in A. Auerbach and N. Feldstein,

    eds., Handbook of Pub1ic Economics, Vol. II. Amsterdam: North Holland,

    1987.
                                        —46—


Lindsey, Lawrence (1985), "Simulating the Response of Taxpayers to Changes in

     Tax   Rates."   Ph.D. Dissertation, Harvard University, Cambridge, Mass.

Lintner, John (1956), "Distribution of Incomes of Corporations Among

     Dividends, Retained Earnings, and Taxes," American Economic Review 46:

     97—113.

Mus9rave, Richard and Peggy Musgrave (1980), Public Finance -— Theory and

     Practice. New York: McGraw Hill.

Ott, Attiat and Ludwig Dittrich (1981), The Federal Tax Burden on Households.

     Washington, D.C.: American Enterprise Institute.

Park, Thai (1986), "Relationship Between Personal Income and Adjusted Gross

     Income: Revised Estimates, 1947—83," Survey of Current Business (May):

     34—40.

Pechman, Joseph (1985), Who Paid the Taxes, 1966—85? Washington, D.C.:

     Brookings Institution.

Pechman, Joseph and Benjamin Okner (1974), Who Bears the Tax Burden?

     Washington, D.C.: Brookings Institution.

Shoven, John and John Whalley (1972), "General Equilibrium Calculation of the

     Effects of Differential Taxation of Income from Capital in the U.S.,"

     Journal of Public Economics 1: 281—321.

Slemrod, Joel (1985), "A General Equilibrium Model of Taxation that Uses

     Micro—Unit Data with an Application to the Impact of Instituting a Flat

     Rate Income Tax," in John Piggot and John Whalley, New Developments

     in Applied General Equilibrium Analysis, Cambridge: Cambridge University

     Press.
