                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




    IDENTIFYING THE EFFECT OF ELECTION CLOSENESS ON VOTER TURNOUT:
                    EVIDENCE FROM SWISS REFERENDA

                                          Leonardo Bursztyn
                                           Davide Cantoni
                                             Patricia Funk
                                         Felix Schönenberger
                                           Noam Yuchtman

                                        Working Paper 23490
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w23490


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                      June 2017




This paper supersedes a previous working paper titled, “Polls, the Press, and Political
Participation: The Effects of Anticipated Election Closeness on Voter Turnout.”We would like to
thank Ernesto Dal Bó, Devesh Rustagi and numerous seminar participants for very helpful
comments. We thank Tillmann von Carnap, Raymond Han, Peter Hong, Vasily Korovkin,
Aakaash Rao, Ann-Christin Schwegmann, Abboud Masky Youssef, Sylvain Züger, and in
particular Francesca Crotta and ChristophWellig, for extraordinary research assistance. Hans-
Peter Kriesi generously shared data. Financial support from the Swiss National Science
Foundation (grant 172739) is gratefully acknowledged. The views expressed herein are those of
the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic
Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2017 by Leonardo Bursztyn, Davide Cantoni, Patricia Funk, Felix Schönenberger, and Noam Yuchtman.
All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit
permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Identifying the Effect of Election Closeness on Voter Turnout: Evidence from Swiss Referenda
Leonardo Bursztyn, Davide Cantoni, Patricia Funk, Felix Schönenberger, and Noam Yuchtman
NBER Working Paper No. 23490
June 2017
JEL No. D72,P16

                                           ABSTRACT

We provide evidence of a causal effect of anticipated election closeness on voter turnout,
exploiting the precise day-level timing of the release of Swiss national poll results for high-stakes
federal referenda, and a novel dataset on daily mail-in voting for the canton of Geneva. Using an
event study design, we find that the release of a closer poll causes voter turnout to sharply rise
immediately after poll release, with no differential pre-release turnout levels or trends. We
provide evidence that polls affect turnout by providing information shaping beliefs about
closeness: first, the introduction of Swiss polls had significantly larger effects in politically
unrepresentative municipalities, where locally available signals of closeness are less correlated
with national closeness. Second, the effects of close polls are largest where newspapers report on
them most. Counterfactual exercises suggest the importance of polls and reporting on polls in
shaping election outcomes.

Leonardo Bursztyn                                 Felix Schönenberger
Department of Economics                           Università della Svizzera Italiana
University of Chicago                             Via Giuseppe Buffi 13
1126 E. 59th Street                               6904 Lugano
Chicago, IL 60637                                 Switzerland
and NBER                                          felix.schoenenberger@usi.ch
bursztyn@uchicago.edu
                                                  Noam Yuchtman
Davide Cantoni                                    London School of Economics
Seminar für Wirtschaftsgeschichte                 Houghton St.
University of Munich                              London WC2A 2AE
80539 Munich                                      United Kingdom
Germany                                           and CEPR
and CEPR                                          and also NBER
davide.cantoni@econ.lmu.de                        n.yuchtman@lse.ac.uk

Patricia Funk
Università della Svizzera Italiana
Via Giuseppe Buffi 13
6904 Lugano
Switzerland
patricia.funk@usi.ch
1     Introduction
Voter turnout is among the political behaviors of greatest interest to social scientists, shaping elec-
tion outcomes and thus public policy. Yet, there is a surprising lack of clear, causal evidence for
one of the most widely-studied drivers of turnout: a voter’s response to anticipated election close-
ness, which is at the heart of voting models dating back to Downs (1957), and the subject of more
than 100 empirical studies (summarized in Cancela and Geys, 2016).1 On the one hand, obser-
vational studies generally find significant, positive correlations between election closeness and
voter turnout, but causal inference is undermined by concerns that underlying issue type or the
behavior of the political “supply side” (e.g., political advertising) may drive the results.2 On the
other hand, recent field experiments providing far more credible tests (Gerber and Green, 2000,
Bennion, 2005, Dale and Strauss, 2009, and particularly Enos and Fowler, 2014, and Gerber et al.,
2020) find no effect of anticipated election closeness on voter turnout.
     In this paper we provide evidence of a significant, causal effect of anticipated election close-
ness on voter turnout. In contrast to existing observational studies we exploit a credible quasi-
experiment arising from the release of polls. In contrast to field experimental research our analysis
is less exposed to concerns that results might be driven by common information sets outside of the
experiment.3 Specifically, we exploit the precise day-level timing of the release of Swiss national
poll results for 52 high-stakes federal referenda, and a novel dataset on daily mail-in voting for the
canton of Geneva.4 Using an event study design — thus holding fixed the issue type — we find
that the release of a closer poll causes voter turnout to sharply rise immediately after poll release.
A one-standard deviation closer poll increases voter turnout by a statistically significant 0.4 per-
centage points in each of three days immediately following the poll’s release. We find that turnout
rates are no different in levels or trends in the days prior to the release of close polls, suggesting
that the information contained in the polls was not anticipated.
     Importantly, we can exclude that these results are caused by a differential response of the “sup-
ply side”, i.e. political advertisements. First, the absence of pre-trends suggests that the supply
    1 Such a causal effect might arise for a variety of theoretical reasons, from (perhaps imperfect) instrumental calcula-
tions of costs and benefits (Myatt, 2015), to interactions of election closeness with social preferences (e.g., DellaVigna
et al., 2016) or with the intrinsic utility from voting (e.g., Riker and Ordeshook, 1968, Brennan and Buchanan, 1984,
Schuessler, 2000, Feddersen and Sandroni, 2006, and Ali and Lin, 2013).
   2 See, for example, Barzel and Silberberg (1973), Cox and Munger (1989), Matsusaka (1993), Shachar and Nalebuff

(1999), and Kirchgässner and Schulz (2005).
   3 Common information sets outside the experiment would tend to produce convergence in posterior beliefs regard-

ing closeness at the time of the elections — and therefore similar turnout levels — between treatment and control
groups. Gerber et al. (2020) implement a particularly elegant design, experimentally shocking voters’ beliefs, and elicit-
ing posterior beliefs to document a “first stage” effect of the intervention. However, because the first stage is measured
two weeks before the election itself, there remains the possibility that posterior beliefs regarding closeness converged
between treatment and control groups by the time the voting decision was made.
   4 The vast majority — 90% — of votes cast in Geneva for the referenda studied are mail-in ballots. Note that we use

the term “referenda” throughout to refer to federal referenda and initiatives. We discuss the institutional details of our
setting in Section 2.



                                                            1
side was not differentially active prior to the release of close polls. Nor does an endogenous sup-
ply side response to the close polls, in the days following their release, account for our findings:
we observe significant effects of close polls on votes counted the day immediately after a close poll
was released — before the supply side could have affected turnout. Moreover, we can directly test
for a supply side response, counting political ads in newspapers (the primary form of political
advertising in Switzerland, as TV ads are prohibited). We find that, consistent with close polls
meaningfully affecting political beliefs and behavior, there is some evidence of a supply side re-
sponse: ads significantly increase following a close poll. But, this response appears only three days
after the release of a closer poll (potentially affecting votes counted four days after poll release),
well after voter turnout already significantly increased.
    We next examine data from across Switzerland testing several auxiliary predictions and pro-
viding evidence that polls affect turnout by providing information shaping beliefs about closeness.
First, we propose a simple conceptual framework in which, in the absence of polls, voters gauge
an upcoming election’s closeness by “locally sampling” among individuals in their municipality.
This will yield correct beliefs only if the municipality’s closeness is correlated with closeness at the
national level (i.e., if the municipality is “representative”). In unrepresentative municipalities, it is
difficult for individuals to condition their turnout decision on national-level vote closeness, since
their locally available signal is uninformative. In contrast, even in the absence of polls, individuals
in politically representative municipalities are able to condition their turnout decision on national-
level vote closeness, as their local signal is informative. When national polls are introduced,
information on national-level closeness becomes widely available, allowing individuals in both
representative and unrepresentative municipalities to condition their turnout on national-level
closeness. Exploiting the introduction of polls in Switzerland in 1998, we test whether polls’ intro-
duction indeed had a larger effect on voter turnout in unrepresentative municipalities. Consistent
with our predictions, we find that prior to 1998, municipalities representative of Switzerland ex-
hibit some association between closeness and turnout, while unrepresentative municipalities do
not. Following the introduction of polls, the closeness-turnout gradient increases differentially in
unrepresentative municipalities, is positive and highly significant, and nearly identical in the two
sets of municipalities.
    Next, we examine whether close polls differentially increase turnout when they receive more
coverage in local media. Using a canton×vote panel, we study the effect of within-election variation
in the coverage of the national poll by newspapers read by the citizens of a canton. Importantly,
newspapers were the primary source of political information among Swiss voters throughout the
period we study.5 Controlling for canton and vote fixed effects — and thus purging our estimates
  5 The   nationally-representative “VOX survey,” conducted following each vote, asks Swiss citizens a broad range
of political questions. One of these directly asks, “Through which media did you orient yourself and learn about
the pros and cons of the last vote?” In each survey, newspapers were the most frequent selection, with around 80%
of respondents indicating the importance of newspapers as a source of political information. See Online Appendix
Figure A.1.



                                                        2
of the effects of a fixed (national-level) “issue type” driving turnout — we find that greater can-
tonal newspaper coverage of close polls significantly increases voter turnout. A one standard de-
viation increase in the newspaper coverage of a poll that is one standard deviation closer than the
mean increases turnout by around 0.5 percentage points. To address concerns about endogenous
local coverage of polls, we exploit a canton’s arguably “incidental” exposure to poll reporting. We
define “incidental” reporting on polls in a canton as poll coverage in newspapers that are read in
the canton, but whose largest market is elsewhere. If newspaper editors target their news coverage
(specifically poll coverage) toward their largest cantonal audience, then readers exposed to this
reporting in other cantons will read it for reasons other than their own canton’s election-specific
interest. We find that greater exposure to this “incidental” reporting on close polls is associated
with greater turnout as well.
   We close the paper by illustrating the importance of polls and poll coverage for determin-
ing election outcomes. We consider two counterfactuals that involve modest deviations from the
status-quo information voters possess about election closeness. First, we consider a case in which
a second national poll is added to the one poll currently conducted in Switzerland. We assume
that individuals consume information aligned with their political positions, in which case sup-
porters of the losing side in a poll would see poll results that are closer than the actual poll results.
We find that when supporters of the losing side observe a one standard deviation closer poll result
than the actual poll (while supporters of the leading side observe the actual poll), the increased
turnout among the “losers” would have flipped the results of two Swiss referenda in our sam-
ple. In a second exercise, we counterfactually vary newspapers’ coverage of the actual national
poll. We consider a scenario in which a newspaper with readers supporting the losing side in a
referendum increased coverage of the actual poll to the sample maximum level of coverage (for
example, to stimulate readers’ turnout). Such a strategy in a single canton would have flipped one
referendum. A more systematic effort by the press — increased coverage in ten of Switzerland’s
twenty-six cantons — would have flipped the results of five referenda.
   Our evidence of a causal effect of anticipated election closeness contributes to a growing em-
pirical literature studying the determinants of voter turnout. Existing work has tested rational
choice models of voter turnout structurally (e.g., Coate and Conlin, 2004 and Coate et al., 2008)
and in the lab (e.g., Levine and Palfrey, 2007, Duffy and Tavits, 2008, and Agranov et al., 2018),
finding mixed results. It has also identified other drivers of voter turnout: expressive motives
(Pons and Tricaud, 2018), personality traits (Ortoleva and Snowberg, 2015), habits (Fujiwara et al.,
2016), social considerations (Gerber et al., 2016, Funk, 2010, and DellaVigna et al., 2016), political
movements (Madestam et al., 2013), media content (Strömberg, 2004, Gentzkow, 2006, DellaVi-
gna and Kaplan, 2007, Enikolopov et al., 2011, Gentzkow et al., 2011, and Spenkuch and Toniatti,
2018), the existence of exit poll results (Morton et al., 2015), and compulsory voting laws (León,
2017 and Hoffman et al., 2017).6 Our evidence of a causal effect of anticipated election closeness
  6 Additional empirical evidence exists on factors affecting other political behaviors, such as contributing to a political



                                                            3
complements this empirical literature and provides support for theoretical models in which voter
turnout increases with beliefs about closeness. The counterfactual analysis suggests that institu-
tions shaping these beliefs — particularly polls and media coverage of them — can play a critical
role in shaping voter turnout and the outcomes of close elections.
      In what follows, in Section 2, we discuss the institutional context of Swiss referenda and in
Section 3, we describe our data. In Section 4, we discuss the challenge of identifying a causal
effect of anticipated election closeness and present our conceptual framework. In Section 5, we
present our empirical results from Geneva, from municipality-level data, and from canton-level
data. In Section 6, we conduct our counterfactual analyses of Swiss referenda outcomes. Finally,
in Section 7, we offer concluding thoughts.


2     Institutional Context

2.1     Swiss Direct Democracy: Overview and the Issues
Switzerland is a federal republic consisting of 26 cantons and 2,202 municipalities (as of 2020).
Along with a distinct federal structure, Switzerland has a long tradition of direct democracy, prac-
ticed at all three levels: federal, cantonal, and municipal.7 The two main instruments of direct
democracy at the federal level (the level on which we focus) are the popular initiative and the
referendum.
      Since 1891, Swiss citizens have had the right to call for a popular initiative, with which they
can revise the federal constitution, if 100,000 signatures are collected in support of the proposed
initiative within 18 months. A popular initiative is accepted if the majority of Swiss citizens vote
in favor, and the majority of the cantons do so as well.8 In response to an initiative, the Federal
Council and the Federal Assembly may propose a direct counter-proposal; usually, this is a more
“moderate” proposal.9
campaign or turning out to a protest. These range from traditional and social media (Enikolopov and Petrova, 2015,
Enikolopov et al., 2020, Durante et al., 2019), to the behavior of other citizens (Perez-Truglia and Cruces, 2017, González,
2020, and Cantoni et al., 2019).
    7 See https://www.ch.ch/en/demokratie/political-rights/, last accessed July 26, 2020, for basic information on

Swiss direct democratic institutions at the federal level. More detailed discussion of direct democracy in Switzerland
can be found in Linder (2010).
    8 Technically, there are 20 cantons, each of which receives a vote, and 6 half cantons (Obwalden, Nidwalden, Basel-

Stadt, Basel-Landschaft, Appenzell Ausserrhoden and Appenzell Innerrhoden), each of which receives half a vote,
making 23 votes in total. In nearly every case in our data, popular and cantonal majorities go hand in hand. Between
1981 and 2019, there were four votes (out of 331) in which a narrow majority of voters approved (between 50.9 % and
54.3 % of voters voting yes) but the cantons did not, and two votes in which a narrow majority of voters rejected (with
49.2 % and 49.9 % of voters voting yes) while the majority of cantons approved. Note that there is no minimum voter
turnout required for the referendum to be binding.
    9 In the case of a counter-proposal, voters are currently able to approve both the initiative and the counter proposal,

if both are preferred to the status quo (before 1998, voters could only approve the initiative or the counter-proposal, but
not both at the same time). Voters who support both the initiative and the counter-proposal are required to indicate
which they prefer to determine which is to be implemented if both initiative and counter-proposal were approved.



                                                             4
      In addition to the popular initiative (and the counter-proposal), the Swiss constitution grants
two types of referenda rights. First, a referendum can be called on all laws issued by the federal
government if supported by 50,000 signatures or eight Swiss cantons. This sort of referendum is
then accepted or rejected by a simple majority of the votes cast. Higher-stakes policy choices —
any changes to the constitution and some international treaties — are subject to a mandatory
referendum requiring a majority of voters and cantons to be passed. Swiss citizens vote on federal
ballots two to four times per year, with each “election day” including votes on multiple proposals.
Vote topics vary broadly, from social issues, to military policy, to infrastructure, to participation in
international organizations, such as the European Union. Between 1981 and 2019, Swiss citizens
voted on 331 federal ballots, and these ballots were held on 115 election days.
      Given the high stakes involved, it is unsurprising that referenda are politically contentious.
Political parties regularly take positions and issue voting recommendations. In the 331 votes be-
tween 1981 and 2019, the moderate right-wing party (FDP) provided a recommendation on how to
vote in all but one vote; the centrist party (CVP) and the populist right-wing party (SVP) provided
recommendations in all but three votes; and the major left-wing party (SP) provided a recom-
mendation in all but 17 votes.10 The left and the right typically provided voters with contrasting
recommendations: there was disagreement among parties in 271 out of 331 of the votes held be-
tween 1981 and 2019.

2.2     The Voting Process and Voter Information
While the Swiss are asked to vote on many issues, it is important to note that the voting process in
Switzerland is quite convenient. No registration to vote is necessary, and every eligible voter (i.e.,
Swiss citizen of at least 18 years of age) receives the voting documents by regular mail at home.
The voter then casts the ballot either at the polling booth on the election day (always a Sunday)
or through early voting. Early voting in the last two decades was done primarily via standard
mail, but in recent years also online, and could also be done by bringing a ballot personally to the
closest electoral office (usually in the municipality where voters live).11
      Swiss voters are also provided with substantial amounts of information on the substance of
the issues on which they will vote. The voting documents sent to eligible voters’ homes include
the precise questions, arguments for and against each proposition, and often outside opinions
from interest groups. In addition, most federal votes are extensively debated in the media (TV,
radio and dozens of local newspapers). Political advertising exists, but only in newspapers, with
political TV and radio ads prohibited under federal law.12
  10 See   https://swissvotes.ch/page/dataset, last accessed July 26, 2020.
  11 In our sample of Genevan voters, virtually all voters make use of early voting:  90.0% of those turning out use postal
voting and 4.3% use voting by internet; only 5.7% cast their vote at the polling booth on Sunday morning. See Funk
(2010) for additional institutional information and for a discussion of the different turnout effects of the introduction of
voting by mail.
  12 See https://www.admin.ch/opc/en/classified-compilation/20001794/index.html, last accessed July 26, 2020.




                                                             5
2.3         The Collection and Dissemination of National Polls
A pivotal event altering the political media landscape — and voters’ information sets — occurred
in 1998, when the Swiss public television station decided to sponsor the first widely-disseminated
national voting forecasts in Switzerland. The idea was simply to collect politically relevant in-
formation to make political discussions on TV more lively, but the poll results ended up being
disseminated far more broadly, through other media as well. Pre-election polls were conducted
for nearly all votes since June 1998, with a research institute called “gfs.bern” (or “gfs”), responsible
for almost all of these.
      Two rounds of polls are typically conducted: results of the first poll are published around 5
weeks before the voting Sunday — before any voting can take place — and results of the last poll
typically released 11 days before the voting date, the Wednesday in the week prior to the election
date. Because our event study analysis of Geneva voter turnout relies on the exact date of the
release of the final poll, we note here that of the 52 votes examined in our analysis of Geneva voter
turnout, 2 polls were released 16 days before the voting date, 1 poll 13 days before, 2 polls 12 days
before, 44 polls 11 days before, and 3 polls 10 days before.
      The release of this national-level poll (and its closeness) before each vote provides the key
source of variation we will exploit in our event-study analysis of Geneva voters’ turnout. In our
analysis of the effects of close polls depending on municipality representativeness, we will com-
pare voter turnout before and after 1998, when polling began. And, in our analysis of the role of
newspaper dissemination of poll results, we will examine newspaper articles reporting on these
national polls.13


3      Data and Summary Statistics

3.1         Voter Turnout and Vote Outcomes
Data on daily voter turnout in the canton of Geneva are obtained from the office of statistics of the
canton of Geneva.14 To the best of our knowledge, Geneva is the only canton keeping detailed ad-
ministrative records on the timing of voter turnout. Beginning from the 2–3 weeks before election
Sunday (this has varied across election days), the cantonal Service of Popular Votes and Elections
registers the number of incoming ballots from early voters at a daily level. The Service of Popular
Votes and Elections registers incoming postal ballots — around 90% of the votes cast in our sam-
ple — on working days (including election Sunday and the preceding Saturday, but excluding all
    13 To
        the extent that exposure to information regarding polls via newspapers is a noisy indicator of exposure to infor-
mation regarding polls by any means, our estimates of the effects of newspaper coverage of polls might be biased. For
example, uniform exposure to TV coverage of polls across space would tend to produce an underestimate of the effect
of newspaper coverage, while non-uniform exposure to polls (on TV or radio) correlated with newspaper coverage
across space would tend to produce an overestimate.
  14 See https://www.ge.ch/statistique/, last accessed on July 26, 2020. Geneva is the 6th largest of Switzerland’s

cantons, with a population of around 500,000.


                                                           6
other weekends and public holidays).15
      It is important to note that we do not observe different turnout for each individual vote (i.e.,
ballot issue) that is decided on the same election day, as the ballots are placed together in a sealed
envelope.16 There are 52 election days in Geneva for which turnout is observed both before and
after the release of pre-election poll results. We thus construct a panel of daily turnout for the
voting days preceding these 52 election days. We consider cumulative turnout rate as of each day;
the log of the daily count of ballots received; the daily turnout rate as a fraction of the eligible
voting population in the canton, and the daily “net” turnout rate, calculated as the turnout rate
among the eligible voters who have not yet voted in a particular election.
      We additionally consider data on voter turnout and referenda outcomes for all of Switzerland.
These data are available for single votes on an election day (i.e., specific ballot issues), disag-
gregated at the municipal, canton, or federal level, and are provided by the Swiss federal office
of statistics.17 In our analysis, we use data on: eligible voters, votes cast, the number of votes
in support of the initiative, and the number of votes against the initiative.18 We calculate an ex
post vote closeness measure, which is the share of the votes cast for the losing side in a vote. In
our municipality×vote-level analysis, we use ex post closeness to construct a measure of a mu-
nicipality’s “political unrepresentativeness” prior to the release of any polls: the opposite of the
correlation between each municipality’s vote share closeness and the national closeness between
1981 and 1998. We also use the measure to calculate a municipality’s homogeneity: how much a
municipality’s voting outcomes differed from 50-50, on average, prior to the release of any polls.

3.2     Importance of a Vote
While each election day typically features several votes (ballot issues), we find it plausible that
a voter’s decision to turn out on the margin will be based on the “most important” vote held
on that day. To determine the most important vote on a given election day, we combine data
   15 The relatively small number of ballots submitted by internet (around 6%) are recorded automatically every day

(including weekends and public holidays) by the e-voting system. We therefore aggregate votes on eligible “voting
days,” i.e. days when postal ballots are registered, to which we add any incoming ballots by internet recorded on
weekends or public holidays immediately preceding the voting day.
   16 The sealed envelope is then mailed, in a larger envelope, together with the signed voter identification card. To

preserve the secrecy of the ballot, authorities are not allowed to open the sealed envelope or to count votes before
election Sunday, but only to register the voter identification card.
   17 These data are available for referenda held since 1981. See https://www.pxweb.bfs.admin.ch/pxweb/de/, last

accessed July 26, 2020. The municipality-level voting data of the federal office of statistics includes 2,202 municipalities
that existed at the end of our sample period, where historical municipalities that merged are aggregated to the set
of municipalities in existence at the beginning of 2020. For 19 municipalities, the federal office of statistics reports
incomplete data because these municipalities were subject to complex mergers not allowing the aggregation of data by
adding up historical electoral returns from formerly independent municipalities. For another 7 municipalities, no data
are reported because they share a common ballot box with neighboring municipalities to which electoral returns are
aggregated. This leaves us with 2,176 municipalities in our data.
   18 Turnout is calculated at the level of the individual vote. In practice, turnout is very similar for all votes held on a

given election day: a regression of turnout on election day fixed effects generates residuals with a standard deviation
of 0.128 percentage points.


                                                             7
from several sources. In our analysis of daily voter turnout in Geneva, we use responses in post-
election surveys: the “VOX surveys” before September 2016, and the “VOTO Surveys” after.19 We
specifically rely on survey respondents’ views of the personal importance of each voting issue (or
referendum) on a given election day.20 We identify the vote with the highest personal importance
score as the one whose poll closeness may affect turnout for that election day.
      This survey-based measure of a vote’s importance is direct, and it covers all 52 votes we
study in our analysis of voter turnout in Geneva. However, it provides incomplete coverage of
votes in our analysis of municipality×vote and canton×vote level turnout. In our analysis of
municipality×vote-level turnout, we wish to study voting in the era prior to the release of polls —
going back to 1981, before survey data on the importance of each voting issue were collected. We
thus supplement the VOX and VOTO survey data with a count of the number of articles men-
tioning each vote (issue) in Switzerland’s preeminent German newspaper, the NZZ, in the three
months preceding each election day.21 In the absence of survey data, the issue with the most NZZ
articles is identified as the most important vote on a given election day. In our canton×vote-level
analysis, we are able to include one more election day by shifting to a slightly different survey
question from the VOX survey, which asks about the importance of the vote to the nation, rather
than about its personal importance.22 Table 1 lists a few examples of election days, with the re-
spective issues (votes) on the ballot and their importance scores (Online Appendix Table A.1 lists
all the election days and the most important vote on each day).

3.3    Pre-Election Poll Results
Since 1998, the Swiss Public TV and Radio Corporation (SRG) has sponsored surveys eliciting the
voting intentions of Swiss citizens before all federal votes. We collected poll results, as well as
the precise timing of the release of poll results (crucial for our analysis of daily voter turnout in
Geneva) from the website of the SRG.23 The poll results are reported as the shares of eligible voters
(among those who report an intention to vote), who: (i) are definitely in favor of the proposal; (ii)
are somewhat in favor of the proposal; (iii) are somewhat against the proposal; (iv) are definitely
opposed to the proposal; (v) do not know; or, (vi) prefer not to answer.24 Our main variable of
  19 The VOX surveys, like the pre-election polls, were conducted by gfs. The VOTO surveys were conducted by the

research institute FORS. The survey data for both VOX and VOTO can be found at https://forsbase.unil.ch/, last
accessed July 26, 2020.
  20 The question reads: “Let’s talk about the importance this issue had for you personally. Please tell me . . . how important the

vote about [issue title] has been for you personally. Tell me a number between 0 and 10. 0 means not important at all, 10 very
important.”
  21 We checked six major newspapers in Switzerland (NZZ, Blick, Tages Anzeiger, Le Matin, Journal de Genève, and Tribune

de Genève) for an available online archive going back to 1981, but only the NZZ had a complete archive throughout this
time period.
  22 Our results are nearly identical using the personal importance measure, but we prefer to maximize the sample

coverage.
  23 See https://www.srf.ch/, last accessed July 26, 2020.
  24 Note that the poll does not project whether the referendum is likely to receive support from a majority of cantons

(which technically is required to pass many of the referenda we study). As noted above, however, the popular vote has


                                                                8
interest is the predicted closeness of the final poll prior to a vote. To calculate poll closeness we
first construct the “share yes”: the total “yes” support (groups (i) and (ii), who are definitely or
somewhat in favor) divided by the total number of respondents indicating support for “yes” or
“no” (groups (i), (ii), (iii), and (iv)). We then analogously construct the “share no,” and code ex
ante poll closeness as the vote share of the losing side. Our empirical ex ante (i.e., poll) closeness
measure will be the vote share of the losing side in the poll.

3.4    Data on Newspaper Coverage of Polls
The Swiss Agency of Media Research (WEMF) has regularly conducted surveys on newspaper
readership since the year 2000, with random samples of cantonal inhabitants interviewed and
asked which newspapers they read.25 The Agency generously shared their data on canton-level
newspaper readership with us, allowing us to construct a list of newspapers read by at least 10%
of a canton’s inhabitants in a given year. Overall, there are 50 newspapers on this list, many of
which are read in several cantons (see Online Appendix Table A.2, for a list of the newspapers). To
measure canton-level coverage of pre-election polls, we count the number of times a pre-election
poll was mentioned in each of the newspapers read by at least 10% of a canton’s inhabitants, be-
tween 2000 and 2014. We used three different strategies in this search: online databases, “Factiva”
and “Swissdox”26 ; newspapers’ own online archives; and, manual search in the Swiss National
Library in Bern.
      In our empirical analysis below, we will address concerns regarding the endogenous local
newspaper coverage of close polls by exploiting a canton’s voters’ (arguably) “incidental” expo-
sure to polls. We propose that newspaper editors may target their news coverage (specifically,
poll coverage) toward their largest cantonal audience; if so, then readers exposed to this reporting
in other cantons will read it for reasons other than their own canton’s election-specific interest.
We thus can decompose total coverage of polls in a canton into two components: first, endogenous
coverage, which is arguably targeted toward that canton, because it represents a newspaper’s
largest cantonal audience; second, incidental coverage, to which a canton is exposed despite a
newspaper’s largest audience being in a different canton. We use the newspaper readership data
to define incidental poll exposure in two ways: first, coverage by a source with a majority reader-
ship in a different canton; second, and more conservatively, coverage by a source with at least 85%
readership in other cantons (Online Appendix Figure A.2, shows how endogenous and incidental
coverage vary by canton).
nearly always been the binding factor determining the passage of referendum; thus, information on the closeness of
this component of the vote alone will be highly informative to voters.
  25 See https://wemf.ch/, last accessed July 26, 2020.
  26 See https://global.factiva.com and https://swissdox.ch/, both last accessed July 26, 2020.




                                                        9
3.5     The Political “Supply Side”: Political Advertising in Newspapers
For our analysis of voter turnout in the canton of Geneva, we hand-collected all political adver-
tisements related to the 52 referenda studied between 2001 and 2019 for the two most widely-read
Genevan newspapers: Le Temps and Tribune de Genève. We aggregate these data to counts of polit-
ical ads relating to each of the 52 votes at the daily level.
      For our analysis of voter turnout across Switzerland, we measure political advertising using
data from Kriesi (2009) and the Année Politique Suisse on political ads in six major Swiss newspa-
pers: NZZ, Blick, Tages-Anzeiger, Le Matin, Journal de Genève, and Tribune de Genève.27 To measure
campaigning intensity at the vote level, we calculate the sum of ads placed in these six major
newspapers relating to each vote.
      For our canton×vote-level analysis, we collected advertising data from a much broader set of
newspapers: all of the newspapers read by at least 10% of any canton’s inhabitants. We sum up to
the canton×vote level our counts of political ads relating to each vote for each newspaper read in
each canton.

3.6     Summary Statistics
We present summary statistics for the datasets used in our empirical analysis in Table 2. First, we
consider our primary dataset of interest: vote×day-level data for the canton of Geneva (Panel A).
We observe voting, on days both before and after polls are released (around 15 days per vote) for
52 “most important” votes held on election days since 2001 (757 vote×day observations in total).
Around 3% of eligible voters vote on an average day; cumulative turnout is around 28% on the
average day (which of course will be higher by the day of the election itself). The average ex ante
poll closeness in our sample is 38.30 (that is a 62-38 margin for the winning side). Finally, on the
average day in our sample, we count 1.6 newspaper ads related to the upcoming vote in the two
major Genevan newspapers.28
      Second, we turn to the vote-level dataset at the federal level (Panel B). It is composed of the
“most important” issue for each of the 115 election days for which we have voter turnout data
between 1981 and 2019. On average, over 40% of eligible voters turn out; the average margin
is around 65%–35%; voters rate the importance of the issue to themselves as a 6 out of 10 in
importance; and, the average vote saw around 100 ads placed in the major Swiss newspapers.29
      Third, we construct a municipality×vote-level dataset, including voting data for 2,176 mu-
nicipalities and 115 “most important” votes held between 1981 and 2019 (Panel C). In addition
  27 Hanspeter Kriesi generously shared data for votes from 1981 to 2014, which we supplemented with the Année

Politique Suisse for more recent votes (see https://anneepolitique.swiss/pages/campaign_research, last accessed
July 26, 2020).
  28 We are missing ads data for 52 voting days — the election Sunday for each of our votes.
  29 Data on the importance of the vote are missing for 32 votes because the VOX surveys did not include this question

before 1993. Missing data for political ads are inherited from the Kriesi (2009) dataset.



                                                         10
to summary statistics that match the vote-level data at the federal level (subject to differences
due to the construction of the municipal-level data), one can see that 60% of the votes in our
municipality×vote-level analysis were held after polls were introduced; the average municipality
has an unrepresentativeness value of -0.59 (meaning that the average correlation between national
and municipality closeness is around 0.60), but this ranges from close to -1 (a nearly perfect corre-
lation between municipality and national closeness) to around 0 (implying no correlation between
the municipality closeness and national closeness).
    Fourth, we construct a canton×vote-level dataset, including voting data for 26 cantons and 37
“most important” votes held between 1998 and 2014 (Panel D). This panel is limited to votes for
which we have a count of newspaper articles mentioning polls and political ads relating to votes
in the 50 newspapers read by at least 10% of a canton’s population. One can see that this slightly
smaller sample, relative to the Geneva dataset that also examines the poll era, does not look very
different in terms of poll closeness: on average, this is around 38 (i.e., a 38% share for the losing
side) in both samples. We count around 4 newspaper articles mentioning polls for the average
vote, with 2.5–3 articles mentioning polls published in newspapers read in a canton, but having
a larger market elsewhere (our measure of “incidental” exposure to information). We count, on
average, around 70 political advertisements on the most important vote in the newspapers read
in a canton. Finally, we note that the personal importance of this set of votes looks very similar to
the full sample.30


4    The Identification Challenge, Conceptual Framework, and Hypothe-
     sis Tests
Abundant evidence exists of a correlation between election closeness and voter turnout. This
correlation can arise from three sources: first, voters may turn out more when they anticipate
a close election — this is the causal effect of closeness, working through voter beliefs, that is of
interest to us. Second, unobserved issue type may drive both closeness and turnout: for example,
more important referenda issues (or election races) may be more contentious (and hence closer)
and also motivate voter turnout. Third, the actions of the political supply side, that is, political
actors and organizations with a stake in the referendum (election) outcome, may be correlated
with both voter turnout and closeness: for example, high levels of political advertising on two
sides of an issue would tend to drive up turnout and closeness.
    One can see in Figure 1 that in our setting, the closeness of Swiss referendum results is indeed
strongly, positively associated with voter turnout (Panel A). But, the importance of an issue (mea-
sured in voter surveys) and political advertising are also strongly, positively associated with voter
turnout (Panels B and C). And, the importance of an issue and political advertising are strongly,
  30 Importance data are missing for five observations because the VOX survey did not receive responses from small

cantons for these votes.


                                                       11
positively associated with referendum closeness (Panels D and E) and with each other (Panel F).
   The ideal experiment would randomly shock voters’ beliefs about election closeness, while
holding fixed the issue type and the political supply side. We identify a setting that approximates
this experiment: the sharp arrival of information about election closeness in newly-released polls.
Using unique data from the canton of Geneva that allow us to observe voter turnout day-by-day,
around the day when polls are released, we can test whether the release of closer polls differentially
increases voter turnout (accounting for issue fixed effects). Furthermore, we can evaluate whether
the natural experiment we study is a good one, by testing for differential turnout levels and trends
prior to the release of closer polls — such an effect might arise if closer polls were anticipated;
if issue types that were associated with closer polls were also associated with different turnout
trends, or if the political supply side were differentially active prior to poll release on issues that
(eventually) have closer polls.
   To be precise, we estimate the following model:


                              turnoutvd =   ∑ βd Closev + αv + γd + evd .                            (1)
                                            d

   This is a simple event study, examining voter turnout by vote×day, where “day” is the number
of days prior to, or following release of a poll. The coefficients of interest are the sequence of β d ,
which are estimated as coefficients on the interaction of poll closeness (Closev ) with a full set of
day-to-poll indicators. These tell us how turnout varies in the days before or after a closer poll is
released — accounting for vote (v) and day-to-poll (d) fixed effects. Our proposed mechanism of
a causal effect of closer polls through changed voter beliefs about closeness suggests that β d will
be very close to 0 for d < 0 and significant and positive for some d > 0.
   In addition to examining voter turnout, we can also directly study the political supply side
by estimating the event study model in equation (1), but predicting political ads by vote×day. If
close polls causally shape turnout, one might expect the political supply side to respond to them
as well — albeit likely with some lag given the need to develop ads and place them. Crucially, we
predict a response of voter turnout prior to any political supply side response.
   After testing for a causal effect of closer polls on voter turnout in Geneva, we then test two sets
of auxiliary predictions arising from our proposed mechanism that polls affect turnout by shaping
voters’ beliefs about election closeness. First, we test for heterogeneous effects of the introduction
of polls in Switzerland in 1998. In the absence of information from national, pre-election polls, it
is plausible that voters will gauge an upcoming election’s closeness by “locally sampling” among
their friends and neighbors. This strategy will yield beliefs that reflect the actual national-level
closeness only if the local sample is politically representative of the country as a whole. In such
cases, it may be possible to condition the turnout decision on an informative local signal even
in the absence of national polls. In contrast, in politically unrepresentative municipalities, it will




                                                  12
not be easy for individuals to condition their turnout decision on national-level vote closeness.31
Once polls are introduced, however, voters in both politically representative and politically unrep-
resentative municipalities will be able to condition their turnout on an accurate signal of election
closeness.
    Our hypothesis of local sampling should produce several patterns in the data. Under the as-
sumption that voters turn out more when they anticipate a closer election, and that they condition
their turnout decisions on national-level poll results (rather than local information) when avail-
able, we should observe: (i) in the era before polls, the closeness-turnout relationship should be
positive in more politically representative municipalities, but there should be no relationship in
politically unrepresentative municipalities. In other words, there should be a significant differ-
ence in the closeness-turnout gradient between politically representative and politically unrep-
resentative municipalities in the era without polls. (ii) The introduction of polls should have a
significantly larger effect on the closeness-turnout relationship in politically unrepresentative mu-
nicipalities (the poll has a larger effect on voters’ information sets there). (iii) There should be
convergence toward the same closeness-turnout relationship in the era with polls: i.e., no differ-
ence in the closeness-turnout gradient in the era with polls.
    We test these predictions using a municipality×vote panel, pooling data from the era with
and without polls (and thus using an ex post measure of election closeness), and estimating the
following model:



                 turnoutmv = αm + γv + δ1 closenessv × unrepresentativem × PollErav                                      (2)
                                     +δ2 closenessv × unrepresentativem
                                     +δ3 unrepresentativem × PollErav + ε mv .

    It is useful to match our conceptual framework’s hypotheses to regression coefficients. Pre-
diction (i) suggests a significant and negative coefficient δ2 . Prediction (ii) implies a positive and
significant coefficient δ1 . Prediction (iii) suggests that the sum of the coefficients δ1 + δ2 will be
insignificantly different from zero.
    Our second set of auxiliary predictions regards heterogeneity in the dissemination of infor-
mation about election closeness. Quite simply, in locations where individuals read newspapers
that report more on poll results, the impact of poll closeness should be magnified. Using our
canton×vote panel data, we test whether there exists a differential positive relationship between
ex ante poll closeness and turnout in cantons with greater reporting on polls in local newspapers,
controlling for vote fixed effects — and thus a national-level “issue type” — as well as canton fixed
  31 Votersin politically unrepresentative municipalities may turn out more in response to local signals of closeness,
but because these signals are uncorrelated with national-level closeness, they will not turn out systematically more for
(nationally) closer elections. It is also possible that because their local signals are uninformative, they choose not to act
on them.


                                                             13
effects. We estimate the following model:


                    turnoutcv = φc + µv + ψ1 closenessv × coveragecv + ψ2 coveragecv + ucv ,                        (3)

where turnoutcv is the turnout rate (in percent) in canton c for vote v, φc are a set of canton fixed
effects, and µv are a set of vote fixed effects. The interaction closenessv × coveragecv is the explana-
tory variable of interest, with the coefficient ψ1 telling us whether close polls have a differential
impact on turnout specifically when they are covered more by a canton’s newspapers.32
      To account for endogenous targeting of news — editors may choose to report on polls in re-
sponse to their readers’ preferences — we exploit a canton’s voters’ (arguably) “incidental” expo-
sure to polls. If newspaper editors target their news coverage (specifically, poll coverage) toward
their largest cantonal audience, then readers exposed to this reporting in other cantons will read it
for reasons other than their own canton’s election-specific interest. We thus can decompose total
coverage of polls in a canton into two components: first, endogenous coverage, which is arguably
targeted toward that canton, because it represents a newspaper’s largest cantonal audience; sec-
ond, incidental coverage, to which a canton is exposed despite a newspaper’s largest audience be-
ing in a different canton. We test whether greater incidental coverage of close polls also increases
turnout.


5      Empirical Analysis

5.1     Event-Study Evidence from the Canton of Geneva
Our analysis of voter turnout in Geneva examines whether, in the days following the release of
closer polls, voters turn out more. In Figure 2, we present prima facie evidence that close polls
increase turnout, showing (raw) cumulative voter turnout (Panel A) and net voter turnout rates
(Panel B) day by day around the time when polls are released, and splitting polls into above- or
below-median closeness (above or below a 40% vote share for the losing side). One can see that
voter turnout follows a very similar pattern day by day up to poll release for votes that would
eventually have closer or less close polls. But, once polls are released, voter turnout diverges
sharply, particularly in the three days immediately following poll release.
      We next more formally test for the effect of closer polls. We estimate the event study equa-
tion (1) presented above, examining the effects of closer polls on net voter turnout rates day by
day. One can see in Figure 3 coefficient estimates (and 95% confidence intervals) on the interaction
of (standardized) poll closeness with each day-to-poll indicator (with the day of poll release the
omitted reference day).33 Prior to the day when polls are released, we see no difference in turnout
rates depending on the closeness of the to-be-released poll. In contrast, on the first three days af-
    32 Note   that the lower-order term closenessv is omitted as it is collinear with the vote fixed effects.
    33 The   coefficient estimates and standard errors are also presented in Online Appendix Table A.3, column 1.


                                                             14
ter a closer poll is released, voter turnout rates are significantly higher — by around 0.4 percentage
points.34 This is not merely vote shifting across time, as coefficient estimates remain above 0 up
through election day (consistent with the higher cumulative turnout for votes with closer polls
seen in Figure 2).
     We present several robustness exercises in Figure 4.35 First, in Panel A, we pool net voter
turnout into two-day bins, which increases the precision of the estimated time-varying effect of
closer polls, and confirms our baseline results. In Panel B, we adjust the denominator of the voter
turnout rate, using the fixed eligible number of voters, rather than accounting for the individuals
who already voted on prior days; our results are qualitatively unchanged (though estimated ef-
fects on days beyond one day following poll release are smaller, given the turnout effect on that
first day). In Panel C, we present estimates from a balanced panel, limiting the window to 2 days
prior to poll release through election day, as some votes do not have voting data for earlier days.
One can see that our results are not sensitive to this choice of sample window. Finally, in Panel D,
we examine the log of the daily turnout level as the outcome, and again our results are unaffected.
     The results presented in Figures 3 and 4 provide evidence of a causal effect of anticipated
closeness on voter turnout. Higher turnout just after the release of close polls is not driven by
issue type: time-invariant issue type that might be associated with voter turnout is accounted for
by the vote fixed effects; day-varying effects of issue type on voter turnout are ruled out by the
insignificant differences in voter turnout rates observed for all of the days prior to the release of
closer polls.
     Nor can the political supply side account for the response of voter turnout to the release of
closer polls. The absence of pre-trends suggests that the supply side was not differentially active
prior to the release of close polls; poll results do not seem to have been anticipated. However,
the release of polls may affect the supply side directly (if this information about closeness was
not available to campaigns before) or indirectly (e.g., because anticipated greater voter turnout in
closer votes increases the returns to persuasion through ads).
     We thus estimate our event study model (equation (1)), but now examining the effects of closer
polls on political advertisements day by day, both before and after poll release. The results are
reported in Figure 5. As in Figure 3, we find no difference in political behavior (in this case ad-
vertisements) depending on the closeness of the to-be-released poll prior to poll release. After the
release of closer polls, we continue to see no effect of closer polls on ads until three days after the
  34 Itis worth clarifying how polls released on day t can produce an increase in votes counted on day t + 1. This can
arise through several mechanisms: first, when poll result are released on the morning of day t, voters may respond by
mailing a ballot in time for the vote to be counted on day t + 1. Second, even when polls are released on the evening of
day t, voters are able to hand-deliver their ballots to the electoral office on day t + 1 or to vote online on day t or day
t + 1.
  35 Coefficient estimates and standard errors are provided in Online Appendix Tables A.3 and A.4. In those tables, we

also estimate models including fixed effects for each day-to-election (not perfectly collinear with day-to-poll because
the poll release day is not always the same number of voting days prior to the election). These fixed effects have no
impact on our results. Note that day-to-election fixed effects also account for differences in turnout by days of the week,
which are perfectly collinear with day-to-election fixed effects (because election day is always a Sunday).


                                                            15
poll, when we observe significantly more ads in response to a closer poll. This suggests that there
is some supply side response to closer polls, but that it appears with a lag. It also suggests that
endogenous changes in the behavior of the political supply side cannot account for all of the voter
turnout effect that we observe in response to closer polls: political ads printed three days after the
release of a poll would generally affect votes counted four or more days after poll release. Yet we
find the largest effects of close polls on votes counted in the first three days after poll release.
      Our results thus suggest that polls causally affect voters’ turnout by providing them with in-
formation about upcoming election closeness, which affects voters’ beliefs and thus turnout. We
next test auxiliary predictions of this proposed mechanism.

5.2     Heterogeneous Effects of Polls depending on Municipality Representativeness
We first test a set of hypotheses regarding the effects of the introduction of polls in Switzerland
in 1998. We propose that the availability of information about the national-level closeness of an
upcoming vote will be particularly valuable — and differentially affect voter turnout — in munici-
palities that are politically unrepresentative of Switzerland, where local signals of election closeness
are unreliable.36 We begin by providing the raw correlation between election closeness and mu-
nicipality voter turnout, splitting the sample of municipalities above and below the median level
of political unrepresentativeness in our sample, and examining separately the set of votes held
before polls were conducted and the set of votes with polls.
      In Figure 6, one can see patterns matching our predictions: in the absence of polls, among
relatively unrepresentative municipalities, there is practically no relationship between election
closeness and turnout. Among more representative municipalities, there is a stronger positive
gradient — the difference in slopes between the representative and unrepresentative municipali-
ties is statistically significant (p = 0.01). In contrast, in there era when polls are conducted, there
is no difference between unrepresentative and representative municipalities in their relationship
between election closeness and voter turnout (p = 0.693). In both sets of municipalities the slope
is positive and significant (p < 0.01) and the difference in differences (comparing the eras with
and without polls) is statistically significant as well (p = 0.037). Finally, the magnitudes are sub-
stantial: a one-standard deviation closer election is associated with around 2.5 percentage points
higher turnout when polls are released. In the absence of polls, a one-standard deviation closer
election was associated with around 1.7 percentage points higher turnout in municipalities that
were representative of Switzerland, and only 0.7 percentage points in municipalities that were
unrepresentative.
      In Table 3, column 1, we provide regression estimates of equation (2), examining the rela-
tionship between election closeness and municipality voter turnout depending on municipality
  36 Asa reminder, “unrepresentativeness” is calculated as the opposite of the correlation between each municipality’s
vote share closeness and the national closeness between 1981 and 1998 (prior to the release of any polls). See Online
Appendix Figure A.3, Panel A for the distribution of unrepresentativeness.


                                                         16
unrepresentativeness and on the existence of polls, accounting for vote and municipality fixed
effects. We find estimates that confirm the predictions made in Section 4: (i) there exists a sig-
nificant difference between representative and unrepresentative municipalities in the relationship
between election closeness and turnout in the era without polls (the coefficient on closenessv ×
unrepresentativem is negative and statistically significant). (ii) The effect of the release of polls
on the relationship between election closeness and turnout is greater in unrepresentative munic-
ipalities (the coefficient on closenessv × unrepresentativem × PollErav is positive and statistically
significant). (iii) With polls available, there no longer is a significant difference between repre-
sentative and unrepresentative municipalities in their relationship between election closeness and
turnout: We cannot reject that the sum of the coefficients on closenessv × unrepresentativem and
closenessv × unrepresentativem × PollErav equals 0, p = 0.798.
      One might wonder whether unrepresentative municipalities are simply smaller than represen-
tative ones, with municipality size driving the patterns observed (unrepresentativeness is nega-
tively correlated with electorate size, r = −0.15). To account for the effects of municipality size,
we control for the triple interaction among closeness, municipality electorate size, and a Poll Era
dummy (closenessv × electoratem × PollErav ) as well as all of the lower-order terms. One can see
in Table 3, column 2, that accounting for differences in the size of municipalities does not affect
our results.
      Finally, one might wonder what are some of the underlying local political characteristics that
may generate unrepresentativeness? We propose that one plausible source is political homogene-
ity: a very homogeneous municipality will likely never have locally close elections, as voters will
always skew strongly toward one side. This implies that there will be little or no correlation
between local closeness and national closeness. Indeed, we find a strong correlation between
municipality political homogeneity and unrepresentativeness (r = 0.60).37 In Online Appendix
Figure A.4 and Table A.5, we show that the patterns of heterogeneity observed with respect to
municipality unrepresentativeness also appear with respect to homogeneity, as we would expect.

5.3     Heterogeneous Effects of Polls depending on Newspaper Coverage
We next test whether variation in voters’ exposure to information about polls affects voter turnout.
To do so, we estimate the canton×vote-level equation (3) and test for a differential closeness-
turnout gradient in cantons with greater reporting on polls in local newspapers, controlling for
vote fixed effects — and thus a national-level “issue type” — as well as canton fixed effects.
      In Table 4, Panel A, column 1, one can see that indeed, voter turnout is significantly greater
when ex ante closer polls are reported on more often. We plot the estimated effect of one standard
deviation greater poll coverage across levels of (standardized) poll closeness in Figure 7. One
can see that a poll that is one standard deviation closer than average (where there is substantial
 37 The   distribution of political homogeneity is provided in Online Appendix Figure A.3, Panel B.



                                                          17
support in the data) increases voter turnout by a statistically significant 0.5 percentage points when
newspaper coverage is one standard deviation greater. At average closeness, more coverage has
little effect, and when newspapers report more on polls that are not close, turnout is predicted to
be substantially smaller, as one would expect.
    Of course, it is possible that greater coverage of close polls in locally-read newspapers is cor-
related with a canton×vote-specific unobservable that might shape turnout. We consider several
possibilities. First, it is possible that locally-targeted political campaigning is associated with both
local newspaper coverage of close polls and turnout. To evaluate this concern, we estimate equa-
tion (3), but predicting the number of political ads in a canton’s newspapers for a given vote. As
can be seen in Table 4, Panel A, column 3, while greater newspaper coverage of polls in general
is associated with the number of ads, the differential coverage of closer polls is not associated with
political ads. The political supply side thus does not seem to account for our findings.
    Another possibility is that newspapers providing more coverage of closer polls may also in-
clude other coverage that motivates turnout — for example, by persuading readers that a par-
ticular vote is important, in addition to being close. We thus estimate equation (3), but predicting
cantonal voters’ ex post assessment of an issue’s importance. As can be seen in Table 4, Panel A,
column 5, we find no evidence of greater perceived importance of an issue when a canton’s news-
papers cover close polls more. Thus, alternative newspaper content does not seem to drive our
results.38
    Finally, differences across Switzerland’s linguistic-cultural communities represent another pos-
sible source of variation in both newspaper poll coverage and voter turnout. For example, perhaps
newspapers read by German-speaking Swiss are more likely to report on close polls and German-
speaking Swiss are also more likely to turn out to vote in close elections, but greater coverage
may not cause the higher turnout. To account for differences in turnout across linguistic-cultural
communities depending on a vote’s closeness or on a vote’s coverage, we control for interactions
between an indicator that a canton is German-speaking with pre-election poll closeness as well
as with cantonal poll coverage. Including these controls does not affect our any of our results
(Table 4, Panel A, columns 2, 4, and 6).
    As an alternative approach to addressing concerns regarding the endogenous local newspaper
coverage of close polls, we exploit a canton’s voters’ arguably “incidental” exposure to polls. As
explained in section 3.4 above, we decompose total coverage of polls in a canton into endogenous
coverage, by newspapers whose largest audience lies in that canton, and incidental coverage, by
newspapers that are read in that canton but whose largest audience lies elsewhere. Incidental
coverage of polls in our data is only very weakly correlated with endogenous coverage (the cor-
relation is -0.153).39 We thus examine the impact of incidental coverage of pre-election polls at the
  38 While  we prefer not to control for political ads and vote importance, as they are endogenous with respect to our
explanatory variable of interest, we note here that their inclusion in the model presented in Table 4, column 1, does not
affect our results.
  39 We present each canton’s endogenous and incidental exposure to newspaper coverage of polls in Online Appendix



                                                           18
canton×vote level, plausibly a “cleaner” source of variation in exposure to information regarding
the closeness of an upcoming election.40
    In Table 4, Panel B, we present estimates from specifications analogous to those in Panel A, but
now exploiting within-vote variation in exposure to incidental coverage of pre-election polls. One
can see that greater coverage of closer polls continues to predict higher turnout (column 1) and
that this effect is robust to including controls for interactions between an indicator that a canton
is German-speaking with pre-election poll closeness as well as with cantonal poll coverage (col-
umn 2). The coefficient on the interaction between poll closeness and incidental exposure is about
25% smaller than the coefficient in Panel A, but this does not necessarily imply that the coefficient
in Panel A was biased: our measure of incidental poll coverage necessarily excludes coverage of
polls in widely-read newspapers, which would plausibly have large effects on turnout. One con-
tinues to see no relationship between greater coverage of closer polls and political advertisements
or voters’ perceptions of issues’ importance (columns 3–6). In Panel C, we repeat the same ex-
ercises, but now implementing a more demanding measure of “incidental” newspaper coverage
of polls, requiring that a canton represent less than 15% of a newspaper’s readership. Our find-
ings are much the same as in Panels A and B: greater coverage of closer polls is associated with
significantly higher voter turnout; this does not seem to be driven by different cultural/linguistic
groups; and it does not seem to be driven by political ads or changes in voters’ perceptions of vote
importance.41


6    Counterfactuals
Does our identified effect of anticipated election closeness on voter turnout affect election out-
comes in a substantial way? To shed some light on this question, we consider two counterfactual
exercises that represent modest deviations from the status-quo set of information about election
closeness possessed by voters.42 We find that the effects of anticipated closeness on turnout are
large enough to flip several high-stakes referenda outcomes in these counterfactuals, on issues
Figure A.2.
  40 Of course, it is possible that a newspaper’s readers will have correlated political preferences across cantons, which

shape turnout; these analyses are thus best viewed as suggestive.
  41 As a final exercise with the canton×vote data, we use incidental exposure to poll coverage as an instrument for

total exposure (and the interaction between poll closeness and incidental newspaper coverage of polls as an instrument
for the interaction between poll closeness and total newspaper coverage of polls). In Online Appendix Table A.6, one
can see: (i) strong first stage estimates; (ii) the coefficient on incidental articles on polls in the first stage predicting
total articles on polls is not greater than 1, suggesting that an additional incidental article is not associated with more
endogenous articles (the p-value from a one-sided test is < 0.001); and (iii) the IV estimate (using the empirical specifi-
cation from Table 4, column 1) is somewhat larger than the OLS. This suggests that endogenous coverage of close polls
may be greater when turnout is lower for other reasons: for example, newspaper editors may wish to stimulate turnout
when they believe turnout will be lower than they think it ought to be.
  42 Note that we do not consider simply replacing the actual poll results with counterfactual results. This would have

no impact on vote shares as long as anticipated closeness does not differentially affect the turnout decision of voters
with different preferences.



                                                             19
including corporate taxation, military policy, asylum for refugees, and immigration.
    In our first exercise, we consider a case in which a second national poll is added to the one poll
currently conducted in Switzerland. We assume that this second poll is one standard deviation
closer than the actual poll (capped at maximal closeness of 50–50) and that individuals consume
information aligned with their own political positions, perhaps because newspapers systemati-
cally report on poll results that are skewed toward their readers’ political preferences. In this case,
supporters of the leading side in a poll would see the actual poll results, while supporters of the
losing side in a poll would see results that are closer than the actual poll results.
    To calculate the increased turnout in response to the closer poll, we first estimate a simple OLS
regression of federal turnout on ex ante (that is, poll) closeness in the sample of 57 most important
votes with a pre-election poll. This regression yields a coefficient of 0.16 (p < 0.1): a one standard
deviation (around 7.7 percentage point) closer poll thus increases turnout rates by just over 1
percentage point.43 Applying this higher turnout rate to the individuals who support the losing
side in a poll, but did not turn out in the actual vote, generates an increase in turnout sufficient to
flip two of the votes in our sample (see Table 5, Panel A).
    We also consider the reverse case: i.e., the possibility that the second poll is less close than the
actual poll, and that this less close poll informs supporters of the leading side in the poll. As a
result, turnout by the leading side is reduced, and two of the votes in our sample are flipped as
well (see Table 5, Panel B).
    In our second exercise, we consider the variation in newspapers’ coverage of the actual na-
tional poll, whose effects are analyzed in section 5.3 above. We consider a scenario in which
newspapers with readers supporting the losing side in a referendum increase their coverage of
the actual poll such that the supporters of the losing side of the vote in a particular canton are
exposed to the sample maximum level of cantonal newspapers’ poll coverage. To calculate the
increased turnout in response to greater poll coverage, we apply the estimated effects of greater
poll coverage from our canton×vote-level analysis (Table 4, Panel A, column 1) to the individuals
who support the losing side in a poll, but did not turn out in the actual vote.
    We conduct this exercise one canton at a time, and find that such increased poll coverage
(directed toward the losing side in a vote) in a single canton would have flipped one referen-
dum among the thirty-seven we consider. A more systematic effort by the press — increased
coverage in more cantons — would flip additional referenda, with increased coverage in ten of
Switzerland’s twenty-six cantons reversing the results of five of thirty-seven referenda (see Table 5,
Panel C).
    Our two counterfactual exercises thus suggest that the effect of anticipated election closeness
on voter turnout is large enough to be policy relevant. It is strong enough that policies restrict-
  43 Toestimate this national-level counterfactual, we prefer to use a parameter estimate derived from national-level
outcomes (57 votes, rather than the 52 votes available in the Geneva data). We note however that this estimate is
quantitatively very similar to the turnout effect identified in the Geneva sample, following the release of a closer poll.



                                                           20
ing the number of polls conducted or regulating their dissemination can meaningfully affect the
composition of the electorate and high-stakes public policy outcomes.


7      Conclusion
Our finding of a causal effect of anticipated election closeness on voter turnout provides empir-
ical support for a key reduced form prediction made by a range of models of voter turnout. By
isolating the effect of information about election closeness from unobserved issue type and the
behavior of the political supply side, it contributes a crucial existence result to a vast empirical
literature that had lacked a well-identified effect of closeness on turnout.
      Yet, much work remains to be done. One naturally wonders about the external validity of
our existence result: how general is the causal effect of election closeness on turnout? While the
context we study has distinctive features — we study voter turnout for referenda, rather than
traditional elections, in a country with a long democratic tradition — we believe it likely gener-
alizes to a range of important settings. First, referenda play a role around the world in deciding
high-stakes issues: from Brexit, to the decision to end the Pinochet regime, to many important
policy issues in the state of California (which looks like the Swiss case, with many referenda voted
on each year). More generally, as described in Section 2, Swiss referenda often produce high-
stakes political competitions between left- and right-wing parties. In this sense, Swiss referenda
are single-issue analogues of the majoritarian political competition that exists elsewhere. Still, it
remains important to estimate causal effects of anticipated election closeness on voter turnout in
other settings. In addition, it is important to examine effects of polls through mechanisms other
than anticipated closeness alone: for example, polls may have differential effects on the leading
and losing sides (see for example, Rogers and Moore, 2015), a possibility from which we abstract
in our study. Finally, one would like to unpack the reduced form effect of election closeness we
observe to better understand its theoretical underpinnings, whether considerations of pivotality,
or intrinsic or social motives.
      Our analysis also has important practical implications. While much research on political be-
havior has focused on the effects of persuasive information in newspapers, on television, or in ad-
vertisements, our findings indicate that information about an election’s competitiveness can shape
political behavior as well. In a context of increased political polarization (e.g., Boxell et al., 2017),
persuasion aimed at changing the ideological preferences of voters may be less effective, mak-
ing the turnout margin that we study — changing the ideological composition of the voting elec-
torate — potentially more important than in the past.
      Though admittedly quite speculative, an application to the 2016 United States Presidential
election is illustrative. Political commentators have suggested that low voter turnout played a
role in Donald J. Trump’s victory.44 Interestingly, while media across the political spectrum con-
    44 See,   e.g., the Washington Post article, “Hillary Clinton’s campaign was crippled by voters who stayed home,” by


                                                             21
sistently predicted a Clinton victory, in a sample of 5 media outlets, we find that on Election Day,
more right-leaning sources, likely read by more right-leaning voters, generally reported lower
estimates of the probability of a Clinton victory — that is, a closer election — than did more left-
leaning sources (Fox News reported the closest election, with an 80% chance of a Clinton victory;
see Online Appendix Figure A.5). If closer polls motivated greater turnout, variation in polls re-
ported across media outlets may have played some role in shaping turnout and the outcome in
the U.S. Presidential Election.
    Our analysis thus points to an important policy implication: the regulation of polls’ conduct
and their dissemination can have important consequences for election outcomes. There is a re-
markable degree of variation across countries in such regulation: for example, in Australia and
in the United States there is none; in Italy, polls are prohibited within 15 days of a vote; and, in
Switzerland, no information on polls can be released in the 10 days before the vote. The impact
of these regulations on a range of policy outcomes might be far greater than many policymakers
realize.
Philip Bump, dated November 9, 2016. Article available at https://goo.gl/Irfy0c, last accessed July 26, 2020.




                                                        22
References
Agranov, Marina, Jacob Goeree, Julian Romero, and Leeat Yariv, “What Makes Voters Turn Out:
 the Effects of Polls and Beliefs,” Journal of European Economic Association, 2018, 16 (3), 825–856.

Ali, S. Nageeb and Charles Lin, “Why People Vote: Ethical Motives and Social Incentives,” Amer-
  ican Economic Journal: Microeconomics, May 2013, 5 (2), 73–98.

Barzel, Yoram and Eugene Silberberg, “Is the act of voting rational?,” Public Choice, September
  1973, 16 (1), 51–58.

Bennion, Elizabeth A., “Caught in the Ground Wars: Mobilizing Voters during a Competitive
  Congressional Campaign,” Annals of the American Academy of Political and Social Science, Septem-
  ber 2005, 601 (1), 123–141.

Boxell, Levi, Matthew Gentzkow, and Jesse M. Shapiro, “Is the Internet Causing Political Polar-
  ization? Evidence from Demographics,” NBER Working Paper, March 2017, w23258.

Brennan, Geoffrey and James Buchanan, “Voter Choice: Evaluating Political Alternatives,” Amer-
  ican Behavioral Scientist, November 1984, 28 (2), 185–201.

Cancela, Joao and Benny Geys, “Explaining voter turnout: A meta-analysis of national and sub-
  national elections,” Electoral Studies, 2016, 42, 264–275.

Cantoni, Davide, David Y. Yang, Noam Yuchtman, and Y. Jane Zhang, “Protests as Strategic
  Games: Experimental Evidence from Hong Kong’s Antiauthoritarian Movement,” Quarterly
  Journal of Economics, January 2019, 134 (2), 1021–1077.

Coate, Stephen and Michael Conlin, “A Group Rule-Utilitarian Approach to Voter Turnout: The-
  ory and Evidence,” American Economic Review, 2004, 94 (5), 1476–1504.

  , , and Andrea Moro, “The performance of pivotal-voter models in small-scale elections: Evi-
  dence from Texas liquor referenda,” Journal of Public Economics, April 2008, 92 (3-4), 582–596.

Cox, Gary W. and Michael C. Munger, “Closeness, Expenditures, and Turnout in the 1982 U.S.
  House Elections,” American Political Science Review, March 1989, 83 (1), 217.

Dale, Allison and Aaron Strauss, “Don’t Forget to Vote: Text Message Reminders as a Mobiliza-
 tion Tool,” American Journal of Political Science, October 2009, 53 (4), 787–804.

DellaVigna, Stefano and Ethan Kaplan, “The Fox News Effect: Media Bias and Voting,” Quarterly
 Journal of Economics, August 2007, 122 (3), 1187–1234.

  , John A. List, Ulrike Malmendier, and Gautam Rao, “Voting to Tell Others,” Review of Economic
  Studies, October 2016, 84 (1), 143–181.

Downs, Anthony, “An Economic Theory of Political Action in a Democracy,” Journal of Political
 Economy, April 1957, 65 (2), 135–150.

Duffy, John and Margit Tavits, “Beliefs and Voting Decisions: A Test of the Pivotal Voter Model,”
 American Journal of Political Science, July 2008, 52 (3), 603–618.


                                                23
Durante, Ruben, Paolo Pinotti, and Andrea Tesei, “The Political Legacy of Entertainment TV,”
 American Economic Review, 2019, 109 (7), 2497–2530.

Enikolopov, Ruben, Aleksey Makarin, and Maria Petrova, “Social Media and Protest Participa-
  tion: Evidence from Russia,” Econometrica, July 2020, 88 (4), 1479–1514.

   and Maria Petrova, “Media Capture,” in “Handbook of Media Economics,” Vol. 1, Elsevier,
  2015, pp. 687–700.

  , , and Ekaterina Zhuravskaya, “Media and Political Persuasion: Evidence from Russia,”
  American Economic Review, December 2011, 101 (7), 3253–3285.

Enos, Ryan D. and Anthony Fowler, “Pivotality and Turnout: Evidence from a Field Experiment
  in the Aftermath of a Tied Election,” Political Science Research and Methods, 2014, 2 (2), 309–319.

Feddersen, Timothy and Alvaro Sandroni, “A Theory of Participation in Elections,” American
  Economic Review, August 2006, 96 (4), 1271–1282.

Fujiwara, Thomas, Kyle Meng, and Tom Vogl, “Habit Formation in Voting: Evidence from Rainy
  Elections,” American Economic Journal: Applied Economics, October 2016, 8 (4), 160–188.

Funk, Patricia, “Social Incentives and Voter Turnout: Evidence from the Swiss Mail Ballot Sys-
  tem,” Journal of the European Economic Association, September 2010, 8 (5), 1077–1103.

Gentzkow, Matthew, “Television and Voter Turnout,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, August 2006,
 121 (3), 931–972.

  , Jesse Shapiro, and Michael Sinkinson, “The Effect of Newspaper Entry and Exit on Electoral
  Politics,” American Economic Review, December 2011, 101 (7), 2980–3018.

Gerber, Alan S. and Donald P. Green, “The Effects of Canvassing, Telephone Calls, and Direct
 Mail on Voter Turnout: A Field Experiment,” American Political Science Review, September 2000,
 94 (03), 653–663.

  , Jonathan Gruber, and Daniel M Hungerman, “Does church attendance cause people to vote?
  Using blue laws’ repeal to estimate the effect of religiosity on voter turnout,” British Journal of
  Political Science, July 2016, 46 (3), 481–500.

  , Mitchell Hoffman, John Morgan, and Collin Raymond, “One in a Million: Field Experiments
  on Perceived Closeness of the Election and Voter Turnout,” American Economic Journal: Applied
  Economics, July 2020, 12 (3), 287–325.

González, Felipe, “Collective Action in Networks: Evidence from the Chilean Student Move-
 ment,” Journal of Public Economics, August 2020, 188.

Hoffman, Mitchell, Gianmarco León, and Maria Lombardi, “Compulsory Voting, Turnout, and
 Government Spending: Evidence from Austria,” Journal of Public Economics, January 2017, 145,
 103–115.

Kirchgässner, Gebhard and Tobias Schulz, “Was treibt Stimmbuerger an die Urne? Eine em-
  pirische Untersuchung der Abstimmungsbeteiligung in der Schweiz, 1981–1999,” Swiss Political
  Science Review, 2005, 11 (1), 1–56.

                                                 24
Kriesi, Hanspeter, “Sind Abstimmungen käuflich?,” in Adrian Vatter, Frédéric Varone, and Fritz
  Sager, eds., Demokratie als Leidenschaft. Planung, Entscheidung und Vollzug in der schweizerischen
  Demokratie, Bern: Haupt, 2009.

León, Gianmarco, “Turnout, Political Preferences and Information: Experimental Evidence from
  Perú,” Journal of Development Economics, July 2017, 127, 56–71.

Levine, David K. and Thomas R. Palfrey, “The Paradox of Voter Participation? A Laboratory
  Study,” American Political Science Review, February 2007, 101 (01), 143–158.

Linder, Wolf, Swiss Democracy: Possible Solutions to Conflict in Multicultural Societies, 3rd Edition,
  Basingstoke: Palgrave Macmillan, 2010.

Madestam, Andreas, Daniel Shoag, Stan Veuger, and David Yanagizawa-Drott, “Do Politi-
 cal Protests Matter? Evidence from the Tea Party Movement,” Quarterly Journal of Economics,
 November 2013, 128 (4), 1633–1685.

Matsusaka, John G., “Election closeness and voter turnout: Evidence from California ballot
 propositions,” Public Choice, August 1993, 76 (4), 313–334.

Morton, Rebecca B., Daniel Muller, Lionel Page, and Benno Torgler, “Exit polls, turnout, and
 bandwagon voting: Evidence from a natural experiment,” European Economic Review, July 2015,
 77, 65–81.

Myatt, David P., “A Theory of Voter Turnout,” September 2015. London Business School Working
 Paper.

Ortoleva, Pietro and Erik Snowberg, “Overconfidence in Political Behavior,” American Economic
 Review, February 2015, 105 (2), 504–535.

Perez-Truglia, Ricardo and Guillermo Cruces, “Partisan Interactions: Evidence from a Field Ex-
  periment in the United States,” Journal of Political Economy, August 2017, 125 (4), 1208–1243.

Pons, Vincent and Clémence Tricaud, “Expressive Voting and Its Cost: Evidence From Runoffs
  With Two or Three Candidates,” Econometrica, 2018, 86, 1621–1649.

Riker, William H. and Peter C. Ordeshook, “A Theory of the Calculus of Voting,” American Polit-
  ical Science Review, March 1968, 62 (01), 25–42.

Rogers, Todd and Don Moore, “It’s Close But We’re Losing: The Motivating Power of Under-
  Confidence,” Proceedings of the Academy of Management, 2015.

Schuessler, Alexander A., A logic of expressive choice, Princeton: Princeton University Press, 2000.

Shachar, Ron and Barry Nalebuff, “Follow the Leader: Theory and Evidence on Political Partici-
  pation,” American Economic Review, June 1999, 89 (3), 525–547.

Spenkuch, Jörg L and David Toniatti, “Political Advertising and Election Results,” The Quarterly
  Journal of Economics, November 2018, 133 (4), 1981–2036.

Strömberg, David, “Radio’s impact on public spending,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 2004, 119
  (1), 189–221.

                                                 25
Figures and Tables

                   F IGURE 1: T URNOUT, C LOSENESS , I SSUE T YPE ,                                                             AND THE             P OLITICAL S UPPLY S IDE
         60




                                                                                  60




                                                                                                                                                             60
                   Panel A                                                                        Panel B                                                                   Panel C
         50




                                                                                  50




                                                                                                                                                             50
   Turnout




                                                                          Turnout




                                                                                                                                                    Turnout
         40




                                                                                  40




                                                                                                                                                             40
                                         slope = 0.212 (p = 0.008)                                                  slope = 5.016 (p < 0.001)                                                       slope = 0.031 (p < 0.001)
         30




                                                                                  30




                                                                                                                                                             30
              10             20          30           40             50                       4             5        6           7              8                       0               200                    400              600
                                  Ex Post Closeness                                                             Importance                                                                    Advertisements
                                                                                  50




                                                                                                                                                             50
                                                                                                  Panel D                                                                   Panel E
                                                                          Ex Post Closeness




                                                                                                                                                    Ex Post Closeness
                                                                                       40




                                                                                                                                                                40
                                                                                  30




                                                                                                                                                             30
                                                                                                                    slope = 2.342 (p = 0.089)                                                       slope = 0.022 (p < 0.001)

                                                                                              4             5        6           7              8                       0               200                    400              600
                                                                                                                Importance                                                                    Advertisements



                                                                                                                                                                            Panel F
                                                                                                                                                             7
                                                                                                                                                             6.5
                                                                                                                                                    Importance
                                                                                                                                                             6




                                                                                                                                                                                                    slope = 0.001 (p = 0.285)
                                                                                                                                                             5.5




                                                                                                                                                                        0         100            200            300      400
                                                                                                                                                                                              Advertisements




Notes: The matrix of binned scatter plots shows pairwise correlations of turnout, ex post closeness, vote importance
and political advertisements at the vote (i.e., election) level. Turnout is the number of votes cast, as a percentage of
eligible voters at the national level. Ex Post Closeness is the vote share of the losing side in percent. Importance is the
self-reported personal importance attached by respondents of the VOX/VOTO surveys to a vote, on a scale from 0 to
10. Advertisements is the count of political ads in the six major Swiss newspapers (NZZ, Tages-Anzeiger, Blick, Tribune
de Genève, Le Temps, Le Matin) during the four weeks preceding election day. Lines represent the bivariate linear fit
with reported slope parameters estimated by simple OLS using heteroskedasticity-robust standard errors. Reported
p-values refer to a test that the slope parameter is equal to zero.




                                                                                                                26
             F IGURE 2: U NCONDITIONAL T URNOUT B EFORE AND A FTER P OLL R ELEASE


           Panel A: Cumulative Turnout                                                  Panel B: Net Turnout
                                                                                  7
    50


          Poll Release                                                                  Poll Release
    40                                                                            6


    30
                                                                                  5


    20
                                                                                  4

    10
                                                    Ex Ante Closeness > 40
                                                    Ex Ante Closeness < 40
                                                                                  3
     0
         -5 -4 -3 -2 -1 0           1   2   3   4     5    6   7    8    9            -5 -4 -3 -2 -1          0   1   2    3   4   5   6   7   8   9
                         Voting Day to / from Poll Release                                             Voting Day to / from Poll Release


Notes: Panel A plots daily cumulative turnout, i.e., the percentage share of Genevan voters who turned out at or before
a given voting day, separately for votes with ex ante poll closeness above or below the sample median of 40 (i.e., a losing
side vote share above or below 40). Panel B shows an analogous plot for net turnout, i.e., the daily inflow of ballots
divided by the stock of remaining voters (who did not turn out before a given voting day). The sample is an unbalanced
panel of 52 votes observed from 5 voting days before to 9 voting days after poll release.




                                                                             27
F IGURE 3: T HE E FFECT OF C LOSER P OLLS ON N ET V OTER T URNOUT: E VENT- STUDY B ASELINE


               Net Turnout



     .8



     .4



     0



    -.4
                                                            Poll Release




          -5     -4      -3     -2      -1      0       1         2        3   4       5      6       7       8      9
                                             Voting Day to / from Poll Release

Notes: The event study graph plots day-specific effects of a one standard deviation increase in ex ante (poll) closeness on
net turnout, i.e., the daily inflow of ballots in the canton of Geneva divided by the number of remaining Genevan voters
who did not turn out before a given voting day, conditional on vote and voting day fixed effects. Squares represent
coefficients and spikes depict 95% confidence intervals from OLS estimates (reported in Online Appendix Table A.3,
Column 1). The sample is an unbalanced panel of 52 votes observed from 5 voting days before to 9 voting days after
poll release, where the day of poll release is the omitted category of reference.




                                                             28
F IGURE 4: T HE E FFECT OF C LOSER P OLLS ON N ET V OTER T URNOUT: E VENT- STUDY
           R OBUSTNESS


               Panel A: Net Turnout [2-day bins]                                                    Panel B: Turnout / All Voters

     .8                                                                                     .8

                                                                                            .4
     .4

                                                                                             0
      0
                                                                                            -.4
                                                                                                                          Poll Release
    -.4
                                             Poll Release


               -5, -4   -3, -2       -1, 0    1, 2     3, 4       5, 6   7, 8, 9                  -5 -4 -3 -2 -1 0    1     2    3       4   5   6   7   8   9



               Panel C: Net Turnout [balanced]                                                      Panel D: Log(Turnout)

     .8
                                                                                            .4

     .4                                                                                     .2

      0                                                                                      0
                                                                                                                          Poll Release
    -.4                                                                                     -.2
                                     Poll Release


          -2      -1     0       1       2     3      4       5     6     7        8              -5 -4 -3 -2 -1 0    1     2    3       4   5   6   7   8   9


Notes: The figure shows variants of the event study graph presented in Figure 3. Panel A plots coefficients and 95%
confidence intervals for bins of two voting days, reported in Online Appendix Table A.4, Column 1, using the day of
poll release as well as the day just before poll release as the omitted category of reference. Panel B uses the daily inflow
of ballots divided by all eligible Genevan voters as an alternative measure of turnout, and plots OLS estimates reported
in Online Appendix Table A.3, Column 3. Panel C drops all voting days in which not every vote has ballots counted,
and instead uses a balanced panel of 52 votes observed from 2 voting days before to 8 voting days after poll release.
Panel D uses the natural logarithm of the daily number of incoming ballots in the canton of Geneva as an alternative
measure of turnout, and plots OLS estimates reported in Online Appendix Table A.4, Column 5.




                                                                                       29
  F IGURE 5: T HE E FFECT OF C LOSER P OLLS ON P OLITICAL A DVERTISEMENTS : E VENT- STUDY


               Advertisements (std.)
     .4




     .2




     0




    -.2
                                                        Poll Release


          -5      -4     -3     -2      -1      0       1        2     3       4       5      6       7       8
                                             Voting Day to / from Poll Release

Notes: The event study graph replicates Figure 3 with a standardized measure of political campaigning activity as the
outcome. It plots day-specific effects of a one standard deviation increase in ex ante (poll) closeness on the standardized
number of political advertisements in Geneva’s two major newspapers (Tribune de Genève, Le Temps), conditional on
vote fixed effects and voting day fixed effects. The sample is an unbalanced panel of 52 votes observed from 5 voting
days before to 8 voting days after poll release, where the day of poll release is the omitted category of reference. The
last voting day of each vote is dropped because there are no Sunday editions of Geneva’s major newspapers.




                                                            30
F IGURE 6: T HE E FFECT OF C LOSENESS ON T URNOUT BY M UNICIPALITY
           U NREPRESENTATIVENESS , B EFORE AND A FTER THE I NTRODUCTION OF P OLLS
   70




                                                                      70
               Panel A: Votes Before Poll Era                                Panel B: Votes in Poll Era
   60




                                                                      60
Turnout




                                                                   Turnout
  50




                                                                     50
   40




                                                                      40
   30




                                                                      30
          -2            -1              0              1       2             -2           -1          0             1   2
                         Ex Post Closeness (std.)                                        Ex Post Closeness (std.)


                                                               Slopes Before Poll Era          Slopes in Poll Era

                             Unrepresentative Municipalities         0.724 (p = 0.646)            2.699 (p = 0.005)
                             Representative Municipalities           1.700 (p = 0.244)            2.547 (p = 0.005)

                             Differences within Era:                -0.976 (p = 0.010)            0.152 (p = 0.693)
                             Difference in Differences:                                           1.128 (p = 0.037)

Notes: Panel A shows binned scatter plots correlating municipality-level voter turnout and national-level ex post close-
ness, splitting the sample of municipalities above and below median political unrepresentativeness, for 46 votes in the
era before pre-election polls were introduced. Panel B replicates Panel A for 69 votes in the era with pre-election polls.
Unrepresentativeness is a municipality’s historical tendency to produce voting results unrepresentative of national-
level closeness, measured as the negative of the correlation coefficient between municipality-level and national-level ex
post closeness of voting results in the era before pre-election polls were introduced. Estimates of slope parameters as
well as p-values associated with tests that (differences in) slopes equal zero are obtained from an OLS regression using
all 115 votes, with standard errors clustered at vote level.




                                                               31
F IGURE 7: M ARGINAL E FFECTS OF N EWSPAPER P OLL M ENTIONS D EPENDING ON P OLL
           C LOSENESS


                                             2
   Marginal Effect of Poll Mentions (std.)




                                             1




                                             0




                                             -1




                                             -2

                                                  -3   -2     -1                0              1                   2
                                                            Ex Ante Closeness (std.)

Notes: The solid line plots the total effect of a one standard deviation increase in poll mentions in cantonal newspapers
on cantonal turnout depending on standardized ex ante (poll) closeness. Dashed lines represent 95% confidence inter-
vals. The plot is based on OLS estimates reported in Table 4, Panel A, Column 1. The histogram shows the distribution
of (standardized) ex ante (poll) closeness across votes.




                                                                   32
                                       TABLE 1: E XAMPLES OF E LECTION D AYS AND M OST I MPORTANT V OTES

      Date           Vote Title                                                                                        NZZ Mentions       Vote Importance (Survey)
      1994-09-25     Federal Penal Code and Military Penal Code (Racial Discrimination)                                       39                      6.12
      1994-09-25     Federal Decision Abolishing Subsidies for Domestic Breadstuff from Tariff Revenues                       16                      3.48
      2001-03-04     Initiative “Yes to Europe!”                                                                              68                      6.61
      2001-03-04     Initiative “for Lower Prices of Pharmaceuticals”                                                         53                      5.79
      2001-03-04     Initiative “for Road Safety with 30 km/h in Built-Up Areas”                                              36                      5.53
      2009-11-29     Initiative “against the Construction of Minarets”                                                       112                      6.91
      2009-11-29     Initiative “for a Ban on Exports of War Material”                                                        47                      6.28
      2009-11-29     Federal Decision on Special Funding for Air Traffic                                                      27                      3.85
      2019-05-19     Federal Act on Tax Reform and Funding for Old Age Insurance                                              77                      7.42
      2019-05-19     Federal Decision Adopting the EU Directive on Gun Control                                                13                      6.49
      Notes: NZZ Mentions measures the number of times a vote was mentioned in the NZZ newspaper in the three months preceding election day. Vote Importance measures the
     average personal importance attached by VOX/VOTO survey respondents to a vote, on a 0-10 scale (10 indicating maximum imortance).
33
                                         TABLE 2: S UMMARY S TATISTICS



 PANEL A: V OTE × D AY- LEVEL D ATA (G ENEVA )                    Mean      Std. Dev.      Min.       Max.        Obs.
   Net Turnout (%)                                                4.58         1.96        0.02       16.75        757
   Turnout / All Voters (%)                                       3.32         1.33        0.02       12.76        757
   Log(Turnout)                                                   8.76         0.56        3.91       10.02        757
   Cumulative Turnout (%)                                         28.19        14.24       0.02       62.90        757
   Ex Ante Closeness                                              38.38         7.69       18.89      48.96        757
   Advertisements                                                 1.60         2.48        0.00       19.00        705


 PANEL B: V OTE - LEVEL D ATA
   Turnout (%)                                                   43.78         8.33        27.60      78.78        115
   Ex Post Closeness                                             35.30         9.75         8.03      49.91        115
   Importance                                                     6.13         0.87        3.22       7.79         83
   Advertisements                                                107.56       145.18        0.00     1146.00       112


 PANEL C: M UNICIPALITY × V OTE - LEVEL D ATA
   Turnout (%)                                                    44.00        13.02       3.20      100.00      250240
   Ex Post Closeness                                              35.30         9.70        8.03      49.91      250240
   Poll Era                                                        0.60        0.49        0.00       1.00       250240
   Unrepresentativeness                                           -0.59        0.19        -0.93      0.03       250240
   Homogeneity                                                    34.65         4.15       25.40      59.93      250240
   Electorate Size (in 1000)                                       1.98        7.08        0.03      233.14      250240


 PANEL D: C ANTON × V OTE - LEVEL D ATA
   Turnout (%)                                                    47.27         8.91       21.67     72.61         962
   Ex Ante Closeness                                              37.88         7.47       18.89     48.91         962
   Poll Mentions                                                  4.28         3.42        0.00      24.00         962
   Incidental Poll Mentions                                       2.89         3.04        0.00      20.00         962
   Incidental Poll Mentions (< 15% Market Share)                  2.40         2.83         0.00      15.00        962
   Importance                                                     6.12         1.13        0.50      10.00         957
   Advertisements                                                 73.93        68.18       0.00      403.00        962
 Notes: In each dataset, vote-specific variables refer to the most important vote per election day, as indicated by self-
reported importance in VOX/VOTO surveys, or, for years prior to the existence of survey measures, by the number of
vote mentions in the NZZ in the three months preceding the vote. Vote × Day-level Data: Net Turnout measures turnout
as the daily number of votes cast, in percent of eligible voters not having cast their vote on earlier days. Turnout
/ All Voters is the daily number of votes cast, in percent of eligible voters. Log(Turnout) is the natural logarithm
of the daily number of votes cast. Cumulative Turnout is the daily running total of votes cast, in percent of eligible
voters. Ex Ante Closeness measures the losing side’s vote share at the federal level in percent, as predicted by the
pre-election poll, and varies from 0 to 50 (50 indicating maximum closeness). Advertisements is the daily count of
political ads placed in the two major Genevan newspapers (Tribune de Genève , Le Temps). Vote-level Data: Turnout is
the number of votes cast, in percent of eligible voters at the federal level. Ex Post Closeness is the vote share of the
losing side at the federal level. Importance measures the average personal importance attached by VOX/VOTO survey
respondents to a vote, on a 0-10 scale (10 indicating maximum importance). Advertisements is the number of political
ads placed in the six major Swiss newspapers (NZZ, Tages-Anzeiger, Blick, Tribune de Genève , Le Temps, Le Matin) in the
four weeks preceding election day. Municipality × Vote-level Data: Turnout is the number of votes cast, in percent of
eligible voters at the municipal level. Ex Post Closeness defined as in vote-level data. Poll Era is a dummy variable
equal to 1 for the 69 votes held after the introduction of pre-election polls. Unrepresentativeness is a municipality’s
historical tendency to produce voting results unrepresentative of national-level closeness, measured as the negative of
the correlation coefficient between municipality-level and national-level ex post closeness of voting results before pre-
election polls were introduced. Homogeneity is a municipality’s historical tendency to produce voting results distant
from 50-50 outcomes, measured as the average municipal-level margin of majority across all votes held before pre-
election polls were introduced. Electorate Size is the average number of eligible voters (in 1000) in a municipality across
votes held before pre-election polls were introduced. Canton × Vote-level Data: Turnout measures cantonal turnout as
the number of votes cast, in percent of eligible voters. Ex Ante Closeness defined and measured as in day × vote-level
data. Poll Mentions is the number of times the pre-election poll for a vote is mentioned in cantonal newspapers read by
at least 10% of a canton’s inhabitants. Incidental Poll Mentions are poll mentions in cantonal newspapers whose largest
market is in another canton. Incidental Poll Mentions (<15 % Market Share) are poll mentions in cantonal newspapers,
excluding newspapers for which the canton is either the largest market or makes for more than 15% of the newspaper’s
readership. Importance measures the average personal importance attached by a canton’s VOX survey respondents to
a vote. Advertisements is the number of political ads placed in cantonal newspapers in the month preceding election
day.


                                                           34
TABLE 3: H ETEROGENEOUS E FFECTS OF E LECTION C LOSENESS AND P OLLS D EPENDING ON
         M UNICIPALITY U NREPRESENTATIVENESS

                                                                                              (1)                (2)
 Ex Post Closeness (std.) × Unrepresentativeness (std.)                                   -0.5676∗∗∗         -0.5696∗∗∗
                                                                                           (0.2132)           (0.2156)
 Ex Post Closeness (std.) × Unrepresentativeness (std.) × Poll Era                         0.6211∗∗           0.6179∗∗
                                                                                           (0.2983)           (0.3003)
 Unrepresentativeness (std.) × Poll Era                                                   1.9756∗∗∗          2.0288∗∗∗
                                                                                           (0.2613)           (0.2629)
 Test for Convergence (p-value)                                                              0.798              0.818
 R-squared                                                                                   0.697             0.698
 Observations                                                                               250240            250240
 Municipality Fixed Effects                                                                    Y                 Y
 Vote Fixed Effects                                                                            Y                 Y
 Electorate Size                                                                               N                 Y
 Notes: Each column presents results from an OLS regression with municipality-level voter turnout as the depen-
dent variable. Unrepresentativeness is a municipality’s historical tendency to produce voting results unrepresenta-
tive of national-level closeness, measured by the negative of the correlation coefficient between muncipality-level and
national-level ex post closeness of voting results in the era before pre-election polls. Poll Era is a dummy equal to 1 for
69 votes held after the introduction of polls in 1998. Test for Convergence reports the p-value of an F-test that the sum
of the coefficients on Ex Post Closeness (std.) × Unrepresentativeness (std.) and Ex Post Closeness (std.) × Unrepresen-
tativeness (std.) × Poll Era (std.) equals 0. Column 2 controls for a triple interaction among Ex Post Closeness, Poll Era
and the standardized average municipality electorate size, as well as all lower order terms. The sample is a balanced
panel of 2176 municipalities observed in 115 votes held from 1981 to 2019. Standard errors clustered at the vote level in
parentheses: ∗ p < 0.10, ∗∗ p < 0.05, ∗∗∗ p < 0.01 .




                                                            35
                                         TABLE 4: N EWSPAPER C OVERAGE , C LOSENESS AND C ANTONAL V OTER T URNOUT

                                                                                              Turnout (%)                 Advertisements (std.)              Importance (std.)
      PANEL A: P OLL M ENTIONS IN C ANTONAL N EWSPAPERS                                     (1)         (2)                (3)          (4)                   (5)        (6)
       Poll Mentions (std.) × Ex Ante Closeness (std.)                                  0.4795∗∗        0.5426∗∗          0.0408            0.0389           0.0419        0.0376
                                                                                        (0.2170)        (0.2010)         (0.0378)          (0.0377)         (0.0506)      (0.0509)
       Poll Mentions (std.)                                                               0.1877        1.2549∗∗        0.2266∗∗∗         0.1393∗∗           0.0416        0.0427
                                                                                         (0.2419)       (0.6185)         (0.0526)         (0.0658)          (0.0597)      (0.0953)
       R-squared                                                                          0.820           0.822           0.876             0.877            0.329          0.329

      PANEL B: I NCIDENTAL P OLL M ENTIONS
       Poll Mentions (std.) × Ex Ante Closeness (std.)                                   0.3741∗        0.4516∗∗∗         0.0287            0.0519           0.0479        0.0328
                                                                                         (0.1928)        (0.1635)        (0.0455)          (0.0412)         (0.0359)      (0.0481)
       Poll Mentions (std.)                                                               -0.0818       1.3947∗         0.2459∗∗∗         0.2977∗∗∗          0.0364        0.0132
                                                                                         (0.2722)       (0.7391)         (0.0547)          (0.0857)         (0.0594)      (0.1122)
       R-squared                                                                          0.820           0.821           0.878             0.878            0.329          0.329
36




      PANEL C: I NCIDENTAL P OLL M ENTIONS (<15% Market Share)
       Poll Mentions (std.) × Ex Ante Closeness (std.)                                  0.3835∗∗        0.5380∗∗∗         0.0137            0.0335           0.0511        0.0338
                                                                                        (0.1753)         (0.1752)        (0.0465)          (0.0441)         (0.0335)      (0.0398)
       Poll Mentions (std.)                                                               0.0234        2.0387∗∗        0.2361∗∗∗         0.2975∗∗∗          0.0133       -0.0353
                                                                                         (0.2673)       (0.8815)         (0.0554)          (0.0766)         (0.0572)      (0.1110)
       R-squared                                                                          0.820           0.822           0.876             0.876            0.329          0.329
      Observations                                                                         962             962             962               962              957            957
      German × Poll Mentions (std.)                                                         N               Y               N                 Y                N              Y
      German × Ex Ante Closeness (std.)                                                     N               Y               N                 Y                N              Y
      Notes: Each panel presents results from six OLS regressions using three dependent variables: cantonal turnout (Columns 1 and 2), the standardized number of newspaper
     advertisements in cantonal newspapers (Columns 3 and 4), and standardized importance, as rated by a canton’s average VOX survey responses (Columns 5 and 6). In Panel A,
     Poll Mentions (std.) refer to the standardized count of poll mentions in cantonal newspapers, i.e., newspapers read by at least 10% of a canton’s inhabitants. In Panel B, only
     Incidental Poll Mentions are considered, i.e., mentions in cantonal newspapers whose main market lies in another canton. Panel C further restricts Incidental Poll Mentions
     to mentions in newspapers whose cantonal readership accounts for less than 15% of the newspaper’s total readership. Ex Ante Closeness is the losing side’s vote share at the
     federal level, as predicted by the pre-election poll. All specifications include canton and vote fixed effects. Columns 2, 4, and 6 additionally control for a dummy equal to one
     for German-speaking cantons, interacted with both Ex Ante Closeness (std.) and Poll Mentions (std.). The sample is a panel of 26 cantons, observed in 37 votes held between
     2000 and 2014. Standard errors clustered at the vote level in parentheses: ∗ p < 0.10, ∗∗ p < 0.05, ∗∗∗ p < 0.01.
                                                         TABLE 5: C OUNTERFACTUAL T URNOUT AND V OTE R ESULTS

      PANEL A: C LOSER P OLL FOR L OSING S IDE                                                                      Actual Yes (%)       Poll Yes (%)     Counterfactual Yes (%)          Cantons
       Federal Act on Corporate Tax Reform (February 24, 2008)                                                           50.53               59.74                   49.75
       Initiative “Limiting the Construction of Second Homes” (March 11, 2012)                                           50.63               58.43                   49.97

      PANEL B: L ESS C LOSE P OLL FOR L EADING S IDE
       Federal Act on Corporate Tax Reform (February 24, 2008)                                                           50.53               59.74                   49.72
       Initiative “Limiting the Construction of Second Homes” (March 11, 2012)                                           50.63               58.43                   49.95

      PANEL C: H IGHER P OLL C OVERAGE BY N EWSPAPERS S UPPORTING THE L OSING S IDE
       Federal Act on the Army and Military Administration (June 10, 2001)                                               50.99               59.49                   49.97                   10
       Initiative “against Abuse of Asylum” (November 24, 2002)                                                          49.91               53.75                   50.16                    1
       Federal Act on Corporate Tax Reform (February 24, 2008)                                                           50.53               59.74                   49.91                    3
       Initiative “Limiting the Construction of Second Homes” (March 11, 2012)                                           50.63               58.43                   49.93                    5
       Initiative “against Mass Immigration” (February 9, 2014)                                                          50.33               46.24                   49.89                    2
      Notes: Table lists the actual Yes vote share, the Yes vote share predicted by the pre-election poll, and the counterfactual Yes vote share, for all votes with election outcomes flipped by the
     counterfactual exercises. Each panel corresponds to one counterfactual exercise. Panel A calculates counterfactual Yes vote shares assuming that voters supporting the losing side in the
     pre-election poll observe a counterfactual pre-election poll overstating closeness by one standard deviation (i.e., by 7.69 percentage points) with respect to the actual pre-election poll, with
37




     counterfactual closeness bounded above by 50. The implied increase in turnout of the losing side is ∆ closeness · β̂/100, where β̂ = 0.16 ( p < 0.1) is the slope coefficient from a simple OLS
     regression of national-level turnout (%) on ex ante (poll) closeness, in the sample of 57 most important votes with a pre-election poll. Panel B replicates Panel A, but assuming that voters
     supporting the leading side observe a pre-election poll understating closeness by one standard deviation. Panel C calculates counterfactual Yes vote shares assuming that, in some cantons,
     newspapers read by voters supporting the losing side in the election increase poll mentions to the sample maximum. The change in turnout of the losing side induced by the increase in poll
     mentions is calculated using coefficients and the sample of 37 votes from Table 4, Panel A, Column 1. Counterfactual Yes vote shares in panel C result from limiting the number of cantons
     subject to the counterfactual to the minimum necessary to flip the outcome of the vote. The rightmost column reports the minimum number of cantons subject to the counterfactual newspaper
     poll coverage required in order to flip the vote outcome.
                          Online Appendix: Not for Publication

                     F IGURE A.1: M EDIA U SAGE FOR P OLITICAL O PINION F ORMATION


             100


             80


             60
   Percent




             40


             20


              0
                   1990           1995               2000                2005               2010                2015
                                                            Year of Vote

                                    Newspapers                   TV             Radio              Internet

Notes: Responses from the VOX survey to the following prompt: “Through which media did you orient yourself and
learn about the pros and cons of the last vote? Please indicate all possibilities that were accurate for the last vote.” The
graph shows the share of survey respondents who indicated the use of newspapers, TV, radio, or the Internet.




                                                            38
F IGURE A.2: E NDOGENEOUS AND I NCIDENTAL P OLL M ENTIONS IN C ANTONS OVER T IME
                            Aargau                             Appenzell Ausserrhoden                                 Appenzell Innerrhoden
         20                                        20                                                  20
         15                                        15                                                  15
         10                                        10                                                  10
          5                                         5                                                   5
          0                                         0                                                   0
              2000   2005            2010   2015        2000      2005              2010      2015          2000        2005            2010   2015


                     Basel Landschaft                                Basel Stadt                                               Bern
         20                                        20                                                  20
         15                                        15                                                  15
         10                                        10                                                  10
          5                                         5                                                   5
          0                                         0                                                   0
              2000   2005            2010   2015        2000      2005              2010      2015          2000        2005            2010   2015


                        Fribourg                                          Genève                                               Glarus
         20                                        20                                                  20
         15                                        15                                                  15
         10                                        10                                                  10
          5                                         5                                                   5
          0                                         0                                                   0
              2000   2005            2010   2015        2000      2005              2010      2015          2000        2005            2010   2015


                       Graubünden                                          Jura                                                Luzern
         20                                        20                                                  20
         15                                        15                                                  15
         10                                        10                                                  10
          5                                         5                                                   5
          0                                         0                                                   0
              2000   2005            2010   2015        2000      2005              2010      2015          2000        2005            2010   2015


                        Neuchâtel                                        Nidwalden                                         Obwalden
         20                                        20                                                  20
         15                                        15                                                  15
         10                                        10                                                  10
          5                                         5                                                   5
          0                                         0                                                   0
              2000   2005            2010   2015        2000      2005              2010      2015          2000        2005            2010   2015


                      Schaffhausen                                        Schwyz                                            Solothurn
         20                                        20                                                  20
         15                                        15                                                  15
         10                                        10                                                  10
          5                                         5                                                   5
          0                                         0                                                   0
              2000   2005            2010   2015        2000      2005              2010      2015          2000        2005            2010   2015


                        St.Gallen                                         Thurgau                                              Ticino
         20                                        20                                                  20
         15                                        15                                                  15
         10                                        10                                                  10
          5                                         5                                                   5
          0                                         0                                                   0
              2000   2005            2010   2015        2000      2005              2010      2015          2000        2005            2010   2015


                             Uri                                          Valais                                               Vaud
         20                                        20                                                  20
         15                                        15                                                  15
         10                                        10                                                  10
          5                                         5                                                   5
          0                                         0                                                   0
              2000   2005            2010   2015        2000      2005              2010      2015          2000        2005            2010   2015


                             Zug                                          Zürich
         20                                        20
         15                                        15
         10                                        10
          5                                         5
          0                                         0
              2000   2005            2010   2015        2000      2005              2010      2015



                                              Endogenous Poll Mentions                     Incidental Poll Mentions


        Notes: Each panel plots the number of endogenous and incidental poll mentions over
        time, for one canton. Endogenous Poll Mentions are poll mentions in newspapers read
        by at least 10% of a canton’s inhabitants and for which the canton is the largest market. In-
        cidental Poll Mentions are poll mentions in newspapers read by at least 10% of a canton’s
        inhabitants, but whose largest market is in a different canton.

                                                                         39
 F IGURE A.3: D ISTRIBUTIONS OF M UNICIPALITY U NREPRESENTATIVENSS AND H OMOGENEITY

                         Panel A: Unrepresentativeness                                     Panel B: Political Homogeneity

               2
                                                                                      .1

              1.5
                                                                                    .075
    Density




                                                                          Density
               1
                                                                                     .05


               .5                                                                   .025


               0                                                                      0
                    -1        -.8      -.6      -.4        -.2   0                            30          40          50    60
                                    Unrepresentativeness                                                Homogeneity

Notes: The figure shows the distribution of 2176 Swiss municipalities according to unrepresentativeness (panel A)
and political homogeneity (panel B). Unrepresentativeness is a municipality’s historical tendency to produce voting
results unrepresentative of national-level closeness, measured as the negative of the correlation coefficient between
municipality-level and national-level ex post closeness of voting results in the era before pre-election polls were in-
troduced. Political homogeneity is a municipality’s historical tendency to produce outcomes distant from 50-50, as
measured by the average municipal-level margin of majority across all votes held in the era before pre-election polls
were introduced.




                                                                     40
F IGURE A.4: T HE E FFECT OF C LOSENESS ON T URNOUT BY M UNICIPALITY H OMOGENEITY,
             B EFORE AND A FTER THE I NTRODUCTION OF P OLLS
   70




                                                                   70
               Panel A: Votes Before Poll Era                             Panel B: Votes in Poll Era
   60




                                                                   60
Turnout




                                                                Turnout
  50




                                                                  50
   40




                                                                   40
   30




                                                                   30
          -2            -1             0            1       2             -2          -1           0            1     2
                         Ex Post Closeness (std.)                                    Ex Post Closeness (std.)


                                                            Slopes Before Poll Era         Slopes in Poll Era

                             Homogeneous Municipalities         0.786 (p = 0.612)             2.661 (p = 0.005)
                             Heterogeneous Municipalities       1.638 (p = 0.267)             2.585 (p = 0.005)

                             Differences within Era:            -0.852 (p = 0.005)            0.077 (p = 0.800)
                             Difference in Differences:                                       0.928 (p = 0.030)

Notes: Panel A shows binned scatter plots correlating municipality-level voter turnout and national-level ex post close-
ness, splitting the sample of municipalities above and below median political homogeneity, for 46 votes in the era
before pre-election polls were introduced. Panel B replicates Panel A for 69 votes in the era with pre-election polls.
Political homogeneity is a municipality’s historical tendency to produce outcomes distant from 50-50, as measured by
the average municipal-level margin of majority across all votes held in the era before pre-election polls. Estimates of
slope parameters as well as p-values associated with tests that (differences in) slopes equal zero are obtained from an
OLS regression using all 115 votes, with standard errors clustered at vote level.




                                                             41
    F IGURE A.5: P REDICTED P ROBABILITY OF A C LINTON V ICTORY B Y O UTLET S LANT


                       100
                                                                           HuffPost
    Predicted Chance of Clinton Victory (%)
                                  95




                                                   Daily Kos
           85         90




                                                               NY Times


                                                                                                          CNN
                       80




                                                                                                                           Fox News

                                              -6                      -4                      -2                   0   2
                                                                                      Political Leaning

                                                                               Observed               Linear Fit

  Notes: Estimated Probability of a Clinton victory in the 2016 Presidential Elections reported by media outlets
  on Election Day, plotted against the slant of the media outlet. Positive values of Political Leaning indicate
  pro-Trump bias. Media slant of outlets other than the Daily Kos is based on Pew data45 . Media slant of the
  Daily Kos is estimated using Quantcast46 , Fact Check / New York Times47 , Media Bias Fact Check48 , and Fake
  News Checker49 .




1 http://www.journalism.org/2014/10/21/political-polarization-media-habits/
2 https://www.quantcast.com/dailykos.com#demographicsCard
3 http://www.nytimes.com/2010/04/05/technology/05snopes.html
4 https://mediabiasfactcheck.com/daily-kos/
5 http://www.fakenewschecker.com/fake-news-source/daily-kos



                                                                                          42
                               TABLE A.1: L IST OF M OST I MPORTANT V OTES BY E LECTION D AY



     Date         Title                                                                           Turnout (%)   Yes (%)
     1981-06-14   Initiative for “Equal Rights of Men and Women”                                     33.95       60.27
     1981-11-29   Federal Decision on the Financial Order Improving the Federal Budget               30.35       68.95
     1982-06-06   Federal Penal Code (Violent Crime)                                                 35.19       63.71
     1982-11-28   Initiative for “Preventing Abusive Pricing”                                        32.93       57.94
     1983-02-27   Federal Decision on the Revision of Fuel Tariffs                                   32.42       52.69
     1983-12-04   Federal Decision on the Regulation of Citzenship in the Constitution               35.84       60.81
     1984-02-26   Initiative “for Civil Service Based on Factual Evidence”                           52.77       36.17
     1984-05-20   Initiative “against Bank Secrecy and the Power of Banks”                           42.52       26.96
     1984-09-23   Initiative “for a Safe, Economical and Eco-Friendly Energy”                        41.62       45.77
     1984-12-02   Initiative “for an Effective Protection of Motherhood”                             37.66       15.78
     1985-03-10   Initiative “for Extending Paid Holidays”                                           34.60       34.78
     1985-06-09   Initiative “for the Right to Life”                                                 35.72       30.96
43




     1985-09-22   Federal Decision on Risk Guarantees for Innovations in SMEs                        40.87       43.11
     1985-12-01   Initiative “for Abolishing Vivisection”                                            37.97       29.47
     1986-03-16   Federal Decision on the Accession to the United Nations                            50.71       24.33
     1986-09-28   Initiative “for Secured Vocational Education and Re-training”                      34.82       18.38
     1986-12-07   Initiative “for an Fair Levy on Heavy Traffic”                                     34.74       33.87
     1987-04-05   Initiative “for Referenda against Military Expenses”                               42.42       40.56
     1987-12-06   Federal Decision on “Railway 2000”                                                 47.70       56.99
     1988-06-12   Initiative “for Reducing the Retirement Age”                                       42.02       35.12
     1988-12-04   Initiative “against Land Speculation”                                              52.83       30.78
     1989-06-04   Initiative “for Natural Farming - against Animal Factories”                        35.96       48.95
     1989-11-26   Initiative “for Switzerland Without an Army and a Comprehensive Peace Policy”      69.19       35.59
     1990-04-01   Initiative “against Concrete - for Limiting Road Construction”                     41.13       28.51
     1990-09-23   Initiative “against Constructing New Nuclear Power Plants”                         40.44       54.52
     1991-03-03   Initiative “for Promoting Public Transport”                                        31.24       37.14
     1991-06-02   Federal Decision on Federal Budget Reform                                          33.27       45.65
     1992-02-16   Initiative “for the Drastic and Stepwise Limitation of Animal Experiments”         44.50       43.63
                                                                                                  Continued on next page
                                                                                                 Continued from previous page
     Date         Vote Title                                                                          Turnout (%)    Yes (%)
     1992-05-17   Initiative “against Abuses of Reproduction Technology and Genetic Engeneering”          39.18       73.83
     1992-09-27   Federal Decision on the New Railway Link through the Alps (NRLA)                        45.91       63.61
     1992-12-06   Federal Act on the Accession to the European Economic Area                              78.78       49.66
     1993-03-07   Initiative “for Abolishing Animal Experiments”                                          51.26       27.77
     1993-06-06   Initiative “for Switzerland without New Fighter Jets”                                   55.61       42.81
     1993-09-26   Federal Decision on Temporary Measures against Cost Increases in Health Care            39.80       80.55
     1993-11-28   Initiative “for Reducing Alcohol Problems”                                              45.51       25.26
     1994-02-20   Initiative “for Protecting the Alpine Region against Transit Traffic”                   40.86       51.91
     1994-06-12   Federal Decision on the Facilitated Naturalization for Young Foreign Nationals          46.78       52.84
     1994-09-25   Federal Penal Code and Military Penal Code (Racial Discrimination)                      45.93       54.65
     1994-12-04   Federal Act on Coercive Measures under the Law on Foreigners                            44.06       72.91
     1995-03-12   Federal Decision on Curbing Expenditures                                                37.88       83.38
     1995-06-25   Federal Act on Old Age Insurance                                                        40.45       60.71
     1996-03-10   Federal Decision Abolishing Cantonal Responsibility for the Equipment of Soldiers       31.04       43.70
44




     1996-06-09   Initiative “Farmers and Consumers - for a natural Agriculture” (counter-proposal)       31.44       77.59
     1996-12-01   Federal Act on Labor                                                                    46.76       32.97
     1997-06-08   Initiative “for a Ban on Exports of War Material”                                       35.50       22.50
     1997-09-28   Federal Decision on the Financing of the Unemployment Insurance                         40.65       49.18
     1998-06-07   Initiative “for Protecting Life and Environment from Genetic Engeneering”               41.35       33.29
     1998-09-27   Federal Act on Power-Dependent Levies on Heavy Traffic                                  51.85       57.20
     1998-11-29   Initiative “for a Reasonable Drug Policy”                                               38.39       26.01
     1999-02-07   Federal Decision on a Constitutional Article on Transplant Medicine                     38.01       87.77
     1999-04-18   Federal Decision on a New Constitution                                                  35.93       59.16
     1999-06-13   Federal Decision on Maternity Insurance                                                 45.98       38.99
     2000-03-12   Initiative “for Halving Motorised Traffic and Conserving Habitats”                      42.41       21.33
     2000-05-21   Federal Decision on Bilateral Treaties between Switzerland and the EU                   48.35       67.19
     2000-09-24   Initiative “for Regulating Immigration”                                                 45.31       36.20
     2000-11-26   Initiative “for Lower Hospital Costs”                                                   41.69       17.89
     2001-03-04   Initiative “Yes to Europe!”                                                             55.84       23.15
     2001-06-10   Federal Act on the Army and Military Administration (Armament)                          42.55       50.99
                                                                                                      Continued on next page
                                                                                              Continued from previous page
     Date         Vote Title                                                                       Turnout (%)    Yes (%)
     2001-12-02   Initiative “for a Credible Security Policy and Switzerland without an Army”          37.96       21.90
     2002-03-03   Initiative “for Accession to the UN”                                                 58.48       54.61
     2002-06-02   Federal Penal Code (Abortion)                                                        41.85       72.15
     2002-09-22   Initiative “Gold Reserves for the Old Age Insurance”                                 45.21       47.56
     2002-11-24   Initiative “against Abuse of Asylum”                                                 47.97       49.91
     2003-02-09   Federal Act on Adjusting Cantonal Contributions to Hospitals                         28.74       77.36
     2003-05-18   Initiative “Energy without Nuclear Power - For a Stepwise Phaseout”                  49.77       33.71
     2004-02-08   Initiative “Liefelong Custody for Untreatable, Extremely Dangerous Offenders”        45.54       56.19
     2004-05-16   Federal Act on Tax Refrom and Revision Stamp Duties                                  50.85       34.12
     2004-09-26   Federal Act on Compensation for Loss of Earings (Motherhood)                         53.82       55.45
     2004-11-28   Federal Act on Stem Cell Research                                                    37.04       66.39
     2005-06-05   Federal Decision on the Association to the EU Schengen-Dublin Agreements             56.64       54.63
     2005-09-25   Federal Decision Extending Free Movement of Persons to New EU Member States          54.29       55.98
     2005-11-27   Initiative “Initiative for GMO-Free Agriculture”                                     42.25       55.67
45




     2006-05-21   Federal Decision on Revising Constituional Provisions for Education                  27.80       85.58
     2006-09-24   Federal Act on Asylum                                                                48.92       67.76
     2006-11-26   Federal Act on Family Allowances                                                     45.01       67.98
     2007-03-11   Initiative “for a Unified Social Health Insurance”                                   45.94       28.76
     2007-06-17   Federal Act on Disability Insurance                                                  36.20       59.09
     2008-02-24   Federal Act on Corporate Tax Reform                                                  38.63       50.53
     2008-06-01   Initiative “for Democratic Naturalizations”                                          45.18       36.25
     2008-11-30   Initiative “for a Flexible Retirement Age”                                           47.67       41.38
     2009-02-08   Federal Decision Extending Free Movement of Persons to New EU Members                51.44       59.61
     2009-05-17   Initiative “Yes to Complementary Medicine” (counter-proposal)                        38.80       67.03
     2009-09-27   Federal Decision on Funding the Disability Insurance by Raising the VAT              41.01       54.56
     2009-11-29   Initiative “against the Construction of Minarets”                                    53.76       57.50
     2010-03-07   Federal Act on the Occupational Pension Scheme                                       45.75       27.27
     2010-09-26   Federal Act on the Unemployment Insurance                                            35.84       53.42
     2010-11-28   Initiative “for the Expulsion of Criminal Foreign Nationals”                         52.93       52.91
     2011-02-13   Initiative “for Protection against Armed Violence”                                   49.12       43.70
                                                                                                   Continued on next page
                                                                                                 Continued from previous page
     Date         Vote Title                                                                            Turnout (%)   Yes (%)
     2012-03-11   Initiative “Limiting the Construction of Second Homes”                                   45.18       50.63
     2012-06-17   Federal Act on Health Insurance (Managed Care)                                           38.65       23.95
     2012-09-23   Federal Decision on a Constitutional Article Promoting Music Lessons for the Young       42.42       72.69
     2012-11-25   Federal Act on Epizootic Diseases                                                        27.60       68.28
     2013-03-03   Initiative “against Rip-Off Salaries”                                                    46.74       67.96
     2013-06-09   Federal Act on Asylum                                                                    39.43       78.45
     2013-09-22   Initiative “Repealing Compulsory Military Service”                                       46.89       26.79
     2013-11-24   Federal Act on Tolls for the Use of National Roads                                       53.61       39.54
     2014-02-09   Initiative “against Mass Immigration”                                                    56.57       50.33
     2014-05-18   Initiative “for Protecting Fair Wages (Minimum Wage Initative)”                          56.36       23.73
     2014-09-28   Initiative “for a Public Health Insurance”                                               47.18       38.16
     2014-11-30   Initiative “Stop Overpopulation - for Securing Natural Life Resources”                   49.98       25.90
     2015-03-08   Initiative “for an Energy Tax Instaed of the Value Added Tax”                            42.06        8.03
     2015-06-14   Initiative “for Bequest Taxes on the Wealthy for Funding the Old Age Insurance”          43.71       28.96
46




     2016-02-28   Initiative “for Enforcing the Expulsion of Criminal Foreign Nationals”                   63.73       41.15
     2016-06-05   Federal Act on Asylum                                                                    46.79       66.78
     2016-09-25   Initiative “for a Stronger Old Age Insurance”                                            43.13       40.60
     2016-11-27   Initiative “for a Structured Nuclear Phaseout”                                           45.38       45.80
     2017-02-12   Federal Decision on Facilitaed Naturalization of Third Generation Foreign Nationals      46.84       60.41
     2017-05-21   Federal Act on Energy                                                                    42.89       58.22
     2017-09-24   Federal Act on the Old Age Insurance Reform 2020                                         47.39       47.31
     2018-03-04   Initiative “for Abolishing Radio and Television Fees”                                    54.84       28.44
     2018-06-10   Initiative “for Crisis-Proof Money: Money Creation Only by the Central Bank”             34.55       24.28
     2018-09-23   Initiative “for Healthy, Environmentally Friendly and Fair Food”                         37.52       38.70
     2018-11-25   Federal Act on Social Insurance                                                          48.38       64.72
     2019-02-10   Initiative “against Urban Sprawling - for a Sustainable Settlement Development”          37.92       36.34
     2019-05-19   Federal Act on Tax Reform and Funding for Old Age Insurance                              43.74       66.38
TABLE A.2: L IST OF N EWSPAPERS C ONSULTED FOR P OLL C OVERAGE AND P OLITICAL A DS

                                                                   # of cantons for which it
  Newspaper                                             Language         has been used
  Aargauer Zeitung                                      German                 1
  Badener Woche                                         German                 1
  Basellandschaftl. Ztg.                                German                 1
  Basler Zeitung                                        German                 2
  Berner Zeitung                                        German                 2
  Blick                                                 German                20
  Blick am Abend                                        German                15
  Bund                                                  German                1
  Büwo                                                 German                1
  Caffè della domenica (Il)                             Italian               1
  Corriere del Ticino                                    Italian               1
  Côte (La)                                            French                1
  Engadiner Post                                        German                 1
  (L’)Express (aggregated with L’Impartial)             French                 1
  Freiburger Nachrichten                                German                 1
  Giornale del Popolo                                    Italian               1
  Gruyère (La)                                         French                 1
  Liberté (La)                                         French                1
  Matin (Le)                                            French                 6
  Matin Dimanche (Le)                                   French                 6
  Matin Bleu (Le)                                       French                 6
  Mattino della Domenica (Il)                            Italian               1
  Neue Luzerner Zeitung GES (sometimes aggre-           German                6
  gated with: Neue Nidwaldner Zeitung; Neue Obwaldner
  Zeitung; Neue Schwyzer Zeitung; Neue Urner Zeitung;
  Neue Zuger Zeitung)
  Nouvelliste (Le)                                      French                 1
  NZZ                                                   German                 3
  NZZ am Sonntag                                        German                14
  Ostschweiz am Sonntag                                 German                 4
  Quotidien Jurassien (Le)                              French                 1
  Regione Ticino (La)                                    Italian               1
  Rheinzeitung                                          German                 2
  Schaffhauser Nachrichten                              German                 1
  Sonntag (Schweiz am Sonntag from 2013)                German                 5
  Sonntags Blick                                        German                21
  Sonntags Zeitung                                      German                19
  St. Galler Tagblatt (sometimes aggregated with: Ap-   German                5
  penzeller Zeitung)
  Südostschweiz GES (Die)                              German                4
  Südostschweiz am Sonntag                             German                1
                                                                     Continued on next page


                                               47
                                        Continued from previous page
                                            # of cantons for which it
Newspaper                        Language         has been used
Tages-Anzeiger                   German                7
Temps (Le)                       French                2
Thurgauer Zeitung                German                 1
Tribune de Genève               French                1
Walliser Bote                    German                1
Wiler Zeitung                    German                1
Zentralschweiz am Sonntag        German                5
Zuger Woche                      German                1
Zürichsee Zeitung               German                1
20 Minuten                       German                19
20 Minutes                       French                6
20 Minuti                         Italian              1
24 Heures                        French                1




                            48
TABLE A.3: D AILY T URNOUT B EFORE AND A FTER P OLL R ELEASE D EPENDING ON P OLL C LOSENESS : S INGLE D AYS

                                                              Net Turnout (%)           Turnout / All Voters (%)             Log(Turnout)
                                                               (1)       (2)              (3)          (4)                   (5)      (6)
 5 days before poll × Ex Ante Closeness (std.)               0.0429       -0.0154      -0.0614           -0.1186           0.0973       0.0767
                                                            (0.3879)      (0.3902)     (0.3580)          (0.3583)         (0.2203)     (0.2239)
 4 days before poll × Ex Ante Closeness (std.)               0.0288       -0.0684      -0.0571           -0.1431           0.0031      -0.0324
                                                            (0.3348)      (0.3300)     (0.3053)          (0.2981)         (0.1592)     (0.1532)
 3 days before poll × Ex Ante Closeness (std.)               0.1241        0.0278       0.0562           -0.0381          -0.0147      -0.0390
                                                            (0.2872)      (0.2920)     (0.2676)          (0.2703)         (0.1437)     (0.1464)
 2 days before poll × Ex Ante Closeness (std.)               0.0579        0.0864       0.0003            0.0241          -0.0051       0.0057
                                                            (0.2775)      (0.2860)     (0.2526)          (0.2593)         (0.1144)     (0.1186)
 1 day before poll × Ex Ante Closeness (std.)               -0.0667       -0.0591      -0.0712           -0.0658           0.0088       0.0142
                                                            (0.1841)      (0.1900)     (0.1496)          (0.1532)         (0.0542)     (0.0560)
 1 day after poll × Ex Ante Closeness (std.)                0.3926∗∗     0.3731∗∗      0.3088∗∗         0.2931∗∗          0.1131∗      0.1101∗
                                                            (0.1743)     (0.1753)      (0.1343)         (0.1352)          (0.0588)     (0.0602)
 2 days after poll × Ex Ante Closeness (std.)               0.3534∗∗      0.3289∗       0.2422            0.2267         0.1218∗∗      0.1162∗∗
                                                            (0.1741)      (0.1770)     (0.1457)          (0.1502)        (0.0560)      (0.0572)
 3 days after poll × Ex Ante Closeness (std.)               0.4253∗∗     0.4438∗∗      0.2853∗           0.2998∗          0.1048∗      0.1120∗
                                                            (0.2052)     (0.2107)      (0.1652)          (0.1696)         (0.0594)     (0.0623)
 4 days after poll × Ex Ante Closeness (std.)                0.2247        0.1996       0.1279            0.1117           0.0777       0.0770
                                                            (0.2619)      (0.2707)     (0.2319)          (0.2421)         (0.0774)     (0.0813)
 5 days after poll × Ex Ante Closeness (std.)                0.3014        0.3219       0.1654            0.1799           0.0946       0.1024
                                                            (0.2061)      (0.2111)     (0.1801)          (0.1852)         (0.0636)     (0.0660)
 6 days after poll × Ex Ante Closeness (std.)                0.0805        0.0773       0.0168            0.0152           0.0678       0.0693
                                                            (0.3072)      (0.3103)     (0.2463)          (0.2515)         (0.0751)     (0.0779)
 7 days after poll × Ex Ante Closeness (std.)                0.3365        0.3503       0.1722            0.1840           0.1037       0.1097
                                                            (0.3158)      (0.3220)     (0.2605)          (0.2665)         (0.0854)     (0.0883)
 8 days after poll × Ex Ante Closeness (std.)                0.0594        0.0551       0.0115            0.0102           0.0574       0.0604
                                                            (0.3561)      (0.3562)     (0.2625)          (0.2645)         (0.0818)     (0.0839)
 9 days after poll × Ex Ante Closeness (std.)                0.4430        0.4018       0.2324            0.2071           0.1135       0.1109
                                                            (0.3354)      (0.3303)     (0.2468)          (0.2477)         (0.0797)     (0.0816)
 R-squared                                                   0.488          0.511        0.300            0.330            0.235         0.258
 Observations                                                 757            757          757              757              757           757
 Vote Fixed Effects                                            Y              Y            Y                Y                Y             Y
 Voting Day from/to Poll Fixed Effects                         Y              Y            Y                Y                Y             Y
 Day to Vote Fixed Effects                                     N              Y            N                Y                N             Y
 Notes: The table presents OLS estimates with three measures of daily turnout in Geneva as dependent variables: Net Turnout (columns 1
and 2) defined as the number of votes cast, in percent of eligible voters net of those voters who cast their vote on earlier days; Turnout / All
Voters (columns 3 and 4) defined as the number of votes cast, in percent of all eligible voters; Log(Turnout) (columns 5 and 6) defined as the
natural logarithm of the number of votes cast. Ex Ante Closeness is the losing side’s vote share predicted by the pre-election poll whose release
date is the omitted day of reference. The sample is an unbalanced panel of 52 votes held between 2001 and 2019 observed from 5 voting days
before to 9 voting days after poll release. Standard errors in parentheses, clustered at the vote level: ∗ p < 0.10, ∗∗ p < 0.05, ∗∗∗ p < 0.01.




                                                                       49
         TABLE A.4: D AILY T URNOUT B EFORE AND A FTER P OLL R ELEASE D EPENDING ON P OLL C LOSENESS : B INS OF T WO D AYS

                                                                        Net Turnout (%)               Turnout / All Voters (%)                 Log(Turnout)
                                                                        (1)         (2)                 (3)            (4)                     (5)       (6)
      4-5 days before poll × Ex Ante Closeness (std.)                 0.0690         -0.0126         -0.0237             -0.0978             0.0451         0.0145
                                                                     (0.2808)        (0.2766)        (0.2638)            (0.2574)           (0.1618)       (0.1584)
      2-3 days before poll × Ex Ante Closeness (std.)                 0.1243          0.0873          0.0638              0.0266            -0.0143        -0.0231
                                                                     (0.2085)        (0.2111)        (0.2005)            (0.2025)           (0.1124)       (0.1148)
      1-2 days after poll × Ex Ante Closeness (std.)                 0.4063∗∗∗       0.3806∗∗∗       0.3111∗∗∗          0.2929∗∗∗          0.1130∗∗∗       0.1061∗∗
                                                                      (0.1440)        (0.1417)        (0.1054)           (0.1044)           (0.0412)       (0.0403)
      3-4 days after poll × Ex Ante Closeness (std.)                 0.3584∗∗        0.3512∗∗        0.2422∗             0.2387∗            0.0868∗        0.0875∗
                                                                     (0.1422)        (0.1457)        (0.1285)            (0.1335)           (0.0434)       (0.0459)
50




      5-6 days after poll × Ex Ante Closeness (std.)                  0.2243          0.2292          0.1267              0.1305             0.0768         0.0789
                                                                     (0.1853)        (0.1856)        (0.1556)            (0.1580)           (0.0468)       (0.0484)
      7-9 days after poll × Ex Ante Closeness (std.)                  0.3088          0.2952          0.1719              0.1648             0.0866         0.0862
                                                                     (0.2630)        (0.2638)        (0.2003)            (0.2028)           (0.0597)       (0.0615)
      R-squared                                                        0.486           0.509           0.298              0.327              0.233           0.256
      Observations                                                      757             757             757                757                757             757
      Vote Fixed Effects                                                 Y               Y               Y                  Y                  Y               Y
      Voting Day from/to Poll Fixed Effects                              Y               Y               Y                  Y                  Y               Y
      Day to Vote Fixed Effects                                          N               Y               N                  Y                  N               Y
      Notes: The table presents OLS estimates with three measures of daily turnout in Geneva as dependent variables: Net Turnout (columns 1 and 2) defined as
     the number of votes cast, in percent of eligible voters net of those voters who cast their vote on earlier days; Turnout / All Voters (columns 3 and 4) defined as
     the number of votes cast, in percent of all eligible voters; Log(Turnout) (columns 5 and 6) defined as the natural logarithm of the number of votes cast. Ex Ante
     Closeness is the losing side’s vote share predicted by the pre-election poll whose release date (and the preceding day) are the omitted days of reference. The
     sample is an unbalanced panel of 52 votes held between 2001 and 2019 observed from 5 voting days before to 9 voting days after poll release. Standard errors
     in parentheses, clustered at the vote level: ∗ p < 0.10, ∗∗ p < 0.05, ∗∗∗ p < 0.01.
TABLE A.5: H ETEROGENEOUS E FFECTS OF E LECTION C LOSENESS AND P OLLS D EPENDING ON
           M UNICIPALITY P OLITICAL H OMOGENEITY

                                                                                        (1)                    (2)
 Ex Post Closeness (std.) × Homogeneity (std.)                                     -0.5674∗∗∗              -0.5659∗∗∗
                                                                                    (0.1900)                (0.1904)
 Ex Post Closeness (std.) × Homogeneity (std.) × Poll Era                           0.5874∗∗                0.5822∗∗
                                                                                    (0.2631)                (0.2630)
 Homogeneity (std.) × Poll Era                                                      2.3689∗∗∗              2.3936∗∗∗
                                                                                     (0.2319)               (0.2319)
 Test for Convergence (p-value)                                                       0.913                   0.928
 R-squared                                                                            0.700                   0.700
 Observations                                                                        250240                  250240
 Municipality Fixed Effects                                                             Y                       Y
 Vote Fixed Effects                                                                     Y                       Y
 Electorate Size                                                                        N                       Y
 Notes: Each column presents results from an OLS regression with municipality-level voter turnout as the dependent
variable. Political Homogeneity is a municipalitiy’s historical tendency to produce voting results distant from 50-50, as
measured by the average municipal-level margin of majority across all votes held in the era before pre-election polls.
Poll Era is a dummy equal to 1 for 69 votes held after the introduction of polls in 1998. Test for Convergence reports
the p-value of an F-test that the sum of the coefficients on Ex Post Closeness (std.) × Homogeneity (std.) and Ex Post
Closeness (std.) × Homogeneity (std.) × Poll Era (std.) equals 0. Column 2 controls for a triple interaction among
Ex Post Closeness, Poll Era and the standardized average municipality electorate size, as well as all lower order terms.
The sample is a balanced panel of 2176 municipalities observed in 115 votes held from 1981 to 2019. Standard errors
clustered at the vote level in parentheses: ∗ p < 0.10, ∗∗ p < 0.05, ∗∗∗ p < 0.01 .




                                                           51
                                      TABLE A.6: N EWSPAPER C OVERAGE , C LOSENESS AND C ANTONAL V OTER T URNOUT: IV E STIMATES

                                                                                                                        First Stage                                              Second Stage
                                                                                           (1)                                         (2)                                            (3)
                                                                                    Poll Mentions (std.)         Poll Mentions (std.) × Ex Ante Closeness (std.)                   Turnout
       Incidental Poll Mentions (std.) × Ex Ante Closeness (std.)                           0.0231                                      0.3880∗∗∗
                                                                                           (0.0392)                                      (0.0433)
       Incidental Poll Mentions (std.)                                                    0.7351∗∗∗                                      0.1020∗
                                                                                           (0.0397)                                      (0.0578)
       Poll Mentions (std.) × Ex Ante Closeness (std.)                                                                                                                              0.9789∗∗
                                                                                                                                                                                    (0.4790)
       Poll Mentions (std.)                                                                                                                                                         -0.2472
                                                                                                                                                                                    (0.3788)
      R-squared                                                                             0.866                                          0.699                                      0.819
      Observations                                                                           962                                            962                                        962
      Test Joint Significance Excluded Instruments                                       p < 0.0001                                    p < 0.0001
      Test β (Incidental Poll Mentions) ≥ 1                                              p < 0.0001
      Notes: The table presents two-stage least squares estimates using Incidental Poll Mentions as an instrument for Poll Mentions in cantonal newspapers. Columns 1 and 2 show the two
52




     first-stage estimates. Column 3 shows estimates of the second stage. All specifications include canton and vote fixed effects. The sample is a balanced panel of 26 cantons observed in 37 votes
     held between 2000 and 2014. Standard errors in parentheses, clustered at the vote level: ∗ p < 0.10, ∗∗ p < 0.05, ∗∗∗ p < 0.01.
