                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




      THE VALUE OF MANDATING MATERNAL EDUCATION IN A DEVELOPING
                              COUNTRY

                                        Bahadir Dursun
                                          Resul Cesur
                                       Inas Rashad Kelly

                                      Working Paper 23492
                              http://www.nber.org/papers/w23492


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     June 2017




We thank Jorge M. Agüero, Dhaval M. Dave, Michael Grossman, Adalet Keskin, Naci Mocan,
Prakarsh Singh, Erdal Tekin, Jennifer M. Trudeau, seminar participants at the Southern Economic
Association 2016 Meeting, 2016 Development Economics Conference at Fordham University,
Eastern Economic Association 2017 Meeting, Auburn University, University of Southern
Mississippi, CBRT, Koc University, Sabanci University, University of South Florida, Texas
A&M University, San Antonio, and RAND for their valuable comments and suggestions. We are
grateful to Şebnem Beşe Canpolat and the Demographic Statistics Department of Turkish
Statistical Institute for their assistance with respect to the Population and Housing Census 2011
data. The authors thank Dr. Emel Ergün Seyit for providing insights about the collection of birth
outcomes data at the Family Health Centers in Turkey. All remaining errors are our own. The
views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the
National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2017 by Bahadir Dursun, Resul Cesur, and Inas Rashad Kelly. All rights reserved. Short
sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission
provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
The Value of Mandating Maternal Education in a Developing Country
Bahadir Dursun, Resul Cesur, and Inas Rashad Kelly
NBER Working Paper No. 23492
June 2017
JEL No. I12,I21,I26,J13

                                           ABSTRACT

While several studies estimate the impact of maternal education on birth weight and child
mortality using quasi-experimental identification strategies in developing countries, the state of
the literature on the causal relationship between maternal education and child health is far from
being complete:(i) the extant literature offers conflicting findings; (ii) the local average treatment
effects of maternal education, induced by different types of natural experiments, on child health
are not well-distinguished; and (iii) many of the existing articles are undermined by limited
statistical power due to small sample sizes and/or a weak first stage. To fill the void in the
literature, we examine the impact of mother’s extended primary schooling on birth outcomes and
child mortality using two large data sets from the Republic of Turkey. We use the 1997 education
reform, which extended the duration of mandatory schooling from 5 to 8 years, to address the
endogeneity of maternal education to children’s outcomes. A unique feature of the schooling
reform of 1997 is that, in a developing country, it arguably provides one of the most suitable
empirical frameworks to identify the local average treatment effect of compulsory education
among women with a low tendency to extend their schooling beyond five years of elementary
school. Results show that an increase in mother’s schooling improves child health at birth (such
as through a reduction in the likelihood of low birth weight and premature births) and lowers
child mortality. Moreover, it improves outcomes pertaining to method of birth delivery and
maternal smoking. These findings survive a number of sensitivity tests. The current study
provides robust evidence in favor of the argument that increasing the duration of mandatory
primary education among women who have a low interest in receiving more schooling may have
substantial non-pecuniary benefits in terms of the health of the offspring in developing countries.

Bahadir Dursun                                    Inas Rashad Kelly
Department of Economics                           Queens College, CUNY
Louisiana State University                        Economics Department
2326A BEC                                         300 Powdermaker Hall
Baton Rouge, LA 70803                             65-30 Kissena Boulevard
odursu2@lsu.edu                                   Flushing, NY 11367
                                                  and NBER
Resul Cesur                                       Inas.Kelly@qc.cuny.edu
University of Connecticut
School of Business
2100 Hillside Road
Storrs, CT 06269
and NBER
cesur@uconn.edu
I. INTRODUCTION

Exploiting different natural experiments, a number of studies have analyzed the causal effect of maternal

education on child outcomes in developing countries. The literature thus far, though, has provided

incomplete evidence on the impact of mother’s schooling on offspring’s health in terms of infant health at

birth and child mortality. Although there is research showing that maternal education has a favorable

impact on child health (Breierova and Duflo 2004; Chou et al. 2010; Grépin and Bharadwaj 2015; Günes

2015; Makate and Makate 2016), there is also evidence suggesting that mother’s schooling has little effect

on birth outcomes and infant mortality (Keats 2014; Zhang 2014).1

        Aside from the non-uniformity on whether parental schooling causally impacts health outcomes

of children, existing literature offers fairly limited information on specific policy implications of the local

average treatment effects (LATE) of alternative education reforms among different types of populations.

For instance, some natural experiments enable researchers to tease out the impact of increased educational

attainment among people with a high interest in receiving more education (such as through increased

school availability and/or the elimination of school fees when those who desire to attend school cannot

afford it). Conversely, exogenous variation in education induced by compulsory schooling laws allows

one to examine the impact of education among those with a low tendency to obtain additional years of

schooling. Given that many developing nations have weakly enforced compulsory schooling laws and

usually require relatively few years of education (UN 2015), separating the impact of extra schooling

among individuals with a low tendency to attend school from that of increases in educational attainment

of those with a greater propensity to get education may have important policy implications.

        Additionally, most studies coming from developing countries are hindered by limited statistical

power due to small sample sizes and/or a lack of strong instrumental variables to predict statistically and




1
 Research focused on affluent societies also offers conflicting evidence on whether maternal education causally
impacts child health. While some studies document that maternal education improves child health (Currie and
Moretti 2003; Grytten, Skau, and Sørensen 2014), a handful of others (Lindeboom, Llena-Nozal, and van der
Klaauw 2009; McCrary and Royer 2011) do not find a statistically significant relationship between the two.


                                                                                                                  1
economically significant changes in schooling. Hence, the current incomplete state of the literature on

maternal education and child health warrants more research (Grossman 2015).

        Using two large data sets from the Republic of Turkey, the current study examines the causal

effect of mandatory maternal education on birth outcomes and child mortality by utilizing the 1997

education reform, which extended the duration of minimum years of compulsory schooling from 5 to 8

years, as the source of exogenous variation in mother’s education. Our analysis exploits the fact that those

born after 1986 are bound by the 1997 schooling law to acquire at least eight years of basic education.

Thus, we use exposure to the reform as an instrumental variable to estimate the impact of mother’s

likelihood of holding at least a middle school diploma on birth outcomes and child mortality.

        The 1997 compulsory schooling reform, for the most part, caused an increase in the educational

attainment of girls with a relatively low interest in attending middle school because of a high degree of

stigma associated with female schooling in Turkey (Dulger 2004). Although Turkey was classified as a

middle-income country during the 1990s, gender inequality in education was exceptionally high, with

women lagging behind men in education (Otaran et al. 2003). As we later discuss in greater detail, for a

developing country, this aspect of the 1997 education reform makes it one of the rare cases where one can

examine what happens when the government forces girls to obtain extra schooling at the lower tail of the

educational attainment distribution.

        Child health outcomes analyzed in this paper include very low birth weight (< 1500 grams), low

birth weight (< 2500 grams), and high birth weight (> 4500 grams); child mortality (deceased before age

five); gestation; and premature birth (gestation < 37 weeks). In addition, maternal outcomes analyzed

include the method of birth delivery and propensity to smoke. Results indicate that mothers who

completed at least eight years of schooling are less likely to deliver babies with very low birth weight,

low birth weight, and high birth weight, and they are less likely to have a child deceased before age five.

Furthermore, obtaining at least a middle school degree extends gestational age and lowers the propensity

of delivering premature babies. Lastly, we also find evidence suggesting that additional education,




                                                                                                              2
through exposure to the reform, increases the likelihood of a vaginal delivery and lowers maternal

smoking.

        This research contributes to the maternal education and child health literature in developing

countries in a number of ways. First, our findings provide robust evidence in favor of the view that

maternal education improves child health. Second, these results support the argument that mandated

education may be instrumental in improving public health in developing countries. Thus, in addition to

increasing resources for primary and secondary education in developing societies, enacting compulsory

schooling laws, which require a minimum number of years of completed schooling, and enforcing them to

increase educational attainment of females with a low interest in attending school may have significant

benefits in terms of children’s health. We also show evidence that without a sufficiently large sample, the

instrumental variable estimates of the impact of the treatment variable (e.g., maternal education) on

outcome measures (such as child health at birth and child mortality) may be biased when (i) only a

relatively small fraction of those in the treatment group are impacted by the instrumental variable at hand,

and (ii) the mean of the dependent variable is fairly small.

        The rest of the article is organized as follows. The next section describes the 1997 education

reform. Section III discusses the conceptual framework and reviews the relevant literature. Section IV

presents the data and measures. In Section V, the econometric methodology is laid out. Section VI

displays the main estimates. Section VII performs robustness checks, explores potential heterogeneity,

and implements a two-sample instrumental variable estimation strategy for birth outcomes. Section VIII

examines the impact of additional education on maternal behaviors. Finally, Section IX concludes.



II. IDENTIFICATION: THE 1997 EDUCATION REFORM

Until mid-1990s, the Turkish primary and secondary education system was comprised of three stages:

elementary school (5 years), junior high school (3 years), and high school (3 years). Of these, completing

the first stage (i.e., 5-year elementary school) was compulsory, and whether a child continues schooling

after earning an elementary school diploma was left to the discretion of families. Non-compliance is


                                                                                                           3
subject to monetary fines in Turkey even though they are not always strictly imposed, and with the

exception of books, supplies, school uniforms, and commuting costs, all public primary and secondary

schools are free of charge in Turkey.2

        In 1997, the Turkish Parliament increased the duration of compulsory schooling from 5 to 8

years. Known as the “eight-year uninterrupted education reform,” law number 4306 required children to

continue primary schooling until earning a middle school degree, which corresponds to at least 8 years of

schooling (Dulger 2004). Chief motivators behind the enactment of the 1997 education reform were the

efforts towards endorsing Turkey’s accession to the European Union and curbing the rise of Political

Islam.3 The reform became effective in the 1998-99 academic year, combining the first two stages (i.e.,

elementary and lower secondary) of schooling under the umbrella of Primary School (İlköğretim Okulu).

The new legislation meant that children who completed fifth grade in 1998 were obliged to continue their

education until they earned a middle school degree. In other words, those who started elementary school

in the 1993-94 academic year were the first cohort to be impacted by the law (Dursun and Cesur 2016).

Because the Turkish law allows pupils who are 72 months old by the end of the calendar year to begin

elementary schooling in the corresponding academic year (Dinçer, Kaushal, and Grossman 2014),

children who were born in 1987 constitute the first fully affected birth cohort.4 Note that as parents (and

school administrators) can exert a considerable degree of discretion with respect to school starting age,

some children can start elementary school a year earlier than their own birth cohort and vice versa (Torun

2015). Therefore, while the majority of children born in 1986 were likely to start elementary school in

1992 and not bound by the reform, some of them possibly delayed it to 1993 and were impacted by the

reform. This aspect of the education system in Turkey imposes some ambiguity with respect to whether

children born in 1986 were affected by the compulsory schooling reform of 1997. Therefore, following

the approach taken by Battistin et al. (2009), Cesur and Mocan (2013), Fort, Schneeweis, and Winter-

2
  See http://spm.ku.edu.tr/wp-content/uploads/pdf/okulterk.pdf and http://mevzuat.meb.gov.tr/html/24.html for more
detail.
3
  See Cakir, Bozan, and Talu (2004) and Cesur and Mocan (2013) for a detailed discussion of the political
developments leading to the legislation of the 1997 education reform.
4
  Resmi Gazete; Friday, 7 August 1992, Section 14.


                                                                                                                 4
Ebmer (2016), and Dursun and Cesur (2016) in examining the implications of similar schooling reforms,

including the current one, we exclude the 1986 birth cohort from our main analysis to get a handle around

this issue.5

           Importantly, the reform mainly focused on increasing educational attainment and made no

curricular or compositional changes (Dulger 2004). Therefore, our identification strategy relies on the

following assumption: Once the trends at the birth cohort level are accounted for, those born before 1986

should constitute an ideal comparison group for individuals who were born after 1986. This type of an

instrumental variable is consistent with the fuzzy regression discontinuity design (Oreopoulos 2006; Lee

and Lemieux 2010; Brunello, Fabbri, and Fort 2013; Clark and Royer 2013).

           To supplement the mandate of the reform, which aimed to increase enrollment especially among

females, the Ministry of Education made a number of changes, including adding new classrooms to

existing schools, hiring new teachers, incorporating a bus system to carry students from rural areas to

urban schools, reorganizing the geographic distribution of public schools, and providing free books and

lunch to poor children (Turkish Ministry of National Education (MONE) 2001; Dulger 2004). Notably,

the reform increased classroom capacity at existing schools as opposed to constructing new schools in

different localities. As shown in Appendix Table 1, the total number of Primary Schools, which were

established after the reform by uniting the Elementary and Middle Schools, is lower than the number of

Elementary Schools prior to the enactment of the 1997 education reform. This is because the classroom

capacity of urban public schools was extended at the expense of closed elementary schools in rural areas

(Dulger 2004). In addition, in a number of rural areas, schools were consolidated into a single school for

clusters of villages (Dulger 2004). To compensate for school closures in non-urban areas, children in

villages without Primary Schools were transported by bus to the nearest available school; hence, the

number of students who were bussed increased significantly shortly after the reform (Erçelebi 2000;

Dulger 2004). Lastly, in central locations, the capacity of boarding schools was expanded after the reform

to catch up with increased enrollment (Dulger 2004; World Bank 2005). Consequently, as shown in

5
    However, including the 1986 cohort in the analysis sample has no bearing on our estimates.


                                                                                                             5
Appendix Figure 1, trends in the percent of women holding at least a middle school degree exhibited a

secular jump among women who were bound by the reform.6

         Predictably, using the “eight-year uninterrupted education reform” as the source of identifying

variation, a number of studies have examined the causal impact of extended primary schooling on

different outcomes, including earnings, subjective well-being, religiosity, marital status, fertility, health

outcomes, gender gap in educational attainment, and domestic violence (Cesur, Dursun, and Mocan 2014;

Mocan 2014; Dinçer, Kaushal, and Grossman 2014; Güneş 2015, 2016; Torun 2015; Dursun and Cesur

2016; Erten and Keskin forthcoming).

         Secondary school attainment could have increased after the 1997 education reform among two

different types of female populations: (i) girls with a fairly low interest in receiving more education may

have increased their educational attainment due to the mandate of the reform; and (ii) those with a high

zeal to attend middle school could have enrolled in a school because of increased school availability

and/or reduction in cost of education.7 Even before the reform, school availability was not an obstacle to

enrollment in urban areas because nearly all urban localities had a middle school (according to the

Ministry of National Education Yearbooks 1991-92 to 1997-98), and no student could be denied

enrollment (Turkish Constitution Article 42, and Ministry of National Education Legislation).8 As we

discussed above, the geographical convenience of schools did not increase due to the 1997 reform. On the

contrary, schools became more concentrated after the reform and students were transported from rural

areas to the nearest schools using the bussing system, and the capacity of boarding schools in central areas


6
  As the focus of the current study is examining the impact of maternal education on child health, we display the
trends in educational attainment of women who gave birth to at least one child. However, using different data sets, a
number of studies show that the 1997 compulsory schooling reform caused a significant increase in the lower
secondary schooling of both men and women in all parts of the country regardless of urban versus rural residential
status or of birth of children (Cesur and Mocan 2013; Mocan 2014; Torun 2015; Dursun and Cesur 2016).
7
  Note that the decision to attend middle school upon completing a five-year elementary school degree is made when
the child is 11 years old. Hence, while in some cases the decision surrounding whether to attend middle school may
be solely decided by the child, families play a major role in the schooling decision of their children. However, for
ease of expression, children’s propensity to attend middle school is used interchangeably (and/or jointly) with the
interest of their families.
8
  While we acknowledge the possibility that in some cases a student might have been denied enrollment due to
classroom capacity constraints, it was extremely rare and temporary even before the 1997 education reform was in
effect.


                                                                                                                   6
was expanded to compensate for school closures and accommodate increased enrollment. Therefore,

investments in school capacity did not improve the convenience of attending nearby schools. However,

the school bus system and boarding schools could have lowered the cost of commuting to schools for

students residing in rural areas.

        All in all, the 1997 education reform targeted those with a low propensity to attend middle school,

especially among females (Dulger 2004; Mocan 2014). As supported by the available evidence, we argue

that even for those living in rural areas, the schooling mandate played a much bigger role in increasing

educational attainment. To begin with, the reform had a greater impact on female education compared to

that of males (Mocan 2014; Torun 2015; Dursun and Cesur 2016). It is well known that there has been a

considerably high degree of stigma attached to girls attending secondary schools in Turkey (TDHS 1998;

Aytaç and Rankin 2004; Rankin and Aytaç 2006; Unicef 2007). If there is stigma pertaining to female

schooling, it stands to reason that girls are less likely to continue their education upon earning a five-year

elementary school diploma in the absence of mandatory schooling; thus, the enactment of a compulsory

education law may have a larger impact on female schooling. Therefore, the differential positive effect of

the reform on male and female schooling (in favor of women) supports the view that the compulsory

nature of the reform played a key role in increasing educational attainment. To gain further insight into

the reasons for why females did not pursue secondary schooling prior to the 1997 education reform, we

use data from the Turkish Demographic and Health Surveys (TDHS) collected in 1998. Specifically,

among those who earned at least a primary school diploma (i.e., a minimum of 5 years of schooling),

TDHS 1998 asks ever married women between the ages 15 to 24 (i.e., born between 1974 and 1983) why

they quit or did not attend school at all. As these women are only a few years older than the ones who

were bound by the 1997 education reform, knowing why they stopped attending school after receiving

five years of basic education can provide helpful information on how the 1997 education reform induced

females to obtain more schooling. Results, presented in Appendix Table 2, show that a sizable 40 percent

of women who dropped out of or did not go to middle school at all declared that their family did not allow

them to continue their education, and roughly 20 percent reported that they did not like school or could


                                                                                                             7
not pass the exams. On the other hand, 5.5 and 5.6 percent of them attribute it to the lack of a suitable

nearby educational institution and not being able to afford school expenses, respectively. Moreover, only

1.4 and 1.6 percent declared that they needed to earn money and help their families, in that order.

           Therefore, we conclude that the mandate of the law was the major reason behind the jump in

educational attainment due to the 1997 compulsory schooling reform while we acknowledge that we

cannot fully dismiss the potential role of a reduction in the cost of attending school. This particular

property of the natural experiment at hand has a major implication. That is, the LATE obtained from this

policy change primarily corresponds to the impact of extended primary education among individuals with

a low tendency to continue their schooling beyond five years of basic education. To the extent of our

knowledge, this aspect of the “eight-year uninterrupted education reform” makes it the closest natural

experiment that approximates the impact of compulsory schooling among women with a relatively low

interest in receiving additional education in a developing country. All other reforms in developing

countries that have been utilized in the literature either enable researchers to estimate the impact of extra

schooling among those who desire to receive more education (Indonesia 1973-78, China 1977-83,

Zimbabwe 1980, Malawi 1994, Uganda 1997) or allow one to study the joint effect of extended schooling

among those with a high interest in more education in combination with a compulsory schooling reform

(Taiwan 1968). Thus, knowledge gained from this reform may have important policy implications for

other developing societies that consider increasing the duration of mandatory schooling.



III. BACKGROUND

A large body of literature documents that educated individuals are found to be healthier.9 In addition to

an individual’s own schooling, parental education, particularly that of the mother’s, has been shown to be

a strong predictor of health outcomes (Currie et al. 2010). From a theoretical standpoint, parental

education may impact child health via different mechanisms, including productive and allocative

efficiency (Grossman 1972; Kenkel 1991), income and occupation (Card 2001; Oreopoulos 2006),

9
    See Grossman (2006) for a nice overview of this literature.


                                                                                                                8
assortative mating (Behrman and Rosenzweig 2002), and time preferences (Becker and Mulligan 1997).

Efficiency in production, induced by extended education, may allow mothers to have healthier children

with a given set of both healthcare and non-healthcare resources. Meanwhile, improvements in allocative

efficiency may increase health knowledge and incentivize parents to undertake health behaviors that

enhance child health. For instance, more educated mothers may be more likely to seek preventive care

and avoid unhealthy dietary practices, and they may be less likely to smoke. Educated individuals may

also enjoy a wage premium in the labor market, or match with more educated, healthier, and more

affluent partners, which may in turn improve the health of their children. Finally, if more educated

individuals gain more utility from their children’s future wellbeing, they may invest more in their children

as well.

           Research focused on showing correlations finds a strong positive association between mother’s

schooling and good child health in both affluent and developing societies (Thomas, Strauss, and

Henriques 1991; Grossman 2006). Children of more educated mothers are found to be healthier at birth as

maternal schooling is inversely associated with premature births and low birth weight (Currie and Moretti

2003). In addition, those with more educated mothers are less likely to die during childhood (Cutler,

Deaton, and Lleras-Muney 2006).

           Although descriptive evidence consistently shows that maternal education is favorably associated

with improved child health, findings based on studies addressing the endogeneity of maternal schooling

are not uniform. In developed countries, quasi-experimental evidence offers mixed results. Using college

openings in the United States as an instrument for women’s schooling, Currie and Moretti (2003) find that

higher maternal education promotes child health at birth as measured by gestational age and birth weight.

They also document that increased perinatal care, reduced smoking, increased likelihood of mother being

married, and reduced parity due to college education may serve as potential mediators. Exploiting

variation in the implementation of a compulsory schooling reform between municipalities and over time,

Grytten, Skau, and Sørensen (2014) examine the impact of mother’s education on child health in Norway.

They conclude that increased maternal schooling reduces the likelihood of low birth weight even in a


                                                                                                           9
country with universal healthcare coverage. On the other hand, using the 1947 reform in the United

Kingdom as the source of identifying variation, Lindeboom, Llena-Nozal, and van der Klaauw (2009)

find little evidence that extended parental education improves child health in terms of birth weight,

likelihood of illness at birth, having a chronic condition, having a mental condition, and body mass index.

In addition, McCrary and Royer (2011) implement two regression discontinuity designs (RDD), enabled

by age-at-school-entry policies in California and Texas, to estimate the effect of women’s education on

fertility and the health of their children. Although they find that increased educational attainment of

women has a small positive effect on mate quality, their results show little evidence supporting the

argument that maternal education improves child health.

        Literature investigating the role of parental education in the production of child health by using

natural experiments in developing countries has yet to settle as different studies reach different

conclusions. Exploiting variation in primary school construction between regions and birth cohorts in

Indonesia, Breierova and Duflo (2004) estimate the effect of mother’s and father’s formal schooling on

fertility and child health in a working paper. They find that both maternal and paternal education have

negative effects on child mortality. Using data from Taiwan, Chou et al. (2010) utilize a compulsory

school reform joint with a school construction program to examine the impact of parental education on

birth outcomes and child mortality. The Taiwanese government increased the duration of mandatory

primary schooling from 6 to 9 years in 1968, and a major school construction program has been

implemented to improve school availability and accommodate increased enrollment. Prior to the reform,

public secondary schools were available only for students who did well in a highly competitive national

exam, and attending private schools was only possible for those who could afford expensive private

school fees. Consequently, the reform enabled a large number of students to enroll in secondary schools

that could not afford it otherwise (Chou et al. 2010). They obtain exogenous variation in parental

education by exploiting differential exposure to the school construction program at the county level in

combination with the change in the minimum years of compulsory schooling. Using data on all the births

that took place between 1978 and 1999 in Taiwan, Chou et al. (2010) show that an increase in years of


                                                                                                             10
parental schooling lowers the likelihood of low birth weight and child mortality. Grépin and Bharadwaj

(2015) employ Zimbabwe’s 1980 education reforms to examine the impact of maternal schooling on child

mortality using data from the DHS of Zimbabwe. To increase primary and secondary schooling, the

government undertook a number of changes, including constructing new schools and the introduction of

free and compulsory primary education for all. Exploiting age specific exposure to Zimbabwe’s education

reform of 1980 (i.e., being younger than 15 in 1980) as an instrument for years of schooling (as well as

having some secondary education), Grépin and Bharadwaj (2015) find that mother’s extended schooling

causes a decline in child mortality. Lastly, Makate and Makate (2016) estimate the causal effect of

primary schooling on child health by using the elimination of tuition fees as the source of identifying

variation. They find that an increase in maternal schooling lowers child mortality.

        Even though the aforementioned studies show favorable effects of maternal education on child

health in developing nations, a few recent articles, making use of natural experiments, fail to show that

maternal education favorably impacts child health. Keats (2014) exploits the elimination of primary

school fees beginning 1997 in Uganda to estimate the impact of women’s education on child health.

Using data from DHS Uganda, this study finds little evidence that maternal education lowers child

mortality while it shows that an increase in mother’s schooling has a positive effect on offspring’s

likelihood of receiving immunizations and preventive care. Zhang (2014) uses high school closures as a

predictor of female education to examine the effect of maternal schooling on child health in China. She

does not find much evidence that mother’s high school education reduces the probability of prematurity,

low birth weight, neonatal mortality, and infant mortality.

        Besides the lack of consensus on how maternal schooling impacts child health, different natural

experiments used in the literature are only able to approximate the impact of a specific LATE,

corresponding to the impact of education among a particular subsample of the population (Angrist and

Krueger 1991; Imbens and Angrist 1994). Distinguishing how different types of education reforms shape

the relationship between schooling and health among different groups of individuals is particularly

important in developing countries as such knowledge may be critically important in designing educational


                                                                                                            11
policies (Kremer 2003; Glewwe and Kremer 2006; Glewwe and Muralidharan 2015). The LATEs

stemming from most education reforms, employed as the source of identification in studies using data

from developing countries, correspond to the impact of education among people with a relatively high

tendency to increase their schooling. That is, as summarized in Appendix Table 3, with the exception of

Taiwan’s education reform of 1968 studied by Chou et al. (2010), all of the natural experiments employed

by the above studies generate LATEs which mainly represent the impact of extending schooling among

those who had a high desire to receive more education because the incentives provided by these reforms

either reduced school fees and/or increased school availability for individuals who could not get more

education mainly due to financial constraints. Taiwan’s reform in 1968 enables one to study the combined

impact of compulsory schooling and reduction in the cost of educational attainment. As noted by Chou et

al. (2010), in addition to an increase in the duration of mandatory years of minimum schooling, the

education reform in Taiwan dramatically reduced the cost of attending school for a large number of

individuals who wanted to continue their schooling beyond a six-year basic education. Consequently,

there is a gap in the literature and thus a need for studies identifying the impact of mandatory maternal

schooling on child health using data from a developing country.

        Furthermore, many of the available studies suffer from limited statistical power because of small

sample sizes, as well as a lack of statistically or economically significant relationships between the

associated natural experiment and the endogenous schooling variable. For example, although the results

of Breierova and Duflo (2004) are intuitive, the first stage estimates of the impact of school construction

on years of education do not seem to meet the power requirements for an ideal instrumental variable as

shown by the values of the first-stage F-statistics (i.e., these values are usually less than 3 rather than the

preferred minimum value of 10). Hence, the authors treat their findings as preliminary. Non-availability

of large data sets is a particular limitation in the literature examining the relationship between parental

schooling and child wellbeing in developing countries as well. That is, because the mean values of key

outcome variables (e.g., low birth weight and child mortality) are usually 5 to 7 percent or lower and the

natural experiments at hand only affect a fraction of individuals who are in the treatment group (e.g.,


                                                                                                              12
typically less than 25 percent), even in a study with 8,000 to 10,000 observations, the results may be

driven by a handful of observations.10 Therefore, estimates based on such small (or even moderately

large) sample sizes should be treated with caution as they may be biased.11 In Appendix Table 3, we

summarize the existing studies providing causal evidence on the relationship between parental schooling

and child health in developing societies. Excluding Chou et al. (2010), most studies rely on either

moderate (Zhang 2014; Grépin and Bharadwaj 2015) or considerably small (Güneş 2015; Keats 2014)

sample sizes, or a weak first stage relationship between the associated natural experiments and formal

education (Breierova and Duflo, 2004).

         Note that utilizing the 1997 education reform, Güneş (2015) examined the effects of maternal

education on child health using a convenience sample from the Turkish Demographic and Health Surveys

(TDHS). This study relies on regional differences in schooling capacity, expressed in terms of number of

teachers at the province level, in combination with the 1997 education reform, which increased the

duration of mandatory basic education from 5 to 8 years, as the source of exogenous variation in

schooling.12 Güneş (2015) explores the impact of maternal education on child health outcomes and

maternal healthcare utilization using data from the TDHS 2008. She finds that maternal education has a


10
   For instance, let us assume a case where the sample has 8,000 observations with an equal number of individuals in
the treatment and control groups, the mean of the binary dependent variable is 5 percent, and the associated
compulsory schooling reform affected 20 percent of the individuals in the treatment group. Therefore, out of 4000
people in the treatment group, there are 800 (=4000*0.20) individuals who are impacted by the schooling reform,
and of those there are 40 (=800*0.05) individuals for whom the binary dependent variable equals one. Note that
these figures get much smaller as the number of observations in the treatment group gets smaller. Consequently, a
handful of observations (usually 2 or 3 out of 40) may dictate results that may be biased.
11
   Because Chou et al. (2010) use aggregate data at the county by year of birth level, this limitation does not apply to
them given that their analysis relies on information gathered from a large number of observations (i.e., the full
population).
12
   We prefer to employ a fuzzy-RDD type empirical estimation strategy as we believe that it is more appropriate for
a number of reasons. First, as illustrated in Figure 1, the implementation of the education reform was completed
quickly (i.e., within two years) after the enactment. This identification strategy also relies on much weaker
assumptions in comparison to a difference-in-differences estimation strategy. In addition, we argue in Section II that
the primary driver of the jump in educational attainment was not the increased school availability, but the mandate
of the reform. Therefore, as preferred by a number of other researchers, including Erten and Keskin (forthcoming),
Cesur and Mocan (2013), Mocan (2014), Torun (2015), and Dursun and Cesur (2016), we consider that an
instrumental variables estimation method enabled by a fuzzy-RDD framework at hand is the most appropriate
empirical strategy to study the implications of extended schooling due to the 1997 education reform. Lastly, our
estimates are robust to accounting for potential regional and province level differences in the implementation of the
reform (in addition to addressing potential convergence in child health at the province level) by controlling for
province specific birth cohort trends.


                                                                                                                     13
favorable impact on child health (in terms of height-for-age and weight-for-age z-scores and very low

birth weight) and mother’s likelihood of utilizing healthcare services that may enhance child health. She

also estimates the impact of maternal schooling on the likelihood that a child is born with a birth weight

below 1500 grams and finds that mother’s schooling has a negative effect, which is significant at the 10

percent level.

        Even though a data set with a relatively small number of observations may be suitable to obtain

population estimates as well as to study the impact of women’s education on outcomes with considerably

large mean values, the TDHS offers a fairly small sample to study the impact of maternal education on

variables that have low average values, such as child mortality and low birth weight. Indeed, in the

robustness section of this paper, we formally test the importance of using a sufficiently large sample to

estimate the causal effect of parental education on child health outcomes that have small mean values

when employing an instrumental variables estimation strategy. This exercise, which is performed in

Section VI, documents that, in a small sample (e.g., data from DHS), the instrumental variable estimates

of the effect of maternal education on birth outcomes and child mortality may produce biased results. We

must stress that our research does not invalidate the contributions of previous studies. To the contrary, our

work attempts to address the challenges faced by the broad literature that employs data from developing

nations to estimate the causal impact of maternal schooling on child health. Therefore, motivated to fill

the gaps in the literature, we examine the causal effect of maternal education on birth outcomes and child

mortality by utilizing two large data sets from Turkey that grant us sufficient statistical power.13




13
   Several studies also examine the causal impact of women’s education on fertility using similar identification
strategies in different countries (Osili and Long 2008; Andalón, Williams, and Grossman 2014; Geruso and Royer
2014; Lavy and Zablotsky 2015; Fort, Schneeweis and Winter-Ebmer 2016; Güneş 2016). As our focus is on the
relationship between maternal schooling and child health, we abstain from delving into the literature examining the
impact of women’s education on fertility.


                                                                                                                 14
IV. DATA


We use two data sets in our analysis: Birth outcomes data from the Turkish Ministry of Health, and child

mortality data from the Turkish Statistical Institute’s Population and Housing Census 2011.



Ministry of Health Birth Outcomes Data (MHBOD)

         Information on birth outcomes pertaining to birth weight, gestational age, method of birth

delivery, and maternal smoking come from the Ministry of Health. Historically, birth records have not

been systematically recorded in Turkey.14 With the aim of gaining accurate information on women’s and

children’s health, in 2008 the Ministry of Health initiated a collection of data on birth and maternal

outcomes through the Family Medicine Program (FMP), which provides universal primary care to all the

citizens at Family Health Centers (FHC) regardless of their financial wellbeing.15 The Ministry of Health

provided the MHBOD for our use at the child level.16 The data also provide information on maternal

educational attainment categories of each child.17 These categories include: no education, elementary

school, middle school, high school, college, and graduate degree.18 Because the 1997 education reform

(i.e., the instrumental variable we employ in the analysis) obliged individuals to earn at least a middle

school degree (i.e., at least 8 years of schooling), we coded Middle School equal to one for children whose

mothers earned at least a middle school degree, and it is set equal to zero otherwise. Similar to Brunello,

Fabbri, and Fort (2013), Dursun and Cesur (2016), and Fort, Schneeweis and Winter-Ebmer (2016),


14
   Consequently, there are relatively few articles exploring the determinants of child health, including birth
outcomes, in Turkey. More importantly, existing studies rely on small samples, which result in limited statistical
power. Indeed, the Turkish Demographic and Health Survey (TDHS), conducted every 5th year since 1988 with a
relatively small sample size, has been the major data source for both academic studies and population estimates for a
number of health indicators, including fertility, birth outcomes, and child mortality (Celik and Hotchkiss 2000; Hizel
and Coskun 2000; Erci 2003; Ergin et al. 2010; Dinçer, Kaushal, and Grossman 2014; Güneş 2015, 2016).
15
   See Cesur et al. (2017) for a detailed description of the FMP.
16
   Unfortunately, the MHBOD do not include information on maternal birth history, such as birth order.
17
   While it would have been informative for our purposes, data on paternal education are not available.
18
   As is the case in nearly all data sets collected by governmental organizations in Turkey, the MHBOD does not
include information on years of schooling (Dursun and Cesur 2016). Because our instrumental variable, the 1997
education reform, specifically mandates earning at least a middle school diploma, this is not an issue particularly to
the extent that sheepskin effects, where degrees obtained are more relevant to returns to education than actual years
of education (Hungerford and Solon 1987), apply to nonpecuniary benefits.


                                                                                                                   15
which limit the analysis sample to birth cohorts who were born a few years before and after the pivotal

birth cohort, we restrict the estimation sample to children whose mothers were born 5 years before and

after 1986.19

        Using the available information provided by the MHBOD, we created measures of child health at

birth based on birth weight in grams and gestational age. Following the existing literature (Currie and

Moretti 2003), we construct two binary low birth weight indicators Low Birthweight and Very Low

Birthweight, besides using natural log of birth weight, Log of Birthweight, as a measure of child health at

birth. Low Birthweight is set equal to one for children who weigh less than 2500 grams at birth, and it is

set equal to zero otherwise. Very Low Birthweight is constructed analogously using 1500 grams as the

cut-off birth weight.

        While low birth weight is usually the main concern and more prevalent than high birth weight, a

sizable literature in obstetrics, epidemiology, and medicine associates high birth weight with not only

short run maternal and child health complications (i.e., birth delivery problems, newborn morbidity, birth

injuries), but also long run health ailments including overweight/obesity in late childhood (Boulet et al.

2003; Zhang et al. 2008; Cnattingius et al. 2012; Sparano et al. 2013), type 2 diabetes (Wei et al. 2003;

Whincup et al. 2008), cardiovascular and metabolic complications (Walsh and McAuliffe 2012), and

reduced cognitive outcomes (Cesur and Kelly 2010). Similarly, maternal diabetes, glucose intolerance,

maternal overweight prior to pregnancy, gestational weight gain, gestational age, previous history of

macrosomic birth, maternal age (>30) (Sparano et al. 2013; Walsh and McAuliffe 2012; Koyanagi et al.

2013; Retnakaran et al. 2012), and gender of the child (Walsh and McAuliffe 2012) are listed as

determinants of high birth weight. In order to investigate the effect of maternal education on high birth

weight we generated a High Birthweight variable, equal to one if the infant weighs more than 4500 grams,

and zero otherwise.




19
 We also test the robustness of our findings to alternate bandwidth selections (i.e., from 6,   4, and   3 years). As
we show in Table 6, this exercise did not cause any appreciable change in our main findings.


                                                                                                                  16
           Gestational age in weeks is calculated by taking the difference between the date of birth and the

date of last menstruation. Using the standard definition from the World Health Organization, Premature is

defined as being equal to one if a child’s gestational age is less than 37 weeks, and it is coded as zero

otherwise.20 We also employ natural “Log of Gestational Age” as an outcome variable.

           While the Ministry of Health aims to collect data on all births in the country, the extent of the

MHBOD are limited by the reach of the FMP. Note that the FMP started as a pilot program in 2005 in

one province, and it was expanded to all of the 81 provinces in Turkey by 2010. As discussed extensively

by Cesur et al. (2017), the purpose of the introduction of the FMP was to provide universal primary

healthcare services to all citizens free of charge. Therefore, the MHBOD may have some limitations as

well. First, because the nationwide expansion of the FMP was completed during 2010, the MHBOD could

only be collected in a subsample of provinces prior to 2011 even though the data collection effort was

initiated in 2008. Second, although the FMP aims to cover everyone in the country regardless of income

and socio-economic status, not all citizens will choose to receive the services offered by the FMP. Lastly,

MHBOD are collected by healthcare professionals employed at family health centers (FHC), through

which the FMP program is administered. Therefore, while the MHBOD provides information on a large

number of births between 2008 and 2016, it does not include all of them due to weak enforcement on data

collection by the Ministry of Health in addition to staffing shortages at FHCs, which hinder data

collection efforts. Nevertheless, despite the aforementioned limitations, the MHBOD is ideal for our

purposes and provides us with a large sample to analyze the impact of maternal education on child health.

To begin with, depending on the birth outcome, our data provide information on about 82 percent of all

the births that took place since 2011, the year at which the FMP was in full effect in all provinces.

Furthermore, we also formally test whether the data availability for birth weight, method of birth delivery,

and gestational length is a function of the instrumental variable we employ. Accordingly, we estimated

the effect of exposure to the 1997 education reform on the likelihood of having missing information for

each child health and maternal outcome defined above. If being bound by the compulsory schooling

20
     See http://www.who.int/mediacentre/factsheets/fs363/en/.


                                                                                                               17
reform impacts the likelihood of reporting information on birth and maternal outcomes, our instrumental

variable estimates may be biased. Therefore, this test is particularly important for our purposes. Results

presented in Appendix Table 4 show that the estimated coefficients on education reform are both very

small in magnitude and statistically insignificant; thus, the likelihood of having missing information on

outcome measures is unrelated to exposure to the 1997 education reform. All in all, these exercises

increase our confidence in the suitability of the MHBOD for examining the impact of maternal education

on child outcomes.



Population and Housing Census 2011 (PHC)

        Data on child mortality are obtained from the PHC, conducted by the Turkish Statistical Institute

(TurkStat). Until 2000, a general population census, which collected information from all the residents,

was conducted on a regular basis.21 To enhance the provision of public goods and services via more

accurate planning, the TurkStat established the Address Based Population Census (ABPC) in 2007, which

also replaced the regular census. Since the establishment of ABPC, demographic characteristics,

including population, age and gender structure, marital status, educational attainment, place of

registration, within country migration, and nationality of individuals have been closely monitored through

administrative sources and updated on an annual basis. While the ABPC provides detailed information

on these measures, it does not collect some internationally recommended and nationally needed data on a

number of social, economic, demographic, and housing characteristics of the population.

        Therefore, the TurkStat decided to implement a mini census in order to collect information

unavailable in the ABPC, such as labor force, employment, unemployment, reasons for migration,

disability, and building and dwelling characteristics. The PHC was conducted by face-to-face interviews

of more than two million households and about nine million people in 2011. As we noted previously, we

limit the analysis sample and focus our attention on women who were born between 1981 and 1991.


21
   The first census was conducted in 1927, four years after the establishment of the Republic of Turkey. Then
starting in 1935, censuses were organized every five years until 1990, and the last census was conducted in 2000.


                                                                                                                    18
        Like the MHBOD, instead of years of completed schooling, the PHC provides us with

educational attainment categories, which include no education, elementary school, middle school, high

school, college and graduate school. Thus, Middle School, which is the key independent variable in the

PHC data as well, is coded as one for women who earned at least a middle school degree, and zero

otherwise.

        We set Any Child Died equal to 1 if the respondent mother had at least one child deceased before

the age of five, and it is equated to 0 if she had no children passed away before the age five. Although it

would be informative to examine the impact of maternal schooling on neonatal (i.e., death in the first four

weeks of life) and infant (i.e., death in the first year of life) mortality, one limitation of the PHC data set is

that it only provides information on child mortality by age five. While the lack of information on infant

mortality per se is a disadvantage, child mortality statistics released by the TurkStat suggest that the vast

majority of child deaths in Turkey occur in the first year of life. More specifically, in 2011, even though

the mortality rate of infants was 11.7 in a 1000, the mortality rate among ages 1 to 5 was less than 1 in a

1000. Therefore, for the most part, the child mortality information provided by the PHC is likely to be

driven by and thus also reflect infant mortality.



V. ECONOMETRIC METHODOLOGY

Using the MHBOD at the child level, equation (1) estimates the relationship between maternal schooling

and birth outcomes:



                                                                      (1)



where BO is child i’s associated birth outcome, including birth weight, gestational age, and premature

birth status. Using the MHBOD, we also estimate the impact of women’s education on method of birth

delivery and maternal smoking. The key independent variable, Middle School, is a dichotomous indicator




                                                                                                               19
representing whether child i’s mother earned at least a middle school degree. The vector X contains

predetermined covariates, which are province fixed effects, mother’s month of birth indicators, child’s

birth year fixed effects, and linear approximations of mother’s birth year-month on each side of the

pivotal birth cohort of 1986, thus controlling for maternal age at the birth of the child. The idiosyncratic

error term is denoted by . Controlling for province fixed effects accounts for all the unobserved

determinants of female education and the outcome of interest common to everyone living in the same

province. Maternal month-of-birth fixed effects account for seasonality in mother’s birth (Torun and

Tumen 2015).

        In equation (2), we use data at the mother level from the PHC to examine the relationship

between mother’s education and child mortality:



                                                                             (2)



where CM represents whether mother m had at least one child died by the age of 5. The remaining

covariates of equation (2) are constructed analogously to equation (1).

        Estimating the parameters of equations (1) and (2) using ordinary least squares (OLS) may not

necessarily correspond to the causal effect of maternal schooling on child health given that unobservable

determinants of maternal education may also determine birth outcomes and child mortality. For instance,

more educated mothers may come from high SES families and possess both genetic and behavioral

advantages leading to biased estimates of the effect of maternal education on child outcomes.

        In order to estimate the causal impact of maternal education on child outcomes, we make use of a

two-stage least squares estimation strategy. In doing so, we instrument mother’s educational attainment

on the 1997 education reform, which is used as the source of exogenous variation in maternal education.

Equations (3) and (4) correspond to the first stage estimates of the impact of the 1997 education reform on




                                                                                                           20
the likelihood of maternal middle school completion for the child level birth outcomes, and mother level

child mortality specifications, respectively:



                                                                                            (3)

                                                                                   (4)



where the outcome is Middle School.                  is a dichotomous variable which captures whether the

mother was exposed to the reform (i.e., it is set equal to one if she was born after 1986, and zero

otherwise). All other variables mimic those specified in equations (1) and (2). In the second stage, we use

Reform as an instrument for Middle School and estimate 2SLS models to approximate the causal impact

of maternal middle school education on child health.

         Our identification strategy hinges upon the assumption that pre- and post-reform cohorts (i.e.,

control and treatment groups) have similar observable and unobservable characteristics except their

extended primary schooling induced by exposure to the 1997 reform. This premise becomes more

convincing as the estimation window around the cutoff birth year gets smaller (Lee and Lemieux, 2010).

Therefore, we limit our estimation sample to individuals who were born 5 years before and after 1986.

Nevertheless, to ensure the robustness of our findings to using different data intervals, we also report

results using bandwidths of 6, 4, and 3 years around the cutoff birth cohort. As pointed out earlier,

because the treatment status of the 1986 cohort is ambiguous, we drop the 1986 cohort from our main

analysis.22

         In all specifications, standard errors clustered at the mother’s birth year by province level, leading

to 810 (=81*10) cluster units. Birth outcome models are weighted using province level number of women



22
  Eliminating the 1986 birth cohort also accounts for the potential spillover effects and the possible lag between the
timing of legislation and implementation as well. Moreover, according to data from the World Bank, approximately
5% of primary school students repeated a grade in the mid-1990s; excluding 1986 may also help in accounting for
this group. However, as presented in Table 5, inclusion of the 1986 birth cohort with alternative treatment values
(such as Reform=0.25) does not alter our main findings.


                                                                                                                    21
in the age of fertility (i.e., ages 15 to 49). We use the weights provided by the PHC in child mortality

specifications.



VI. RESULTS

Summary Statistics

        Table 1 presents summary statistics for the MHBOD (in Panel A) and PHC (in Panel B) data sets

by exposure to the 1997 education reform status. Children whose mothers were born between 1981 and

1985 constitute the control group, and the 1987 to 1991 birth cohorts form the treatment group. Panel A

in Table 1 highlights the difference in education levels between the treatment and control groups in birth

weight data; while 57% of mothers obtained at least a middle school diploma in the treatment group, this

percentage is 49.5% in the control group. Mean birth weight is 3,246 grams. Very Low Birthweight and

High Birthweight categories make up 1% of our birth weight sample, while six percent of women gave

birth to low birth weight babies (i.e., under 2500 grams). As expected, the prevalence of very low birth

weight, low birth weight, and high birth weight babies are all lower in the treatment group compared to

the control group. The average gestational age is around 38 weeks; as expected, there were fewer

premature births in the treatment group (11%) compared to the control group (12%).

        As displayed in Panel B of Table 1, we observe a jump in the proportion of women who hold at

least a middle school degree in the treatment group compared to the control group for the PHC data as

well. Panel B of Table 1 also shows that 1.9% of women in the treatment group, and 2.9% of the women

in the control group, declare that at least one of their children died before the age of five.



OLS Estimates of Child Health on Maternal Schooling

        In Table 2, we show the associations between child health and mother’s schooling. In Panel A,

maternal education is positively associated with a healthy birth weight. Specifically, infants whose

mothers earned at least a middle school degree have a 0.50 percent higher birth weight, and 0.48 and 0.30

percentage-point less likely to weigh below 2500 and above 4500 grams, respectively. We also find that


                                                                                                           22
maternal education is associated with a 0.24 percent decrease in the length of gestation and 0.95

percentage point decrease in the likelihood of premature births. We do not find a statistically significant

relationship between parental education and head circumference at birth.

         In Panel B, we find that children of mothers who hold at least a middle diploma are 1.9

percentage points less likely to have died by age 5.

         While the OLS estimates are helpful in observing the descriptive nature of the relationship

between maternal education and the health of the offspring, whether these results reflect the causal effect

of education on child health is debatable. Numerous observable and unobservable common determinants

of maternal schooling and child outcomes, including income, genetic makeup of the mother, and access to

medical care, may bias the estimates of the coefficient on schooling. To get a handle around the potential

endogeneity of maternal education, we next employ an instrumental variable (IV) estimation strategy, in

which Middle School is regressed on the 1997 education reform.



The Impact of the 1997 Education Reform on Maternal Schooling

         As noted above, the 1997 education reform obliged individuals born after 1986 to obtain at least a

middle school degree. Figure 1 provides visual illustrations of the impact of Reform on Middle School by

the estimation sample.23 Accordingly, we observe an unambiguous jump in the proportion of mothers

with at least a middle school diploma among those who were bound by the compulsory schooling reform,

regardless of the estimation sample.

         In Appendix Figures 2 and 3, we provide additional evidence on validating our empirical design

as suggested by Lee and Lemieux (2010). First, as a standard procedure of our empirical design, we show

that some of the potential predetermined variables are balanced across the 1986 cutoff. While the data we

use in this study do not provide us with a rich set of predetermined variables, we are able to employ

disability status and cohort size variables, which are not expected to be impacted by exposure to the

23
  More specifically, we visualize the impact of being exposed to reform on completing at least a middle school
degree by netting out the influence of pre-determined variables and plotting the residuals for pre-and post-reform
cohorts based on Equations (3) and (4) (Lee and Lemiux 2010; Brunello, Fabbri, and Fort 2013).


                                                                                                                     23
reform, to descriptively test the “balanced covariates” assumption. Evidently, as Appendix Figure 2

shows, there is no significant jump across the 1986 cutoff. Second, in Appendix Figure 3, we provide the

visual representation of the McCrary test, which provides evidence that the non-random sorting of the

running variable, month of birth, across the 1986 threshold is rejected and is continuous around the

cutoff.24 This provides additional support for the exogeneity of our IV.

        The strength of our IV is formally tested in Table 3, where we analyze the effect of exposure to

the education reform on the likelihood of earning a middle school diploma at the minimum. Results

suggest that the reform increased middle school graduation between 8 to 23 percentage points, depending

on the estimation sample. In each case, the estimated coefficient on Reform is statistically significant at

the one percent level. While these first stage effect sizes are in the range of other studies examining the

impact of the 1997 education reform on a number of outcomes (Cesur and Mocan 2013; Torun 2015;

Dursun and Cesur 2016), the impact of the reform on educational attainment is greater in the PHC sample

in comparison to the MHBOD sample. We revisit and address this issue in the robustness section below

by performing a two sample instrumental variables estimation strategy.



The Impact of Maternal Education on Child Health

        Baseline IV estimates of the impact of maternal educational attainment on birth outcomes, and

child mortality are presented in Table 4. The first stage F statistics shown here are well above the

recommended value of 10, revealing the strength of our IV.

        In Panel A, Middle School causes a decline in the probability that a child is born with a birth

weight of below 1,500, and 2,500 grams by 4.7, and 7.4 percentage points, respectively. Results also

show that mothers who hold at least a middle school diploma are 2.7 percentage points less likely to have

a baby with a high birth weight (> 4,500 grams). These findings show that maternal education increases

the likelihood that a child is born with a healthy birth weight, which also explains why the effect of


24
   The p-values of the estimated jumps are 0.312 and 0.202 for the birth weight sample and the mortality sample,
respectively.


                                                                                                                   24
Middle School on Log Birthweight is positive but small (3.7 percent) and marginally statistically

significant. Next, we show that maternal education increases the duration of gestation by 2.3 percent, and

it lowers the likelihood of premature births by 5 percentage points. Note that the IV estimate switches the

sign on log gestation age, which suggests that the observed negative relationship in OLS specifications

may be due to selection bias.25 Mother’s middle school education also increases child’s head

circumference at birth by (a statistically insignificant) 1.3 percent. When we evaluate these results jointly,

we reach the conclusion that compulsory maternal schooling has a causal favorable effect on child health

at birth.

            In Panel B, we estimate the causal effect of extended maternal primary schooling on child

mortality. In line with the evidence presented in Panel A of Table 4 (i.e., improved child health at birth),

we find that children of mothers who earned at least a middle school degree are 1.8 percentage points less

likely to have died by age 5.



VII. ROBUSTNESS, HETEROGENEITY, AND TWO SAMPLE IV ESTIMATES

Robustness

            We perform a number of robustness checks to test the sensitivity of our baseline estimates. In our

first robustness exercise, in column (2) of Table 5, we present the reduced form estimates of the impact of

maternal exposure to the 1997 education reform on child outcomes.26 These results are fully in line with

the 2SLS estimates. Furthermore, the reduced form estimates are more precisely estimated and

statistically significant for each specification we estimate.27

            As there is some uncertainty with respect to whether those born in 1986 were bound by the

compulsory schooling reform, we excluded the 1986 birth cohort from our benchmark analysis. In column

(3), we assigned an alternate treatment value to (i.e., Reform=0.25) with respect to exposure to the 1997

25
   For example, the negative sign on OLS estimates presented in Table 2 may be due to C-section birth deliveries
being performed around 38-39 weeks of pregnancy.
26
   To simplify comparison, we also present the baseline IV estimates in the first column of Table 5.
27
   The IV estimates can be obtained by dividing these intent-to-treat estimates of the impact of the education reform
by the associated first stage estimate.


                                                                                                                   25
education reform for those who were born in 1986. 28 These estimates are very similar to our baseline

findings.

        In our main specifications, we accounted for birth cohort trends by controlling for maternal birth

month-year differentiated by exposure to the education reform status. We check if our baseline estimates

change when we specify maternal birth month-year quadratically. As seen in column (4) of Table 5, these

results are nearly identical to our main findings.

        Given that our empirical methodology is consistent with a fuzzy regression discontinuity design

(Lee and Lemieux 2010), we next examine if our results are robust to undertaking the formal RD

estimation procedure using local linear regressions. In doing so, we estimate our models with the

procedure described by Calonico, Cattaneo, and Titiunik (2014) and Calonico et al. (2016a,b).29 As

presented in column (5) of Table 5, the linear RD IV estimates are qualitatively and quantitatively similar

to our baseline findings.

        We next test the robustness of our estimates to accounting for the potential regional heterogeneity

in how extended maternal schooling due to the reform impacted child health. To do so, we interact binary

province indicators with women’s birth month-year and specify them in our regressions. Controlling for

province specific birth cohort trends also accounts for any bias that may stem from convergence in child

outcomes between provinces (and regions) over the years. Because developing countries have exhibited

relatively fast improvements in health outcomes in the past few decades, one may question whether our

findings are driven by potential convergence in child outcomes between different regions. Thus, ruling

out the role of convergence in our framework is particularly informative. Results presented in column (6)

show that when we control for province specific trends, the estimated effect of extended primary

schooling is estimated with greater precision. These estimates show that our findings are not driven by


28
   Assigning alternate treatment values for those born in 1986 (e.g., Reform=0, and Reform=0.33) produces very
similar results.
29
   Moreover, instead of five-year static bandwidths, we estimated our models with optimal bandwidths obtained by
the default MSE-optimal bandwidth selector introduced by Calonico et al. (2014, 2016a,b). The estimates we
obtained from this procedure are completely in line with our benchmark findings, and are available upon request
from the authors.


                                                                                                               26
convergence in child outcomes by maternal birth year between regions. Instead, this exercise suggests that

failing to control for province specific trends may lead to imprecise estimates of the impact of maternal

education on child outcomes.

         An important issue in statistical inference for regression analysis is the possibility that standard

errors are correlated within clusters. In such cases, standard errors may be estimated with bias, which in

turn may lead to false conclusions (Cameron, Gelbach, and Miller 2015). As we previously discussed,

school starting age in Turkey is primarily determined by a child’s birth year. In addition, the mandate of

the reform may have differential effects on educational attainments of individuals residing in different

parts of the country. Therefore, in line with Agüero and Bharadwaj (2014), Cesur and Mocan (2013), and

Grépin and Bharadwaj (2015), we adjust the standard errors at the mother’s birth year by province level.

We next explore if the statistical inference in our main specifications are robust to adjusting the standard

errors at other cluster units. These estimates are presented in Appendix Table 5. Specifically, we cluster

the standard errors on the province (in column 1), birth year-month (column 2), birth year-month by

province (column 3), birth year by region (column 4), and birth year (column 5), respectively. While we

employ a large number of cluster units in columns (1) to (5), standard errors are adjusted for 10 cluster

units in column (5). To address the potential bias that may be induced by employing few cluster units

when adjusting the standard errors on the year of birth, we perform a wild-cluster bootstrapping method

as suggested by Cameron, Gelbach, and Miller (2008). As shown in column (6), this exercise has no

bearing on our main conclusions.30

         We conducted our main analysis using the sample of individuals born 5 years before and after

1986, which is the pivotal birth cohort. While employing a wider estimation-window boosts statistical

power via increasing the sample size, the possibility that the identifying variation comes from individuals

who are further away from the discontinuity may threaten the validity of our estimates. Therefore, in

30
  We conducted all the empirical analysis of the PHC data in October 2015 in the Data Analysis Center of the
TurkStat in Ankara, Turkey. Therefore, in Panel B of Appendix Table 5, we are only able to report standard errors
clustered on the province, and birth year-month levels in columns (1) and (2). Nevertheless, the pattern of results
presented in Panel A of Appendix Table 5 strongly suggest that the statistical inference for the PHC specifications
should be robust to clustering at other levels.


                                                                                                                  27
Table 6, we assess whether our preferred estimates (which include province specific birth cohort trends,

as shown in column 6 of Table 5) hold when we change the data estimation window. In particular, we

estimate our baseline specifications using the sample of individuals born within 6, 5, 4, and 3 years

of the pivotal birth cohort of 1986 in columns (1) to (4), respectively. Results displayed in Table 6

document that our findings are robust to bandwidth selection.

        Next, we present the graphical illustrations of the effect of the 1997 education reform on

outcomes of interest. Such visual summaries are particularly important when the identifying variation in

the endogenous variable is obtained from an exogenous discontinuity (Imbens and Lemieux 2008; Lee

and Lemieux 2010; Clark and Royer 2013). Figures 2A-2K display the reduced form graphs of the effect

of the 1997 compulsory school reform on child health at birth and child mortality. Consistent with the

results shown in Table 6, these graphs support the argument that rather than a sporadic jump in the

outcome variables, our IV estimates are driven by systematic shifts in child health at birth and child

mortality due to mother’s extended primary schooling.

        We noted that most natural experiments employed in the literature usually influence the schooling

behavior of about 25 percent or a smaller fraction of the individuals in the treatment group, and the mean

values for child mortality and low birth weight are usually about 0.10 or lower. Therefore, we argued

above that the IV estimates of the impact of maternal education on child health indicators with low mean

values (e.g., low birth weight and child mortality) may be biased without a sufficiently large sample. To

test the validity of this assertion, we use data from the three available waves of the Turkish Demographic

and Health Survey (TDHS) collected in 2003, 2008, and 2013 and re-estimate our most comprehensive

specifications (shown in Table 6). To do so, we constructed indicators for birth outcomes, which are child

mortality, and maternal smoking using the TDHS data in an identical fashion with the variables we used

in our main analysis. In Appendix Table 6, we employ the sample of mothers born within 6, 5, 4, and

3 years of the pivotal birth cohort in columns (1) through (4). In the TDHS sample, the estimates of birth

outcomes, maternal smoking, and child mortality are conducted with 3,365; 6,564; and 4,692




                                                                                                         28
observations in the largest data interval (column 1) for birth outcomes, maternal smoking and child

mortality samples, respectively. Of these observations, 23 to 33 percent are in the treatment group, and

about 67 to 77 percent constitute the control group. As displayed in columns (1) to (4) of Appendix Table

6, models using the TDHS are imprecisely estimated in all but one of the cases. More importantly,

coefficients have the “wrong sign” for three of four birth weight indicators (i.e., Log Birthweight, Very

Low Birthweight, and Low Birthweight) in most cases, and estimates of Very Low Birthweight and Any

Child Died on Middle School change signs as we change the data estimation interval. To gain additional

statistical power, in column (5) of Appendix Table 6, we estimated our specifications in the TDHS using

the sample of individuals born 10 years before and after the pivotal birth cohort. Even though the sample

sizes increased by 52 to 70 percent, none of the specifications presented in column (5) is statistically

significant although they now carry the expected signs. Consequently, these results provide evidence in

favor of the argument that without a sufficiently large estimation sample, IV estimates of the impact of

maternal education on child health may be imprecisely estimated and/or biased.



Heterogeneity

        To the degree that our data allow us, we also undertake a few exercises to explore the potential

heterogeneity in our estimates. Note that the 1997 education reform aimed to increase the years of

schooling of those with a low tendency to extend their schooling beyond five years of basic education.

How extended education impacts child outcomes among women who are at the lower tail of the

educational attainment distribution is particularly important from the viewpoint of a policymaker. Albeit

imperfect, to provide an answer to this question, we reproduce our main models by limiting the estimation

sample to those with at most a middle school degree. In Table 7, despite reduced sample sizes, estimates

of the impact of maternal education on child outcomes are precisely estimated.

        It is commonly observed in developing countries that families may provide less care to their

daughters because of son preference (Oster 2009; Bharadwaj and Lakdawala 2013). That is, if parents

receive greater utility from their daughters or sons, they may discriminate care in favor of the preferred


                                                                                                             29
gender when providing antenatal or postnatal care. Therefore, in Table 8, we explore whether the effect of

maternal education on child health differs by the gender of the offspring. These estimates show that the

gender specific estimates are similar to those using the full sample; hence, the impact of mother’s

schooling on child health does not seem to depend on child gender.

         Extended maternal schooling may have potentially differing effects on child health in different

regions. On the one hand, women’s education in poorer or more rural regions may be more effective in

improving child health if the marginal effect of maternal behavioral modifications on child outcomes is

greater especially when formal healthcare is not readily available. For example, such behavioral

modifications may become more important if infectious diseases and accidents that are the major causes

of child mortality (Chou et al. 2010). On the other hand, educating women with a low schooling tendency

may improve their productive efficiency when they have easier access to medical care in more developed

or urban areas. Therefore, we also explore if the impact of maternal education on child outcomes differs

by region of residence.31 Although relatively less precisely estimated, region specific estimates, which are

available upon request, show that the impact of maternal education on child outcomes are similar across

different geographic areas.

         Lastly, while it would have been informative to explore the heterogeneous effects of maternal

compulsory schooling on birth outcomes and child mortality in urban versus rural areas, we are unable to

run these models as our data sets do not provide information on whether the respondents live in urban or

rural localities.



Two Sample IV Estimates in the MHBOD

         The first stage estimates presented in Table 3 show a discrepancy between two data sources we

employ. That is, while the reform has a 22.8 percentage point effect on middle school graduation in the

31
  A region in the Republic of Turkey includes groups of provinces based on geographic proximity, and economic
and social similarities for statistical purposes. The country is divided into 12 regions, which include Istanbul Region,
W. Marmara Region, Aegean Region, E. Marmara Region, W. Anatolia Region, Mediterranean Region, Central
Anatolia Region, W. Black Sea Region, E. Black Sea Region, Northeast Anatolia Region, Central East Anatolia
Region, Southeast Anatolia Region.


                                                                                                                     30
PHC data, it is roughly 8 percentage points in the MHBOD sample. To understand why this difference

exists, we reached out to a few family physicians, who are in charge of data collection at the Family

Health Centers. Accordingly, they reported that family physicians access the date of birth information of

mothers and children from the Census Bureau via a computer software. Information on child outcomes,

maternal behaviors, and education are reported by mothers. As the main objective of the data collection

efforts through the family health centers is to get accurate data on health outcomes, it is very likely that

health information is collected with high accuracy.

        However, because the terms to describe 5 years of schooling (İlkokul) prior to the reform and 8

years of schooling (İlköğretim) after the reform are not only phonetically similar but also have similar

meanings in Turkish language, it is possible that those who were bound by the reform may have

inadvertently misreported their educational attainment status. That is, in the Turkish language, the

meaning of the word İlkokul is elementary school, and the word İlköğretim means primary education.

Recall that the reform united elementary school (İlkokul) and middle school (Orta Okul) under the roof of

primary school (İlköğretim). Therefore, the educational attainment status of those who hold an 8-year

primary school diploma may be miscoded as 5-year elementary school diploma due to reporting error.32 If

the potential measurement error in Middle School variable in the MHBOD is correlated with the 1997

education reform, the IV estimates of       may be biased.

        The standard method to tackle this problem in the literature is to implement a two sample

instrumental variables (TSIV) estimation strategy (Angrist and Krueger 1992; Inoue and Solon 2010). In

doing so, we used two different data sources to obtain the first stage effect of the law on Middle School.

First, we used the first stage from the PHC data which is presented in Panel B of Table 3. Second, we

estimate the impact of the 1997 reform on the likelihood of earning at least a middle school diploma

among ever married women using data from the Household Labour Force Survey (HLFS) for the period




32
  This issue should be of a much smaller concern in the PHC data since the TurkStat carefully trains its survey
personnel to minimize potential errors in the TurkStat surveys.


                                                                                                                  31
2008-14.33 The estimate of the impact of Education Reform on Middle School in the HLFS is displayed in

column (1) of Table 9. Accordingly, those who are bound by the reform are 24.5 percentage points more

likely to earn at least a middle degree. For ease of presentation, we display the first stage estimate from

the PHC data in column (2). It is comforting that the first stage estimate of the effect of law on

educational attainment in the HLFS is fairly close to that in the PHC data. In column (3), we present the

reduced form impact of the 1997 reform on child health outcomes. Then, in columns (4) and (5) we

display the TSIV using the first stage estimates from the HLFS and PHC, respectively. The TSIV

coefficients obtained from this exercise is equal to the ratio of the reduced from and the associated first

stage coefficient. We use the delta method to calculate the standard errors for these coefficients as

summarized in Inoue and Solon (2010).34 The estimates presented in columns (4) and (5) are very similar

to each other and precisely estimated. Furthermore, as implied by the change in the magnitude of the

associated first stage estimate, coefficients obtained from the TSIV estimation method are roughly one

third of those presented in previous tables. An additional advantage of the TSIV exercise is that it also

allows to correctly evaluate our effect sizes.

         In column (5), which provides us with the unbiased effect sizes for the IV estimates in the

MHBOD, we find that earning at least a middle school diploma leads to a 1.3 percent increase in birth

weight of the offspring. Middle School lowers the likelihood of Very Low Birthweight, Low Birthweight,

and High Birthweight by 1.6, 2.5, and 0.9 percentage points, respectively. Furthermore, mothers who

possess at least eight years of schooling have a 1.8 percentage point lower likelihood of delivering

preterm babies, and experience a 1.5, and 0.4 percent increase in gestational length and head

circumference, respectively.

33
   The HLFS has been conducted since 1988 by the Turkish Statistical Institute and is the main data source for
employment, economic activity, occupation, and other labor market indicators. See http://www.turkstat.gov.tr/ for
more information.
34
   More specifically, following Inoue and Solon (2010), and Mocan, Rashke and Unel (2015), we use the delta
method to calculate the standard error of the estimated TSIV coefficient,   , as:
 12 12       ( 1), where 1 is the first stage coefficient in Equation 3 and 4, and, 1 is the corresponding reduced
form coefficient.




                                                                                                                    32
        We also undertook a quick and dirty approach to circumvent the potential issue of

mismeasurement of maternal schooling in the MHBOD. Accordingly, we assign different probabilities to

the likelihood of middle school graduation rates of women who were born after 1986 and declared that

their highest level of completed schooling corresponds to a five-year elementary school degree. In

Appendix Table 7, we estimate the impact of maternal schooling on birth outcomes by assigning the

values of 1, 0.75, 0.5, and 0.25 to the likelihood of earning at least a middle school diploma for those who

were bound by the reform and reported their highest level of educational attainment as five years of

elementary school diploma in columns (1) to (4), respectively. This exercise produces coefficients which

are similar to those obtained from the TSIV estimates and lead to greater precision in the estimated effect

of maternal schooling on outcomes of health. More importantly, in column (2), in which the first stage

estimate is very similar to those in the HLFS and PHC, the coefficients on Middle School are

qualitatively and qualitatively very similar to those obtained from the TSIV.



VIII. THE IMPACT OF MATERNAL EDUCATION ON MATERNAL BEHAVIORS

        Does extended primary schooling influence maternal attitudes? While the MHBOD do not

contain extensive information on maternal behaviors, the data provide information on method of birth

delivery and maternal smoking.

        If education impacts women’s behaviors during pregnancy in terms of seeking preventive care

and/or adherence to recommendations by healthcare professionals, the likelihood of experiencing health

complications during child delivery may be reduced (Currie and Moretti 2003; Cutler and Lleras-Muney

2006; McCrary and Royer 2011). Furthermore, while the primary purpose of utilizing non-natural

childbirth delivery methods (e.g., C-section, vacuum extraction, forceps delivery) is to prevent potential

health complications that may impact the mother and child, C-sections are also preferred by some women

due to perceived pain avoidance during birth delivery (Penna and Arulkumaran 2003). Studies have

shown that children who are not exposed to maternal bowel flora during birth due to C-section birth

delivery may be more likely to face adverse health consequences later in life, including increased risk of


                                                                                                         33
obesity, asthma, and energy uptake from the gut and immune development (Blustein and Liu 2015; Black

et al. 2016). Therefore, women who are more knowledgeable about the subsequent health effects of C-

sections as a consequence of extended schooling may consider attempting to avoid C-section birth

deliveries. Normal Birth, which may capture child health at birth or maternal investment in child health, is

a binary variable equal to 1 if the birth delivery was vaginal, and 0 otherwise. Lastly, we construct two

maternal smoking measures that may capture mother’s health behaviors during pregnancy. Ever Smoked

and Current Smoker are dichotomous covariates representing whether the mother ever smoked regularly

and whether she was smoker at the time of data collection, respectively.35 Descriptive statistics, displayed

in Appendix Table 8, show that 46% of women experienced a normal delivery, and this rate is

significantly higher in the treatment group (52%) compared to the control group (42%).36 Women in the

treatment group are less likely to report they have ever smoked or are smoking at the time of the data

collection in comparison to women in the control group.

         In Table 10, we present the estimates of the relationship between women’s education and

maternal behaviors. The OLS estimates in column (1) reveal that women with at least eight years of

schooling are 11.7 percentage points less likely to deliver babies via natural birth delivery. Given that C-

sections constitute a large fraction of non-normal birth delivery methods (53.5 percent in our sample), the

negative association between maternal education and Normal Birth is consistent with the argument that C-

section birth deliveries are preferred by women who earned at least a middle school degree.37 This could

be due to the potential positive association between women’s level of education / age and experiencing

complications when giving birth. Meanwhile, it is also possible that as more educated women can

financially afford C-sections, perceived pain avoidance during delivery may partially explain the
35
   While it would have been informative to know the status of women’s tobacco use during pregnancy, our data do
not allow us to make such a distinction.
36
   Turkey has a disproportionately high rate of C-sections compared to the world average (Akarsu and Mucuk 2014;
Zeldin 2012; Seckiner, Tezcan, and Tunckanat 2010). C-sections are an important option, particularly when the
mother or infant is facing a life-threatening situation during labor or delivery. Yet it is riskier than vaginal delivery
and has a longer recovery period. In spite of this, many Turkish women prefer C-sections to vaginal births, partly
due to “labor pain and fear” (Akarsu and Mucuk 2014).
37
   In an unreported specification, we also estimated the likelihood of C-section on Middle School. In line with the
OLS estimate of Normal Birth, we find that women who completed at least eight years of schooling are 12
percentage points more likely to use C-section as the method of birth delivery.


                                                                                                                       34
observed positive association. High prevalence of C-section may also explain the negative association

between maternal education and gestational age as C-section surgeries are usually performed at around

38-39 weeks of gestation (Davidoff et al. 2006; Wilmink et al. 2010). In column (1), we also explore the

associations between women’s education and smoking behavior. This can be a mechanism through which

maternal education is linked to child health. We find that women who hold at least a middle school

diploma are 2 and 0.9 percentage points more likely to have ever smoked cigarettes and smoke at the time

of data collection, respectively. This finding is consistent with the observed positive association between

education and female smoking in middle-income countries (Cutler and Lleras-Muney, 2012). As

discussed by Cutler and Lleras-Muney (2012), this pattern is likely to represent the social context of

female smoking in such countries, including women’s empowerment and social acceptability.

        In column (2) we present the IV estimates of the impact of female schooling on maternal

behaviors. Children with mothers who earned at least a middle school diploma are 24.8 percentage points

more likely to be delivered via normal birth. This finding is in stark contrast to the OLS estimate

presented in column (1), in which we found that maternal education was negatively correlated with the

likelihood of a normal birth delivery. Different factors can explain why an increase in maternal

educational attainment has a positive impact on normal birth delivery. First, likely due to improvements

in allocative efficiency, access to maternal care, and increased income, if maternal education induces

mothers to exhibit health improving behaviors during pregnancy, the chances of experiencing health

complications during birth delivery may diminish. For instance, we already showed that maternal

schooling has a causal negative impact on high birth weight, which is a well-known reason to employ

non-normal birth delivery methods. Moreover, if more educated mothers are more aware of the child

health benefits of a vaginal birth delivery, they may choose to avoid unnecessary C-sections.

        When we turn our attention to maternal smoking, in column (2) we find that receiving at least

eight years of schooling lowers the likelihood of ever smoking regularly and being a current smoker by

8.4 and 3.4 percentage points, respectively. Given that women’s smoking is found to have negative




                                                                                                         35
effects on child health, these results suggest that the avoidance of risky health behaviors by mothers may

mediate the relationship between maternal education and child health.38

        In columns (3) to (7) we display the reduced form effect of education reform on maternal

attitudes and perform the TSIV estimates. Then, we repeat the robustness and sensitivity exercises that we

performed for child health outcomes in Figures 3A-3C, and Appendix Tables 9, 10 and 11. These

exercises produce a very similar pattern to that of birth outcomes and child mortality. These estimates

suggest increased schooling among women improves their behaviors towards enhancing the health of

their offspring’s. Altogether, these findings boost our confidence of the findings pertaining to the main

focus of our study, which show that extended maternal schooling improves child health at birth and lower

child mortality.



IX. DISCUSSION AND CONCLUSIONS

A number of researchers in economics have explored whether parental (particularly maternal) schooling

has a causal effect on child health in developing nations. Although some of these studies document that

extending mother’s years of schooling improves child health at birth and lowers child mortality, a set of

others does not find a statistically or economically significant relationship between the two. A closer look

at these studies reveals that a key shortcoming of many of the studies in this literature is the lack of

adequate statistical power. Even when the source of identifying variation in maternal education comes

from a credible natural experiment, without a sufficiently large estimation sample, the results may be

biased especially when the mean of the dependent variable is small. Furthermore, previous literature

offers little knowledge on the impact of forcing those with a little interest to pursue additional schooling

to receive extra education in developing countries.




38
  Nevertheless, if extra schooling causes women to under-report their smoking to healthcare professionals
especially, our estimates may be biased away from zero (or from a potential positive impact of education on
smoking). Therefore, caution should be exhibited in interpreting the impact of women’s education on maternal
smoking.


                                                                                                               36
        To fill the void in the literature, we analyze the effect of maternal compulsory schooling on child

health using two large data sets from a developing country, the Republic of Turkey. We exploit the 1997

compulsory education reform as our source of exogenous variation in maternal schooling to address the

endogenous nature of mother’s education. We analyze a host of outcomes, including birth weight,

gestation, head circumference, child mortality, method of birth delivery, and maternal smoking.

        Our findings show that mothers who earned at least a middle school diploma are less likely to

give birth to babies with very low birth weight, low birth weight, and high birth weight. They are less

likely to have a child died by age five. Additionally, obtaining increased schooling extends gestational

age and lowers the propensity of delivering premature babies. Finally, we also find evidence suggesting

that additional extended primary education increases the likelihood of normal births and decreases

maternal smoking.

        To put the estimates in context and be able to compare to other studies examining the relationship

between maternal education and child health in developing countries, we calculated the impact of at least

one additional year of maternal education, which is obtained by dividing our estimates by three given that

the 1997 education reform led to an increase of at least three years of education among those who are

impacted by the law. Our results imply that at least one more year of maternal education lowers the

probability of very low birthweight by 0.53 percentage points, low birth weight by 0.83 percentage points,

and high birthweight by 0.3 percentage points. It lowers the probability of premature birth by 0.6

percentage points and the probability of child mortality by 0.6 percentage points. We also find evidence

that it increases the probability of a normal birth by 3.3 percentage points and lowers the probability of

maternal smoking by 1.33 percentage points. Our results survive a number of robustness checks.39 These

effect sizes are similar to those reported by Grépin and Bharadwaj (2015) and Chou et al. (2010).

        Our careful analysis addresses potential concerns surrounding the validity of our instrumental

variable. As illustrated by our graphical analysis, figures reveal a discontinuity around the reform for our


39
  These effect sizes on birth outcomes and maternal smoking are obtained using the estimates presented in column 5
of Table 9. The effect size on child mortality is shown in Table 5 (column 6) and also in Table 6 (column 2).


                                                                                                               37
outcome variables yet no discontinuity for the balancing covariates, lending further support for the

strength of our instrument in the first stage and the validity of exclusion restrictions. The consistency of

our results across the estimates of various models, including different econometric specifications,

functional forms, choice of bandwidth, different samples, as well as the inclusion of province specific

birth cohort trends, among other robustness checks, suggests that our findings represent the causal effect

of having obtained a middle school degree on child health outcomes.

        Importantly, our estimates correspond to the LATE of maternal education on birth outcomes and

child mortality among mothers with a low tendency to extend their education beyond five years of basic

schooling in the absence of the mandate of the law. The 1997 education reform in Turkey is a unique one

in developing countries for the reason that it allows one to estimate the policy implications of compulsory

schooling at the lower end of the educational attainment distribution. Note that, as we previously

discussed, some aspects of the 1997 reform may have also reduced the cost of educational attainment and

enabled some individuals to afford schooling; thus, the LATE of this study does not perfectly represent

the pure effect of extended education among those with no interest in additional schooling. That being

said, to the best of our knowledge, this reform provides the closest natural experiment that enables one to

study the impact of mandated schooling in a developing country.

        While the efforts towards accomplishing universal primary schooling in poorer societies of the

world lead to significant progress, many developing countries have relatively few years of mandated

education. Furthermore, those with compulsory schooling laws oftentimes fail to successfully enforce the

rule, especially for females. Taken together, our findings underscore the role of positive health spillovers

of women’s education in developing countries in particular, where rates of female educational attainment

are significantly lower. Therefore, this research provides strong support for the argument that enacting

compulsory schooling laws and enforcing them in developing countries may have large positive

externalities in terms of child health.




                                                                                                           38
REFERENCES

Agüero, Jorge M., and Prashant Bharadwaj. (2014). Do the more educated know more about health?
       Evidence from schooling and HIV knowledge in Zimbabwe. Economic Development and
       Cultural Change 62, no. 3: 489-517.

Angrist, Joshua D., and Alan B. Krueger. (1991) Does Compulsory School Attendance Affect Schooling
        and Earnings? The Quarterly Journal of Economics 106, no. 4: 979-1014.

Angrist, Joshua D., and Alan B. Krueger. (1992). The effect of age at school entry on educational
        attainment: an application of instrumental variables with moments from two samples. Journal of
        the American statistical Association 87, no. 418: 328-336.

Akarsu, Rukiye Hobek, and Salime Mucuk. (2014) Turkish women’s opinions about cesarean delivery.
        Pak J Med Sci. Nov-Dec; 30(6): 1308–1313.

Andalón, Mabel, Jenny Williams, and Michael Grossman (2014). Empowering Women: The Effect of
       Schooling on Young Women’s Knowledge and Use of Contraception. National Bureau of
       Economic Research Working Paper No. w19961.Cambridge, MA.

Aytaç, Işık A., and Bruce H. Rankin. Modernity, traditionality, and junior high school attainment in
        Turkey. Social Indicators Research 66, no. 3 (2004): 267-282.

Battistin E, Brugiavini A, Rettore E, Weber G (2009) The retirement consumption puzzle: evidence from
         a regression discontinuity approach. Am Econ Rev 99:2209–2226.

Becker, Gary S., and Casey B. Mulligan. (1997) The endogenous determination of time preference. The
        Quarterly Journal of Economics:729-758.

Behrman, Jere R., and Mark R. Rosenzweig. (2002). Does Increasing Women’s Schooling Raise the
      Schooling of the Next Generation? American Economic Review, XCII (March), 323–334.

Bharadwaj, Prashant, and Leah K. Lakdawala. (2013) Discrimination begins in the womb: evidence of
       sex-selective prenatal investments. Journal of Human Resources 48, no. 1:71-113.

Black, Mairead, Siladitya Bhattacharya, Sam Philip, Jane E. Norman, and David J. McLernon. (2016)
       Planned Repeat Cesarean Section at Term and Adverse Childhood Health Outcomes: A Record-
       Linkage Study. PLoS Med 13, no. 3:e1001973.

Blustein, Jan, and Jianmeng Liu. (2015) Time to consider the risks of caesarean delivery for long term
        child health. BMJ 350:h2410.

Boulet, Sheree L., Greg R. Alexander, Hamisu M. Salihu, and MaryAnn Pass. (2003)Macrosomic births
        in the United States: determinants, outcomes, and proposed grades of risk. American journal of
        obstetrics and gynecology 188, no. 5:1372-1378.

Breierova, Lucia, and Esther Duflo (2004). The impact of education on fertility and child mortality: Do
        fathers really matter less than mothers? National Bureau of Economic Research Working Paper
        No. w10513.Cambridge, MA.




                                                                                                         39
Brunello, Giorgio, Daniele Fabbri, and Margherita Fort. (2013) The causal effect of education on body
        mass: Evidence from Europe. Journal of Labor Economics 31, no. 1:195-223.

Cakir, R., Irfan Bozan and B. Talu. (2004). Imam Hatip Liseleri: Efsaneler ve Gercekler. TESEV,
        http://www.tesev.org.tr/.

Calonico, Sebastian, Matias D. Cattaneo, and Rocio Titiunik. (2014) Robust Nonparametric Confidence
       Intervals for RegressionDiscontinuity Designs. Econometrica 82, no. 6 2295-2326.

Calonico, Sebastian, Matias D. Cattaneo, Max H. Farrell, and Rocıo Titiunik. (2016a) rdrobust: Software
       for Regression Discontinuity Designs. Working paper, University of Michigan.

Calonico, Sebastian, Matias D. Cattaneo, Max H. Farrell, and Rocıo Titiunik. (2016b). Regression
       Discontinuity Designs Using Covariates. Working paper, University of Michigan.

Cameron, A. Colin, Jonah B. Gelbach, and Douglas L. Miller. (2008). Bootstrap-based improvements for
      inference with clustered errors. The Review of Economics and Statistics 90, no. 3: 414-427.

Cameron, A. Colin, and Douglas L. Miller. (2015) A practitioner’s guide to cluster-robust
      inference. Journal of Human Resources 50, no. 2: 317-372.

Card, D. (2001). Estimating the Return to Schooling: Progress on Some Persistent Econometric Problems.
       Econometrica, 69(5), pp. 1127-60.

Celik, Yusuf, and David R. Hotchkiss. (2000) The socio-economic determinants of maternal health care
        utilization in Turkey. Social science & medicine 50, no. 12: 1797-1806.

Cesur, Resul; Kelly, Inas. (2010). From Cradle to Classroom: High Birth Weight and Cognitive
        Outcomes. Forum for Health Economics and Policy, Vol. 13: Iss. 2 (Health Economics), Article
        2.

Cesur, Resul, and Naci H. Mocan. (2013) Does secular education impact religiosity, electoral
        participation and the propensity to vote for Islamic parties? Evidence from an education reform in
        a Muslim country. National Bureau of Economic Research Working Paper No.
        w19769.Cambridge, MA.

Cesur, Resul, Bahadır Dursun, and Naci Mocan. (2014) The impact of education on health and health
        behavior in a middle-income, low-education country. National Bureau of Economic Research
        Working Paper No. w20764. Cambridge, MA.

Cesur, Resul, Pınar Mine Güneş, Erdal Tekin, and Aydogan Ulker. The value of socialized medicine: The
        impact of universal primary healthcare provision on mortality rates in Turkey. Journal of Public
        Economics 150 (2017): 75-93.

Chou, Shin-Yi, Jin-Tan Liu, Michael Grossman, and Ted Joyce. (2010) Parental education and child
       health: evidence from a natural experiment in Taiwan. American Economic Journal: Applied
       Economics 2, no. 1 33-61.

Clark, Damon, and Heather Royer. (2013). The Effect of Education on Adult Mortality and Health:
        Evidence from Britain. American Economic Review103, no. 6: 2087-2120.



                                                                                                        40
Cnattingius, Sven, E. Villamor, Y. T. Lagerros, Anna-Karin Wikström, and Fredrik Granath. (2012). High
        birth weight and obesity—a vicious circle across generations. International journal of obesity 36,
        no. 10: 1320-1324.

Currie, Janet, and Enrico Moretti. (2003). Mother’s Education and the Intergenerational Transmission of
         Human Capital: Evidence from College Openings. The Quarterly Journal of Economics 1495-
         1532.

Currie, Janet, Mark Stabile, Phongsack Manivong, and Leslie L. Roos. (2010). Child health and young
         adult outcomes. Journal of Human Resources 45, no. 3: 517-548.

Cutler, David, Angus Deaton and Adriana Lleras-Muney. (2006). The determinants of mortality. Journal
        of Economic Perspectives 20(3): 97-120.

Cutler, David M., and Adriana Lleras-Muney. (2012). Education and health: insights from international
        comparisons. National Bureau of Economic Research Working Paper No. w17738. Cambridge,
        MA.

Davidoff, Michael J., Todd Dias, Karla Damus, Rebecca Russell, Vani R. Bettegowda, Siobhan Dolan,
       Richard H. Schwarz, Nancy S. Green, and Joann Petrini. (2006). Changes in the gestational age
       distribution among US singleton births: impact on rates of late preterm birth, 1992 to 2002.
       In Seminars in perinatology, vol. 30, no. 1, pp. 8-15. WB Saunders.

Dinçer, Mehmet Alper, Neeraj Kaushal, and Michael Grossman. (2014) Women’s education: Harbinger
        of another spring? Evidence from a natural experiment in Turkey. World Development 64: 243-
        258.

Dulger I (2004) Turkey: rapid coverage for compulsory education—the 1997 basic education program.
        Scaling up poverty reduction: a global learning process. World Bank Conference, Shanghai.
        Available at: http://siteresources.worldbank.org/INTTURKEY/Resources/361616-
        1142415001082/Compulsory_Education_by_Dulger.pdf. Accessed 30 October 2016.

Dursun, Bahadır, and Resul Cesur. (2016). Transforming lives: the impact of compulsory schooling on
       hope and happiness. Journal of Population Economics. July, Volume 29, Issue 3, pp 911-956.

Erçelebi, Hasan. (2000). SEKİZ YILLIK ZORUNLU EĞİTİMİN İÇİNİN
        DOLDURULMASI. Pamukkale Üniversitesi Eğitim Fakültesi Dergisi 7, no. 7: 91-97.

Erci, Behice. Barriers to utilization of prenatal care services in Turkey. (2003). Journal of Nursing
        Scholarship 35, no. 3: 269-273.

Ergin, Isil, Hur Hassoy, Feride A. Tanik, and Gokce Aslan. (2010) Maternal age, education level and
         migration: socioeconomic determinants for smoking during pregnancy in a field study from
         Turkey. BMC Public Health 10, no. 1: 1.

Erten, Bilge, and Pınar Keskin. (Forthcoming). For Better or for Worse? Education and the Prevalence of
        Domestic Violence in Turkey. American Economic Journal: Applied Economics.

Fort, Margherita, Nicole Schneeweis, and Rudolf Winter‐Ebmer. Is Education Always Reducing
       Fertility? Evidence from Compulsory Schooling Reforms. The Economic Journal 126, no. 595
       (2016): 1823-1855.


                                                                                                        41
Geruso, Michael, and H. Royer. (2014). The impact of education on family formation: Quasi-
        experimental evidence from the uk. Technical report, mimeo, University of California, Santa
        Barbara.

Glewwe, Paul, and Michael Kremer. Schools, teachers, and education outcomes in developing
      countries. Handbook of the Economics of Education 2 (2006): 945-1017.

Glewwe, Paul, and Karthik Muralidharan. (2015). Improving school education outcomes in developing
      countries: evidence, knowledge gaps, and policy implications. University of Oxford, Research on
      Improving Systems of Education (RISE).

Grépin, Karen A., and Prashant Bharadwaj. (2015). Maternal education and child mortality in
        Zimbabwe. Journal of health economics 44: 97-117.

Grossman, Michael. On the concept of health capital and the demand for health. Journal of Political
      economy 80, no. 2 (1972): 223-255.

Grossman, M. (2006). Education and nonmarket outcomes. In E. A. Hanushek & F. Welch (Eds.),
      Handbook of the economics of education (Vol. 1, pp. 577–633): North Holland.

Grossman, Michael. (2015). The Relationship between Health and Schooling: What’s New? Nordic
      Journal of Health Economics 3, no. 1: pp-7.

Grytten, Jostein, Irene Skau, and Rune J. Sørensen. (2014). Educated mothers, healthy infants. The impact
        of a school reform on the birth weight of Norwegian infants 1967–2005. Social Science &
        Medicine 105: 84-92.

Güneş, Pınar Mine. (2015). The role of maternal education in child health: Evidence from a compulsory
       schooling law. Economics of Education Review, 47, 1-16.

Güneş, Pınar Mine. (2016). The Impact of Female Education on Teenage Fertility: Evidence from Turkey.
       The BE Journal of Economic Analysis & Policy 16, no. 1: 259-288.

Hizel, Selda, and Turgay Coskun. (2000). Determinants of Birth Weight: Does Air Pollution Have an
        Influential Effect? Turkish Journal of Medical Sciences 30, no. 1: 47-54.

Hungerford, T. and Solon, G., (1987). Sheepskin effects in the returns to education. The Review of
       Economics and Statistics, pp.175-177.

Imbens, Guido W., and Joshua D. Angrist. (1994). Identification and Estimation of Local Average
       Treatment Effects. Econometrica 62, no. 2: 467-475.

Inoue, Atsushi, and Gary Solon. (2010). Two-sample instrumental variables estimators. The Review of
        Economics and Statistics 92, no. 3: 557-561.

Imbens, Guido W., and Thomas Lemieux. (2008). Regression discontinuity designs: A guide to
       practice. Journal of econometrics 142, no. 2: 615-635.

Keats, Anthony. (2014). Women’s schooling, fertility, and child health outcomes: Evidence from
        Uganda’s free primary education program. Mimeo, Wesleyan University.


                                                                                                      42
Kenkel, Donald S. (1991). Health behavior, health knowledge, and schooling. Journal of Political
       Economy 99, no. 2: 287-305.

Koyanagi, Ai, Jun Zhang, Amarjargal Dagvadorj, Fumi Hirayama, Kenji Shibuya, João Paulo Souza, and
      Ahmet Metin Gülmezoglu. (2013) Macrosomia in 23 developing countries: an analysis of a
      multicountry, facility-based, cross-sectional survey. The Lancet 381, no. 9865: 476-483.

Kremer, Michael. (2003). Randomized evaluations of educational programs in developing countries:
       Some lessons. The American Economic Review 93, no. 2: 102-106.

Lavy, Victor, and Alexander Zablotsky. (2015). Women’s schooling and fertility under low female labor
       force participation: Evidence from mobility restrictions in Israel. Journal of Public
       Economics 124: 105-121.

Lee, David S., and Thomas Lemieux. (2010). Regression discontinuity designs in economics. Journal of
       economic literature 48, no. 2: 281-355.

Lindeboom, Maarten, Ana Llena-Nozal, and Bas van der Klaauw. (2009). Parental education and child
       health: Evidence from a schooling reform. Journal of health Economics 28, no. 1: 109-131.

Makate, Marshall, and Clifton Makate. (2016) The causal effect of increased primary schooling on child
       mortality in Malawi: Universal primary education as a natural experiment. Social Science &
       Medicine 168: 72-83.

McCrary, Justin, and Heather Royer. (2011) The effect of female education on fertility and infant health:
      Evidence from school entry policies using exact date of birth. The American economic
      review 101, no. 1: 158-195.

Mocan, Leyla. (2014). The impact of education on wages: Analysis of an Education Reform in
       Turkey. Available at SSRN 2537472.

Mocan, Naci, Christian Raschke, and Bulent Unel. (2015). The impact of mothers’ earnings on health
       inputs and infant health. Economics & Human Biology 19: 204-223.

Oreopoulos, Philip. (2006). Estimating average and local average treatment effects of education when
       compulsory schooling laws really matter. The American Economic Review 96, no. 1: 152-175.

Osili, Una Okonkwo, and Bridget Terry Long. (2008). Does female schooling reduce fertility? Evidence
        from Nigeria. Journal of development Economics 87, no. 1: 57-75.

Oster, Emily. (2009). Proximate Causes of Population Gender Imbalance in India. Demography
        46(2):325–39.

Otaran, Nur, A. Sayn, F. Güven, I. Gürkaynak, and S. Satakul. A gender review in education, Turkey
        2003. Retrieved October 15, 2016, from http://www.unicef.org/turkey/gr/ge21.html.

Penna, L., and S. Arulkumaran. (2003). Cesarean section for non-medical reasons. International Journal
        of Gynecology & Obstetrics 82, no. 3: 399-409.




                                                                                                       43
Rankin, Bruce H., and Işik A. Aytaç. Gender inequality in schooling: The case of Turkey. Sociology of
        Education 79, no. 1 (2006): 25-43.

Retnakaran, Ravi, Chang Ye, Anthony JG Hanley, Philip W. Connelly, Mathew Sermer, Bernard Zinman,
       and Jill K. Hamilton. (2012). Effect of maternal weight, adipokines, glucose intolerance and
       lipids on infant birth weight among women without gestational diabetes mellitus. Canadian
       Medical Association Journal 184, no. 12: 1353-1360.

Seckiner, Pelin Cagatay; Tezcan, Sabahat; Tunckanat, Hande. Turkey’s rising trend in Cesarean section:
       who are these women? (2010) Paper presented at the 2010 European Population Conference.
       Available at: http://epc2010.princeton.edu/abstracts/100551. Accessed 30 October 2016.

Sparano, Sonia, Wolfgang Ahrens, Stefaan De Henauw, Staffan Marild, Denes Molnar, Luis A. Moreno,
       Marc Suling et al. (2013). Being macrosomic at birth is an independent predictor of overweight in
       children: results from the IDEFICS study. Maternal and child health journal 17, no. 8: 1373-
       1381.

Thomas, Duncan, John Strauss, and Maria-Helena Henriques. (1991) How does mother’s education affect
      child height? Journal of human resources 183-211.

Torun, Huzeyfe. (2015). Compulsory Schooling and Early Labor Market Outcomes in a Middle-Income
       Country. Central Bank of the Republic of Turkey Working Paper No. 15/34. Available at:
       http://www.tcmb.gov.tr/wps/wcm/connect/87ae51d6-a895-46ad-a132-
       c4794435d224/wp1534.pdf?MOD=AJPERES&CACHEID=ROOTWORKSPACE87ae51d6-
       a895-46ad-a132-c4794435d224.

Torun, H. and S. Tumen (2015). The Empirical Content of Season-of-Birth Effects: An Investigation with
       Turkish Data. Unpublished manuscript, Central Bank of the Republic of Turkey.

Turkish Ministry of National Education (2001). National Education Statistics. State Institute of Statistics,
        Prime Ministry Republic of Turkey.

UNICEF (2007). Eliminating Gender Disparity in Primary Education: The Case of Turkey. New York:
     United Nations Children’s Fund (UNICEF).

United Nations (2015). The Millennium Development Goals Report, United Nations. Available at:
       http://www.un.org/millenniumgoals/2015_MDG_Report/pdf/MDG%202015%20rev%20(July%2
       01).pdf. Accessed 31 May 2017.

Walsh, Jennifer M., and Fionnuala M. McAuliffe. (2012). Prediction and prevention of the macrosomic
        fetus. European Journal of Obstetrics & Gynecology and Reproductive Biology 162, no. 2: 125-
        130.

Wei, Jung-Nan, Fung-Chang Sung, Chung-Yi Li, Chia-Hsuin Chang, Ruey-Shiung Lin, Chau-Ching Lin,
       Chuan-Chi Chiang, and Lee-Ming Chuang. (2003). Low birth weight and high birth weight
       infants are both at an increased risk to have type 2 diabetes among schoolchildren in
       Taiwan. Diabetes care 26, no. 2: 343-348.

Whincup, Peter H., Samantha J. Kaye, Christopher G. Owen, Rachel Huxley, Derek G. Cook, Sonoko
      Anazawa, Elizabeth Barrett-Connor et al. (2008). Birth weight and risk of type 2 diabetes: a
      systematic review. JAMA 300, no. 24: 2886-2897.


                                                                                                          44
Wilmink, Freke A., Chantal WPM Hukkelhoven, Simone Lunshof, Ben Willem J. Mol, Joris AM van der
      Post, and Dimitri NM Papatsonis. 2010. Neonatal outcome following elective cesarean section
      beyond 37 weeks of gestation: a 7-year retrospective analysis of a national registry. American
      journal of obstetrics and gynecology 202, no. 3: 250-e1.

World Bank (2005). Turkey-education Sector Study: Sustainable Pathways to an Effective, Equitable, and
       Efficient Education System for Pre-school Through Secondary School Education. Report No.
       32450-TU, Washington, DC.

Zeldin, Wendy. (2012) Turkey: Law Restricting Caesarean Births. Library of Congress. Available at:
        http://www.loc.gov/law/foreign-news/article/turkey-law-restricting-caesarean-births/. Accessed
        30 October 2016.

Zhang, Shuang. (2014) Mother’s Education and Infant Health: Evidence from High School Closures in
       China. Working Paper.

Zhang, Xun, Adriana Decker, Robert W. Platt, and Michael S. Kramer. (2008). How big is too big? The
       perinatal consequences of fetal macrosomia. American journal of obstetrics and gynecology 198,
       no. 5: 517-e1.




                                                                                                     45
Figure 1: The Impact of the 1997 Reform on Educational Attainment




                                                                    46
Figure 2: The Impact of the 1997 Education Reform on Outcome Variables




                                                                         47
48
Figure 3: The Impact of the 1997 Education Reform on Maternal Behavior




                                                                         49
                           Table 1 Summary Statistics
                                     All           Control            Treatment
                              Panel A: Birth Outcomes
Middle School                          0.5315             0.4951           0.5719
                                       (0.499)            (0.500)         (0.4948)
 Birth Weight                        3245.947           3260.277         3229.235
                                    (502.2491)         (511.5284)       (490.6807)
 Very Low Birthweight                  0.0055             0.0061           0.0049
                                      (0.0742)           (0.0778)         (0.0698)
 Low Birthweight                       0.0601             0.0607           0.0595
                                      (0.2378)           (0.2388)         (0.2366)
 High Birthweight                      0.0047             0.0058           0.0034
                                      (0.0686)           (0.0761)         (0.0585)
 Age                                  26.8181            29.4389          23.7617
                                      (3.2559)           (1.6383)         (1.5753)
                                     [186,840]           [96,874]         [89,966]
 Gestational Age                      38.4173            38.3058           38.541
                                      (2.1752)           (2.1361)         (2.2111)
 Preterm<37 weeks                      0.1169             0.1212           0.1121
                                      (0.3213)           (0.3264)         (0.3155)
                                    [1,486,353]         [756,929]        [729,424]
 Head Circumference                   34.5653            34.5975          34.5278
                                       (1.732)            (1.749)         (1.7113)
                                     [186,505]           [96,689]         [89,816]
                               Panel B: Child Mortality
 Middle School                         0.6215             0.5438           0.8026
                                       (0.485)           (0.4981)         (0.3981)
 Any Child Died                         0.026             0.0291           0.0188
                                      (0.1591)           (0.1681)         (0.1359)
                                     [340,091]          [237,964]        [102,128]
The means in Panel A are generated using data from the Ministry of Health Birth
Outcomes Data (MHBOD), and in Panel B, we used Turkish Statistical Institute’s
Population and Housing Census 2011 (PHC). Individuals born between 1987 and
1991 constitute the treatment group and those who were born between 1981 and 1985
form the control group. Standard deviations are in parentheses. Variables in Panel A
are weighted by number of women in fertility age (ages 15 to 49) in the province.
Survey weights provided by the PHC are used in Panel B. Number of observations are
in square brackets [].




                                                                                       50
                            Table 2
  OLS Estimates of Child Health and Maternal Health Outcomes
                    on Maternal Education
                           Panel A: Birth Outcomes
 Dependent Variables
   Log Birthweight                                              0.0050***
                                                                 (0.0016)
    Very Low Birthweight                                          -0.0004
                                                                 (0.0007)
    Low Birthweight                                             -0.0048**
                                                                 (0.0021)
    High Birthweight                                              -0.003*
                                                                 (0.0007)
 Observations                                                    [186,840]
   Log Gestational Age                                          -0.0024***
                                                                  (0.0002)
    Preterm<37 weeks                                            -0.0095***
                                                                   (0.001)
 Observations                                                  [1,486,353]
   Log Head Circumference                                         -0.0006
                                                                 (0.0004)
 Observations                                                   [186,505]
                            Panel B: Child Mortality
    Any Child Died                                              -0.019***
                                                                  (0.001)
 Observations                                                   [340,091]
The entries in parentheses are standard errors of the estimated coefficients,
clustered at the birth year by province level. *, **, and *** indicate statistical
significance at the 10%, 5%, and 1% levels, respectively. All models include
re-centered birth date in months differentiated by exposure to the 1997 reform
status, mother’s month of birth dummies, and province fixed effects. Birth
outcome models also control for child’s birth year fixed effects and male child
dummy. Birth outcome models are weighted by number of women in fertility
age (ages 15 to 49) in the province. Survey weights provided by the PHC are
used in mortality estimations. Number of observations are in square brackets
[].




                                                                                     51
                                      Table 3
The Impact of the 1997 Education Reform on Obtaining at Least a Middle School Degree
                                      Panel A: Birth Outcomes
    Birth Weight Sample
       Education Reform                                                    0.0757***
                                                                            (0.0099)
                                                                            [186,840]
    Gestational Age Sample
      Education Reform                                                     0.0834***
                                                                            (0.0097)
                                                                 [1,486,353]
                                      Panel B: Child Mortality
       Education Reform                                                        0.228***
                                                                                (0.014)

                                                                                [340,091]
    The entries in parentheses are standard errors of the estimated coefficients, clustered at the
    birth year by province level. *, **, and *** indicate statistical significance at the 10%, 5%,
    and 1% levels, respectively. All models include re-centered birth date in months
    differentiated by exposure to the 1997 reform status, mother’s month of birth dummies, and
    province fixed effects. Birth outcome models also control for child’s birth year fixed effects
    and male child dummy. Birth outcome models are weighted by number of women in fertility
    age (ages 15 to 49) in the province. Survey weights provided by the PHC are used in
    mortality estimations. Number of observations are in square brackets [].




                                                                                                     52
                             Table 4
Instrumental Variable Estimates of the Impact of Maternal Education
                 on Child Health: Baseline Results
                            Panel A: Birth Outcomes
 Dependent Variables
   Log Birthweight                                                  0.037*
                                                                    (0.022)
    Very Low Birthweight                                          -0.047***
                                                                    (0.012)
    Low Birthweight                                                -0.074**
                                                                    (0.031)
    High Birthweight                                               -0.027**
                                                                    (0.011)
    1st Stage F-test                                               {36.835}
                                                                  [186,840]
    Log Gestational Age                                            0.023***
                                                                    (0.004)
    Preterm<37 weeks                                              -0.050***
                                                                    (0.014)
    1st Stage F-test                                              {74.464}
                                                                 [1,486,353]
    Log Head Circumference                                          0.013
                                                                   (0.008)
    1st Stage F-test                                              {37.341}
                                                                  [186,505]
                             Panel B: Child Mortality
    Any Child Died                                                 -0.018**
                                                                    (0.007)
    1st Stage F-test                                              {232.883}
                                                                  [340,091]
 The entries in parentheses are standard errors of the estimated coefficients,
 clustered at the birth year by province level. *, **, and *** indicate statistical
 significance at the 10%, 5%, and 1% levels, respectively. All models include
 re-centered birth date in months differentiated by exposure to the 1997 reform
 status, mother’s month of birth dummies, and province fixed effects. Birth
 outcome models also control for child’s birth year fixed effects and male child
 dummy. Birth outcome models are weighted by number of women in fertility
 age (ages 15 to 49) in the province. Survey weights provided by the PHC are
 used in mortality estimations. Number of observations are in square brackets
 []. 1st Stage F-Statistics are provided in curly brackets {}.




                                                                                      53
                                                                     Table 5
                                       The Impact of Maternal Education on Child Health, Robustness Checks
                                                            (1)                   (2)            (3)                (4)                (5)               (6)
                                                         Baseline              Intent to   Alt. Treatment       Quadratic BC     Local Linear IV    With Province
                                                         Estimates               Treat     for 1986 Birth         Control         with rdrobust     Specific Birth
                                                                              Estimates   Cohort T==0.25          Function         command          Cohort Trends
                                                                      Panel A: Birth Outcomes
  Dependent Variables
    Log Birthweight                                        0.037*               0.00287**           0.046**            0.038             0.033**            0.038**
                                                           (0.022)              (0.00123)           (0.023)            (0.026             (0.015            (0.019)
      Very Low Birthweight                               -0.047***            -0.00355***         -0.039***         -0.046***          -0.041***          -0.047***
                                                           (0.012)              (0.00056)           (0.011)           (0.011)             (0.01)            (0.011)
      Low Birthweight                                     -0.074**            -0.00563***          -0.077**          -0.073**           -0.06***           -0.074**
                                                           (0.031)              (0.00171)            (0.03)           (0.033)            (0.023)            (0.029)
      High Birthweight                                    -0.027**            -0.00200***         -0.027***          -0.026**          -0.026***          -0.026***
                                                           (0.011)              (0.00073)            (0.01)           (0.011)             (0.01)             (0.01)
      1st Stage F-test                                    {36.835}                  ---            {43.903}          {36.538}                               {58.66}
                                                         [186,840]              [186,840]         [208,424]         [186,840]          [186,840]          [186,840]
      Log Gestational Age                                 0.023***             0.00190***          0.021***          0.023***           0.020***          0.023***
                                                           (0.004)               (0.0002)           (0.004)           (0.004)            (0.004)            (0.003)
      Preterm<37 weeks                                   -0.050***            -0.00414***         -0.057***         -0.052***          -0.037***          -0.050***
                                                           (0.014)              (0.00116)           (0.015)           (0.016)            (0.013)            (0.014)
      1st Stage F-test                                    {74.464}                  ---            {77.535}          {72.681}                             {147.562}
                                                        [1,486,353]            [1,486,353]       [1,654,931]       [1,486,353]        [1,486,353]        [1,486,353]
      Log Head Circumference                                0.013               0.00100*             0.016*            0.013              0.011              0.013*
                                                           (0.008)              (0.00053)           (0.009)           (0.009)            (0.008)            (0.008)
      1st Stage F-test                                    {37.341}                  ---            {44.374}          {37.078}                              {59.373}
                                                         [186,505]              [186,505]         [208,043]         [186,505]          [186,505]          [186,505]
                                                                      Panel B: Child Mortality
      Any Child Died                                       -0.018**              -0.004**         -0.018***         -0.019***           -0.017**          -0.018***
                                                            (0.007)               (0.001)           (0.007)           (0.006)            (0.008)            (0.006)
      1st Stage F-test                                    {232.883}                 ---             {218.5}         {232.198}                               {374.9}
                                                          [340,091]             [340,091]         [375,433]         [340,091]          [340,091]          [340,091]
The entries in parentheses are standard errors of the estimated coefficients, clustered at the birth year by province level. *, **, and *** indicate statistical
significance at the 10%, 5%, and 1% levels, respectively. All models include re-centered birth date in months differentiated by exposure to the 1997 reform
status, mother’s month of birth dummies, and province fixed effects. Birth outcome models also control for child’s birth year fixed effects and male child
dummy. Birth outcome models are weighted by number of women in fertility age (ages 15 to 49) in the province. Survey weights provided by the PHC are used
in mortality estimations. Number of observations are in square brackets []. 1 st Stage F-Statistics are provided in curly brackets {}.


                                                                                                                                                                  54
                                             Table 6
  Robustness of the IV Estimates of the Impact of Maternal Education on Child Health to Using
                                     Alternative Bandwidths
                                                            (1)              (2)            (3)           (4)
                                                           80-92            81-91          82-90         83-89
                                             Panel A: Birth Outcomes
   Dependent Variables
     Log Birthweight                                        0.028*          0.038**        0.030*        0.037**
                                                            (0.017)         (0.019)        (0.017)       (0.016)
      Very Low Birthweight                                -0.030***       -0.047***      -0.044***     -0.045***
                                                            (0.011)         (0.011)        (0.011)       (0.010)
      Low Birthweight                                      -0.055**        -0.074**       -0.065**      -0.050**
                                                            (0.025)         (0.029)        (0.026)       (0.023)
      High Birthweight                                    -0.027***       -0.026***      -0.030***        -0.019
                                                            (0.009)         (0.010)        (0.010)       (0.012)
      1st Stage F-test                                     {66.797}        {58.660}       {82.271}     {176.673}
                                                          [214,185]       [186,840]      [154,533]     [119,450]
      Log Gestational Age                                  0.021***        0.023***       0.020***     0.018***
                                                            (0.003)         (0.003)        (0.003)       (0.004)
      Preterm< 37 weeks                                   -0.036***       -0.050***      -0.027***     -0.042***
                                                            (0.012)         (0.014)        (0.010)       (0.014)
      1st Stage F-test                                     {155.373}      {147.562}      {203.758}     {279.901}
                                                          [1,710,454]    [1,486,353]    [1,227,026]    [947,857]
      Log Head Circumference                                 0.012*         0.013*         0.008         0.014*
                                                            (0.007)        (0.008)        (0.008)       (0.008)
      1st Stage F-test                                   {67.835}         {59.373}       {82.894}      {177.573}
                                                        [213,807]         [186,505]      [154,257]     [119,231]
                                             Panel B: Child Mortality
      Any Child Died                                     -0.015**         -0.018***       -0.018**      -0.017*
                                                          (0.006)           (0.006)        (0.007)      (0.009)
      1st Stage F-test                                          {407.0}      {374.9}         {354.0}       {342.5}
                                                               [406,046]    [340,091]       [269,958]     [204,549]
The entries in parentheses are standard errors of the estimated coefficients, clustered at the birth year by province
level. *, **, and *** indicate statistical significance at the 10%, 5%, and 1% levels, respectively. All models
include re-centered birth date in months differentiated by exposure to the 1997 reform status, mother’s month of
birth dummies, and province fixed effects and province specific maternal birth month-year trends. Birth outcome
models also control for child’s birth year fixed effects and male child dummy. Birth outcome models are weighted
by number of women in fertility age (ages 15 to 49) in the province. Survey weights provided by the PHC are used
in mortality estimations. Column headings pertains to data estimation intervals based on year of birth year of the
mother. Number of observations are in square brackets []. 1 st Stage F-Statistics are provided in curly brackets {}.




                                                                                                                   55
                               Table 7
Instrumental Variable Estimates of the Impact of Maternal Education on
             Child Health, at Most Middle School Sample
                             Panel A: Birth Outcomes
 Dependent Variables
   Log Birthweight                                                     0.020
                                                                      (0.024)
    Very Low Birthweight                                            -0.028***
                                                                      (0.007)
    Low Birthweight                                                  -0.055**
                                                                      (0.025)
    High Birthweight                                                 -0.024**
                                                                      (0.011)
    1st Stage F-test                                                {127.320}
                                                                    [116,184]
    Log Gestational Age                                             0.016***
                                                                     (0.003)
    Preterm<37 weeks                                                  -0.020
                                                                     (0.014)
    1st Stage F-test                                                {223.940}
                                                                    [961,594]
    Log Head Circumference                                            0.011
                                                                     (0.007)
    1st Stage F-test                                                {125.249}
                                                                    [115,978]
                              Panel B: Child Mortality
    Any Child Died                                                  -0.020***
                                                                      (0.006)
    1st Stage F-test                                                    {430.5}
                                                                       [234,084]
 The entries in parentheses are standard errors of the estimated coefficients,
 clustered at the birth year by province level. *, **, and *** indicate statistical
 significance at the 10%, 5%, and 1% levels, respectively. All models include re-
 centered birth date in months differentiated by exposure to the 1997 reform status,
 mother’s month of birth dummies, and province fixed effects and province
 specific maternal birth month-year trends. Birth outcome models also control for
 child’s birth year fixed effects and male child dummy. Birth outcome models are
 weighted by number of women in fertility age (ages 15 to 49) in the province.
 Survey weights provided by the PHC are used in mortality estimations. Number of
 observations are in square brackets []. 1st Stage F-Statistics are provided in curly
 brackets {}.




                                                                                        56
                                     Table 8
Gender Specific IV Estimates of the Impact of Maternal Education on Child Health
                                                          (1)                      (2)
                                                       Daughter                   Son
                                                        Sample                   Sample
                                   Panel A: Birth Outcomes
    Dependent Variables
      Log Birthweight                                        0.032               0.045*
                                                            (0.029)              (0.026)
       Very Low Birthweight                               -0.060***            -0.032***
                                                            (0.016)              (0.011)
       Low Birthweight                                       -0.078            -0.070***
                                                            (0.049)              (0.026)
       High Birthweight                                   -0.030***               -0.023
                                                             (0.01)              (0.018)

       1st Stage F-test                                    {74.157}             {23.479}
                                                           [90,985]             [95,855]
       Log Gestational Age                                 0.024***             0.021***
                                                            (0.004)              (0.005)
       Preterm<37 weeks                                   -0.069***              -0.031*
                                                            (0.024)              (0.018)

       1st Stage F-test                                   {179.517}            {113.265}
                                                          [722,387]            [763,966]
       Log Head Circumference                               0.01                0.017**
                                                           (0.012)              (0.008)

       1st Stage F-test                                 {75.606}                 {23.67
                                                        [90,801]                [95,704]
                                    Panel B: Child Mortality
       Any Child Died                                    -0.012*                 -0.014*
                                                         (0.007)                 (0.007)

       1st Stage F-test                                     {374.9}                {374.9}
                                                           [221,061]              [236,081]
   The entries in parentheses are standard errors of the estimated coefficients, clustered at
   the birth year by province level. *, **, and *** indicate statistical significance at the
   10%, 5%, and 1% levels, respectively. All models include re-centered birth date in
   months differentiated by exposure to the 1997 reform status, mother’s month of birth
   dummies, and province fixed effects and province specific maternal birth month-year
   trends. Birth outcome models also control for child’s birth year fixed effects and male
   child dummy. Birth outcome models are weighted by number of women in fertility age
   (ages 15 to 49) in the province. Survey weights provided by the PHC are used in
   mortality estimations. Number of observations are in square brackets []. 1 st Stage F-
   Statistics are provided in curly brackets {}.




                                                                                                57
                                                   Table 9
                                 Two Sample Instrumental Variable Estimates
                                      (1)          (2)         (3)            (4)                             (5)
                                  First Stage  First Stage   Reduced      2 Sample IV                    2 Sample IV
                                    HLFS          PHC         Form           HLFS                            PHC
Dependent Variables
  Log Birthweight                   0.245***        0.227***          0.00287**           0.0100*            0.013**
                                     (0.015)         (0.012)          (0.00123)           (0.005)            (0.005)
    Very Low Birthweight            0.245***        0.227***        -0.00355***         -0.014***          -0.016***
                                     (0.015)         (0.012)          (0.00056)           (0.002)            (0.002)
    Low Birthweight                 0.245***        0.227***        -0.00563***         -0.022***          -0.025***
                                     (0.015)         (0.012)          (0.00171)           (0.007)            (0.007)
    High Birthweight                0.245***        0.227***        -0.00200***         -0.008***          -0.009***
                                     (0.015)         (0.012)          (0.00073)           (0.003)            (0.003)
                                    [154,160]       [340,091]         [186,840]         [186,840]          [186,840]
   Log Gestational Age              0.245***        0.227***         0.00190***          0.008***          0.008 ***
                                     (0.015)         (0.012)           (0.0002)           (0.001)            (0.001)
   Preterm                          0.245***        0.227***        -0.00414***         -0.017***          -0.018***
                                     (0.015)         (0.012)          (0.00116)           (0.005)            (0.000)
                                    [154,160]       [340,091]        [1,486,353]       [1,486,353]        [1,486,353]
   Log Head Circumference           0.245***        0.227***           0.00100*          0.00373*           0.00441*
                                     (0.015)         (0.012)          (0.00053)         (0.00211)          (0.00234)
                                    [154,160]       [340,091]         [186,505]         [186,505]          [186,505]
The entries in parentheses are standard errors of the estimated coefficients, clustered at the birth year by province
level. *, **, and *** indicate statistical significance at the 10%, 5%, and 1% levels, respectively. All models include
re-centered birth date in months differentiated by exposure to the 1997 reform status, mother’s month of birth
dummies, child’s birth year fixed effects, province fixed effects, and province specific maternal birth month-year
trends. Birth outcome models are weighted by number of women in fertility age (ages 15 to 49) in the province.
Survey weights provided by the PHC and HLFS are used in corresponding estimations. Column headings pertains to
data used in estimations. Number of observations are in square brackets [].




                                                                                                                58
                                                   Table 10
               Instrumental Variable Estimates of the Impact of Maternal Education on Maternal
                                                   Behaviors
                             (1)            (2)             (3)              (4)            (5)            (6)              (7)
                            OLS             IV           Intent to       First Stage    First Stage   2 Sample IV      2 Sample IV
                                                      Treat Estimates      HLFS            PHC           HLFS              PHC
Dependent Variables
   Normal Birth        -0.11650***          0.266***       0.02289***     0.245***       0.227***         0.093***         0.100***
                         (0.00393)           (0.039)        (0.00238)       (0.015)        (0.012)         (0.014)          (0.012)
  1st Stage F-test                        {167.822}
                         [1,594,793] [1,594,793]           [1,594,793]    [154,160]      [340,091]      [1,594,793]      [1,594,793]
   Ever Smoked           0.01900***        -0.084***      -0.00834***     0.245***       0.227***        -0.034***        -0.037***
                           (0.0012)          (0.023)        (0.00192)       (0.015)        (0.012)         (0.009)          (0.009)
  Current Smoker         0.00863***        -0.034***      -0.00341***     0.245***       0.227***        -0.014***        -0.015***
                          (0.00137)          (0.013)        (0.00122)       (0.015)        (0.012)         (0.005)          (0.005)
  1st Stage F-test                        {222.429}
                          [550,001]        [550,001]        [550,001]     [154,160]      [340,091]       [550,001]        [550,001]
 The entries in parentheses are standard errors of the estimated coefficients, clustered at the birth year by province level. *, **,
 and *** indicate statistical significance at the 10%, 5%, and 1% levels, respectively. All models include re-centered birth
 date in months differentiated by exposure to the 1997 reform status, mother’s month of birth dummies, and province fixed
 effects, province specific maternal birth month-year trends, child’s birth year fixed effects, and male child dummy. Models
 are weighted by number of women in fertility age (ages 15 to 49) in the province. Number of observations are in square
 brackets []. 1st Stage F-Statistics are provided in curly brackets {}.




                                                                                                                      59
Appendix Figure 1: Trends in Educational Attainment by Birth Cohort




                                                                      60
Appendix Figure 2: Balanced Covariates




   Appendix Figure 3: McCrary Test




                                         61
                              Appendix Table 1
Trends in the Number of Elementary, Middle, and Primary Schools in 1990s
                                  Total Number of Schools
    Academic        Elementary Middle               Primary
      Year            School    School               School
     1991-92          50,701     7,025                N/A
     1992-93          49,974     7,544                N/A
     1993-94          49,599     8,318                N/A
     1994-95          48,429     8,897                N/A
     1995-96          49,240     9,385                N/A
     1996-97          47,313     9,830                N/A
     1997-98            N/A       N/A                46,801
     1998-99            N/A       N/A                44,433
     1999-00            N/A       N/A                32,634
     2000-01            N/A       N/A                35,356
    The data come from the Ministry of National Education’s 2000-01 Yearbook.




                                                                                62
                                       Appendix Table 2
               Main Reasons for Not Attending School Among Ever Married
                Women Who Were Not Bound by the 1997 Education Reform
 Reasons for Dropping Out School                        Total   Urban                       Rural
  School Not Accessible                                 0.055    0.037                      0.075
  Did not like school/ did not pass exams               0.195    0.239                      0.150
  Cannot afford schooling expenses                      0.056    0.074                      0.036
  Had enough schooling                                  0.007    0.006                      0.007
  Needed to earn money                                  0.014    0.021                      0.006
  Family needed help                                    0.016    0.012                      0.020
  Take care of children                                 0.001    0.001                      0.001
  Got married                                           0.021    0.023                      0.020
  His/her family doesn’t permit child to go to school   0.401    0.362                      0.446
  Other                                                 0.204    0.191                      0.220
  Don’t Know/ Missing                                   0.023    0.017                      0.028
  Number of Observations                                1,563     829                        734
The data come from the Ever-Married Module of the Turkish Demographic and Health Survey collected in
1998. The table shows the percentage distribution of women aged 15-24 who stopped attending school
upon earning a 5-year elementary school diploma by reasons for not continuing their education. Women
who were between 15 and 24 were not affected by the 1997 education reform.




                                                                                                    63
                                                                             Appendix Table 3
                           Studies Using Natural Experiments to Estimate the Effect of Maternal Education on Child Health in Developing Countries
   Study         Country                             Identification                           Outcomes Coinciding      Impact of Additional          No. of                          Notes
                                                                                               With This Study          Year of Schooling         Observations
Breierova        Indonesia     Age and region specific exposure to the school                Total Number of         45% decrease                   122,818      First stage F-test statistic is < 5
and Duflo                      construction program (INPRES) that took                       Children Died           in the total number
(2004)                         place between 1973 and 1978.                                                          of children died
Chou et al.       Taiwan       Age and region specific exposure to the                       Birth weight,           Lowers the incidence            7,853*
(2010)                         school construction program joint with                        Child mortality         of low birth
                               compulsory schooling reform in 1968-69.                                               weight by 25%.
Grépin and      Zimbabwe       Age specific exposure to education reform                     Child mortality         Lowers the                     7813**       3339 observations in treatment group;
Bharadwaj                      followed by independence in 1980.                                                     child mortality                             3103 observations in control group.
(2015)                                                                                                               by 21%.
Günes             Turkey       Age specific exposure to the 1997 education reform            Birth weight,           Decreases                       1677        265 observations in the treatment group;
(2015)                         and the intensity of the additional classrooms                height/weight for age   very low birth                              1412 observations in the control group.
                               constructed in mother’s birth province due to the reform      for age z-scores        weight by 85%.
Keats (2014)      Uganda       Exposure to a national reform that eliminates                 Preventative care       Null effect for mortality.      8,348
                               primary school fees in 1997                                   and chronic             Decreases stunting by
                                                                                             malnutrition            18% and anemia by 14%.
Makate and        Malawi       Elimination of schooling fees due to the 1994                 Under 5 Mortality       Lowers mortality by             40,540
Makate                         Universal Primary Schooling Program.                          Infant Mortality        6.48%.
(2016)
Zhang              China       Mothers’ exposure to high school closures after                Birth weight,          Null effect.                    22,444
(2014)                         the Cultural Revolution                                        Child mortality
               * Chou et al. (2010) use data aggregated at the parental county of by birth year level.
               ** The number of mothers in the sample




                                                                                                                                                                                            64
                                   Appendix Table 4
The Impact of Being Exposed to the 1997 Education Reform on the Likelihood of Providing
          Missing Information on Outcome Measures and Maternal Education
                    Panel A. Missing Birth weight and Mothers Education on Reform
Education Reform                                                                                 0.000197
                                                                                                 (0.00069)

                                                                                                [2,943,692]
                Panel B. Missing Gestational Age and Mothers Education on Reform
Education Reform                                                                                 0.001056
                                                                                                 (0.00125)

                                                                                                [2,943,692]
                   Panel C. Missing Birth Method and Mothers Education on Reform
Education Reform                                                                                 0.000066
                                                                                                (0.001325)

                                                                                                [2,943,692]
               Panel D. Missing Smoking Behavior and Mothers Education on Reform
Education Reform
                                                                                                -0.001275
                                                                                                   (0.00148)
                                                                                                  [2,943,692]
The entries in parentheses are standard errors of the estimated coefficients, clustered at the birth year by
province level. *, **, and *** indicate statistical significance at the 10%, 5%, and 1% levels, respectively.
All models include re-centered birth month differentiated by exposure to the 1997 reform status, mother’s
month of birth dummies, province fixed effects, child’s birth year fixed effects, and male child dummy.
Models are weighted by number of women in fertility age (ages 15 to 49) in the province. Number of
observations are in square brackets [].




                                                     65
                                                     Appendix Table 5
                               Instrumental Variable Estimates with Alternative Cluster Levels
                                             (1)                (2)          (3)         (4)                        (5)          (6)
                                         Cluster by         Cluster by   Cluster by   Cluster by                Cluster by      Wild
                                          Province            Birth     Birth Month Birth Year                  Birth Year    Bootstrap
                                            Level         Month Level by Province by NUTS1                        Level       P-Values
                                                   Panel A: Birth Outcomes
  Dependent Variables
    Log Birthweight                           0.038***               0.038           0.038         0.038**        0.038**
                                                                                                                                0.040
                                               (0.008)              (0.032)          (0.03)        (0.019)        (0.015)
     Very Low Birthweight                    -0.047***            -0.047***       -0.047***      -0.047***      -0.047***
                                                                                                                                0.015
                                               (0.011)              (0.016)         (0.016)        (0.012)        (0.012)
     Low Birthweight                          -0.074**              -0.074*         -0.074*       -0.074**      -0.074***
                                                                                                                                0.005
                                               (0.035)              (0.043)         (0.044)        (0.029)        (0.027)
     High Birthweight                          -0.026*             -0.026**        -0.026**      -0.026***      -0.026***
                                                                                                                                0.055
                                               (0.016)              (0.011)         (0.013)        (0.010)        (0.007)
     1st Stage F-test                         {31.689}              {81.28}       {101.742}       {53.474}       {26.857}
                                              [186,840]           [186,840]       [186,840]      [186,840]      [186,840]
     Log Gestational Age                      0.023***             0.023***       0.023***        0.023***       0.023***
                                                                                                                                0.005
                                               (0.006)              (0.003)         (0.004)        (0.004)        (0.003)
     Preterm<37 weeks                        -0.050***            -0.050***       -0.050***      -0.050***      -0.050***
                                                                                                                                0.020
                                               (0.018)              (0.018)         (0.019)        (0.014)        (0.013)
     1st Stage F-test                         {73.456}            {314.821}       {441.995}      {127.103}        {65.52}
                                             [1,486,353          [1,486,353]     [1,486,353]    [1,486,353]    [1,486,353]
     Log Head Circumference                     0.013                0.013           0.013         0.013*         0.013**
                                                                                                                                0.141
                                               (0.009)               (0.01)          (0.01)        (0.008)        (0.007)
     1st Stage F-test                         {31.953}             {81.238}       {101.947}       {54.068}       {27.103}
                                              [186,505]           [186,505]       [186,505]      [186,505]      [186,505]
     Any Child Died                           -0.018**            -0.018***
                                               (0.008)              (0.006)          N/A            N/A            N/A           N/A
     1st Stage F-test                        {205.309}              {374.9}
                                              [340,091]           [340,091]
The entries in parentheses are standard errors of the estimated coefficients, clustered at the birth year by province level. *, **, and ***
indicate statistical significance at the 10%, 5%, and 1% levels, respectively. All models include re-centered birth date in months
differentiated by exposure to the 1997 reform status, mother’s month of birth dummies, province fixed effects, and province specific
maternal birth month-year trends. Birth outcome models also control for child’s birth year fixed effects and male child dummy. Birth
outcome models are weighted by number of women in fertility age (ages 15 to 49) in the province. Survey weights provided by the PHC are
used in mortality estimations. Number of observations are in square brackets []. 1 st Stage F-Statistics are provided in curly brackets {}.




                                                                    66
                                    Appendix Table 6
   Instrumental Variable Estimates of the Impact of Maternal Education on Child Health
                   Using the Turkish Demographic and Health Surveys
                                         (1)           (2)        (3)                  (4)             (5)
                                        80-92        81-91       82-90                83-89           76-96
                                         Panel A: Birth Outcomes
Dependent Variables
  Log Birthweight                       -0.068          -0.012         -0.025         -0.173           0.089
                                       (0.136)          (0.13)        (0.148)        (0.306)         (0.124)
    Very Low Birthweight                0.033           -0.023         -0.011          0.198          -0.004
                                       (0.051)         (0.046)        (0.049)        (0.164)         (0.052)
    Low Birthweight                     0.116            0.068          0.141          0.084          -0.012
                                       (0.196)         (0.192)        (0.222)        (0.447)         (0.165)
    High Birthweight                    -0.035          -0.044          -0.04         -0.015          -0.014
                                       (0.067)         (0.066)         (0.08)        (0.152)         (0.054)

    1st Stage F-test                  {13.432}        {13.884}       {10.053}        {2.637}        {17.665}
                                       [3,365]         [2,808]        [2,211]        [1,702]         [5,111]
    Current Smoker                      -0.173          -0.114         -0.274         -0.214          -0.117
                                       (0.163)         (0.159)        (0.196)         (0.28)         (0.093)

    1st Stage F-test                  {42.531}      {44.738}       {36.788}         {21.549}        {87.729}
                                       [6,564]       [5,391]        [4,229]          [3,144]        [11,175]
                                          Panel B: Child Mortality
    Any Child Died                      0.026         -0.051         -0.14           -0.370*          -0.024
                                       (0.081)       (0.079)        (0.095)          (0.205)         (0.071)

    1st Stage F-test                    {16.133}       {15.642}        {12.543}        {5.071}         {20.974}
                                         [4,692]        [3,837]         [2,976]        [2,207]          [7,930]
These models estimated using data are from all available rounds of the Turkish Demographic Health
Surveys collected in 2003, 2008, and 2013. The entries in parentheses are standard errors of the estimated
coefficients, clustered at the birth year by province level. *, **, and *** indicate statistical significance at
the 10%, 5%, and 1% levels, respectively. All models include re-centered birth-date in months
differentiated by exposure to the 1997 reform status, mother’s month of birth dummies, and province fixed
effects and province specific maternal birth month-year trends. Survey weights provided by the DHS are
used in estimations. Column headings pertains to data estimation intervals based on year of birth year of the
mother. Number of observations are in square brackets []. 1st Stage F-Statistics are provided in curly
brackets {}.




                                                      67
                                              Appendix Table 7
                                     Instrumental Variable Estimates
          Assigning Alternative Probabilities to the Likelihood of Earning At least a Middle School
         Diploma Among Those Who Were Bound by the Reform but Reported Their Highest Level
                 of Educational Attainment as Elementary School Diploma in the MHBOD
                                            (1)                        (2)                   (3)                      (4)
                                    Assigned Probability of Obtaining At Least a Middle School Degree Among Individuals
                                        Who Were Bound by the Reform but Reported Their Highest Level of Educational
                                           Attainment as Elementary School Diploma (i.e., 5-Years of Basic Education)
Dependent Variables                        (P)=1                   (P)=0.75              (P)=0.50                 (P)=0.25
  Log Birthweight                        0.010**                    0.012**               0.015**                  0.022**
                                          (0.004)                   (0.005)               (0.007)                  (0.010)
  Very Low Birthweight                  -0.012***                 -0.014***             -0.019***                -0.027***
                                          (0.002)                   (0.003)               (0.003)                  (0.005)
  Low Birthweight                       -0.019***                 -0.023***             -0.030***                -0.043***
                                          (0.006)                   (0.008)               (0.010)                  (0.015)
  High Birthweight                      -0.007***                 -0.008***             -0.011***                -0.015***
                                          (0.002)                   (0.003)               (0.004)                  (0.006)
  1st Stage Estimates                   0.302***                   0.245***              0.189***                 0.132***
                                        (0.01005)                 (0.00973)             (0.00960)                (0.00964)
  1st Stage F-test                      {899.901}                 {633.945}             {386.378}                {187.712}
                                        [186,840]                 [186,840]             [186,840]                [186,840]
  Log Gestational Age                   0.007***                   0.008***              0.010***                 0.014***
                                          (0.001)                   (0.001)               (0.001)                  (0.002)
  Preterm<37 weeks                      -0.015***                 -0.018***             -0.023***                -0.031***
                                          (0.004)                   (0.005)               (0.006)                  (0.009)
  1st Stage Estimates                   0.283***                   0.233***              0.183***                 0.133***
                                          (0.008)                   (0.008)               (0.007)                  (0.007)
  1st Stage F-test                     {1175.917}                 {912.288}             {630.541}                {361.894}
                                       [1,486,353]               [1,486,353]           [1,486,353]              [1,486,353]
  Log Head Circumference                  0.003*                     0.004*                0.005*                   0.008*
                                          (0.002)                   (0.002)               (0.003)                  (0.004)
  1st Stage Estimates                   0.302***                   0.246***              0.189***                 0.132***
                                          (0.010)                   (0.009)               (0.009)                  (0.009)
  1st Stage F-test                      {909.440}                 {640.618}             {390.408}                {189.704}
                                        [186,505]                 [186,505]             [186,505]                [186,505]
  The entries in parentheses are standard errors of the estimated coefficients, clustered at the birth year by province
  level. *, **, and *** indicate statistical significance at the 10%, 5%, and 1% levels, respectively. All models include
  re-centered birth date in months differentiated by exposure to the 1997 reform status, mother’s month of birth
  dummies, and province fixed effects, province specific maternal birth month-year trends, child’s birth year fixed
  effects, and male child dummy. Birth outcome models are weighted by number of women in fertility age (ages 15 to
  49) in the province. Number of observations are in square brackets []. 1 st Stage F-Statistics are provided in curly
  brackets {}.




                                                             68
                                                    Appendix Table 8
                                       Summary Statistics for Maternal Behaviors
                                             All                       Control                   Treatment
  Normal Birth                             0.4644                      0.4166                      0.5174
                                          (0.4987)                     (0.493)                    (0.4997)
                                        [1,594,793]                  [812,985]                   [781,808]
  Ever Smoked                              0.1025                      0.1203                      0.0823
                                          (0.3032)                    (0.3253)                    (0.2748)
  Current Smoker                           0.0683                      0.0792                      0.056
                                          (0.2522)                      (0.27)                    (0.2299)
                                         [550,001]                   [281,422]                   [268,579]
The means are generated using data from the Ministry of Health Birth Outcomes Data (MHBOD). Individuals born
between 1987 and 1991 constitute the treatment group and those who were born between 1981 and 1985 form the
control group. Standard deviations are in parentheses. Variables in Panel A are weighted by number of women in
fertility age (ages 15 to 49) in the province. Number of observations are in square brackets [].




                                                       69
                                                      Appendix Table 9
                          The Impact of Maternal Education on Maternal Behaviors, Robustness Checks
                                             (1)               (2)                (3)              (4)                (5)                (6)
                                          Baseline          Intent to      Alt. Treatment      Quadratic BC     Local Linear IV     With Province
                                          Estimates           Treat         for 1986 Birth       Control         with rdrobust      Specific Birth
                                                            Estimates      Cohort T==0.25        Function         command           Cohort Trends
 Dependent Variables
   Normal Birth                             0.269***         0.02289***          0.214***          0.262***         0.237***            0.266***
                                              (0.063)         (0.00238)           (0.058)           (0.058)          (0.044)              (0.039)
     1st Stage F-test                        {76.495}             ---            {80.488}          {75.112}                             {167.822}
                                           [1,594,793]       [1,594,793]       [1,775,812]       [1,594,793]       [1,594,793]         [1,594,793]
     Ever Smoked                            -0.084***       -0.00834***          -0.068**         -0.083***         -0.067**            -0.084***
                                              (0.026)         (0.00192)           (0.028)           (0.024)          (0.028)              (0.023)
     Current Smoker                         -0.034***       -0.00341***          -0.030**         -0.034***         -0.029**            -0.034***
                                              (0.013)         (0.00122)           (0.014)           (0.012)          (0.013)              (0.013)
     1st Stage F-test                        {98.002}             ---           {107.353}          {99.921}                             {222.429}
                                            [550,001]         [550,001]         [612,733]         [550,001]         [550,001]           [550,001]
The entries in parentheses are standard errors of the estimated coefficients, clustered at the birth year by province level. *, **, and *** indicate
statistical significance at the 10%, 5%, and 1% levels, respectively. All models include re-centered birth date in months differentiated by
exposure to the 1997 reform status, mother’s month of birth dummies, province fixed effects, child’s birth year fixed effects, and male child
dummy. Birth outcome models are weighted by number of women in fertility age (ages 15 to 49) in the province. Number of observations are
in square brackets []. 1st Stage F-Statistics are provided in curly brackets {}.




                                                                         70
                                       Appendix Table 10
        Robustness of the IV Estimates of the Impact of Maternal Education on Maternal
                           Behaviors to Using Alternative Bandwidths
                                                         (1)             (2)           (3)             (4)
                                                        80-92           81-91         82-90           83-89
Dependent Variables
  Normal Birth                                        0.242***        0.266***       0.245***       0.208***
                                                       (0.043)         (0.039)        (0.031)        (0.023)
   1st Stage F-test                                   {175.861}       {167.822}     {221.386}       {319.168}
                                                     [1,834,716]     [1,594,793]   [1,316,711]     [1,017,506]
   Ever Smoked                                        -0.083***       -0.084***     -0.057***        -0.056**
                                                        (0.018)         (0.023)       (0.022)         (0.026)
   Current Smoker                                     -0.049***       -0.034***        -0.019       -0.030***
                                                        (0.012)         (0.013)       (0.012)         (0.012)
   1st Stage F-test                                      {231.656}       {222.429}    {228.806}        {251.143}
                                                         [631,108]       [550,001]     [455,856]        [353,401]
The entries in parentheses are standard errors of the estimated coefficients, clustered at the birth year by
province level. *, **, and *** indicate statistical significance at the 10%, 5%, and 1% levels, respectively. All
models include re-centered birth date in months differentiated by exposure to the 1997 reform status, mother’s
month of birth dummies, and province fixed effects, province specific maternal birth month-year trends, child’s
birth year fixed effects, and male child dummy. Models are weighted by number of women in fertility age
(ages 15 to 49) in the province. Column headings pertain to data estimation intervals based on year of birth
year of the mother. Number of observations are in square brackets []. 1 st Stage F-Statistics are provided in
curly brackets {}.




                                                      71
                                                     Appendix Table 11
                   Instrumental Variable Estimates with Alternative Cluster Levels- Maternal Behaviors
                                    (1)             (2)            (3)        (4)         (5)         (6)     (7)
                                Cluster by     Cluster by    Cluster by   Cluster by Cluster by Cluster by    Wild
                                 Province          Birth    Birth Month Birth Year Birth Year Birth Year Bootstrap
                                   Level      Month Level by Province by NUTS1 by NUTS2             Level   P-Values
Dependent Variables
  Normal Birth                   0.266***       0.266***       0.266***    0.266***    0.266***   0.266***
                                                                                                             0.000
                                  (0.045)        (0.041)        (0.039)     (0.041)     (0.039)    (0.058)
  1st Stage F-test               {68.826}      {351.223}     {488.548}    {140.562}    {162.72}   {77.787}
                               [1,594,793]    [1,594,793] [1,594,793] [1,594,793] [1,594,793 [1,594,793]
  Ever Smoked                   -0.084***      -0.084***      -0.084***   -0.084*** -0.084*** -0.084***
                                                                                                             0.005
                                  (0.023)        (0.027)         (0.03)     (0.024)     (0.023)     (0.02)
  Current Smoker                -0.034***        -0.034*        -0.034*    -0.034**   -0.034*** -0.034***
                                                                                                             0.090
                                  (0.007)         (0.02)         (0.02)     (0.014)     (0.013)    (0.012)
  1st Stage F-test               {56.732}      {281.553}     {329.173}    {188.578} {218.393}     {147.67}
                                [550,001]      [550,001]      [550,001]   [550,001]   [550,001]   [550,001]
The entries in parentheses are standard errors of the estimated coefficients. *, **, and *** indicate statistical significance at the 10%, 5%,
and 1% levels, respectively. All models include re-centered birth date in months differentiated by exposure to the 1997 reform status,
mother’s month of birth dummies, province fixed effects, province specific maternal birth month-year trends, child’s birth year fixed
effects, and male child dummy. Models are weighted by number of women in fertility age (ages 15 to 49) in the province. Column headings
pertain to alternative cluster levels. Number of observations are in square brackets []. 1st Stage F-Statistics are provided in curly brackets {}.




                                                                       72
