                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




        KINSHIP, COOPERATION, AND THE EVOLUTION OF MORAL SYSTEMS

                                        Benjamin Enke

                                      Working Paper 23499
                              http://www.nber.org/papers/w23499


                    NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                             1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                           June 2017, Revised October 2018




Previously circulated as "Kinship Systems, Cooperation and the Evolution of Culture." I am
grateful to Jesse Graham, Jonathan Haidt, and Nathan Nunn for generous data sharing. An editor
and referees provided extremely helpful comments. This paper would not have been possible
without the inspiration provided by my conversations with Joe Henrich. I further thank Anke
Becker, Filipe Campante, Ed Glaeser, Raquel Fernandez, Jeff Frieden, Paola Giuliano, Sara
Lowes, Stelios Michalopoulos, Nathan Nunn, Gerard Roland, Raul Sanchez de la Sierra, Jesse
Shapiro, Guido Tabellini, and many seminar audiences for helpful comments. Patricia Sun
provided outstanding research assistance. The views expressed herein are those of the author and
do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2017 by Benjamin Enke. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two
paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including ©
notice, is given to the source.
Kinship, Cooperation, and the Evolution of Moral Systems
Benjamin Enke
NBER Working Paper No. 23499
June 2017, Revised October 2018
JEL No. D0,O0

                                         ABSTRACT

Across the social sciences, a key question is how societies manage to enforce cooperative
behavior in social dilemmas such as public goods provision or bilateral trade. According to an
influential body of theories in psychology, anthropology, and evolutionary biology, the answer is
that humans have evolved moral systems: packages of functional psychological and biological
mechanisms that regulate economic behavior, including a belief in moralizing gods; moral values;
negative reciprocity; and emotions of shame, guilt, and disgust. Based on a stylized model, this
paper empirically studies the structure and evolution of these moral traits as a function of
historical heterogeneity in extended kinship relationships. The evidence shows that societies with
a historically tightly-knit kinship structure regulate behavior through communal moral values;
revenge taking; emotions of external shame; and notions of purity and disgust. In loose kinship
societies, on the other hand, cooperation appears to be enforced through universal moral values;
internalized guilt; altruistic punishment; and an apparent rise and fall of moralizing religions.
These patterns point to the presence of internally consistent, but culturally variable, functional
moral systems. Consistent with the model, the relationship between kinship ties, economic
development, and the structure of the mediating moral systems amplified over time.


Benjamin Enke
Department of Economics
Harvard University
Littauer M008
Cambridge, MA 02138
and NBER
enke@fas.harvard.edu
1    Introduction
Social and economic life are pervaded by social dilemmas – situations that are charac-
terized by a conflict between collective and individual interests. Be it in the contexts of
the tragedy of the commons, bilateral trade, stealing, team production, or mutual ag-
gression, people could in principle effectively cooperate with each other, yet basic game
theory tells us that defecting on others is often a rational strategy for self-interested in-
dividuals. Given the ubiquitous presence of social dilemmas, psychologists and anthro-
pologists argue that this “fundamental problem of human existence” (Greene, 2014) is
of such importance that it has induced societies to build its entire social organization
around solving this problem (Henrich, n.d.).
    In these theories, researchers point to the existence of variation in societal struc-
tures, as they are induced by differences in kinship systems. Some societies are said to
consist of multiple, disjoint, tightly knit and cohesive in-groups that form dense social
networks of kith and kin. Here, these social groups form the basic unit of society. Peo-
ple are believed to effectively cooperate with in-group members, yet everybody outside
the in-group is considered an enemy, which effectively partitions society into “us” and
“them”. In other societies, in contrast, the individual is the basic unit of society. Here,
people are said to have weaker personal relationships, but presumably also engage in
mutually beneficial interactions with members of society at large because they have less
pronounced in-group vs. out-group notions (see, e.g., Hofstede, 1984; Shweder, 1991;
Markus and Kitayama, 1991; Triandis, 1995; Nisbett, 2003). Loosely in line with these
accounts, experimental games have revealed that cooperation behavior indeed varies
widely across societies (Henrich et al., 2001, 2010; Herrmann et al., 2008).
    Economists, psychologists, and anthropologists alike have long worked towards an
understanding of which mechanisms sustain and enforce cooperative behavior. How-
ever, if societies exhibit different scopes of cooperation, then they should also employ
different tools to incentivize people to behave cooperatively. While economists typi-
cally emphasize institutions and social norms, psychologists, anthropologists and evo-
lutionary human biologists have recently started to argue that certain psychological
and biological facets have specifically evolved to support effective cooperation, so that
cross-cultural variation can be rationalized as reflecting differential needs for “internal
police officers”, i.e., psychological punishment devices (e.g., Haidt, 2012; Greene, 2014;
Norenzayan et al., 2016; Henrich, 2015, n.d.). The key argument is that maintaining
cooperation within in-groups that typically depend on repeated interaction requires a
different set of psychological or biological adaptations as well as formal or informal insti-
tutions than regulating behavior in societies that largely rely on impersonal exchange.
According to this literature, key mechanisms for sustaining cooperation in the latter

                                             1
type of society are hypothesized to be (i) “moralizing” gods that are actively concerned
with and supportive of human morality (Norenzayan and Shariff, 2008; Norenzayan,
2013; Botero et al., 2014), (ii) an emphasis on universal moral values versus “tribal-
istic” values such as in-group loyalty (Fei et al., 1992; Shweder et al., 1997; Haidt,
2012; Greene, 2014), (iii) a prevalence of emotions of internal guilt relative to exter-
nal shame (Dodds, 1957; Benedict, 1967; Bowles and Gintis, 2003; Henrich, n.d.), and
(iv) widespread altruistic punishment (Fehr and Gächter, 2002; Boyd et al., 2003). On
the other hand, enforcing behavior in a kith-and-kin based society is hypothesized to
rely on “tribalistic” moral values, an emphasis on second-party punishment (revenge-
taking), external shaming of wrongdoings, strong local institutions, and conformity to
social norms, including values related to norm adherence.
   This paper presents a unified empirical analysis of this large body of psychologi-
cal and anthropological theories. The contribution is twofold. First, the paper devel-
ops a novel measure of the tightness of historical kinship systems as proxy for social
organization, which builds directly on observable societal characteristics and can be
used to study variation across a large number of historical and contemporary societies.
Second, by linking kinship tightness to various cross-cultural datasets from economics,
psychology, and anthropology, the empirical analysis documents the presence of a con-
tinuum of social cooperation systems that are associated with fundamentally different
enforcement devices, including aspects of human psychology and biology. At one end
of the spectrum, societies with weak kinship ties cooperate and trust broadly, but do
not place special emphasis on helping in-group members in need. Such cooperation
patterns appear to be enforced through a belief in moralizing gods, universal moral val-
ues, internalized guilt, altruistic punishment, and large-scale institutions. At the other
extreme, societies with tight kinship structures are readily willing to support in-group
members, but cheat on and deeply distrust the out-group. This cooperation system of
in-group favoritism tends to be regulated within the group through strong local insti-
tutions, conformity to social norms, relationship-specific “tribalistic” moral values such
as in-group loyalty, revenge-taking, and emotions of shame.
   According to cultural anthropologists, the structure of kinship systems is the most
important determinant of social organization. Kinship describes the system of procre-
ative relationships in society, i.e., patterns of relatedness as they arise through mating
and birth. This concept is much broader than Western notions of the nuclear family.
Kinship is relevant in the present context because cohesive and tight kinship systems
are believed to give rise to “clannish” social structures (Henrich, n.d.), and are hence
directly related to the scope of people’s cooperation patterns. This paper develops a
measure of the historical tightness of kinship systems that is based on information in



                                            2
the Ethnographic Atlas, an ethnographic dataset on the historical structure of 1,311
pre-industrial ethnicities around the globe (Murdock, 1967; Giuliano and Nunn, 2017).
Anthropological textbook knowledge prescribes that kinship systems can be classified
along three dimensions, i.e., family structure, marriage patterns, and descent systems
(Parkin, 1997; Haviland, 2002; Schultz and Lavenda, 2005; Henrich, n.d.). Closely fol-
lowing prior anthropological work, for each of these dimensions, I identify two variables
in the Ethnographic Atlas that measure the respective dimensions of kinship, and ag-
gregate them through a factor analysis. The resulting score of kinship tightness loads
positively on the presence of extended versus nuclear family systems, negatively on
neolocal post-marital residence (family structure), positively on the presence of both
cousin marriage and polygamy (marriage patterns), and positively on the presence of
lineages and localized clans (descent systems). Thus, the score intuitively corresponds
to what anthropologists consider tight kinship systems. This composite index can be
used to study variation (i) within the Ethnographic Atlas, i.e., across historical ethnic-
ities, (ii) across contemporary countries by matching historical ethnicities to contem-
porary populations (Giuliano and Nunn, 2017), (iii) across contemporary ethnicities
within countries in the World Values Survey by linking historical ethnicities to contem-
porary ethnicities, (iv) across contemporary second-generation migrants in the Euro-
pean Social Survey by linking migrants to the characteristics of their ancestors from
their country of origin, and (v) across contemporary first-generation migrants in the
Global Preference Survey (Falk et al., 2016) and the Moral Foundations Questionnaire
(Haidt and Joseph, 2004; Graham et al., 2012).
   The empirical analysis begins at the country level, by investigating the relationship
between kinship tightness and the radius of trust. The analysis documents that kinship
tightness is positively correlated with trust in in-group members (e.g., neighbors), but
negatively associated with both generalized trust and trust in specific categories of out-
group members such as strangers or foreigners. In addition, by exploiting variation in
kinship tightness and trust across contemporary ethnicities in the World Values Sur-
vey and across second-generation migrants in the European Social Survey, the analysis
documents that the relationship between ancestral kinship tightness and people’s trust
extends to individual-level within-country analyses. Here, again, people from tight kin-
ship societies exhibit higher in-group trust, but lower trust in people in general. In a final
step of the analysis of trust patterns, I exploit ethnographic records that code the extent
to which historical ethnicities in the Ethnographic Atlas inculcated trust into their chil-
dren. The results reveal that the negative relationship between kinship tightness and
trust was already present in pre-industrial times.
   The strong distinction between trust towards in-group and out-group members in



                                              3
tight kinship societies is mirrored in people’s cooperation behavior. Across countries, an-
cestral kinship tightness is strongly negatively correlated with out-group cooperation,
measured by contributions in an experimental public goods game that was conducted
among students across countries (Herrmann et al., 2008). In addition, ancestral kinship
tightness is positively correlated with cheating on an out-group member in the cross-
cultural experiments of Gächter and Schulz (2016). But while tight kinship is associ-
ated with lower cooperation and more cheating on out-group members, it is strongly
positively associated with cross-country variation in in-group favoritism in the business
domain, i.e., the fraction of management jobs that is assigned based on kin relations
Van de Vliert (2011). Similar results hold within countries: again exploiting variation
across contemporary ethnicities and across second-generation migrants in the World
Values and European Social Surveys, tight kinship is positively correlated with the im-
portance people attach to helping and caring for in-group members, while controlling
for country of residence as well as a host of other covariates.
   Next, the paper analyzes the relationship between kinship tightness and the struc-
ture of psychological, biological, and institutional enforcement devices, i.e., religious
beliefs, moral values, shame versus guilt, altruistic versus second-party punishment, for-
mal institutions, and social norms. First, the analysis uncovers that historical ethnicities
with strong kinship ties were less likely to honor a moralizing god, consistent with the
idea that moralizing gods are more beneficial in regulating behavior when interactions
are mostly not of a repeated nature.
   Second, the analysis documents that kinship tightness is positively related to the
relative importance of “communal” or “tribalistic” over universal moral values. For ex-
ample, tight kinship societies highly value in-group loyalty, also relative to moral values
that emphasize concepts such as individual harm, rights, and justice. These relation-
ships hold (i) across historical ethnicities by exploiting variation in ethnographic records
of societies’ moral values, (ii) across contemporary countries, and (iii) in within-country
analyses across migrants in the Moral Foundations Questionnaire.
   Third, extending the analysis to partly biological aspects, I study the relationship
between kinship tightness and the relative importance of internalized guilt versus ex-
ternal shame. Based on the idea that online searches reveal the subjective importance of
psychological phenomena (Stephens-Davidowitz, 2014), the analysis employs the fre-
quency with which people across countries searched for “shame” or “guilt” on Google
in their respective language as proxy for the relative prominence of these two concepts
in daily life. The results document that, exploiting variation within languages, kinship
tightness is positively related to the relative frequency of googling shame. Moreover,
self-reports contained in cross-cultural psychological questionnaires reveal that people



                                             4
in tight kinship societies perceive emotions of shame as significantly more intense and
long-lasting than feelings of guilt, again in line with the notion that biology is part of the
coevolutionary process that is at the heart of this paper (Wallbott and Scherer, 1995;
Sapolsky, 2017).
   Fourth, the analysis relates kinship tightness to the relative prevalence of altruistic
(third-party) and second-party punishment. Consistent with the notion that altruistic
punishment is akin to contributing to an impersonal public good, and should hence
be more prevalent in loose kinship societies, the results document that members of
societies with weak kinship ties are significantly more likely to incur personal costs to
sanction wrongdoing, even without having a personal stake in the issue. In tight kinship
societies, on the other hand, direct revenge-taking is relatively more pronounced.
   Fifth, turning to an analysis of institutional structures, the analysis provides evi-
dence that – across historical ethnicities – kinship tightness is negatively related to the
development of large-scale institutions that supersede local groups, such as chiefdoms
or states. At the same time, kinship tightness is positively correlated with the sophistica-
tion and power of institutions at the level of local communities, including jurisdictional
hierarchies at the village level.
   Sixth, the analysis illuminates the role of conformity to social norms. In contem-
porary cross-country data, ancestral kinship tightness is strongly related to experimen-
tally measured norm compliance or conformity (Bond and Smith, 1996). In addition,
kinship tightness is positively correlated with the importance of values that mandate
norm adherence: across contemporary countries, within countries across ethnicities in
the World Values Survey, within countries across second-generation migrants in the Eu-
ropean Social Survey, and across historical ethnicities is tight kinship associated with
the importance people attach to proper behavior or rule-following.
   In sum, the structure of enforcement devices closely corresponds to the observed
cooperation and trust patterns, hence pointing to a coevolution of kinship structures,
cooperation regimes, institutions, and psychological or biological traits. These results
propose a new explanation both for the existence of large cultural variation (“culture”
enforces different cooperation regimes) and for Alesina and Giuliano’s (2015) obser-
vation that cultural traits are often correlated (some of them jointly enforce the same
cooperation systems).
   The final part of the paper sheds light on the origins of tight kinship and its relation
to economic development. Anthropologists have long argued that kinship tightness is
hump-shaped in societal complexity (Blumberg and Winch, 1972). The gist of the ar-
gument is twofold. First, tight kinship is believed to have evolved to serve a functional
role in enabling effective cooperation within suitably defined in-groups for the purposes



                                              5
of agricultural (as opposed to hunter-gatherer) subsistence (Johnson and Earle, 2000;
Gowdy and Krall, 2016). Second, however, tight kinship is believed to have turned
into a sticky disadvantage once technological change required increased specialization,
geographic mobility, and trade with strangers (Henrich, n.d.). While examining the
causal relationships in these accounts is inherently difficult, I provide a series of corre-
lational tests. Consistent with the anthropological narrative, historical ethnicities that
subsisted on agriculture exhibit tighter kinship systems than hunter-gatherers. On the
other hand, ancestral kinship tightness is strongly negatively correlated with contempo-
rary per capita income, and this relation first emerged during the Industrial Revolution.
    The remainder of the paper is organized as follows. Section 2 discusses related lit-
erature. Section 3 lays out the hypothesized relationship between kinship tightness,
cooperation patterns and enforcement devices. Section 4 presents the data. The analy-
sis starts in Section 5 with the relationships between kinship tightness and coperation,
cheating, and trust. Section 6 presents evidence on how kinship tightness is associated
with enforcement devices. Section 7 reports robustness checks. Section 8 discusses the
emergence of tight kinship and its relationship to development. Section 9 concludes.



2     Related Literature
Behavioral and experimental economists have invested massive efforts into studying
cooperation behavior in different contexts (e.g. Fehr and Gächter, 2000), yet despite
exceptions (Herrmann et al., 2008), understanding the cultural variation in coperation
behavior and enforcement devices has not attracted much attention in this literature.
    In cultural economics and political economy, research on social organization and
cooperation started with the classic theoretical treatment of Greif (1994) and Tabellini
(2008b), yet empirical work on cooperation and corresponding enforcement devices
is limited. Instead, research on social structures has focused on the cross-country re-
lationships between contemporary cousin marriages and corruption levels or democ-
racy (Akbari et al., 2016; Schulz, 2016), analyses of how segmentary lineage orga-
nization shapes civil conflict and trust in Africa (Moscona et al., 2017a,b), the rela-
tionship between matrilineal kinship systems and intra-household bargaining (Lowes,
2017), or studies of the relationship between survey measures of individualism and per
capita income (Gorodnichenko and Roland, 2016). Recent work on (nuclear) family
ties (Bertrand and Schoar, 2006; Alesina and Giuliano, 2013) shares this paper’s focus
on social structures, but differs greatly in terms of substantive focus and measurement.¹

    ¹Research on the relationship between agriculture and social structures includes Olsson and Paik’s
(2012; 2016) analysis of the role of collectivism in an “agricultural reversal” as well as the contemporary
work by Buggle (2017).


                                                    6
    More broadly, this paper is part of the literature on cultural variation in economic
preferences and attitudes (Guiso et al., 2009; Algan and Cahuc, 2010; Voigtländer and
Voth, 2012; Chen, 2013; Falk et al., 2016; Dohmen et al., 2016; Desmet et al., Forth-
coming), in particular papers that highlight the endogeneity or evolution of cultural
traits (Bisin and Verdier, 2001, 2017; Fernández, 2007; Doepke and Zilibotti, 2014;
Becker et al., 2016; Galor and Özak, 2016; Litina, 2016; Buggle and Durante, 2017).
    Finally, the paper is also related to various literatures in moral and cultural psy-
chology and anthropology. While the various – often disjoint – narratives that were
developed in these fields serve as basis for my analysis, my results contribute to this lit-
erature by proposing an explicit measurement of kinship tightness as well as a rigorous
and quantitative investigation of the topic in a unified empirical framework.



3     Research Hypothesis and Background
The various literatures in psychology and anthropology that deal with human cooper-
ation share one aspect in common: they emphasize that enforcing cooperation is not
achieved by any single mechanism, but rather by an entire package of tools. The goal of
this paper is to understand the relationship between kinship systems, cooperation and
corresponding enforcement devices as broadly as possible. Thus, the paper does not
focus on highlighting a single variable or mechanisms, but rather on presenting a com-
prehensive pattern of correlations that integrate variables and hypotheses from across
the social sciences. This analysis is based on large literatures in cultural psychology and
anthropology.


3.1    Tight Kinship, Cooperation and Trust
For cultural psychologists, the idea that societies exhibit heterogeneity in basic social
organization regarding how deeply people are embedded in cohesive in-groups, is as
basic as the idea that markets equilibrate supply and demand to an economist (Triandis,
1995). In some societies, economic and social life is organized around dense, tightly
structured in-groups that form the basic unit of society. Here, people are said to think
of themselves as “we”: they rely on the in-group for food and other necessities of life in
exchange for unquestioning loyalty. Outsiders to their group (be it the family, extended
family, ethnicity, or village) are considered strangers at best, and enemies at worst.
    At the other extreme of the spectrum, psychologists say, lie societies in which people
think of themselves as “I”. Such individuals are said to have weaker personal relation-
ships with in-group members and cannot rely on unconditional loyalty, but at the same



                                             7
time enter productive relationships with people outside their own group. Thus, one ex-
pects a negative correlation between kinship tightness and cooperation with (or trust
in) out-group members, but a postive relation between kinship tightness and treating
in-group members well or trusting them.


3.2     Tight Kinship and Enforcement Devices
If it is true that societies exhibit heterogeneous cooperation schemes, it is also conceiv-
able that they have developed different devices to sustain and enforce such cooperation.
Across the social sciences, researchers have proposed various mechanisms to enforce
cooperative behavior, including religious beliefs, moral values, basic emotions and their
physiological consequences, formal institutions, and social norms, some of which pre-
dominantly apply to enforcing cooperation within an in-group, or across groups of peo-
ple. Excellent overviews of (various subsets) of the hypotheses outlined below can be
found in Boyd and Richerson (1988); Fei et al. (1992); Boyd and Richerson (2009);
Greene (2014); Henrich (n.d.). To clarify any potential ambiguity, the hypotheses be-
low are not intended to suggest that kinship systems cause the emergence of certain
institutional or cultural structures – the argument is merely about the coevolution of
social organization, cooperation schemes, and enforcement devices.


Moralizing gods.        Cultural psychologists, anthropologists, historians, and scholars of
religious studies routinely emphasize the importance of religious practices and beliefs in
sustaining cooperation. In this context, moralizing gods are believed to play a key role
(Roes and Raymond, 2003; Norenzayan and Shariff, 2008; Norenzayan, 2013; Botero
et al., 2014). A god is said to be moralizing if they are concerned with and supportive of
human morality by, e.g., punishing wrongdoing or rewarding prosocial behavior.² The
notion that a god is moralizing is often implicit in contemporary discussions because
– mostly due to the spread of the Abrahamic religions Islam and Christianity – today
the vast majority of humans live in a society that honors a moralizing god. However,
historically, this was not the case. Animistic religions, for example, usually featured
gods that were not particularly interested in the actions of mortal humans.
    Crucially, moralizing gods are hypothesized to have evolved to solve human social
dilemma problems. In large-scale anonymous societies in which direct enforcement and
punishment is difficult, belief in a moralizing god is helpful because it functions as an
internal “policeman” who punishes human wrongdoing even in the absence of wordly
punishment. But this logic makes it clear that societies with tight kinship ties are in

    ²Small-scale behavioral experiments have shown that belief in a punitive god is positively correlated
with cooperative behavior (Purzycki et al., 2016; Norenzayan et al., 2016).


                                                   8
less need of a moralizing god: because people predominantly interact within their own
group in which personal monitoring is feasible, a moralizing god has a smaller upside,
but presumably the same downside in terms of paying the costs of religious beliefs such
as attending mass and extending sacrifices.


Moral values.      Moral and evolutionary psychologists argue that human morality partly
evolved to solve social dilemma problems by imbuing principles that prevent people
from defecting on others (e.g., Haidt, 2012; Greene, 2014). However, if true, this
implies that moral principles should vary across societies: societies with tight kinship
should have evolved “tribalistic” or “communal” moral values such as in-group loyalty
that sustain in-group cooperation. Those societies with low kinship tightness, on the
other hand, should develop moral principles that apply universally, i.e., equally to ev-
eryone. In line with this, moral psychologists have indeed documented cross-cultural
variation in the moral principles people employ, in particular with respect to whether
moral reasoning emphasizes universal moral values or relationship-specific obligations
that predominantly apply to in-groups (Shweder, 1991; Shweder et al., 1997; Fei et
al., 1992; Haidt, 2012). In the words of Shweder (1999), “there is an “ethics of au-
tonomy,” which strongly emphasizes harm, rights, and justice. . . There is an “ethics of
community”, which emphasizes such issues as duty, hierarchy, and interdependency.”³


Shame versus guilt.       Basic emotions and their physiological consequences are concep-
tually very similar to moralizing gods and moral values in that they are internal to an
individual In contrast to these “psychological police officers”, emotions are both psycho-
logical and biological in nature. In a by now classic cultural psychology paper, Markus
and Kitayama (1991) argue that cultural contexts that are characterized by cohesive in-
groups emphasize emotions that occur between individuals, rather than within a certain
person. In particular, cultural psychologists and anthropologists have long coined the
terms “shame” and “guilt” cultures (Dodds, 1957; Benedict, 1967; Scherer and Wall-
bott, 1994; Bowles and Gintis, 2003; Gintis, 2003; Wong and Tsai, 2007; Henrich, n.d.)
to draw attention to the notion that societies inculcate different emotional responses
to wrongdoing into their children. In this terminology, guilt refers to something that
is internalized and can be evoked even when nobody knows about the event. Shame,
on the other hand, describes an emotion that is invoked in front of others, presum-
ably in particular those one cares about (in economics terminology, this distinction is
reminiscent of the difference between social and self image). In impersonal exchange
societies, the argument goes, people often engage in anonymous one-shot interactions,

    ³Haidt (2012) refers to these two different types of values as “individualizing” and “binding”, re-
spectively, because the communal values are said to bind people together into moral groups.


                                                  9
so that instilling feelings of shame is less effective than inculcating internalized guilt.
Thus, loose kinship systems should be associated with a more pronounced importance
of guilt relative to shame. Because emotions like shame and guilt also have physio-
logical consequences, this hypothesis implies a coevolution of psychology and biology
(Sapolsky, 2017).


Altruistic punishment.      Across the social sciences, researchers have emphasized the
important role of negative reciprocity in sanctioning wrongdoings. The probably most
important conceptual distinction in the discussion of such punishment patterns is the
extent to which punishment reflects altruistic motives, i.e., the extent to which people
are willing to incur personal costs to punish wrongdoing even if they did not personally
suffer from the misconduct. As is implied in its name, altruistic punishment is concep-
tually very similar to cooperation behavior itself, because it requires that the punisher
give up private resources to contribute to a common good, i.e., preventing the villain
from future misbehavior. From this discussion, it follows immediately that altruistic
punishment should be higher in loose kinship societies. After all, if an individual in a
tight kinship society is unconcerned with the well-being of an out-group member, then
why would they incur personal costs to sanction someone who mistreated them? In con-
trast, punishment patterns in tight kinship societies should be characterized by a higher
prevalence of direct punishment and revenge-taking, i.e., second-party punishment.


Institutions and social norms.      Differences in social organization should go hand in
hand with the development of institutions and social norms, where I will speak of norms
simply as a less formal way to regulate behavior than through laws and courts. If people
mainly interact with in-group members and everybody outside of that group is consid-
ered an enemy, then there is less of a need to bear the cost of setting up large-scale
formal enforcement institutions that supersede each separate group. Instead, such so-
cieties have incentives to develop strong institutions at the local level. That is, this per-
spective suggests that kinship tightness is negatively correlated with the development
of formal institutions above the level of an in-group, but positively correlated with the
development of institutions at the local level, including the strength of and conformity
to informal social norms.
   To sum up the discussion, Table 1 presents an overview of the hypotheses underlying
the empirical analysis.




                                            10
                                   Table 1: Overview of hypotheses


                   Tight kinship                              Loose kinship

                   Cheat on out-group;                        Cooperate with out-group;
 Behavior          In-group favoritism                        Equal treatment of in- and out-group
                   Strong care for in-group members
                   High in in-group;
 Trust                                                        Uniformly high
                   Low in out-group

                   Tribalistic moral values pertaining to     Universal moral values;
                   relationship-specific obligations;         Moralizing god;
 Enforcement       Shame;                                     Guilt;
 devices           Second-party punishment;                   Altruistic punishment;
                   Local institutions;                        Global institutions
                   Strong social norms and
                   values of norm adherence




4     Data

4.1      Measure of Kinship Tightness
Cultural psychologists and anthropologists agree that the single most important aspect
of people’s in-group ties are their kin relations. Kinship describes the system of procre-
ative relationships in society. It clarifies what rights and obligations people have, and
oftentimes even constitutes the foundation of people’s social lifes (Schultz and Lavenda,
2005). Accordingly, this paper measures social organization by developing an index of
historical kinship tightness. In contrast to the more qualitative survey-based approach of
psychologists, this measure is based on observable characteristics and is hence arguably
amenable to direct interpretation.
    The measure of kinship tightness is based on variables in the Ethnographic Atlas
(EA), an ethnicity-level dataset that contains detailed information on the living condi-
tions and social structures of 1,265 ethnic groups prior to industrialization (Murdock,
1967). The EA is arguably the leading collection of anthropological knowledge on his-
torical ethnicities. Murdock constructed the data by coding ethnicities for the earliest
period for which ethnographic data is available or can be reconstructed from written
records. The average year of observation is 1898, but even for those ethnicities for which
information was sampled during the 20th century, the data are meant to describe living
conditions prior to intense European contact or industrialization.⁴ Following work in
ethnography, Giuliano and Nunn (2017) extend this dataset by additionally including
    ⁴The year of observation is only weakly and insignificantly correlated with the index of kinship
tightness that I develop below (ρ = 0.04).


                                                 11
46 ethnicities to broaden coverage in Europe. The EA contains information on mode
of subsistence (agriculture, animal husbandry, hunting, gathering, and fishing), fam-
ily structure and community organization, religious beliefs, language, and institutions,
among others. In fact, for a subset of 186 ethnicities – the so-called Standard Cross-
Cultural Sample (SCCS) – very detailed ethnographic information on local customs,
beliefs etc. is available.⁵
    The dimensions that cultural anthropologists use to classify the nature of kinship
systems are textbook knowledge. This paper closely follows the – largely overlapping
– discussions in Parkin (1997), Haviland (2002), Schultz and Lavenda (2005), and
Henrich (n.d.). At a broad level, kin relations describe patterns of relatedness as they
arise through mating and birth. Dimensions of kinship can hence be partitioned into (i)
family structure, (ii) marriage patterns, and (iii) descent systems (Parkin, 1997; Schultz
and Lavenda, 2005). For each of these categories, I identify those two variables in the
EA that are closest to the presentations in Haviland (2002) and Henrich (n.d.); this is
straightforward given that these discussions are based on the terminology or even data
in the EA:

   1. Family structure

        (a) Domestic organization. A key distinction in anthropological research is the
             presence of independent nuclear versus extended families. I generate a bi-
             nary variable that equals zero if the domestic organization is around inde-
             pendent nuclear families and one otherwise (Q8 in the EA).
        (b) Post-wedding residence. Post-marital residence varies widely across cultures.
             Anthropologists argue that close kinship ties are indicated by social norms
             that prescribe residence with the husband’s (or the wife’s) group. Weak kin-
             ship ties, on the other hand, are indicated by couples either living by them-
             selves or flexibly with either the wife’s or the husband’s group. Accordingly,
             I generate a variable that equals 1 if the wife is expected to move in with
             the husband’s group or vice versa, and 0 otherwise (Q11).

   2. Marriage patterns

        (a) Cousin marriage. Endogamous marriage, i.e., marriage within in-groups is
             believed to be a key characteristic of tight kinship, and the most important

    ⁵Murdock assembled the EA by relying on the records of different ethnographers, so that that Mur-
dock’s own predispositions are unlikely to be a major source of bias in the dataset. In addition, many
of the theoretical developments in cultural psychology and anthropology that link social structure to
enforcement devices took place relatively recently and are hence implausible to have affected ethnogra-
phers’ perceptions during the time of coding.


                                                 12
             case of this is cousin marriage (also see Schulz, 2016). While many cultures
             allow marriage among (certain) first- or second-degree cousins, others do
             not. I construct a three-step index that equals one if marrying first-degree
             cousins is allowed, 0.5 if marriage among second-degree cousins is allowed,
             and zero otherwise (Q24). Since this variable is missing for 253 ethnicities in
             the EA (which leads to a loss of more than a dozen countries), I supplement
             this variable with information on local kin terminology (Q27). Anthropolo-
             gists have long noted that those cultures that allow cousin marriage tend to
             make a linguistic distinction between those cousins that can be married and
             those that cannot. Thus, information on kin terms can be used to impute
             levels of cousin marriage for those ethnicities for which the cousin marriage
             variable is missing.⁶
        (b) Polygamy. Polygamy is argued to support strong kinship ties because it allows
             the building of large interconnected families. For example, if a man has
             several wives and children from all of them, then in a patrilineal society the
             children would all be considered part of the same lineage, even though they
             have different mothers. To capture this aspect of kinship systems, I code a
             variable that equals 0 if polygamy is absent and 1 otherwise (Q9).

   3. Descent systems

        (a) Lineages. Descent groups are defined by people’s ancestry. Key defining char-
             acteristic of a descent system is whether it features unilineal or bilateral
             descent groups. Unilineal descent systems track descent primarily through
             one line as opposed to through both lines, and are said to induce particu-
             larly strong and cohesive in-groups because they make people feel close to
             a particular part of the family. A lineage is hence a group of people who
             trace descent to a known common ancestor (alive or dead), i.e., people who
             can specify the links that unite them. Such groups are typically much larger
             than Western notions of “the family” and can be composed of more than
             1,000 people. In contrast, bilateral systems such as in large parts of West-
             ern Europe are ego-oriented, meaning that everybody relates to a different
             family, which is believed to prevent the build-up of extended tight linkages.
             I construct a variable that equals 0 if descent is bilateral, and 1 otherwise
             (Q43).
    ⁶Specifically, for each of eight different kin terminology systems, I compute the average cousin mar-
riage index described in the main text for all societies in the EA that have information on both Q24
and Q27. Then, I assign this index of “expected cousin marriage” to those ethnicities for which cousin
marriage information is missing, based on their respective kin terminology. All main results in the paper
are robust to excluding cousin marriage from the construction of the kinship tightness index altogether.


                                                  13
        (b) Segmented communities and localized clans. When lineage systems become
             too large to be tractable and memorized, they split into new, smaller lineages.
             In such cases, people across lineages continue to recognize their “broad re-
             latedness” even though they could not describe the specific path that con-
             nects them. Such systems are called clans. Clans are more or less closely
             interconnected, partly depending on whether clans determine geographical
             residency as opposed to being geographically dispersed. Accordingly, I code
             a variable that equals one if a clan takes the form of localized clans that live
             as segmented communities in, e.g., clan barrios, and zero otherwise (Q15).

    In sum, this paper characterizes kinship systems through a set of six variables. To
aggregate these dimensions of kinship tightness, I compute the first principal compo-
nent.⁷ This score endogenously has the appealing property that it loads to a substantial
extent on all six of the above variables in a direction that is consistent with anthropo-
logical notions of tight kinship.⁸ The index loads negatively on independent nuclear
families (weight 0.35), negatively on neolocal residence (0.42), positively on cousin
marriage (0.19), positively on polygamy (0.34), negatively on bilateral descent (0.54),
and positively on the presence of segmented communities or clans (0.50).⁹ The result-
ing Kinship Tightness Index (KTI) is normalized to be in [0, 1]. Figure 7 in Appendix B
depicts the distribution of the kinship tightness index at the level of 989 historical eth-
nicities for which data on all six dimensions are available.¹⁰


4.2     Additional Data Sources and Nature of Variation
The measure of kinship tightness can be utilized to exploit variation across historical
ethnicities. In addition, the data can be matched to contemporary populations, hence
allowing for contemporary cross-country, cross-ethnicity, and cross-migrant analyses.
To facilitate a comprehensive analysis of cooperation patterns and enforcement devices,

    ⁷Principal component analysis constructs a set of uncorrelated principal components from the ob-
servations such that the first principal component accounts for as much of the variance in the data as
possible. Each succeeding component is then constructed to also explain as much of the variance as
possible, conditional on being orthogonal to all previous principal components.
    ⁸This first component has an eigenvalue of 2.10, whereas that of the second component is 1.07. This
second component is difficult to interpret given its weights. For example, it loads positively on cousin
marriage, but also positively on bilateral descent and nuclear families, a combination that is hard to
reconcile with anthropological notions of tight kinship.
    ⁹To interpret these weights, recall that all six variables are in [0,1].
   ¹⁰Table 14 in Appendix A documents that the country-level index of kinship tightness is positively
correlated with measures of collectivism (vs. individualism) that people have previously employed, in-
cluding the collectivism vs. individualism index of Hofstede (1984), a measure of family ties by Alesina
and Giuliano (2013), and the fraction of the population speaking a language that allows dropping the
pronoun (Tabellini, 2008a).


                                                  14
the analysis links the kinship tightness index to various cross-cultural datasets such as
experiments, surveys, and ethnographic records. Thus, most of the dependent variables
are independent from the sampling and coding scheme in the EA. Appendix C provides
a detailed description of all variables used in this study.


Cross-Country.        Giuliano and Nunn (2017) propose a method to match the historical
ethnicities in the EA to contemporary populations using the language people speak. Ap-
pendix C.3.1 provides a desciption of this matching procedure. Following their method-
ology, Figure 1 depicts the country-level distribution of historical kinship tightness, as
it applies to contemporary populations.¹¹ The color coding roughly corresponds to the
seven-quantiles of the distribution of kinship tightness. Evidently, kinship tightness ex-
hibits geographic clustering: with a few exceptions, Western Europe and their offshoots
have loose ancestral kinship ties, whereas parts of Eastern Europe, Asia, and Africa ex-
hibit substantial variation. South America lies in between Western Europe and Asia or
Africa. The analysis will link this variation to data on behavioral experiments, surveys,
and language use across countries. In light of the geographical clustering of kinship
tightness, the analysis will include within-country regressions to alleviate potential
concerns about cross-country results. In addition, cross-country analyses will control
for continent fixed effects.


World Values Survey: Ethnicities Within Countries.                  The World Values Survey (WVS)
contains information on respondents’ ethnicity. While these data are often very coarse,
111 ethnicities in 41 countries were described in sufficiently great detail for me to be
able to match a total of 45,958 respondents to their ancestors in the EA. Thus, I can
investigate the relationship between ancestral kinship tightness and respondents’ trust
or values by exploiting variation across contemporary ethnicities within countries.


European Social Survey: Second-Generation Migrants.                        The European Social Sur-
vey (ESS) provides detailed information on the migration background of respondents’
parents. Thus, following Giuliano (2007) and Fernández (2007), I can study the rela-
tionship between people’s values and the kinship tightness of their ancestors by com-
puting the average kinship tightness index across the country of origin of father and
mother (where the country-level data are computed as described above). That is, in
these analyses, the sample is restricted to respondents who were born in the country

   ¹¹In cases in which the kinship tightness index is missing for the dominant ethnicity in a country, the
country-level score is based on ethnicities that account for only a relatively small share of the population.
I have verified that excluding all countries in which this is the case has only very minor, if any, effects
on coefficient estimates and significance levels in the cross-country regressions. Figure 9 in Appendix B
provides a map of the kinship tightness index that accounts for these populations.


                                                    15
Kinship Tightness
    NoData
    0-0.05
    0.05-0.25
    0.25-0.5
    0.5-0.75
    0.75-0.85




                                                                                                 Ü
    0.85-0.95
    0.95-1

                                                              0   1,000 2,000   4,000   6,000   8,000
                                                                                                   Miles




                    Figure 1: Distribution of kinship tightness across countries




of current residence, yet their ancestral kinship tightness varies because of the parents’
migratory background. Thus, similarly to the cross-ethnicity analysis in the WVS, this
analysis identifies pure within-country correlates of kinship tightness. In total, I can
make use of 319,137 respondents in 32 countries of residence. Of these, 42,962 people
are second-generation migrants (with respect to at least one parent); their fathers and
mothers migrated from 184 and 186 countries of birth, respectively.


Global Preference Survey and Moral Foundations Questionnaire: Migrants.                            The
Global Preference Survey is a survey dataset on economic preferences from representa-
tive population samples in 76 countries (Falk et al., 2016). The data include informa-
tion on respondents’ country of birth. Thus, similarly to the ESS, I can leverage within-
country variation in kinship tightness by relating people’s preferences to the ancestral
kinship tightness in their country of birth. In total, I can make use of 68,601 respon-
dents in 66 countries of residence for which information on migration background is
available. Of these people, 3,341 are migrants from 148 different countries of birth.
    The Moral Foundations Questionnaire (MFQ) is a psychological questionnaire on
moral values (Graham et al., 2012). The authors uploaded this questionnaire to www.
yourmorals.org in 2008, where thousands of people have completed the question-

                                                16
naire and provided basic background information including their country of birth. The
sample of respondents is purely based on self-selection and hence not representative of
a country’s population. At the same time, I am not aware of reasons why the nature of
differential self-selection into the survey across countries or groups of migrants should
bias the results in favor of my research hypothesis, as opposed to just inducing measure-
ment error. Similarly to the GPS, the MFQ allows to leverage within-country variation in
kinship tightness by relating people’s moral values to the ancestral kinship tightness in
their country of birth. In total, I have access to 285,792 respondents from 206 countries
of residence, of which 26,657 are immigrants from 199 different countries of birth.



5     Tight Kinship, Cooperation and Trust

5.1    Empirical Approach and Covariates
To study the relationship between kinship tightness, cooperation, trust and enforce-
ment devices, the analysis leverages variation across countries, within countries across
ethnicities, within countries across migrants, and across historical ethnicities. For each
concept, I will work at one or more levels of analysis, depending on data availability.


Contemporary Cross-Country. In cross-country analyses, I present multiple specifi-
cations for each dependent variable if feasible given the respective number of observa-
tions. Depending on the specification, I make use of three sets of covariates: (i) control
variables for ancestral characteristics of contemporary populations from the EA, i.e., his-
torical dependence on agriculture, number of jurisdictional hierachies above the local
level, and year of observation; (ii) additional country-level covariates, including dis-
tance from the equator, log land suitability for agriculture, and ancestry-adjusted log
population density in 1500; (iii) continent fixed effects and colonizer fixed effects (to
capture potential cultural transmission). Section 7 reports robustness checks.


Contemporary Within-Country. The contemporary within-country analyses are all
based on large-scale surveys. Here, I control for both individual-level variables (age,
age squared, gender, and education) and characteristics of the groups based on which
the kinship tightness index is assigned to a given individual. That is, in analyses that
leverage variation across ethnicities, I control for the following historical characteristics
of ethnicities: dependence on agriculture, number of jurisdictional hierachies above the
local level, distance from the equator, and year of observation in the EA. In analyses
that leverage variation across migrants, I control for the same characteristics of the
respondent’s (or their parent’s) country of birth as in the cross-country analyses.

                                             17
Historical Cross-Ethnicity.         In historical analyses, I make use of background informa-
tion in the EA on subsistence mode (e.g., dependence on agriculture), number of ju-
risdictional hierachies above the local level, settlement complexity, year of observation,
distance from the equator, longitude, and elevation.
    In all analyses, unless noted otherwise, the dependent variable is transformed into
a z-score, so that OLS coefficients can be easily interpreted: a coefficient of x means
that increasing kinship tightness from its minimum of zero to its maximum of one is
associated with an increase of x% of a standard deviation in the dependent variable.
To keep the exposition concise, tables do not report the coefficients of covariates.


5.2     The Radius of Trust
Researchers in economics have long used beliefs about whether “people in general” can
be trusted to measure the extent to which people are likely to effectively cooperate with
others (Knack and Keefer, 1997; Glaeser et al., 2000). I hence start by considering this
well-known and commonly used proxy for societal cooperation, before moving on to
study less widely used, but more direct, data on cooperation behavior.
    To study the relationship between kinship tightness and trust, I rely on both the “gen-
eral trust” question in the World Values Survey (WVS) and six additional trust questions
that got added to the WVS more recently. These more specific questions ask respondents
for their level of trust in their family, their neighbors, people they know, people they
meet for the first time, people of another religion, and foreigners, respectively (Delhey
et al., 2011). These data will allow to evaluate people’s trust radius.
    The analysis starts with OLS cross-country regressions which relate the different
trust variables to kinship tightness, with and without covariates. Columns (1)–(3) of
Table 2 reveal that kinship tightness is negatively associated with trust in people in
general.¹² To disaggregate this result and develop deeper insights into people’s trust
radius, I consider levels of trust in specific groups. I omit “trust in family” due to a ceiling
effect: on a four-point scale, the average trust in family across countries is 3.80. But
while all societies seem to trust their own family, systematic patterns hold regarding
the other groups. Columns (4) through (8) show that kinship tightness is positively
correlated with trust in neighbors, but negatively with trust in all other groups. Also, as
the analysis successively moves to more “distant” forms of out-group members (from left
to right in Table 2), the point estimate monotonically decreases in size and eventually
becomes highly statistically significant.
   ¹²The Global Preference Survey (Falk et al., 2016) likewise contains a question that elicits a concept
related to genral trust, by asking respondents to state their agreement with the statement: “I assume
that people have only the best intentions.” Responses to this question are likewise significantly negatively
correlated with kinship tightness, ρ = −0.25, p < 0.05.


                                                    18
                                                                   Table 2: Trust across countries

                                                                                       Dependent variable:
                                                                                            Trust in:
                                   People in general            Neighbors   People know    First time   Other religion   Foreigner   ∆ [In-group – out-group]
                                (1)        (2)         (3)         (4)          (5)           (6)             (7)          (8)        (9)       (10)      (11)
                                      ∗          ∗        ∗∗∗        ∗∗                             ∗               ∗∗        ∗∗∗        ∗∗∗       ∗∗∗
      Kinship tightness        -0.60      -0.63      -1.04       0.74          -0.59        -0.68            -0.81       -1.19       0.31      0.37      0.38∗∗∗
                               (0.33)     (0.36)      (0.36)     (0.34)       (0.37)        (0.35)           (0.36)       (0.33)     (0.09)    (0.09)    (0.11)
      EA controls               No         Yes         Yes         No           No            No              No            No        No        Yes       Yes
      Other controls            No         No          Yes         No           No            No              No            No        No        No        Yes




19
      Continent FE              No         No          Yes         No           No            No              No            No        No        No        Yes
      Colonizer FE              No         No          Yes         No           No            No              No            No        No        No        Yes
      Observations               94        94          93          75           75            74               75           74         74        74        73
      R2                        0.04      0.10        0.61        0.06         0.04          0.05             0.08         0.17       0.16      0.27      0.51
      Notes. Country-level OLS estimates, robust standard errors in parentheses. All dependent variables are expressed as z-scores. The dependent variable
     in columns (1)–(3) is generalized trust. In columns (4)–(8), the dependent variables are people’s trust in their neighbors, people they know, people
     they meet for the first time, people of another religion, and people of another nationality, respectively. In columns (9)–(11), the dependent variable
     is the the difference between trust in in-group (family, neighbors, and people one knows) and out-group (groups in columns (6)–(8)). EA controls
     include dependence on agriculture, number of levels of jurisdictional hierarchies above the local level, and year of observation (all computed as
     pertaining to contemporary populations). Other controls include distance from the equator, log land suitability for agriculture, and ancestry-adjusted
     log population density in 1500. ∗ p < 0.10, ∗∗ p < 0.05, ∗∗∗ p < 0.01.
                               Table 3: Trust patterns: Within-country evidence

                                                World Values Survey                      European Social Survey
 Variation in KTI is across:                           Ethnicities                      Parents’ countries of birth

                                                                  Dependent variable:
                                      General trust    ∆ Trust [In- vs. out-group]              General trust
                                      (1)      (2)       (3)             (4)              (5)            (6)
                                                            ∗∗∗             ∗∗               ∗∗∗
 Kinship tightness                   -0.067   -0.013   0.51            0.50             -0.22          -0.16∗∗∗
                                     (0.06)   (0.11)   (0.09)          (0.22)            (0.05)         (0.04)
 Country FE                           Yes      Yes       Yes             Yes              Yes            Yes
 Wave FE                              Yes      Yes       Yes             Yes              Yes            Yes
 Individual-level controls            Yes      Yes       Yes             Yes              Yes            Yes
 Ethnicity-level controls             No       Yes       No              Yes              No              No
 Country of origin controls           No       No        No              No               No             Yes
 Observations                        42038    37950    21104           20872            288519         277186
 R2                                   0.08     0.08     0.09            0.09             0.17           0.15
 Notes. Individual-level OLS estimates in the WVS / ESS, standard errors in parentheses. In columns (1)–(4),
the sample consists of individuals in the WVS. The dependent variables are people’s generalized trust and
the difference in trust between family, neighbors and people one knows on the one hand, and all other three
groups on the other hand, compare Table 2. The standard errors are clustered at the ethnicity level. Individual
level controls include gender, age, age squared, and educational attainment. Ethnicity level controls include
dependence on agriculture, number of levels of jurisdictional hierarchies above the local level, distance from
the equator, and year of observation in the EA. In columns (5)–(6), the sample includes individuals in the
ESS and the standard errors are clustered at the level of the country of birth of the father times the country
of birth of the mother. Individual level controls include gender, age, age squared, years of education, and a
second-generation migrant dummy. Country of origin controls include dependence on agriculture, number of
levels of jurisdictional hierarchies above the local level, and year of observation (all from the EA, but com-
puted as pertaining to contemporary populations) as well as distance from the equator, log land suitability for
agriculture, and ancestry-adjusted log population density in 1500. All dependent variables are expressed as
z-scores. ∗ p < 0.10, ∗∗ p < 0.05, ∗∗∗ p < 0.01.


   To draw out the distinction between trust in in-group and out-group even more
clearly, I construct a variable of difference in trust between in- and out-group. For this
purpose, I add up trust in family, neighbors and people one knows and then subtract
trust in all other groups. As columns (9)–(11) show, kinship tightness is strongly and
significant correlated with this measure of the radius of trust. The left panel of Figure 2
visualizes the relationship between kinship tightness and the difference between in-
group and out-group trust.
   To investigate whether these results might be spuriously driven by omitted cross-
country variables, the analysis proceeds with within-country regressions. For this pur-
pose, I again make use of variation (i) across ethnicities in the WVS and (ii) across
second-generation migrants in the ESS. Table 3 presents the results, which mirror those
established in the cross-country analysis. In the WVS, columns (1)–(4), the point esti-
mates suggest that people exhibit lower trust in people in general, yet this correlation is
not statistically significant. However, kinship tightness is significantly related to larger


                                                       20
differences between in- and out-group trust. Table 15 in Appendix A shows that the lat-
ter result again hides the fact that kinship tightness is positively correlated with trust in
neighbors, yet negatively with trust in strangers. Columns (5) and (6) show that similar
results obtain in the ESS using the general trust question. Here, an individual’s trust
is strongly and significantly negatively correlated with the average ancestral kinship
tightness of the countries of birth of father and mother, conditional on a large set of
individual-level controls as well as country of origin controls of the country of birth of
father and mother. In sum, even though the nature of variation differs in various ways
– across countries, across ethnicities, and across second-generation migrants – do the
results consistently point to a relationship between kinship tightness and contemporary
trust levels.
    In a final step, the analysis provides evidence that tight kinship ties were already
negatively correlated with trust levels in historical ethnicities. For a subset of societies
in the Ethnographic Atlas, the so-called Standard Cross-Cultural Sample (SCCS), very
detailed information on the practices and values of historical ethnicities are available,
based on the records of ethnographers. Ross (1983) coded an eleven-step variable that
describes the extent to which parents in the respective ethnicity inculcated trust into
their children. For the lack of more detailed information, I interpret this abstract trust
variable as being similar to the “general trust” question in the WVS, i.e., that it describes
trust levels in other people in general, as opposed to in the family or neighbors only.
To reiterate, these types of variables reflect the impressions of ethnographers of values
and beliefs in the respective communities; while such variables are probably noisy, I am
not aware of reasons to expect that they are somehow biased in favor of the research
hypothesis. To conserve space, I present these results as part of Table 6 below. Columns
(1) and (2) provide evidence that the trust variable is negatively correlated with kinship
tightness, which is reminiscent of the correlations found in contemporary data.


5.3     Cooperation, Cheating and In-Group Favoritism
To complement the analysis of people’s beliefs with evidence on their behaviors, the
analysis continues by investigating the relationship between historical kinship tight-
ness and contemporary behaviors pertaining to cooperation, cheating, and in-group
favoritism. First, Herrmann et al. (2008) conducted public goods games across 15 coun-
tries in which participants were students and hence presumably strangers to each other,
or at least not in-group members.¹³ My dependent variables are (i) initial contribution


   ¹³The cross-cultural public goods games run by Henrich and collaborators are less useful for my pur-
poses because they were administered on small-scale societies that may have had little cultural overlap
with the majority of the population of the country they reside in (Henrich et al., 2001, 2010).


                                                 21
           Table 4: Cooperation, cheating and in-group favoritism: Cross-country evidence

                                                            Dependent variable:
                          Public goods game contributions           Cheating           In-group favoritism
                          Initial NOP   Initial P   Average        Lying game        Mgmt. jobs based on kin
                              (1)         (2)         (3)         (4)       (5)       (6)       (7)       (8)
                                 ∗∗∗          ∗∗∗           ∗∗       ∗∗∗       ∗∗∗       ∗∗∗       ∗∗∗
 Kinship tightness          -1.92       -2.08       -1.76        2.04      2.15      0.80      0.90      1.31∗∗∗
                             (0.61)      (0.60)     (0.72)       (0.53)    (0.52)    (0.26)    (0.28)    (0.29)
 EA controls                  No          No          No          No        Yes       No        Yes       Yes
 Other controls               No          No          No          No        No        No        No        Yes
 Continent FE                 No          No          No          No        No        No        No        Yes
 Colonizer FE                 No          No          No          No        No        No        No        Yes
 Observations                 15           15         15           23        23       114       113       112
 R2                          0.34         0.40       0.29         0.43      0.48      0.08      0.09      0.50
 Notes. Country-level OLS estimates, robust standard errors in parentheses. The dependent variables in
columns (1) and (2) are initial contribution levels in the PGG of Herrmann et al. (2008) in the treat-
ments without (NOP) and with availability of punishment (P), respectively. In column (3), contribution
levels are averaged across both conditions and all ten periods of the PGG. In columns (4)–(5), the depen-
dent variable is the average monetary payout subjects reported in the lying game of Gächter and Schulz
(2016). In columns (6)–(8), the dependent variable is the fraction of jobs that is assigned based on kinship
(Van de Vliert, 2011). All dependent variables are expressed as z-scores. EA controls include dependence
on agriculture, number of levels of jurisdictional hierarchies above the local level, and year of observation
(all computed as pertaining to contemporary populations). Other controls include distance from the equa-
tor, log land suitability for agriculture, and ancestry-adjusted log population density in 1500. ∗ p < 0.10,
∗∗
   p < 0.05, ∗∗∗ p < 0.01.


levels in an experimental treatment without availability of punishment, (ii) initial con-
tribution levels in a treatment with punishment, and (iii) average contribution levels
across conditions and periods. Second, Gächter and Schulz (2016) conducted an ex-
perimental cheating game across 23 countries in which participants could lie to the
experimenter – an out-group member – to increase their monetary reward. I use aver-
age lying levels as proxy for cheating behavior. Third, while the aforementioned experi-
mental games capture the treatment of out-group members, a survey conducted among
managers in large firms gives insights into people’s preferential treatment of in-group
members (Van de Vliert, 2011). Here, managers in large companies were asked which
fraction of management jobs in their company is assigned based on kin relationships as
opposed to personal qualifications.
   Table 4 presents the results from OLS estimations. Columns (1)–(3) document that
country-level ancestral kinship tightness is negatively correlated with contributions in
a public goods game, hence providing evidence that societies with strong kinship ties
are less cooperative when interacting with out-group members. Columns (4) and (5)
establish that kinship tightness is positively associated with cheating on an out-group
member in a lying game. The right panel of Figure 2 visualizes the relationship between
kinship tightness and cheating behavior. While these behavioral tendencies suggest that

                                                     22
                                    Kinship tightness and in-group vs. out-group trust                                                                         Kinship tightness and out-group cheating
                 .75




                                                                                                                                     3
                                                                                           YEM
                                                                                                               TUN
                                                                                                                                                                                                           MAR
                                                                         EGY LBY
Δ Trust in- vs. out-group (WVS)
                             .5




                                                                                                                      Reported payout in lying game
                                                                                                                                                                                                     TZA




                                                                                                                                                 2
                                                                  ARM        MAR
                                                                             UZB
                                                         MYS
                                                             IRQ                    JOR CHN
                                                                                        PAK
                     .25




                                                                               DZATUR
                                                            CYP                                                                                                                                                        CHN
                                                              THA     GEO      JPN
                                          PHL MEX                               KGZSVN




                                                                                                                                    1
                                                PER                                 ZWE      VNM
                                          COL                       BGR
                                                                   KOR
                                                               IDN ZMBETH                  NGA                                                                                                                   TUR
                                          ESP                                                                                                                                                                          VNM
            0




                                           ROUITA                                                                                                                                        POL
                                                          MDA SGP           GHA            IND        RWA
                                      DEUURY                                                           TWN
                                                   RUS BLRESTKWT
                                              ECU CHL                 UKR                 BFA                                                               COL
                                                                                                                                                                                       IDNCZE
                                                                                                                                                                                                 GEO
                                              AZE            QAT




                                                                                                                          0
                                               NLD
                                                BRA                        KAZMLI
                                                                  HUN        LBN                             TTO                                                                                KENZAF
 -.25




                                                ARG                                                                                                         AUT
                                                                                                                                                             ESP    NLD
                                       FIN
                                       CAN                       POL
                                     NOR
                                        CHEFRA
                                      AUS                                                                                                                          GBR             GTM
                                  GBR USA AND                                                                                                                              MYS            SVK
                                      SWE                              ZAF




                                                                                                                                     -1
                 -.5




                                                                                                                                                         DEU        ITA
                                                                                    BHR                                                                 SWE                      LTU

                                  -.5          -.25            0             .25                 .5            .75                                    -.4            -.2         0              .2               .4      .6
                                                             Kinship tightness                                                                                                   Kinship tightness




      Figure 2: Relationship between kinship tightness and the difference between in-group and out-group
      trust in the WVS (left panel) and between kinship tightness and cheating in a lying game (Gächter
      and Schulz, 2016, left panel). Both plots are partial correlation plots conditional on the vector of “EA
      controls”, compare column (5) of Table 4.


      social structures that are characterized by tight kinship have detrimental consequences
      for interactions among out-group members, the opposite holds true for in-group inter-
      actions. As columns (6)–(8) show, kinship tightness is significantly positively related
      to nepotism in the business domain. Here, the larger number of observations allows to
      condition on the full set of covariates described above, including continent fixed effects
      and colonizer fixed effects.
                                  Table 4 has provided evidence for a cross-country difference in how members of tight
      kinship societies treat in- and out-group members. Table 5 shows that – analogously to
      the cross-country findings – tight ancestral kinship is also postively associated with
      people’s willingness to help in-group members within countries. For this purpose, the
      analysis exploits individual-level variation in ancestral kinship tightness in the WVS and
      ESS. In these analyses, the unit of observation is always an individual, yet the kinship
      tightness index is assigned (i) based on the ethnicity of the respondent (WVS) or (ii)
      based on the respondents’ parents’ countries of birth (ESS).
                                  Both the WVS and the ESS ask respondents how important it is for them to help
      people around them and to care for their well-being. I interpret these survey ques-
      tions as asking about respondents’ attitudes towards their in-group.¹⁴ Columns (1)–(2)
      establish that ancestral kinship tightness is positively correlated with the importance
      people attach to helping in-group members in the WVS. This relationship holds con-
      ditioning on individual-level covariates (age, age squared, gender, and education) as
     well as historical ethnicity-level controls from the EA, including dependence on agricul-

          ¹⁴The WVS also contains a question that asks people how important it is for them to “do something
      for the good of society”. This question is arguably difficult to interpret given that “society” could pertain
      either to the local community or to, e.g., the country as a whole. In any case, in analogous regressions to
      columns (1) and (2) of Table 5, kinship tightness is significantly positively correlated with this variable.


                                                                                                                     23
                  Table 5: Attitudes about helping in-group members (WVS and ESS)

                                           World Values Survey                  European Social Survey
   Variation in KTI is across:                  Ethnicities                  Parents’ countries of birth

                                                                 Dependent variable:
                                      Important help people nearby       Important help people around self
                                        (1)               (2)              (3)                (4)
   Kinship tightness                  0.39∗∗∗          0.63∗∗∗           0.18∗∗∗            0.10∗∗
                                      (0.11)           (0.21)            (0.03)             (0.04)
   Country FE                           Yes               Yes              Yes                Yes
   Wave FE                              Yes               Yes              Yes                Yes
   Individual-level controls            Yes               Yes              Yes                Yes
   Ethnicity-level controls             No                Yes              No                 No
   Country of origin controls           No                No               No                 Yes
   Observations                       14755            14534             278775             267547
   R2                                  0.06             0.07              0.07               0.07
   Notes. Individual-level OLS estimates in the WVS / ESS, standard errors in parentheses. In columns
  (1)–(2), the sample consists of individuals in the WVS. The dependent variable is the importance people
  attach to helping others nearby. The standard errors are clustered at the ethnicity level. Individual level
  controls include gender, age, age squared, and educational attainment. Ethnicity level controls include
  dependence on agriculture, number of levels of jurisdictional hierarchies above the local level, distance
  from the equator, and year of observation in the EA. In columns (3)–(4), the sample includes individuals
  in the ESS and the standard errors are clustered at the level of the country of birth of the father times
  the country of birth of the mother. Individual level controls include gender, age, age squared, years of
  education, and a second-generation migrant dummy. Country of origin controls include dependence on
  agriculture, number of levels of jurisdictional hierarchies above the local level, and year of observation
  (all from the EA, but computed as pertaining to contemporary populations) as well as distance from the
  equator, log land suitability for agriculture, and ancestry-adjusted log population density in 1500. All
  dependent variables are expressed as z-scores. ∗ p < 0.10, ∗∗ p < 0.05, ∗∗∗ p < 0.01.


ture, number of jurisdictional hierarchies above the local level, and year of observation.
Columns (3) and (4) show that similar results obtain in the ESS. Here, the importance
individuals attach to “helping people around him or her” and to “care for their well-
being” is significantly positively correlated with the average ancestral kinship tightness
of the countries of birth of father and mother. Again, this relationship holds conditional
on individual-level covariates as well as country of origin controls that control for the
(average) characteristics of the country of birth of father and mother. These controls
include ancestral characteristics of contemporary populations from the EA, i.e., histori-
cal dependence on agriculture, number of jurisdictional hierachies above the local level,
and year of observation in the EA. In addition, the country of origin controls include
distance from the equator, log land suitability for agriculture, and ancestry-adjusted
log population density in 1500.
   In sum, the cross-country and within-country results on people’s experimental be-
haviors, willingness to help others, and trust beliefs draw a consistent picture. Tight


                                                     24
                       Table 6: Beliefs and moral values of historical ethnicities

                                                            Dependent variable:
                                         Trust                      Religion                Moral values
                              Inculcate trust children           Moralizing god       Loyalty to community
                               (1)               (2)              (3)        (4)       (5)          (6)
                                     ∗                 ∗             ∗∗∗        ∗∗∗       ∗∗
        Kinship tightness     -0.65         -0.69               -0.74      -0.53      1.09         1.09∗∗
                              (0.38)        (0.40)               (0.17)     (0.14)    (0.45)       (0.53)
        Continent FE           Yes               Yes              Yes        Yes       Yes          Yes
        Historical controls    No                Yes              No         Yes       No           Yes
        Observations          129            126                 656        635        82            81
        R2                    0.05           0.11                0.20       0.48      0.10          0.15
        Notes. Historical ethnicity-level OLS estimates, robust standard errors in parentheses. In
       columns (1)–(2), the dependent variable is a categorical 11-step variable that describes
       the extent to which ethnicities inculcated trust in their children. The dependent variable
       in columns (3)–(4) is an indicator for whether the ethnicity had a moralizing god. In
       columns (5)–(6), the dependent variable is the extent to which people are loyal towards
       their local community. All dependent variables are expressed as z-scores. In column (4), the
       historical controls include dependence on agriculture, dependence on animal husbandry,
       year of observation, settlement complexity, number of jurisdictional hierarchies above the
       local level, distance from the equator, longitude, and average elevation. Due to the smaller
       number of observations, the historical controls in columns (2) and (6) only include distance
       from the equator, longitude, average elevation, and number of jurisdictional hierarchies
       above the local level. ∗ p < 0.10, ∗∗ p < 0.05, ∗∗∗ p < 0.01.




kinship is associated with low cooperativeness and trust towards the out-group, but
in-group favoritism and strong trust in the in-group, while loose kinship societies co-
operate relatively well with out-group members and do not disproportionately favor
or trust in-group over out-group members. The analysis now turns to studying the en-
forcement devices that are associated with these two different systems.



6      Enforcement Devices

6.1    Moralizing Gods
The relationship between the presence of a moralizing god and kinship tightness cannot
be meaningfully studied in contemporary data because – due to the spread of Christian-
ity and Islam – the vast majority of human societies today honor a moralizing god. How-
ever, in the EA, only 26% of historical ethnicities are coded as believing in a moralizing
god.
    Columns (3) and (4) of Table 6 study the relationship between religious beliefs and
kinship tightness in the EA. The dependent variable is a (standardized) binary indicator
that equals one if a society has a moralizing god and zero otherwise, i.e., if the society


                                                           25
has no high god or a god that is not moralizing (Q34 in the EA). The results show that
societies with high kinship tightness were significantly less likely to develop beliefs in a
moralizing god. This result holds up against a large and comprehensive vector of control
variables that account for pre-industrial heterogeneity in subsistence style, settlement
patterns, year of observation in the EA, geography, as well as continent fixed effects.¹⁵


6.2     Moral Values: Tribalistic vs. Universal Moral Principles
6.2.1    Moral Values: Evidence from Historical Ethnicities

To study of the link between the structure of moral values and kinship tightness, the
analysis again makes use of the detailed information contained in the SCCS. Specif-
ically, a variable (Q778) measures the extent to which people are loyal to their local
community on a scale of 1–4. According to Ross (1983), who assembled these data, this
variable is meant to measure the degree of in-group loyalty and “we” feelings. Columns
(5)–(6) of Table 6 present the results. Loyalty to the local community is significantly
increasing in kinship tightness, both with and without covariates.


6.2.2    Moral Values: Contemporary Evidence

In a second step, the analysis investigates the relationship between ancestral kinship
tightness and contemporary values, both across and within countries. For this purpose,
I exploit variation in universal vs. tribalistic moral principles in the MFQ, which was
specifically designed to measure variation in moral principles that go beyond tradi-
tional notions of distributional fairness, reciprocity, and not harming others. In par-
ticular, building on research in cultural anthropology (Shweder et al., 1997), the moral
psychologist Haidt (2012) and his collaborators noticed that while the previously men-
tioned dimensions are moral principles that are meant to apply universally to everyone,
other moral principles such as in-group loyality or submitting to authorities refer to
relationship-specific obligations, i.e., to moral rules that differ depending on the person
concerned. The latter types of values have also been referred to as “communal” or “trib-
alistic”. The MFQ contains survey-based measures of five “moral foundations”: fairness
/ reciprocity, harm / care, in-group loyalty, respect / authority, and purity. For example,
the in-group loyalty dimension includes an item that asks respondents to indicate their
agreement with the statement “People should be loyal to their family members, even
when they have done something wrong”, see Appendix C for details.


    ¹⁵Table 16 in Appendix A shows that similar results hold when I restrict the sample of ethnicities to
(i) societies that have a high god or (ii) continents that were largely not influenced by the Abrahamic
religions at the time of recording (Christianity, Islam, Judaism), i.e., the Americas and Oceania.


                                                  26
                                  Table 7: Moral values across countries

                                                           Dependent variable:
                                           In-group loyalty           Rel. imp. tribalistic values
                                         (1)      (2)         (3)       (4)       (5)       (6)
                                           ∗∗∗       ∗∗∗         ∗∗       ∗∗∗        ∗∗∗
              Kinship tightness        0.84      0.73       0.84      1.20       1.15      1.09∗∗
                                       (0.27)    (0.27)     (0.39)    (0.30)     (0.32)    (0.45)
              EA controls                No       Yes         Yes       No        Yes       Yes
              Other controls             No       No          Yes       No        No        Yes
              Continent FE               No       No          Yes       No        No        Yes
              Colonizer FE               No       No          Yes       No        No        Yes
              Observations              104       103         95       104        103       95
              R2                        0.08      0.10       0.35      0.16       0.22     0.48
              Notes. Country-level OLS estimates, robust standard errors in parentheses. The
             dependent variable in columns (1)–(3) is the in-group loyalty dimension in the
             MFQ. In columns (4)–(6), I compute the relative importance of universally appli-
             cable values by adding the MFQ dimensions of fairness / reciprocity and harm
             / care and subtracting in-group loyalty and submission to authority. The sample
             is restricted to countries with at least 18 respondents in the MFQ, which corre-
             sponds to the 25th percentile of the distribution. Table 18 in Appendix A reports
             a robustness check that includes the full sample of countries, and weights each
             observation by the number of respondents. EA controls include dependence on
             agriculture, number of levels of jurisdictional hierarchies above the local level,
             and year of observation (all computed as pertaining to contemporary popula-
             tions). Other controls include distance from the equator, log land suitability for
             agriculture, and ancestry-adjusted log population density in 1500. ∗ p < 0.10, ∗∗
             p < 0.05, ∗∗∗ p < 0.01.


    In line with the research hypothesis discussed in Section 3, the analysis employs
two dependent variables, i.e., (i) the measure of in-group loyalty, and (ii) an index of
the importance of universal values relative to the more “communal” ones. That is, the
hypothesis is explicitly not about some societies being more or less moral than others,
but merely about heterogeneity in the relative importance that people attach to struc-
turally different types of values. To construct the index, I compute the first principal
component of fairness / reciprocity, harm / care, in-group / loyalty, and respect / au-
thority. The resulting score endogenously has the appealing property that – in line with
the research hypothesis – the index loads positively on the first two values and nega-
tively on the latter two, see Appendix C for details. Since purity relates to the religious
domain, it is not directly related to the research question pursued here.¹⁶ I compute
country-level scores by averaging responses by country of residence of respondents.
    Table 7 presents the cross-country results. Kinship tightness is strongly and signifi-
cantly correlated with in-group loyalty as well as the relative importance of tribalistic
vs. universal moral values. The left panel of Figure 3 depicts the relationship between

    ¹⁶However, including the purity dimension in the construction of the index leaves the results unaf-
fected.


                                                   27
                                                     Kinship tightness and tribalistic moral values                                                                                Kinship tightness and shame vs. guilt
                                                                                                  UZB                                                                                                                LBY




                                                                                                                                              2
                                                      CYM                                                                                                                                                     SGP
                                          3
Rel. importance of tribalistic moral values




                                                                                                                                                                                                     ESP




                                                                                                                             Shame -- guilt (Google searches)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            PAK
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             KAZ
                                 2




                                                                                                                                                                                                  MYS PRI




                                                                                                                                                       1
                                                                                                 IRN                                                                                                                           CHL
                                                                                   LKA                                                                                                                URY                    ARG
                                                                                                MAR DZA IND        VIR                                                                                       SVK                                 NGA IND
                                                                                                          NGA VNM                                                                                                                 ARE
                                                       PHL                BOL
                                                                           THA                ASM         CHN                                                                                               CANPER
                                                                                                                                                                                                            CHE
                                                                                                                                                                                                           ISR
                                                       HND                       SGP                                                                                                                 DOM                                              TUN
                        1




                                                                                                        JOR                                                                                        LBNCRI MAR          IRN
                                                                               LVA            EGYBHS      PAK                                                         PHL                   BRA                                   MOZ
                                                                           KWT                  ALB
                                                                           MYS             JPNKEN                                                                                                                  DZA




                                                                                                                                             0
                                                              ECUPER                             LBN   KAZ                                                                                                  AUT     GTM
                                                        AND                    IDN
                                                                             EST
                                                                            OMNLTU                                                                                                              BLR
                                                                                                                                                                                                SYR             JOR
                                                      LUX            RUS
                                                                   SLV             HUNKOR    AFG     TUR
                                                                                                      BIH      TWN
                                                                            GTM         U KR                                                                                        RUS          AFG      PRT       KEN
                                                                               CYP                                                                                                                       DEU
              0




                                                        USA                ARE    POL              BHRSVN
                                                       JAM
                                                        PRI
                                                        CHE                       SVK
                                                                                    BGR        ISR    HRV          BRB                                                            GBR
                                                                                                                                                                                    SAU                    FRA                          NZLZAF
                                                        CAN
                                                         URY
                                                      BMU   FRA         GRC SAU CZE                                                                                               IRL
                                                                                                                                                                                            IRQ    EGY
                                                                                                                                                                                                    MDAMEXCZE YEMIRN
                                                            VEN
                                                           ROU    NLD                        ZAF NZL                   MLT                                                                       COL
                                                      NOR                                                              BGD                                                  AUS
                                                          CRIMEX
                                                        ESP    BELPAN                          GHA                                                                                                        ECU




                                                                                                                                -1
                                                    IRLAUS
                                                        DOM                QATPRT
                                                          AUTITA     ARG
      -1




                                                                       CHL
                                                                         AZE                                       TTO                                                                                  VEN
                                                    GBR                                                                                                                     USA                        PRY
                                                        FIN
                                                      SWE
                                                      DEU
                                                        COL        ISL KHM IRQ                                                                                              CAN                                                         BOL
                                                                                   MKD
                       -2




                                                                                                                                              -2
                                                                    BRA

                                              -.5            -.25          0              .25           .5           .75                                        -.4                   -.2                  0                 .2                  .4
                                                                           Kinship tightness                                                                                                           Kinship tightness




        Figure 3: The left panel depicts the relationship between kinship tightness and the relative importance
        of universally applicable moral principles (Haidt, 2012). The right panel illustrates the correlation be-
        tween kinship tightness and the relative importance of shame over guilt on Google. Both plots are partial
        correlation plots. The left panel is conditional on the vector of “EA controls”, compare, e.g., column (5)
        of Table 4, and the right panel conditional on both the “EA controls” and language fixed effects.



        ancestral kinship tightness and the relative importance of tribalistic values.
                                                Table 8 presents analogous within-country analyses in the MFQ. These regressions
        leverage variation in the country of birth of respondents, conditional on the same coun-
        try of residence. The regressions control for both individual-level covariates (age, age
        squared, gender, education) and country of origin controls. Across specifications and
        dependent variables, kinship tightness is significantly correlated with moral values.


        6.3                                           Emotions: Shame versus Guilt
        Measuring the relative importance of different emotions across cultures requires non-
        standard data. First, I make use of ISEAR, i.e., the “International Survey on Emotion
       Antecedents and Reactions” (Scherer et al., 1986; Scherer and Wallbott, 1994). This
        dataset consists of responses to a psychological questionnaire on how university stu-
        dents across cultures experience emotions (N = 2, 921; 37 countries). Among other
        questions, respondents were asked to describe a situation in which they experienced
        shame and guilt, respectively. Then, for each emotion, they were asked to describe how
        long-lasting (minutes, an hour, several hours, a day or more) and how intense (not very,
        moderately, intense, very) the feeling was.¹⁷ I convert responses to these questions to
        a scale of 1–4, respectively. Then, I compute the difference in intensity and length be-
        tween shame and guilt, respectively, and average these two differences to arrive at an

          ¹⁷The ISEAR questionnaire contains many more detailed questions, including about shame and guilt.
       The two questions that I use are the ones that are asked initially and represent the broadest assessment.
       Follow-up questions, which I have not analyzed, include detailed questions about the physiological symp-
       toms and expressive behaviors that were associated with or followed the emotion.


                                                                                                                           28
            Table 8: Universal vs. tribalistic moral values: Within-country evidence (MFQ)

                                                         Dependent variable:
                                            In-group loyalty        Rel. imp. tribalistic values
                                      (1)         (2)       (3)        (4)       (5)         (6)
                                         ∗∗∗         ∗∗∗       ∗∗∗       ∗∗∗       ∗∗∗
       Kinship tightness            0.53        0.52       0.45      0.33      0.34      0.35∗∗∗
                                    (0.07)      (0.07)     (0.07)    (0.06)    (0.06)    (0.05)
       Country FE                     Yes         Yes       Yes        Yes       Yes         Yes
       Individual level controls      No          Yes       Yes        No        Yes         Yes
       Country of origin controls     No          No        Yes        No        No          Yes
       Observations                 285647      279142     277954    269814    263819    262693
       R2                            0.01        0.07       0.07      0.01      0.03      0.03
       Notes. Individual-level OLS estimates in the MFQ, standard errors (clustered at country of
      birth) in parentheses. The dependent variable in columns (1)–(3) is the in-group loyalty
      dimension in the MFQ. In columns (4)–(6), I compute the relative importance of tribalistic
      values by computing the first principal component of fairness / reciprocity and harm / care
      (both of which enter with negative weights) and in-group loyalty and authority / respect
      (both of which have positive weights). See Appendix C for details. All dependent vari-
      ables are expressed as z-scores. Individual level controls include gender, age, age squared,
      an immigrant dummy, and education fixed effects (seven categories). Country of origin
      controls include dependence on agriculture, number of levels of jurisdictional hierarchies
      above the local level, and year of observation (all from the EA, but computed as pertaining
      to contemporary populations) as well as distance from the equator, log land suitability for
      agriculture, and ancestry-adjusted log population density in 1500. ∗ p < 0.10, ∗∗ p < 0.05,
      ∗∗∗
          p < 0.01.


individual-level summary statistic of the relative (self-reported) strength of shame over
guilt. A country-level index is then computed as average across respondents.¹⁸
    In addition, I develop a second measure of the relative importance of shame and
guilt, which does not rely on self-reports. I explore how often people across cultures
think about shame and guilt by analyzing how often they entered the respective term
into Google (Stephens-Davidowitz, 2014). Google Trends allows to assess this frequency
relative to overall search volume, separately for each country. To avoid a potential bias
that might arise by comparing search behavior across different languages, the anal-
ysis only relies on within-language variation. Accordingly, I restrict attention to lan-
guages that are an official language in at least two countries (since otherwise no within-
language variation can be exploited) and that are covered in the linguistic study of Jaffe
et al. (2014), so I have access to translations for shame and guilt. To take English as
an example, I entered “guilt” and “shame” separately into Google trends and recorded
how often (relative to total search volume) people across countries searched for either
concept in the last five years. I repeated the same procedure for each language in the


   ¹⁸Wallbott and Scherer (1995) analyze these data and show that they are systematically related to
the cross-cultural indices of Hofstede (1984).


                                                   29
                      Table 9: Shame, guilt, and altruistic punishment across countries

                                                               Dependent variable:
                                             Shame – guilt                    ∆ Punishment [Altruistic – Other]
                              Self-reports        # of Google searches        PGG     Global Preference Survey
                              (1)      (2)        (3)        (4)      (5)     (6)       (7)        (8)       (9)
  Kinship tightness         1.28∗∗∗   1.66∗∗∗   1.03∗∗   1.43∗∗∗    1.21∗∗   -1.36∗   -1.26∗∗∗   -1.32∗∗∗   -1.35∗∗
                            (0.43)    (0.49)    (0.40)   (0.45)     (0.52)   (0.70)    (0.30)     (0.35)    (0.65)
  EA controls                 No       Yes        No         Yes      Yes      No       No         Yes       Yes
  Language FE                 No        No        Yes        Yes      Yes      No       No         No         No
  Other controls              No        No        No         No       Yes      No       No         No        Yes
  Continent FE                No        No        No         No       No       No       No         No        Yes
  Colonizer FE                No        No        No         No       Yes      No       No         No        Yes
  Observations                35        35        59          59      59       15       75         75         74
  R2                         0.20      0.43      0.42        0.45    0.58     0.17     0.18       0.21       0.41
  Notes. Country-level OLS estimates, robust standard errors in parentheses. In columns (1)–(3), the dependent
 variable is the difference between the relative frequency of Google searches for shame and guilt in a given
 country-language pair, see Appendix C. In column (6), the dependent variable is the difference between
 altruistic and antisocial punishment in the experimental public goods game data of Herrmann et al. (2008).
 In columns (7)–(9), the dependent variable is the difference between altruistic and second-party punishment
 in the Global Preference Survey, see Appendix C for details. All dependent variables are expressed as z-scores.
 In columns (1)–(3), the standard errors are clustered at the country level. EA controls include dependence
 on agriculture, number of levels of jurisdictional hierarchies above the local level, and year of observation (all
 computed as pertaining to contemporary populations). Other controls include distance from the equator, log
 land suitability for agriculture, and ancestry-adjusted log population density in 1500. ∗ p < 0.10, ∗∗ p < 0.05,
 ∗∗∗
     p < 0.01.


consideration set. In total, I gathered data on search frequency in 59 country-language
pairs (consisting of 9 languages and 56 countries) and computed the difference in word
use between shame and guilt.¹⁹ Importantly, this procedure implies that any noise or
bias in the construction of the language variable that operates at the level of languages
(say, through translation) is netted out because in the empirical analysis I only compare
populations that speak the same language.
    Table 9 presents the results. Columns (1) and (2) document that kinship tightness is
positively correlated with the relative strength of feelings of shame over guilt, according
to the self-reports of respondents in ISEAR. Columns (4)–(6) exploit variation within
languages (by including language fixed effects) in search behavior on Google. I find
that kinship tightness is significantly correlated with the relative importance of shame,
also conditional on controls. The right panel of Figure 3 visualizes this correlation.




   ¹⁹See Appendix C for details.


                                                         30
6.4    Altruistic Punishment
To study people’s punishment patterns across societies, I focus on the difference be-
tween altruistic and other forms of punishment, as discussed in the research hypoth-
esis. For this purpose, the analysis employs two dependent variables. First, I consider
observed punishment patterns in the cross-cultural public goods games of Herrmann
et al. (2008). Here, I compute as dependent variable the difference between altruistic
and antisocial punishment, i.e., the difference in punishment in cases in which the pun-
isher contributed more and less than the punished participant, respectively. Second, the
analysis makes use of the preference measures on negative reciprocity in the GPS. The
GPS explicitly includes survey items to measure both people’s propensity for altruistic
punishment (“How willing are you to punish someone who treats others unfairly, even
if there may be costs for you?”) and for second-party punishment. I again compute the
difference between these variables, see Appendix C for details.
   Columns (6)–(9) of Table 9 document that kinship tightness is negatively correlated
with the prevalence of altruistic punishment, relative to other forms of punishment. This
result holds both using punishment data in the PGG and in the GPS. The latter result
is visualized in the left panel of Figure 4.
   Table 10 provides ancillary regressions using within-country data from the GPS.
Here, the dependent variable is again the difference between altruistic and second-
party punishment, yet the analysis exploits individual-level variation in ancestral kin-
ship tightness across countries of residence, holding fixed respondents’ country of resi-
dence as well as other covariates. The results document that kinship tightness is nega-
tively correlated with the relative importance of altruistic punishment within countries.


6.5    Institutions
To understand the relationship between the development of institutional structures and
kinship tightness, I consider variation across ethnicities in the EA. As outlined above,
this analysis requires me to distinguish between institutions at the local (community)
level and those that supersede separate groups, which I refer to as “global”. First, the
data contain a five-step variable that measures the number of levels of jurisdictional hi-
erarchies beyond the local community (e.g., no levels, petty chiefdom, large chiefdom,
state, large state, Q33 in the EA). This is the standard variable in the literature that peo-
ple have used to proxy for the institutional sophistication of ethnicities in the EA (e.g.,
Giuliano and Nunn, 2013). However, the data also contain a variable that measures the
levels of jurisdictional hierarchy at the local level (Q32), which is used less frequently
in the literature. Local levels of hierarchy include nuclear family, extended family, clan,


                                               31
                              Table 10: Altruistic punishment within countries

                                                                       Dependent variable:
                                                         ∆ Punishment [Altruistic – Second-party]
                                                           (1)        (2)                   (3)
                                                                 ∗
            Kinship tightness                            -0.11       -0.099              -0.29∗∗∗
                                                         (0.06)      (0.07)               (0.10)
            Country FE                                     Yes        Yes                   Yes
            Individual level controls                      No         Yes                   Yes
            Country of origin controls                     No         No                    Yes
            Observations                                 65199       64217                63758
            R2                                            0.06        0.06                 0.06
            Notes. Individual-level OLS estimates in the GPS, standard errors (clustered at country of birth)
           in parentheses. is the difference between prosocial punishment and second-party punishment in
           the Global Preference Survey, see Appendix C for details. Individual level controls include gender,
           age, age squared, self-reported cognitive skills, and educational attainment fixed effects (three
           categories). Country of origin controls include dependence on agriculture, number of levels of
           jurisdictional hierarchies above the local level, and year of observation (all from the EA, but com-
           puted as pertaining to contemporary populations) as well as distance from the equator, log land
           suitability for agriculture, and ancestry-adjusted log population density in 1500. The dependent
           variable is expressed as z-score. ∗ p < 0.10, ∗∗ p < 0.05, ∗∗∗ p < 0.01.



and village. These institutional structures are arguably not just more “local”, but also
more informal than the jurisdictional hierarchies above the local level.
    Columns (1)–(4) of Table 11 relate these two variables to the kinship tightness in-
dex. As hypothesized, kinship tightness is negatively correlated with the development
of institutions above the local level, but positively associated with levels of hierarchy
at the local level, conditional on the society’s dependence on agriculture and animal
husbandry, respectively, settlement complexity, year of observation, distance from the
equator, longitude, average elevation, and continent fixed effects. These findings are
consistent with the idea that tight kinship coevolved with strong institutions at the
local level to regulate behavior within the group, while loose kinship requires the de-
velopment of broader institutional frames to sustain cooperation across groups.
    To shed further light on the nature of local institutions, I again make use of de-
tailed ethnographic information from the SCCS and consider the power these local
institutions had in terms of spelling out sanctions and enforcement for community de-
cisions²⁰ Columns (5) and (6) show that high kinship tightness is associated with local
institutions that were not just more developed, but also more powerful in enforcing
behavior. Here, the smaller number of observations only allows me to condition on a
subset of covariates, including continent fixed effects and geographic covariates.


   ²⁰For this purpose, I extract the first principal component of Q776 and Q777 in the SCCS. These items
code the power of local institutions in enforcing community decisions and the presence of enforcement
specialists, respectively, see Appendix C for details.


                                                          32
                                                         Kinship tightness and altruistic punishment                                                              Kinship tightness and importance of behaving properly
                                              3




                                                                                                                                                2
 Δ Punishment altruistic vs. second-party (GPS)



                                                         USA                                                                                                                                                        JOR          TUN
                                                                                                                                                                                                             LBY
                                                                                                                                                                                                         EGYGHA
                                                                                                                                                                                                             UZB IRN




                                                                                                                                Importance of behaving properly
                                                                                                                                                                                                IDN
                                     2




                                                   GBR                                                                                                                                                 GEO         ZWE         TTO
                                                          CAN
                                                         DEUESP                                                                                                            PHL                               MLI




                                                                                                                                                          1
                                                         AUS
                                                         SWE                                         IRN
                                                                                                                                                                                              CYP                      NGA
                                                                                                                                                                           COL ECU                  ARM                 PAK
                                                         FIN                                                                                                                      BRA
                                                                                                                                                                            ESP
                                                                                                                                                                             ROU                QAT
                                                                            PRT                                                                                                      RUS
                                                                                                                                                                                              MDA HUN ZAF
                                                                                                                                                                                                       MAR            RWA
                             1




                                                                                                                                                                              FRA                          TUR BFA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                 YEMVNMTWN
                                                                            BOL
                                                                              GTM     LKA
                                                                                        MWI            HRV                                                                                                  SVN
                                                           COL      BRA       IRQ                                                                                                                 UKR




                                                                                                                                                0
                                                           AUT
                                                             CRI ITA                      CMR        JPN                                                                                      EST
                                                                     CHL                 KEN     MAR              RWA                                                                      BLR
                                                                                                                                                                                             POL
                                                                                                                                                                                               ZMB              IND
                                                          CHE                          GEO                                                                        GBR         PER
                                                                                                                                                                             AZE
                                                                  NLD
                                                                  ARG
                                                                   PER                                 BIH                                                                  MEXARGCHL           BGR     DZA
                                                                                                                                                                                                      KAZ
                                                                                                                                                                                          IRQ KOR      LBNKGZ
                  0




                                                                                      HUN     TZA                                                                        AND
                                                                                                                                                                         URY               THA
                                                                                                                                                                                          KWT
                                                          PHL FRA           LTUEST            GHA DZA      NGA CHN                                                                    MYS                         CHN
                                                            VENMEX
                                                              ROU                    POL     ISR                                                                        CHE
                                                                                                                                                                      AUS
                                                                                               UGA
                                                                                                KAZ                                                                    CAN
                                                            NIC              ARE
                                                                                                                                                                                            SGP ETH




                                                                                                                                    -1
                                                                     SUR                             ZWEJOR
                                                                                                     BWA                                                                                                    BHR
                                                             SAU                    THA    EGY                            BGD                                         USA
                                                                        GRC
                                                                        RUS                                   PAKVNM                                                  DEU
        -1




                                                                                     CZE
                                                                                  IDN       UKR
                                                                                         ZAF         TUR
                                                                           HTI MDA         AFG                                                                            FIN    NLD
                                                                                                                                                                         SWE




                                                                                                                                                -2
                                                                                   KOR                     IND                                                                                             NZL
                                                                      KHM
-2




                                                                                                                                                                         NOR                                     JPN

                                                  -.5          -.25            0             .25            .5          .75                                        -.5           -.25            0             .25        .5         .75
                                                                              Kinship tightness                                                                                                Kinship tightness




          Figure 4: Relationship between kinship tightness and the relative importance of altruistic punishment in
          the GPS (left panel) and the subjective importance of behaving properly in the WVS (right panel). Both
          figures are partial correlation plots conditional on the vector of “EA controls”, compare, e.g., column (5)
          of Table 4.


                                                   In sum, tight kinship is associated with less developed institutions above the local
          level, but powerful institutions at the local level to regulate in-group behavior. A po-
          tential concern with these regressions is that they compare ethnicicities with different
          subsistence modes. Chiefly, while some ethnic groups followed sophisticated farming
          or herding practices, others subsisted largely on hunting, gathering, and fishing. The
          analysis addresses this issue by controlling for (i) the extent (0-100%) to which an eth-
          nicity subsisted on agriculture and animal husbandry, respectively, (ii) the complexity
          of local settlements as proxy for local development, and (iii) the year of observation in
          the EA. In a further robustness check, Table 17 in Appendix A shows that very similar
          results hold if I exclude all hunter-gatherers from the sample.


          6.6                                            Social Norms
          Social norms can be thought of as informal institutions, i.e., a set of rules that regulates
          behavior without elaborate formal enforcement structures. The study of norms can be
          partitioned into people’s behavioral conformity to social norms, and their intrinsic values
          related to norm adherence.²¹
                                                   The standard method to experimentally measure norm compliance in social psy-
          chology consists of Asch’s (1956) famous conformity game. Here, subjects are asked
          to point out the longest line out of a set of three, and are implicitly induced to give
          blatantly obvious wrong answers because seven other “subjects” (who are actually con-
          federates) provided the same mistaken response beforehand. That is, these confeder-

         ²¹The cultural psychologist Gelfand et al. (2011) develops a survey-based measure of “tight” vs.
     “loose” countries with respect to social norms. This country-level index exhibits a correlation of ρ = 0.31
     with kinship tightness (p < 0.1).


                                                                                                                              33
                           Table 11: Historical institutions and norm adherence

                                                            Dependent variable:
                          Global institutions               Local institutions                 Norm adherence
                            # Levels jurisdictional hierarchy            Strength of local    Inculcate obedience
                          Above local level         Local level            enforcement            in children
                           (1)         (2)         (3)          (4)       (5)       (6)        (7)        (8)
                                 ∗∗          ∗∗       ∗∗∗          ∗∗∗       ∗∗           ∗          ∗
    Kinship tightness     -0.35       -0.32       1.57         1.53      1.17      0.83        0.62      0.75∗∗
                          (0.18)      (0.16)      (0.13)       (0.13)    (0.48)   (0.45)      (0.35)     (0.29)
    Continent FE           Yes         Yes         Yes          Yes       Yes       Yes        Yes        Yes
    Historical controls     No         Yes         No           Yes       No        Yes        No         Yes
    Observations           919         908         928          917       88        87        157        154
    R2                     0.26        0.39        0.27         0.32     0.30      0.43       0.11       0.26
    Notes. Historical ethnicity-level OLS estimates in the EA, robust standard errors in parentheses. The
   dependent variables in columns (1)–(2) and (3)–(4) are the number of levels of jurisdictional hier-
   archy above the local and at the local level, respectively. In columns (5)–(6), the dependent variable
   is the extent to which there is local enforcement and sanctioning for community decisions. The de-
   pendent variable in columns (7)–(8) is the average of the z-scores of four variables that measure the
   extent to which societies instill obedience into young boys, old boys, young girls, and old girls, respec-
   tively. All dependent variables are expressed as z-scores. In columns (1)–(4), the historical controls
   include dependence on agriculture, dependence on animal husbandry, year of observation, settlement
   complexity, distance from the equator, longitude, and average elevation. Due to the smaller number
   of observations, the historical controls in columns (6) and (8) only include distance from the equator,
   longitude, average elevation, and number of jurisdictional hierarchies above the local level. ∗ p < 0.10,
   ∗∗
      p < 0.05, ∗∗∗ p < 0.01.


ates uniformly point to the same wrong line to make the subject feel like they “have to”
conform. Since the implementation of this seminal study, researchers have replicated
this design across 17 countries, as summarized in the meta-study of Bond and Smith
(1996). This meta-study contains a total of 133 studies. The measure of conformity is
the fraction of wrong responses in this experimental game, i.e., the fraction of subjects
who follow the confederates.
   Second, to assess the extent to which people’s conformity with group norms is
driven by values related to norm adherence, the analysis makes use of a range of ques-
tions in the WVS and ESS that ask people to assess to which extent it is important to
“behave properly”, “follow the rules”, and “not draw attention”.
   The analysis begins at the country level. Column (1) of Table 12 shows that kinship
tightness is strongly positively correlated (ρ = 0.69) with conformity in Asch’s game.
Columns (2)–(4) provide evidence that valuing proper behavior is also significantly
positively related to kinship tightness. The right panel of Figure 4 depicts the cross-
country relationship between kinship tightness and valuing proper behavior.
   In a next step, the analysis provides within-country evidence for the relationship be-
tween social norm adherence and kinship tightness. For this purpose, I exploit variation
in values related to norm adherence in the WVS and ESS, see Table 13. Columns (1)–


                                                          34
                                 Table 12: Social norms across countries

                                                         Dependent variable:
                                            Conformity      Important behave properly
                                                (1)          (2)       (3)        (4)
                                                   ∗∗∗          ∗∗∗        ∗∗∗
                  Kinship tightness            1.93         1.20      1.15       1.16∗∗∗
                                               (0.55)       (0.30)    (0.31)     (0.43)
                  EA controls                    No           No       Yes        Yes
                  Other controls                 No           No       No         Yes
                  Continent FE                   No           No       No         Yes
                  Colonizer FE                   No           No       No         Yes
                  Observations                   15           75        75         74
                  R2                            0.48         0.17      0.29       0.56
                  Notes. Country-level OLS estimates, robust standard errors in paren-
                 theses. The dependent variable in column (1) is the fraction of er-
                 rors in Asch’s conformity game, i.e., the fraction of subjects who fol-
                 low the responses of the confederates. In columns (2)–(4), the de-
                 pendent variable is the average importance respondents in the WVS
                 place on behaving properly. All dependent variables are expressed
                 as z-scores. EA controls include dependence on agriculture, number
                 of levels of jurisdictional hierarchies above the local level, and year
                 of observation (all computed as pertaining to contemporary popu-
                 lations). Other controls include distance from the equator, log land
                 suitability for agriculture, and ancestry-adjusted log population den-
                 sity in 1500. ∗ p < 0.10, ∗∗ p < 0.05, ∗∗∗ p < 0.01.


(2) exploit variation across native ethnicities within countries in the WVS to show that
valuing proper behavior is positively related to kinship tightness. Similarly, columns
(3)–(8) exploit variation across second-generation migrants in the ESS to show that an-
cestral kinship tightness (of mother’s and father’s country of birth) are correlated with
valuing proper behavior, rule-following, and not drawing attention.²²
    In a final step, the analysis investigates the importance of social norm adherence in
historical ethnicities. For this purpose, I again make use of detailed information in the
SCCS on the values that parents inculcated in their children, according to ethnographic
records. In particular, four separate variables describe the extent to which obedience
is instilled into young boys, old boys, young girls, and old girls, respectively, on a scale
of 0–9 each (Q322-325). I compute the z-scores of these four obedience variables and
then average them to arrive at a summary measure of obedience. Columns (7) and
(8) of Table 11 show that obedience is positively correlated with kinship tightness in
historical ethnicities. In sum, across contemporary countries, ethnicities, and migrants
as well as historical ethnicities, kinship tightness is positively related to the importance

    ²²Similar results hold when I use the importance of inculcating obedience into children from the WVS
in the within-country analyses.


                                                   35
       Table 13: Attitudes related to norm adherence: Within-country evidence (WVS and ESS)

                               World Values Survey                           European Social Survey
 Variation in KTI is across:          Ethnicities                         Parents’ countries of birth

                                                                 Dependent variable:
                                                                   Important to:
                                Behave properly        Behave properly           Follow rules         Not draw attention
                                (1)           (2)       (3)         (4)          (5)      (6)           (7)       (8)
                                   ∗∗                      ∗∗∗         ∗∗∗         ∗∗∗          ∗∗∗       ∗∗∗
 Kinship tightness             0.15          0.14     0.34        0.26         0.20      0.20         0.23      0.100
                               (0.06)       (0.15)    (0.04)      (0.06)       (0.05)    (0.06)       (0.05)    (0.06)
 Country FE                     Yes           Yes       Yes         Yes          Yes      Yes           Yes       Yes
 Wave FE                        Yes           Yes       Yes         Yes          Yes      Yes           Yes       Yes
 Individual-level controls      Yes           Yes       Yes         Yes          Yes      Yes           Yes       Yes
 Ethnicity-level controls       No            Yes        No         No           No       No            No        No
 Country of origin controls     No            No         No         Yes          No       Yes           No        Yes
 Observations                  24575        24333     278021      266816       277190    266018       278493    267296
 R2                             0.08         0.08      0.08        0.08         0.10      0.10         0.12      0.11
 Notes. Individual-level OLS estimates in the WVS / ESS, standard errors in parentheses. In columns (1)–(2), the
sample consists of individuals in the WVS. The dependent variable is the importance people attach to behaving
properly. The standard errors are clustered at the ethnicity level. Individual level controls include gender, age, age
squared, and educational attainment. Ethnicity level controls include dependence on agriculture, number of levels
of jurisdictional hierarchies above the local level, distance from the equator, and year of observation in the EA. In
columns (3)–(8), the sample includes individuals in the ESS and the standard errors are clustered at the level of
the country of birth of the father times the country of birth of the mother. The dependent variables are the extent
to which respondents deem following rules, behaving properly, and not drawing attention important. Individual
level controls include gender, age, age squared, years of education, and a second-generation migrant dummy.
Country of origin controls include dependence on agriculture, number of levels of jurisdictional hierarchies
above the local level, and year of observation (all from the EA, but computed as pertaining to contemporary
populations) as well as distance from the equator, log land suitability for agriculture, and ancestry-adjusted log
population density in 1500. All dependent variables are expressed as z-scores. ∗ p < 0.10, ∗∗ p < 0.05, ∗∗∗ p < 0.01.




of norm adherence.
   Taken together, the analysis in this section has brought to light that the two extreme
poles of cooperation systems are associated with fundamentally different enforcement
schemes. On the one hand, the broad cooperation and trust patterns of loose kinship
societies are supported by large-scale institutions and “internal police officers” that
broadly sanction wrongdoing even outside of the in-group, including moralizing gods,
universal moral values, and guilt. On the other hand, the in-group oriented coopera-
tion system of tight kinship societies appears to be sustained by strong social norms
and corresponding values of norm adherence, combined with strong local institutions,
tribalistic moral values, and an increased importance of being shamed in front of oth-
ers. Thus, punishment in tight kinship societies is largely personal and direct, while it
is often anonymous and “psychological” in loose kinship societies.




                                                        36
7     Further Robustness Checks

7.1    Additional Covariates
The empirical analysis accounted for a number of geographic, climatic and historical
control variables. This section assesses the extent to which the contemporary cross-
country and migrant-level results are robust against the inclusion of further covariates.


Further geographic covariates.      Tables 19 and 20 in Appendix A replicate all cross-
country analyses (with a sufficiently large number of observations), but additionally
control for longitude, average elevation, average temperature and the fraction of the
population at risk of malaria. Tables 21 and 22 conduct analogous analyses by replicat-
ing the migrant-level analyses in the ESS and MFQ, respectively. All results are robust
to these additional covariates.


Fraction of the population of European descent. Second, Tables 23 and 24 in Ap-
pendix A replicate the cross-country analyses, but additionally control for the fraction
of the population of European descent, constructed from the migration matrix of Put-
terman and Weil (2010). This control variable is of particular interest because many
European ethnicities have relatively low kinship tightness. Still, the results remain al-
most unchanged when the fraction of Europeans is accounted for. Tables 25 and 26
conduct analogous analyses by replicating the migrant-level analyses in the ESS and
MFQ, respectively. Again, controlling for the fraction of Europeans in migrants’ country
of birth leaves the results unaffacted.


National income and human capital. Next, I control for national income per capita
and the average years of schooling in a given country. These variables are arguably
“bad controls” in the sense that the hypothesized coevolution of kinship structures and
cooperation systems that is at the heart of this paper might plausibly also affect these
proxies for comparative development. Still, Tables 26–32 in Appendix A show that a
large majority of both the cross-country and the within-country results reported above
hold up when controlling for income per capita or average years of schooling.


7.2    Separate Kinship Tightness Proxies
Thus far, the empirical analysis has relied on the summary statistic of kinship tightness
that was derived from six characteristics of ethnicities in the EA. While the idea behind
this index – that kinship is a multidimensional concept – is arguably very much in line


                                           37
with how anthropologists think about these issues, it may be of interest to ask whether
any single of these six characteristics alone is strongly predictive of cooperation pat-
terns and enforcement devices. To assess this, Tables 33–38 in Appendix A replicate
one specification for each dependent variable from the above analyses by using each
kinship tightness variable separately. The results are strongest for post-wedding resi-
dence patterns, the presence of lineages, and the presence of localized clans, yet all
of the kinshop tightness variables appear to have “explanatory” power for the different
outcome variables.



8    Tight Kinship, Agriculture and Development
Anthropologists have long argued that – correlationally – kinship tightness is hump-
shaped in economic development (see Blumberg and Winch, 1972, for an early ac-
count). In essence, their argument has two ingredients. First, they assert that tight
kinship ties optimally evolved when societies transitioned from hunter-gatherer sub-
sistence to agricultural production. According to these accounts, agricultural subsis-
tence lead to the emergence of tight kinship systems because (i) agriculture implies
an enhanced need for small-scale cooperation for the sake of planting or harvesting
crop under time pressure, or controlling and defending territory to protect fields in the
timeframe between harvesting and planting, that can be achieved in extended families
(Johnson and Earle, 2000; Talhelm et al., 2014; Gowdy and Krall, 2016), (ii) sedentary
agriculture often implies de facto moving restrictions because farmers’ wealth is “tied
to the soil”, implying that people are less likely to mingle with geographically distant
groups and thereby weaken local kinship structures (Fei et al., 1992), and (iii) agricul-
tural subsistence often comes with increased pathogen prevalence, against which one
mode of protection is to reduce out-group interaction (Fincher et al., 2008; Fincher
and Thornhill, 2012). In line with these hypotheses, recent small-scale anthropological
evidence suggests that farming societies are indeed especially prone to marry within
clan (Walker, 2014). In contrast, hunter-gatherers predominantly have large social net-
works and reside with genetically unrelated individuals (Hill et al., 2011).
    Second, in contrast to the hypothesized positive association between kinship tight-
ness and development at very early stages in the development process, anthropologists
hold that tight kinship might have been detrimental in the transition from simple agri-
cultural to more advanced production modes. The argument is that tight kinship pre-
vents people from cooperating and interacting broadly, trusting strangers, participating
in specialization and trade, and being geographically mobile, all of which are activities
that increasigly paid off after the Industrial Revolution took place (e.g., Henrich, n.d.).


                                           38
                           Kinship tightness and agricultural intensity                                              Kinship tightness and per capita income
          .8




                                                                                                     4
                                                                                                               GRL
                                                                                                                       LUX
                                                                                                                       NOR
                                                                                                                       BMU                              GNQ NZL
                                                                                                                         CHE               BRN SGP
                                                                                                                        AUS
                                                                                                                       SWE
                                                                                                                        USA
                                                                                                                        CAN      NLD FRO                      BHS
                                                                                                                          AUT
                                                                                                                         FIN
                                                                                                                            ITABEL




                                                                                                     2
                                                                                                                       DEU
                                                                                                                        AND
                                                                                                                       IRL FRA        ISL    SAU     GAB
                                                                                                                                                   KOR
                                                                                                                        ESP
                                                                                                                       GBR
                                                                                                                        PRI            GRC CYP           JPN
                                                                                                                                                                 ISRSVN          ABW
                                                                                                                                             PRT
                 .7




                                                                                                                                               CZE
 Kinship tightness




                                                                                                                                         MYS SVK                                 TTO




                                                                                              Log [GDP p/c]
                                                                                                                           VEN                                          SYC      BRB
                                                                                                                        URY            CHL        QAT
                                                                                                                                                 HUN
                                                                                                                                                POL
                                                                                                                                                  VUTNRU        PLWBHR
                                                                                                                                                              LBN    HRVMUS      KNA
                                                                                                                                                                                 ATG MLT
                                                                                                                            MEX BRA ARG       LTU                    LBY
                                                                                                                                                                    TUR
                                                                                                                          CRI       SUR                 FJI            BWA
                                                                                                                       COLROU PAN            EST KWT
                                                                                                                                                BGR
                                                                                                                                                     COG
                                                                                                                                                    NAM
                                                                                                                                                    MHL     ZAFTUV               GRD
                                                                                                                                                                                 LCA
                                                                                                                                                                                 DMA
                                                                                                                                    RUS AZE PNGLVAARE
                                                                                                                                                 MDV BLZ WSM  ALBAGO      KAZ    VCT




                                                                                                    0
                                                                                                                        CUB
                                                                                                                        DOM PER  SLV                            TON IRN
                                                                                                                        JAM PRY
                                                                                                                              ECU              MKD  GEO
                                                                                                                                                    FSM              BIH
                                                                                                                                                                       TKM
                                                                                                                                         GTM SLB OMN
                                                                                                                                           THA                       DZA
                                                                                                                                                                       JOR
                                                                                                                                                                        NGA
                                                                                                                                                                         GUY     CPV
                                                                                                                                                                                SWZ
                                                                                                                                          BLR
                                                                                                                                            IDN ARMZMBKIR CMREGY
                                                                                                                                                            CIV           CHN
                                                                                                                        PHL
                                                                                                                       HND                          LKA
                                                                                                                                                   TCD    KEN
                                                                                                                                                            GHA MAR                  TUN
                                                                                                                                                            MNG
                                                                                                                                          BOL GNB CAF    UKR SEN
                                                                                                                         NIC
                                                                                                                              MMR           LAO IRQ MWITGO   TZASDN     INDDJI BTN
                                                                                                                                                                        YEM
.6




                                                                                                                                                                       BEN
                                                                                                                                                                 MLI LSO  MRTVNM STP
                                                                                                                                     KHMERI  MDA              UGA
                                                                                                                                                               GIN
                                                                                                                                                             GMB   SLE
                                                                                                                                                            LBR MOZ PAKZWE
                                                                                                                                                                       BFA




                                                                                                     -2
                                                                                                                                     HTI             NER AFGCOD        COM KGZ
                                                                                                                                                                           UZBTJK
                                                                                                                                                        ETH       MDG       NPL RWA   BGD

                                                                                                                                                                           BDI




                                                                                                     -4
          .5




                                                                                                              -.75    -.5        -.25            0           .25           .5          .75
                      No agri   Casual   Extensive Horticulture   Intensive Int. irrigated                                              Kinship tightness




   Figure 5: The left panel depicts average kinship tightness and corresponding standard errors for each
   of six levels of agricultural intensity. The right panel visualizes the partial correlation between kinship
   tightness and per capita income conditional on the vector of “EA controls”, compare, e.g., column (5) of
   Table 4.


                      This paper investigates these theories on a correlational basis. The left panel of
   Figure 5 presents a histogram of average kinship tightness across six categories of agri-
   cultural intensity of societies in the EA. According to this classification, agricultural
   practices vary from no agriculture, to casual, to extensive, and eventually to intensive
   and intensive irrigated agriculture. Here, intensive agriculture should be thought of
   as technologically more advanced production techniques including fertilization, crop
   rotation, or other techniques to shorten or eliminate fallow periods.
                      The histogram reveals that kinship tightness indeed significantly increases by al-
   most 30% as the subsistence mode changes from a hunter-gatherer lifestyle (first two
   categories) to extensive agriculture. However, as the agricultural production technol-
   ogy becomes more advanced, kinship tightness decreases again, which is reminiscent
   of the “curvilinear hypothesis” in anthropology (Blumberg and Winch, 1972). Table 41
   in Appendix A analyzes this pattern more rigorously through OLS regressions and con-
   firms that the relationship between kinship tightness and agricultural intensity is indeed
   hump-shaped. At the same time, the variance explained in these regressions is fairly
   small (10%). In other words, while there appears to be systematic covariation of kinship
   tightness and agricultural production modes, the data exhibit large heterogeneity on
   top of this mechanism. For example, the large difference in kinship structures between
  Western Europe and large parts of Asia cannot be “explained” by agricultural intensity:
   after all, many East and Southeast Asian ethnicities employed advanced intensive irri-
   gated production modes that – according to the classification in the EA – are at least as
   advanced as the subsistence style of early Western Europeans.
                      In any case, the data presented in this section evidently do not lend themselves to
   a straightforward (causal) interpretation: even if it was true that agricultural subsis-


                                                                                             39
tence caused the emergence of tight kinship structures, it is not obvious whether the
decreasing part of the relationship between kinship tightness and agricultural intensity
reflects the causal negative effect of kinship tightness on technological progress, or, e.g.,
a by-product of more general social change (e.g., Greenfield, 2009, 2013).
    Given that contemporary societies consist of few hunter-gatherer groups, the an-
thropological theory of a hump-shaped relationship between development and kinship
tightness predicts that contemporary income and kinship tightness are negatively cor-
related. The right panel of Figure 5 shows that this is indeed the case, ρ = −0.53.²³
However, this strong negative correlation appears to have emerged relatively recently.
To make this point, I regress country-level log population density (as adequate proxy for
development in pre-industrial times) in any given available year since 1000 CE on kin-
ship tightness and then analyze the evolution of OLS coefficients over time. To keep the
analysis meaningful in light of the changes in the structure of populations in the course
of the post-Columbian migration flows, I restrict the sample to those 127 countries in
which at least 50% of the current population are native, according to the migration
matrix of Putterman and Weil (2010). The left panel of Figure 6 presents the results.
In this figure, each dot represents the regression coefficient of kinship tightness from a
given year and the color coding is used to denote statistical significance.²⁴
    As the figure shows, the relationship between country-level population density and
kinship tightness starts out to be small and statistically insignificant. However, around
the onset of the Industrial Revolution, the coefficient rapidly increases in absolute size
and becomes statistically significant. Moreover, a set of Seemingly Unrelated Regres-
sions brings to light that the regression coefficient in 1900 is statistically significantly
larger than those in, e.g., 1000, 1500, 1600, 1700, and 1800 (p < 0.01).
    The right panel of Figure 6 replicates the preceeding analysis, but uses urbanization
rates instead of population density as dependent variable. The resulting picture is very
similar in that the relationship between kinship tightness and development becomes
much stronger in the course of the Industrial Revolution.




   ²³Table 40 in Appendix A investigates this correlation more thorougly through multiple regression
analysis and shows that the correlation is robust to the standard control variables that are commonly
used in the literature. While the hump-shaped relationship between kinship tightness and agricultural
intensity is statistically significant and in line with prior anthropological work, it should be emphasized
that this relationship per se does not account for the contemporary cross-country correlation between per
capita income and ancestral kinship tightness. For example, in an OLS regression of per capita income
on kinship tightness and ancestral agricultural intensity, the former is statistically highly significant,
compare Table 40 in Appendix A.
   ²⁴Table 39 in Appendix A shows the regressions results underlying the construction of Figure 6.


                                                   40
                                            Log Population density and kinship complexity                                                      Urbanization rate and kinship complexity
                  -.25




                                                                                                                     0
 Coefficient on kinship complexity




                                                                                                    Coefficient on kinship complexity
                                                                                                                                -.02
                             -.5




                                                                                                                        -.04
                    -.75




                                                                                                              -.06
-1.25       -1




                                                                                                    -.08
                  -1.5




                                                                                                                     -.1
                                     1000       1200       1400          1600   1800        2000                                        1000     1200      1400          1600    1800     2000
                                                                  Year                                                                                            Year




      Figure 6: Kinship tightness and development over time. The left panel shows the results of OLS regres-
      sions in which I regress log population density in a given year on kinship tightness. Each dot then rep-
      resents the OLS point estimate for the regression in the respective year, and the color coding denotes
      levels of significance. In all regressions, the sample is restricted to countries in which at least 50% of the
      population are native, resulting in a sample of 127 countries. The right panel follows an analogous logic,
      except that the dependent variables are urbanization rates.


      9                                     Conclusion
      Based on prominent narratives in cultural psychology and anthropology, this paper has
      presented an analysis of cultural variation in cooperation patterns and corresponding
      enforcement devices. The results suggest that social organization matters: it is inti-
      mately linked to the way people cooperate with and trust each other, and the formal
      and informal mechanisms they put in place to enforce cooperation.
                                       The key insight of the analysis is that – in line with prominant accounts in psychol-
      ogy and anthropology (Greene, 2014; Henrich, 2015, n.d.) – basic aspects of human
      psychology and biology including the structure of religious beliefs, moral values, social
      preferences, and basic emotions, seem to have adapted to serve the functional role of
      enforcing cooperation within specific social structures. Indeed, the results suggest that
      maintaining cooperation in society necessitates the coevolution of an entire bundle of
      tools including institutions, psychology, and biology. These results shed light on two
      prominent puzzles in cross-cultural research.
                                       First, the results provide a rationale why we observe such a large cultural varia-
      tion in such dimensions: because some cultural traits regulate different cooperation
      regimes, they necessarily differ across societies. Second, the analysis illuminates the
      co-occurrence of various cultural traits. Across the social sciences, researchers with an
      interest in cultural variation have noted that cultural traits are frequently highly corre-
      lated, yet insights into why that is the case are rare (Alesina and Giuliano, 2015). The
      present paper sheds light on this issue by showing that different cultural traits serve a


                                                                                                   41
similar role in enforcing cooperation within a given regime, so that their co-occurrence
is simply a by-product of them disciplining prosocialbehavior in similar ways.
   A key open question concerns the origins of the large heterogeneity in ancestral
kinship systems. The analysis has taken a first step in this direction by discussing the
relationship between agricultural subsistence and kinship ties, yet – as discussed in
Section 8 – this does not explain, e.g., the stark difference between Western Europe
and many other parts of the world. Historians and anthropologists have put forward
a number of potential proximate mechanisms through which European local kinship
structures got dismantled (most prominenently the Roman Catholic Church, Goody,
1983; Henrich, n.d.; Schulz, 2016), yet what ultimately set these social changes in
motion is beyond our current understanding.




                                          42
References
Akbari, Mahsa, Duman Bahrami-Rad, and Erik O. Kimbrough, “Kinship, Fractional-
  ization and Corruption,” Working Paper, 2016.

Alesina, Alberto and Paola Giuliano, “Family Ties,” Handbook of Economic Growth,
  2013, 2, 177.

   and    , “Culture and Institutions,” Journal of Economic Literature, 2015, 53 (4),
  898–944.

Algan, Yann and Pierre Cahuc, “Inherited trust and growth,” American Economic Re-
  view, 2010, 100 (5), 2060–2092.

Asch, Solomon E., “Studies of Independence and Conformity: I. A minority of One
  Against a Unanimous Majority,” Psychological Monographs: General and Applied, 1956,
  70 (9), 1.

Ashraf, Quamrul and Oded Galor, “The Out of Africa Hypothesis, Human Genetic Di-
  versity, and Comparative Economic Development,” American Economic Review, 2013,
  103 (1), 1–46.

Becker, Anke, Benjamin Enke, and Armin Falk, “Ancient Origins of the Global Varia-
  tion in Economic Preferences,” Working Paper, 2016.

Benedict, Ruth, The Chrysanthemum and the Sword: Patterns of Japanese Culture,
  Houghton Mifflin Harcourt, 1967.

Bertrand, Marianne and Antoinette Schoar, “The Role of Family in Family Firms,”
  Journal of Economic Perspectives, 2006, 20 (2), 73–96.

Bisin, Alberto and Thierry Verdier, “The Economics of Cultural Transmission and the
  Dynamics of Preferences,” Journal of Economic Theory, 2001, 97 (2), 298–319.

  and    , “On the Joint Evolution of Culture and Institutions,” Technical Report 2017.

Blumberg, Rae Lesser and Robert F. Winch, “Societal Somplexity and Familial Com-
  plexity: Evidence for the Curvilinear Hypothesis,” American Journal of Sociology,
  1972, 77 (5), 898–920.

Bond, Rod and Peter B. Smith, “Culture and Conformity: A Meta-Analysis of Studies
  Using Asch’s (1952b, 1956) Line Judgment Task,” Psychological Bulletin, 1996, 119
  (1), 111.


                                         43
Botero, Carlos A., Beth Gardner, Kathryn R. Kirby, Joseph Bulbulia, Michael C.
  Gavin, and Russell D. Gray, “The Ecology of Religious Beliefs,” Proceedings of the
  National Academy of Sciences, 2014, 111 (47), 16784–16789.

Bowles, Samuel and Herbert Gintis, “Origins of Human Cooperation,” Genetic and
  Cultural Evolution of Cooperation, 2003, 2003, 429–43.

Boyd, Robert and Peter J. Richerson, Culture and the Evolutionary Process, University
  of Chicago Press, 1988.

   and    , “Culture and the Evolution of Human Cooperation,” Philosophical Transac-
  tions of the Royal Society B: Biological Sciences, 2009, 364 (1533), 3281–3288.

  , Herbert Gintis, Samuel Bowles, and Peter J. Richerson, “The Evolution of Al-
  truistic Punishment,” Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, 2003, 100 (6),
  3531–3535.

Buggle, Johannes, “Irrigation, Collectivism and Long-Run Technological Divergence,”
  Working Paper, 2017.

   and Ruben Durante, “Risk, Cooperation and the Economic Origins of Social Trust:
  An Empirical Investigation,” Working Paper, 2017.

Chen, M. Keith, “The Effect of Language on Economic Behavior: Evidence from Savings
  Rates, Health Behaviors, and Retirement Assets,” American Economic Review, 2013,
  103 (2), 690–731.

de Vliert, Evert Van, “Climato-Economic Origins of Variation in Ingroup Favoritism,”
  Journal of Cross-Cultural Psychology, 2011, 42 (3), 494–515.

Delhey, Jan, Kenneth Newton, and Christian Welzel, “How General is Trust in “Most
  People”? Solving the Radius of Trust Problem,” American Sociological Review, 2011,
  76 (5), 786–807.

Desmet, Klaus, Ignacio Ortuno-Ortin, and Romain Wacziarg, “Culture, Ethnicity
  and Diversity,” American Economic Review, Forthcoming.

Dodds, Eric R., The Greeks and the Irrational number 43, Univ of California Press, 1957.

Doepke, Matthias and Fabrizio Zilibotti, “Parenting with Style: Altruism and Pater-
  nalism in Intergenerational Preference Transmission,” Working Paper, 2014.

Dohmen, Thomas, Benjamin Enke, Armin Falk, David Huffman, and Uwe Sunde,
  “Patience, Accumulation, and Comparative Development,” Working Paper, 2016.

                                          44
Falk, Armin, Anke Becker, Thomas Dohmen, Benjamin Enke, David Huffman, and
  Uwe Sunde, “Global Evidence on Economic Preferences,” Working Paper, 2016.

Fehr, Ernst and Simon Gächter, “Cooperation and Punishment in Public Goods Exper-
  iments,” American Economic Review, 2000, 90 (4), 980–994.

      and   , “Altruistic Punishment in Humans,” Nature, 2002, 415 (6868), 137–140.

Fei, Xiaotong, Gary G Hamilton, and Zheng Wang, From The Soil: The Foundations
  of Chinese Society, Univ of California Press, 1992.

Fernández, Raquel, “Women, Work, and Culture,” Journal of the European Economic
  Association, 2007, 5 (2-3), 305–332.

Fincher, Corey L. and Randy Thornhill, “Parasite-Stress Promotes In-Group Assorta-
  tive Aociality: The Cases of Strong Family Ties and Heightened Religiosity,” Behav-
  ioral and Brain Sciences, 2012, 35 (02), 61–79.

  ,     , Damian R. Murray, and Mark Schaller, “Pathogen Prevalence Predicts Human
  Cross-Cultural Variability in Individualism/Collectivism,” Proceedings of the Royal So-
  ciety of London B: Biological Sciences, 2008, 275 (1640), 1279–1285.

Gächter, Simon and Jonathan F. Schulz, “Intrinsic Honesty and the Prevalence of
  Rule Violations Across Societies,” Nature, 2016.

Galor, Oded and Ömer Özak, “The Agricultural Origins of Time Preference,” American
  Economic Review, 2016, 106 (10), 3064–3103.

Gelfand, Michele J., Jana L. Raver, Lisa Nishii, Lisa M. Leslie, Janetta Lun,
  Beng Chong Lim, Lili Duan, Assaf Almaliach, Soon Ang, Jakobina Arnadottir
  et al., “Differences Between Tight and Loose Cultures: A 33-Nation Study,” Science,
  2011, 332 (6033), 1100–1104.

Gintis, Herbert, “The Hitchhiker’s Guide to Altruism: Gene-Culture Coevolution, and
  the Internalization of Norms,” Journal of Theoretical Biology, 2003, 220 (4), 407–418.

Giuliano, Paola, “Living Arrangements in Western Europe: Does Cultural Origin Mat-
  ter?,” Journal of the European Economic Association, 2007, 5 (5), 927–952.

  and Nathan Nunn, “The Transmission of Democracy: From the Village to the Nation-
  State,” American Economic Review, 2013, 103 (3), 86–92.

      and   , “Ancestral Characteristics of Modern Populations,” Working Paper, 2017.


                                           45
Glaeser, Edward L., David I. Laibson, Jose A. Scheinkman, and Christine L. Soutter,
  “Measuring Trust,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 2000, 115 (3), 811–846.

Goody, Jack, The Development of the Family and Marriage in Europe, Cambridge Uni-
  versity Press, 1983.

Gorodnichenko, Yuriy and Gerard Roland, “Culture, Institutions and the Wealth of
  Nations,” Review of Economics and Statistics, 2016.

Gowdy, John and Lisi Krall, “The Economic Origins of Ultrasociality,” Behavioral and
  Brain Sciences, 2016, 39, e92.

Graham, Jesse, Jonathan Haidt, Sena Koleva, Matt Motyl, Ravi Iyer, Sean P. Wojcik,
  and Peter H. Ditto, “Moral Foundations Theory: The Pragmatic Validity of Moral
  Pluralism,” 2012.

Greene, Joshua, Moral Tribes: Emotion, Reason and the Gap Between Us and Them, At-
  lantic Books Ltd, 2014.

Greenfield, Patricia M., “Linking Social Change and Developmental Change: Shifting
  Pathways of Human Development,” Developmental Psychology, 2009, 45 (2), 401.

  , “The Changing Psychology of Culture from 1800 through 2000,” Psychological Sci-
  ence, 2013, p. 0956797613479387.

Greif, Avner, “Cultural Beliefs and the Organization of Society: A Historical and Theo-
  retical Reflection on Collectivist and Individualist Societies,” Journal of political Econ-
  omy, 1994, 102 (5), 912–950.

Guiso, Luigi, Paola Sapienza, and Luigi Zingales, “Cultural Biases in Economic Ex-
  change?,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 2009, 124 (3), 1095–1131.

Haidt, Jonathan, The Righteous Mind: Why Good People are Divided by Politics and
  Religion, Vintage, 2012.

   and Craig Joseph, “Intuitive Ethics: How Innately Prepared Intuitions Generate
  Culturally Variable Virtues,” Daedalus, 2004, 133 (4), 55–66.

Haviland, William A., Cultural Anthropology, Wadsworth Publishing Company, 2002.

Henrich, Joseph, The Secret of Our Success: How Culture is Driving Human Evolution,
  Domesticating Our Species, and Making Us Smarter, Princeton University Press, 2015.




                                            46
  , W.E.I.R.D People: How Westerners became Individualistic, Self-Obsessed, Guilt-Ridden,
  Analytic, Patient, Principled and Prosperous, Princeton University Press, n.d.

  , Jean Ensminger, Richard McElreath, Abigail Barr, Clark Barrett, Alexander
  Bolyanatz, Juan Camilo Cardenas, Michael Gurven, Edwins Gwako, Natalie Hen-
  rich et al., “Markets, Religion, Community Size, and the Evolution of Fairness and
  Punishment,” Science, 2010, 327 (5972), 1480–1484.

  , Robert Boyd, Samuel Bowles, Colin Camerer, Ernst Fehr, Herbert Gintis, and
  Richard McElreath, “In Search of Homo Economicus: Behavioral Experiments in 15
  Small-Scale Societies,” American Economic Review, 2001, 91 (2), 73–78.

Herrmann, Benedikt, Christian Thöni, and Simon Gächter, “Antisocial Punishment
  Across Societies,” Science, 2008, 319 (5868), 1362–1367.

Hill, Kim R., Robert S. Walker, Miran Božičević, James Eder, Thomas Headland,
  Barry Hewlett, A. Magdalena Hurtado, Frank Marlowe, Polly Wiessner, and
  Brian Wood, “Co-Residence Patterns in Hunter-Gatherer Societies Show Unique Hu-
  man Social Structure,” Science, 2011, 331 (6022), 1286–1289.

Hofstede, Geert, Culture’s Consequences: International Differences in Work-Related Val-
  ues, Vol. 5, Sage, 1984.

Jaffe, Klaus, Astrid Florez, Cristina M. Gomes, Daniel Rodriguez, and Carla Achury,
  “On the Biological and Cultural Evolution of Shame: Using Internet Search Tools to
  Weight Values in Many Cultures,” Working Paper, 2014.

Johnson, Allen W. and Timothy K. Earle, The Evolution of Human Societies: From
  Foraging Group to Agrarian State, Stanford University Press, 2000.

Kashima, Emiko S. and Yoshihisa Kashima, “Culture and Language: The Case of Cul-
  tural Dimensionsand Personal Pronoun Use,” Journal of Cross-Cultural Psychology,
  1998, 29 (3), 461–486.

Knack, Stephen and Philip Keefer, “Does Social Capital have an Economic Payoff? A
  Cross-Country Investigation,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 1997, 112 (4), 1251–
  1288.

Litina, Anastasia, “Natural Land Productivity, Cooperation and Comparative Develop-
  ment,” Journal of Economic Growth, 2016, 21 (4), 351–408.

Lowes, Sara, “Matrilineal Kinship and Spousal Cooperation: Evidence from the Matri-
  lineal Belt,” Working Paper, 2017.

                                           47
Markus, Hazel R. and Shinobu Kitayama, “Culture and the Self: Implications for
  Cognition, Emotion, and Motivation,” Psychological Review, 1991, 98 (2), 224.

Moscona, Jacob, Nathan Nunn, and James A. Robinson, “Keeping It in the Family:
  Lineage Organization and the Scope of Trust in Sub-Saharan Africa,” Working Paper,
  2017.

  ,      , and    , “Social Structure and Conflict: Evidence from Sub-Saharan Africa,”
  Working Paper, 2017.

Murdock, George P., “Ethnographic Atlas,” 1967.

Nisbett, Richard, The Geography of Thought: How Asians and Westerners Think Differ-
  ently, Simon and Schuster, 2003.

Norenzayan, Ara, Big Gods: How Religion Transformed Cooperation and Conflict, Prince-
  ton University Press, 2013.

      and Azim F. Shariff, “The Origin and Evolution of Religious Prosociality,” Science,
  2008, 322 (5898), 58–62.

  ,     , Will M. Gervais, Aiyana K. Willard, Rita A. McNamara, Edward Slingerland,
  and Joseph Henrich, “The Cultural Evolution of Prosocial Religions,” Behavioral and
  Brain Sciences, 2016, 39, e1.

Olsson, Ola and Christopher Paik, “A Western Reversal Since the Neolithic? The Long-
  Run Impact of Early Agriculture,” Working Paper, 2012.

      and    , “Long-Run Cultural Divergence: Evidence from the Neolithic Revolution,”
  Journal of Development Economics, 2016, 122, 197–213.

Parkin, Robert, Kinship: An Introduction to Basic Concepts, Blackwell Oxford, 1997.

Purzycki, Benjamin Grant, Coren Apicella, Quentin D. Atkinson, Emma Cohen,
  Rita Anne McNamara, Aiyana K. Willard, Dimitris Xygalatas, Ara Norenzayan,
  and Joseph Henrich, “Moralistic Gods, Supernatural Punishment and the Expansion
  of Human Sociality,” Nature, 2016.

Putterman, Louis and David N. Weil, “Post-1500 Population Flows and the Long-Run
  Determinants of Economic Growth and Inequality,” Quarterly Journal of Economics,
  2010, 125 (4), 1627–1682.

Roes, Frans L. and Michel Raymond, “Belief in Moralizing Gods,” Evolution and Hu-
  man Behavior, 2003, 24 (2), 126–135.

                                            48
Ross, Marc H., “Political Decision Making and Conflict: Additional Cross-Cultural Codes
  and Scales,” Ethnology, 1983, 22 (2), 169–192.

Sapolsky, Robert M., Behave: The Biology of Humans at Our Best and Worst, Penguin,
  2017.

Scherer, Klaus R. and Harald G. Wallbott, “Evidence for Universality and Cultural
  Variation of Differential Emotion Response Patterning,” Journal of Personality and
  Social Psychology, 1994, 66 (2), 310.

  ,   , and Angela B. Summerfield, Experiencing Emotion: A Cross-Cultural Study,
  Cambridge University Press, 1986.

Schultz, Emily Ann and Robert H. Lavenda, Cultural Anthropology: A perspective on
  the Human Condition, Vol. 1, Oxford University Press, USA, 2005.

Schulz, Jonathan F., “The Churches’ Bans on Consanguineous Marriages, Kin-
  Networks and Democracy,” Working Paper, 2016.

Shweder, Richard A., Thinking Through Cultures: Expeditions in Cultural Psychology,
  Harvard University Press, 1991.

Shweder, Richard A, “Why Cultural Psychology?,” Ethos, 1999, 27 (1), 62–73.

Shweder, Richard A., Nancy C. Much, Manamohan Mahapatra, and Lawrence Park,
  “The “Big Three” of Morality (Autonomy, Community, Divinity) and the “Big Three”
  Explanations of Suffering,” 1997.

Stephens-Davidowitz, Seth, “The Cost of Racial Animus on a Black Candidate: Evi-
  dence using Google Search Data,” Journal of Public Economics, 2014, 118, 26–40.

Tabellini, Guido, “Institutions and Culture,” Journal of the European Economic Associa-
  tion, 2008, 6 (2-3), 255–294.

  , “The Scope of Cooperation: Values and Incentives,” Quarterly Journal of Economics,
  2008, 123 (3), 905–950.

Talhelm, Thomas, Xiao Zhang, Shige Oishi, Chen Shimin, D. Duan, X. Lan, and
  S. Kitayama, “Large-Scale Psychological Differences Within China Explained by Rice
  Versus Wheat Agriculture,” Science, 2014, 344 (6184), 603–608.

Triandis, Harry C., Individualism & Collectivism., Westview Press, 1995.




                                          49
Uz, Irem, “The Index of Cultural Tightness and Looseness Among 68 Countries,” Jour-
  nal of Cross-Cultural Psychology, 2015, 46 (3), 319–335.

Voigtländer, Nico and Hans-Joachim Voth, “Persecution Perpetuated: The Medieval
  Origins of Anti-Semitic Violence in Nazi Germany,” Quarterly Journal of Economics,
  2012, 127 (3), 1339–1392.

Walker, Robert S., “Amazonian Horticulturalists Live in Larger, More Related Groups
  Than Hunter–Gatherers,” Evolution and Human Behavior, 2014, 35 (5), 384–388.

Wallbott, Herald G and Klaus R Scherer, Cultural Determinants in Experiencing Shame
  and Guilt, Guilford Press, 1995.

Wong, Ying and Jeanne Tsai, “Cultural Models of Shame and Guilt,” The Self-Conscious
  Emotions: Theory and Research, 2007, pp. 209–223.




                                         50
ONLINE APPENDIX

A     Additional Tables

                        Table 14: Kinship tightness and proxies for individualism

                                                                Dependent variable:
                                    Individualism                        Family ties              Pronoun drop allowed
                            (1)         (2)         (3)         (4)         (5)         (6)       (7)      (8)      (9)
                                ∗∗∗        ∗∗∗         ∗∗∗         ∗∗∗         ∗∗          ∗∗∗       ∗∗       ∗∗
 Kinship tightness        -1.14       -1.02      -1.56         0.37        0.32        0.52      1.07     1.33     1.67∗∗∗
                           (0.27)      (0.28)     (0.31)       (0.12)      (0.12)      (0.17)    (0.49)   (0.52)   (0.25)
 EA controls                 No         Yes         Yes         No          Yes         Yes       No       Yes      Yes
 Other controls              No          No         Yes         No           No         Yes       No       No       Yes
 Continent FE                No          No         Yes         No           No         Yes       No       No       Yes
 Colonizer FE                No          No         Yes         No           No         Yes       No       No       Yes
 Observations               100          99          97          66          66          66      110      108        97
 R2                         0.16        0.26        0.75        0.12        0.24        0.71     0.14     0.22      0.54
 Notes. Country-level OLS estimates, robust standard errors in parentheses. In columns (7)–(9), the standard
errors are clustered at the dominant language in a country. The dependent variable in columns (1)–(3) is the
individualism variable of Hofstede (1984). In columns (4)–(6), it is family ties as discussed in Alesina and Giu-
liano (2013), and in columns (7)–(9) it is the fraction of the population that speaks a language which allows
dropping the pronoun, see Appendix C. EA controls include dependence on agriculture, number of levels of
jurisdictional hierarchies above the local level, and year of observation (all computed as pertaining to contem-
porary populations). Other controls include distance from the equator, log land suitability for agriculture, and
ancestry-adjusted log population density in 1500. ∗ p < 0.10, ∗∗ p < 0.05, ∗∗∗ p < 0.01.




                                                          51
                                           Table 15: Trust patterns: Within-country evidence

                                                                        Dependent variable:
                                                                                Trust in:
                                     Neighbors         People know      Meet first time       Other religion     Foreign nationality
                                    (1)       (2)      (3)      (4)       (5)        (6)       (7)       (8)       (9)       (10)
                                      ∗∗∗                                    ∗∗∗                  ∗∗∗                 ∗∗∗
      Kinship tightness           0.25        0.20    -0.010    0.24    -0.12       0.044    -0.43       -0.44   -0.41       -0.21
                                  (0.06)     (0.26)   (0.04)   (0.24)    (0.04)     (0.15)    (0.09)    (0.27)    (0.08)    (0.26)
      Country FE                    Yes       Yes      Yes      Yes       Yes        Yes       Yes       Yes       Yes       Yes




52
      Wave FE                       Yes       Yes      Yes      Yes       Yes        Yes       Yes       Yes       Yes       Yes
      Individual level controls     Yes       Yes      Yes      Yes       Yes        Yes       Yes       Yes       Yes       Yes
      Ethnicity-level controls      No        Yes      No       Yes       No         Yes       No        Yes       No        Yes
      Observations                22261      22011    22273    22023    22100       21852    21523      21283    21533      21296
      R2                           0.06       0.06     0.05     0.05     0.05        0.05     0.10       0.10     0.10       0.10
      Notes. Individual-level OLS estimates in WVS, standard errors (clustered at ethnicity level) in parentheses. The dependent
     variables are respondents’ trust in specific groups of people, as explained in the notes of Table 2. All dependent variables are
     expressed as z-scores. Individual level controls include gender, age, age squared, and educational attainment. Ethnicity level
     controls include dependence on agriculture, number of levels of jurisdictional hierarchies above the local level, distance
     from the equator, and year of observation in the EA. ∗ p < 0.10, ∗∗ p < 0.05, ∗∗∗ p < 0.01.
      Table 16: Religious beliefs of historical ethnicities: Robustness

                                                   Dependent variable:
                                                     Moralizing god
                                                   Sample restricted to:
                                   Have a high god               Americas & Oceania
                                     (1)             (2)          (3)           (4)
                                        ∗∗∗             ∗∗∗             ∗∗
      Kinship tightness            -1.29           -0.81         -0.58         -0.34∗∗
                                    (0.25)          (0.20)       (0.25)        (0.17)
      Continent FE                   Yes             Yes          Yes           Yes
      Historical controls            No              Yes          No            Yes
      Observations                  401             381           265           259
      R2                            0.19            0.52          0.05          0.42
      Notes. Ethnicity-level OLS estimates in EA, robust standard er-
     rors in parentheses. The dependent variable is an indicator for
     whether a society had a moralizing god, expressed as z-score.
     The sample is restricted to ethnicities that have a high god (mor-
     alizing or not), columns (1)–(2), or to Oceania and the Americas,
     columns (3)–(4). The historical controls include dependence on
     agriculture, settlement complexity, number of jurisdictional hi-
     erarchies above the local level, distance from the equator, longi-
     tude, and average elevation. ∗ p < 0.10, ∗∗ p < 0.05, ∗∗∗ p < 0.01.



             Table 17: EA analyses excluding hunter-gatherers

                                                   Dependent variable:
                       Global institutions           Local institutions          Religion
                         # Levels jurisdictional hierarchy
                       Above local level                Local level           Moralizing god
                        (1)            (2)             (3)         (4)         (5)         (6)
                              ∗∗              ∗∗           ∗∗∗          ∗∗∗          ∗∗
 Kinship tightness     -0.53         -0.51           1.64         1.62        -0.62       -0.49∗∗
                       (0.25)        (0.25)          (0.17)       (0.17)      (0.24)      (0.22)
 Continent FE           Yes            Yes             Yes         Yes         Yes         Yes
 Historical controls     No            Yes             No          Yes         No          Yes
 Observations           595           587             603          595         430         410
 R2                     0.21          0.30            0.23         0.28        0.23        0.48
 Notes. Ethnicity-level OLS estimates in EA, robust standard errors in parentheses.
The dependent variables in columns (1)–(2) and (3)–(4) are the number of levels
of jurisdictional hierarchy above the local and at the local level, respectively. In
columns (5)–(6), the dependent variable is the presence of a moralizing god. All
dependent variables are expressed as z-scores. The sample excludes ethnicities
that subsisted to at least 50% on (the sum of) hunting, gathering, and fishing.
In columns (1)–(4), the historical controls include dependence on agriculture,
year of observation, settlement complexity, distance from the equator, longitude,
and average elevation. Column (6) additionally includes the number of levels
of jurisdictional hierarchies above the local level. ∗ p < 0.10, ∗∗ p < 0.05, ∗∗∗
p < 0.01.



                                              53
          Table 18: Moral values across countries: WLS regressions

                                              Dependent variable:
                               In-group loyalty          Rel. imp. tribalistic values
                            (1)       (2)       (3)        (4)       (5)        (6)
                                ∗∗                 ∗∗∗       ∗∗∗           ∗
 Kinship tightness         0.91       0.61    2.08       0.20        0.13      0.44∗∗∗
                           (0.45)    (0.40)   (0.42)     (0.07)     (0.08)     (0.07)
 EA controls                 No       Yes       Yes        No        Yes        Yes
 Other controls              No       No        Yes        No        No         Yes
 Continent FE                No       No        Yes        No        No         Yes
 Colonizer FE                No       No        Yes        No        No         Yes
 Observations               197      195        154       197       195         154
 R2                         0.09     0.30       0.76      0.09      0.23        0.82
 Notes. Country-level WLS estimates, robust standard errors in parentheses. The
dependent variable in columns (1)–(3) is the in-group loyalty dimension in the
MFQ. In columns (4)–(6), I compute the relative importance of universally appli-
cable values by adding the MFQ dimensions of fairness / reciprocity and harm
/ care and subtracting in-group loyalty and submission to authority. The sample
includes all countries, and each observation is weighted by the square root of the
number of respondents in the MFQ. EA controls include dependence on agricul-
ture, number of levels of jurisdictional hierarchies above the local level, and year
of observation (all computed as pertaining to contemporary populations). Other
controls include distance from the equator, log land suitability for agriculture,
and ancestry-adjusted log population density in 1500. ∗ p < 0.10, ∗∗ p < 0.05,
∗∗∗
    p < 0.01.




                                        54
                                                  Table 19: Country-level analyses: Controlling for geography (1/2)

                                                                                              Dependent variable:
                                       In-group favoritism      General trust       ∆ Trust [In-group – Out-group]   In-group loyalty   Rel. imp. tribalistic values
                                         (1)          (2)       (3)        (4)       (5)                (6)           (7)       (8)      (9)            (10)
                                            ∗∗∗         ∗∗∗        ∗∗∗        ∗∗∗       ∗∗∗               ∗∗∗            ∗∗        ∗∗        ∗∗
      Kinship tightness                1.10         1.14      -1.40      -1.10      0.45              0.46           1.05     1.02      1.26           1.21∗∗
                                       (0.30)       (0.31)     (0.42)     (0.38)    (0.11)            (0.12)         (0.48)   (0.47)    (0.48)         (0.48)
      EA controls                        Yes          Yes       Yes        Yes       Yes                Yes           Yes       Yes      Yes             Yes
      Other controls                     No           Yes       No         Yes       No                 Yes           No        Yes      No              Yes
      Additional geography controls      Yes          Yes       Yes        Yes       Yes                Yes           Yes       Yes      Yes             Yes




55
      Continent FE                       Yes          Yes       Yes        Yes       Yes                Yes           Yes       Yes      Yes             Yes
      Colonizer FE                       Yes          Yes       Yes        Yes       Yes                Yes           Yes       Yes      Yes             Yes
      Observations                      110          109        91         91         71                71             93       92        93             92
      R2                                0.55         0.56      0.56       0.65       0.68              0.70           0.31     0.37      0.47           0.53
      Notes. Country-level OLS estimates, robust standard errors in parentheses. In columns (1)–(2), the dependent variable is the fraction of jobs that is assigned
     based on kinship (Van de Vliert, 2011). In columns (3)–(4), it is general trust and in (5)–(6), the difference between in- and out-group trust, see Table 2.
     In columns (7)–(8) and (9)–(10), the dependent variables are in-group loyalty and the relative importance of tribalistic moral values in the MFQ, compare
     Table 7. All dependent variables are expressed as z-scores. EA controls include dependence on agriculture, number of levels of jurisdictional hierarchies above
     the local level, and year of observation (all computed as pertaining to contemporary populations). Other controls include distance from the equator, log land
     suitability for agriculture, and ancestry-adjusted log population density in 1500. Additional geography include longitude, average temperature, average
     elevation, and the fraction of the population at risk of malaria. ∗ p < 0.10, ∗∗ p < 0.05, ∗∗∗ p < 0.01.
                             Table 20: Country-level analyses: Controlling for geography (2/2)

                                                                         Dependent variable:
                                       Shame – Guilt (Self-reports)    Shame – Guilt (Google)     Important behave properly
                                         (1)             (2)             (3)           (4)          (5)            (6)
                                                                            ∗∗∗          ∗∗∗           ∗∗∗
      Kinship tightness                 0.70            1.06           1.56          1.66         1.40            1.37∗∗∗
                                       (1.07)          (0.98)          (0.53)        (0.58)       (0.47)          (0.48)
      Language FE                        No              No              Yes           Yes           No             No
      EA controls                        Yes             Yes             Yes           Yes          Yes            Yes
      Other controls                     No              Yes             No            Yes           No            Yes
      Additional geography controls      Yes             Yes             Yes           Yes          Yes            Yes




56
      Continent FE                       Yes             Yes             No            No           Yes            Yes
      Colonizer FE                       Yes             Yes             No            No           Yes            Yes
      Observations                       35              35               59           59            72             72
      R2                                0.73            0.77             0.51         0.52          0.61           0.62
      Notes. Country-level OLS estimates, robust standard errors in parentheses. In columns (1)–(2), the dependent variable
     is the relative importance of shame versus guilt in ISEAR self-reports. In columns (3)–(4), it is the difference in Google
     searches for shame and guilt, see Table 9. In columns (5)–(6), it is the importance respondents in the WVS attach to
     behaving properly, compare Table 12. All dependent variables are expressed as z-scores. EA controls include dependence
     on agriculture, number of levels of jurisdictional hierarchies above the local level, and year of observation (all computed
     as pertaining to contemporary populations). Other controls include distance from the equator, log land suitability for
     agriculture, and ancestry-adjusted log population density in 1500. Additional geography include longitude, average
     temperature, average elevation, and the fraction of the population at risk of malaria. ∗ p < 0.10, ∗∗ p < 0.05, ∗∗∗
     p < 0.01.
                                                      Table 21: ESS analyses: Controlling for geography

                                                                                               European Social Survey
                                                                                                 Dependent variable:
                                                                                                              Important to:
                                                      Trust           Help people around self       Behave properly        Follow rules         Not draw attention
                                                (1)           (2)       (3)         (4)               (5)       (6)       (7)        (8)          (9)      (10)
                                                   ∗∗∗          ∗∗∗           ∗           ∗∗            ∗∗∗        ∗∗∗        ∗∗∗         ∗∗∗
      Kinship tightness                       -0.14      -0.14        0.078       0.085             0.20      0.21       0.15       0.18         0.10      0.10
                                               (0.04)     (0.04)      (0.04)      (0.04)            (0.05)    (0.06)     (0.05)     (0.05)      (0.07)    (0.07)
      Country FE                                Yes           Yes       Yes         Yes               Yes       Yes       Yes        Yes          Yes       Yes
      Wave FE                                   Yes           Yes       Yes         Yes               Yes       Yes       Yes        Yes          Yes       Yes
      Individual-level controls                 Yes           Yes       Yes         Yes               Yes       Yes       Yes        Yes          Yes       Yes




57
      Country of origin controls                No            Yes       No          Yes               No        Yes       No         Yes          No        Yes
      Additional country of origin controls     Yes           Yes       Yes         Yes               Yes       Yes       Yes        Yes          Yes       Yes
      Observations                            278388     277110       268707      267472            267965    266741     267164     265943      268451    267221
      R2                                       0.15       0.15         0.07        0.07              0.08      0.08       0.10       0.10        0.11      0.11
      Notes. Individual-level OLS estimates in the ESS, standard errors (clustered at the level of the country of birth of the father times the country
     of birth of the mother) in parentheses. The dependent variables are general trust (columns (1)–(2)) and the extent to which respondents deem
     helping people around the self ((3)–(4)), behaving properly ((5)–(6)), following rules ((7)–(8)), and not drawing attention ((9)–(10)) important.
     Individual level controls include gender, age, age squared, years of education, and a second-generation migrant dummy. Country of origin controls
     include dependence on agriculture, number of levels of jurisdictional hierarchies above the local level, and year of observation (all from the EA, but
     computed as pertaining to contemporary populations) as well as distance from the equator, log land suitability for agriculture, and ancestry-adjusted
     log population density in 1500. Additional country of origin controls include longitude, average temperature, average elevation, and the fraction of
     the population at risk of malaria. All dependent variables are expressed as z-scores. ∗ p < 0.10, ∗∗ p < 0.05, ∗∗∗ p < 0.01.
                     Table 22: MFQ analyses: Additional geography controls

                                                             Dependent variable:
                                                In-group loyalty        Rel. imp. tribalistic values
                                          (1)           (2)      (3)       (4)       (5)       (6)
                                             ∗∗∗          ∗∗∗       ∗∗∗       ∗∗∗       ∗∗∗
 Kinship tightness                       0.25       0.27        0.36      0.18      0.19      0.26∗∗∗
                                         (0.08)     (0.08)      (0.07)    (0.05)    (0.05)    (0.04)
 Country FE                               Yes           Yes      Yes       Yes       Yes       Yes
 Individual level controls                 No           Yes      Yes       No        Yes       Yes
 Country of origin controls                No           No       Yes       No        No        Yes
 Additional country of origin controls    Yes           Yes      Yes       Yes       Yes       Yes
 Observations                            284659     278214      277536    268883    262942    262298
 R2                                       0.01       0.07        0.07      0.01      0.03      0.03
 Notes. Individual-level OLS estimates in the MFQ, standard errors (clustered at country of birth) in
parentheses. The dependent variable in columns (1)–(6) is the in-group loyalty dimension in the
MFQ. In columns (7)–(12), I compute the relative importance of tribalistic values by computing the
first principal component of fairness / reciprocity and harm / care (both of which have negative
weights) and in-group loyalty and authority / respect (both of which have positive weights).
See Appendix C for details. All dependent variables are expressed as z-scores. Individual level
controls include gender, age, age squared, an immigrant dummy, and education fixed effects
(seven categories). Country of origin controls include dependence on agriculture, number of levels
of jurisdictional hierarchies above the local level, and year of observation (all from the EA, but
computed as pertaining to contemporary populations) as well as distance from the equator, log land
suitability for agriculture, and ancestry-adjusted log population density in 1500. Additional country
of origin controls include longitude, average temperature, average elevation, and the fraction of the
population at risk of malaria. ∗ p < 0.10, ∗∗ p < 0.05, ∗∗∗ p < 0.01.




                                                   58
                                        Table 23: Country-level analyses: Controlling for fraction Europeans (1/2)

                                                                                           Dependent variable:
                                In-group favoritism     General trust          ∆ Trust [In-group – Out-group]    In-group loyalty   Rel. imp. tribalistic values
                                  (1)        (2)        (3)         (4)          (5)                (6)           (7)       (8)       (9)            (10)
                                     ∗∗∗        ∗∗∗           ∗∗          ∗∗           ∗                  ∗           ∗∗       ∗∗        ∗∗
      Kinship tightness         1.22        1.24      -1.08        -0.81        0.25                0.25         0.88      0.87     1.01           0.99∗∗
                                (0.34)      (0.31)    (0.51)       (0.39)      (0.13)              (0.15)        (0.41)    (0.40)   (0.42)         (0.44)
      % of European descent     -1.01∗∗∗     -0.47    0.90∗∗∗      0.49∗∗      -0.35∗∗∗           -0.27∗∗        -0.86∗∗   -0.039   -1.21∗∗∗       -0.81∗
                                 (0.28)     (0.34)    (0.27)       (0.24)       (0.10)            (0.13)         (0.37)    (0.40)    (0.42)        (0.47)
      EA controls                 Yes        Yes        Yes         Yes          Yes                Yes           Yes       Yes       Yes            Yes
      Other controls              No         Yes        No          Yes          No                 Yes            No       Yes       No             Yes




59
      Continent FE                Yes        Yes        Yes         Yes          Yes                Yes           Yes       Yes       Yes            Yes
      Colonizer FE                Yes        Yes        Yes         Yes          Yes                Yes           Yes       Yes       Yes            Yes
      Observations               111         111        92           92          72                  72            94       94        94              94
      R2                         0.48        0.52      0.51         0.62        0.54                0.56          0.27     0.36      0.49            0.51
      Notes. Country-level OLS estimates, robust standard errors in parentheses. In columns (1)–(2), the dependent variable is the fraction of jobs that
     is assigned based on kinship (Van de Vliert, 2011). In columns (3)–(4), it is general trust and in (5)–(6), the difference between in- and out-group
     trust, see Table 2. In columns (7)–(8) and (9)–(10), the dependent variables are in-group loyalty and the relative importance of tribalistic moral
     values in the MFQ, compare Table 7. All dependent variables are expressed as z-scores. EA controls include dependence on agriculture, number of
     levels of jurisdictional hierarchies above the local level, and year of observation (all computed as pertaining to contemporary populations). Other
     controls include distance from the equator, log land suitability for agriculture, and ancestry-adjusted log population density in 1500. ∗ p < 0.10, ∗∗
     p < 0.05, ∗∗∗ p < 0.01.
                       Table 24: Country-level analyses: Controlling for fraction Europeans (2/2)

                                                                   Dependent variable:
                                 Shame – Guilt (Self-reports)    Shame – Guilt (Google)     Important behave properly
                                  (1)             (2)              (3)          (4)            (5)            (6)
      Kinship tightness           0.23            0.81           1.24∗∗         1.17∗         0.78            0.82∗
                                 (1.07)          (1.00)          (0.56)        (0.65)        (0.47)          (0.42)
      % of European descent       -0.21           -0.58           -0.27         -0.33       -1.04∗∗∗          -0.55
                                 (1.61)          (2.01)          (0.63)        (0.82)        (0.28)          (0.44)
      Language FE                 No               No              Yes          Yes            No             No
      EA controls                 Yes             Yes              Yes          Yes            Yes            Yes
      Other controls              No              Yes              No           Yes            No             Yes




60
      Continent FE                Yes             Yes              No            No            Yes            Yes
      Colonizer FE                Yes             Yes              No            No            Yes            Yes
      Observations                 35              35              59            59            73              73
      R2                          0.69            0.74            0.45          0.46          0.53            0.58
      Notes. Country-level OLS estimates, robust standard errors in parentheses. In columns (1)–(2), the dependent
     variable is the relative importance of shame versus guilt in ISEAR self-reports. In columns (3)–(4), it is the differ-
     ence in Google searches for shame and guilt, see Table 9. In columns (5)–(6), it is the importance respondents
     in the WVS attach to behaving properly, compare Table 12. All dependent variables are expressed as z-scores.
     EA controls include dependence on agriculture, number of levels of jurisdictional hierarchies above the local
     level, and year of observation (all computed as pertaining to contemporary populations). Other controls include
     distance from the equator, log land suitability for agriculture, and ancestry-adjusted log population density in
     1500. Additional geography include longitude, average temperature, average elevation, and the fraction of the
     population at risk of malaria. ∗ p < 0.10, ∗∗ p < 0.05, ∗∗∗ p < 0.01.
                                             Table 25: ESS analyses: Controlling for fraction Europeans

                                                                                 European Social Survey
                                                                                   Dependent variable:
                                                                                                Important to:
                                           Trust           Help people around self    Behave properly        Follow rules         Not draw attention
                                     (1)           (2)       (3)         (4)            (5)       (6)       (7)       (8)           (9)       (10)
                                        ∗∗∗          ∗∗∗        ∗∗                        ∗∗∗        ∗∗∗        ∗∗          ∗∗∗
      Kinship tightness            -0.15       -0.14       0.11         0.063         0.27      0.24       0.15      0.16         0.070      0.068
                                    (0.05)      (0.05)     (0.05)       (0.05)        (0.06)    (0.06)     (0.06)    (0.06)       (0.06)     (0.06)
      % of European descent        0.045        0.042      -0.079∗     -0.077∗        -0.047    -0.033     -0.043    -0.078       -0.13∗∗∗   -0.066
                                   (0.05)       (0.06)      (0.04)      (0.04)        (0.05)    (0.06)     (0.05)    (0.05)        (0.05)    (0.06)
      Country FE                     Yes           Yes       Yes         Yes            Yes       Yes       Yes       Yes           Yes       Yes




61
      Wave FE                        Yes           Yes       Yes         Yes            Yes       Yes       Yes       Yes           Yes       Yes
      Individual-level controls      Yes           Yes       Yes         Yes            Yes       Yes       Yes       Yes           Yes       Yes
      Country of origin controls     No            Yes       No          Yes            No        Yes       No        Yes           No        Yes
      Observations                 277184      277184      267545      267545         266814    266814     266016    266016       267294     267294
      R2                            0.15        0.15        0.07        0.07           0.08      0.08       0.10      0.10         0.11       0.11
      Notes. Individual-level OLS estimates in the ESS, standard errors (clustered at the level of the country of birth of the father times the
     country of birth of the mother) in parentheses. The dependent variables are general trust (columns (1)–(2)) and the extent to which
     respondents deem helping people around the self ((3)–(4)), behaving properly ((5)–(6)), following rules ((7)–(8)), and not drawing
     attention ((9)–(10)) important. Individual level controls include gender, age, age squared, years of education, and a second-generation
     migrant dummy. Country of origin controls include dependence on agriculture, number of levels of jurisdictional hierarchies above the
     local level, and year of observation (all from the EA, but computed as pertaining to contemporary populations) as well as distance from the
     equator, log land suitability for agriculture, and ancestry-adjusted log population density in 1500. All dependent variables are expressed
     as z-scores. ∗ p < 0.10, ∗∗ p < 0.05, ∗∗∗ p < 0.01.
                                                             Table 26: MFQ analyses: Additional controls

                                                                                            Dependent variable:
                                                           In-group loyalty                                                Rel. imp. tribalistic values
                                     (1)        (2)        (3)        (4)         (5)          (6)        (7)        (8)         (9)        (10)          (11)     (12)
                                        ∗∗∗        ∗∗∗        ∗∗∗        ∗∗∗         ∗∗∗         ∗∗∗         ∗∗∗        ∗∗∗         ∗∗∗         ∗∗∗         ∗∗∗
      Kinship tightness            0.26       0.34       0.24        0.24        0.22        0.25       0.17       0.22        0.23        0.29       0.27        0.34∗∗∗
                                   (0.09)     (0.08)     (0.07)      (0.08)      (0.07)      (0.07)     (0.05)     (0.04)      (0.06)      (0.07)     (0.06)      (0.06)
      % of European descent        -0.36∗∗∗   -0.22∗∗∗                                                  -0.22∗∗∗   -0.25∗∗∗
                                    (0.06)     (0.08)                                                    (0.04)     (0.04)
      Log [GDP p/c]                                      -0.11∗∗∗   -0.096∗∗∗                                                 -0.046∗∗∗   -0.032∗∗
                                                          (0.01)     (0.01)                                                    (0.01)      (0.01)
      Avg. yrs. of schooling                                                    -0.059∗∗∗   -0.049∗∗∗                                                 -0.015∗     -0.0037
                                                                                 (0.01)      (0.01)                                                    (0.01)      (0.01)




62
      Country FE                     Yes        Yes        Yes        Yes         Yes          Yes        Yes        Yes         Yes         Yes          Yes       Yes
      Individual level controls      Yes        Yes        Yes        Yes         Yes          Yes        Yes        Yes         Yes         Yes          Yes       Yes
      Country of origin controls     No         Yes        No         Yes          No          Yes        No         Yes         No          Yes          No        Yes
      Observations                 278132     277635     278488     277595      277784       277076     262869     262392      263200     262355      262535      261861
      R2                            0.07       0.07       0.07       0.07        0.07         0.07       0.03       0.03        0.03       0.03        0.03        0.03
      Notes. Individual-level OLS estimates in the MFQ, standard errors (clustered at country of birth) in parentheses. The dependent variable in columns (1)–(6)
     is the in-group loyalty dimension in the MFQ. In columns (7)–(12), I compute the relative importance of tribalistic values by computing the first principal
     component of fairness / reciprocity and harm / care (both of which have negative weights) and in-group loyalty and authority / respect (both of which have
     positive weights). See Appendix C for details. All dependent variables are expressed as z-scores. Individual level controls include gender, age, age squared,
     an immigrant dummy, and education fixed effects (seven categories). Country of origin controls include dependence on agriculture, number of levels of
     jurisdictional hierarchies above the local level, and year of observation (all from the EA, but computed as pertaining to contemporary populations) as well
     as distance from the equator, log land suitability for agriculture, and ancestry-adjusted log population density in 1500. ∗ p < 0.10, ∗∗ p < 0.05, ∗∗∗ p < 0.01.
                                          Table 27: Country-level analyses: Controlling for income p/c (1/2)

                                                                                        Dependent variable:
                               In-group favoritism    General trust         ∆ Trust [In-group – Out-group]    In-group loyalty    Rel. imp. tribalistic values
                                 (1)        (2)       (3)        (4)          (5)                (6)           (7)        (8)      (9)            (10)
                                    ∗∗         ∗∗           ∗          ∗∗           ∗                                ∗       ∗∗          ∗
      Kinship tightness        0.61       0.65       -0.94      -0.96        0.25               0.23           0.96      1.25      0.85          1.00∗∗
                               (0.26)     (0.26)     (0.49)     (0.45)      (0.14)             (0.15)         (0.56)     (0.56)   (0.44)         (0.48)
      Log [GDP p/c]            -0.52∗∗∗   -0.50∗∗∗    0.20      0.018       -0.11∗∗∗           -0.10∗∗        -0.028      0.25    -0.26∗          -0.10
                                (0.07)     (0.06)    (0.13)     (0.13)       (0.03)            (0.04)         (0.16)     (0.19)   (0.14)         (0.16)
      EA controls                Yes        Yes       Yes        Yes          Yes                Yes           Yes        Yes      Yes             Yes
      Other controls             No         Yes        No        Yes          No                 Yes           No         Yes      No              Yes




63
      Continent FE               Yes        Yes       Yes        Yes          Yes                Yes           Yes        Yes      Yes             Yes
      Colonizer FE               Yes        Yes       Yes        Yes          Yes                Yes           Yes        Yes      Yes             Yes
      Observations              112        111         93         92          73                 72             99        94        99             94
      R2                        0.63       0.64       0.48       0.62        0.60               0.60           0.22      0.39      0.42           0.50
      Notes. Country-level OLS estimates, robust standard errors in parentheses. In columns (1)–(2), the dependent variable is the fraction of jobs that
     is assigned based on kinship (Van de Vliert, 2011). In columns (3)–(4), it is general trust and in (5)–(6), the difference between in- and out-group
     trust, see Table 2. In columns (7)–(8) and (9)–(10), the dependent variables are in-group loyalty and the relative importance of tribalistic moral
     values in the MFQ, compare Table 7. All dependent variables are expressed as z-scores. EA controls include dependence on agriculture, number of
     levels of jurisdictional hierarchies above the local level, and year of observation (all computed as pertaining to contemporary populations). Other
     controls include distance from the equator, log land suitability for agriculture, and ancestry-adjusted log population density in 1500. ∗ p < 0.10,
     ∗∗
        p < 0.05, ∗∗∗ p < 0.01.
                          Table 28: Country-level analyses: Controlling for income p/c (2/2)

                                                                  Dependent variable:
                                Shame – Guilt (Self-reports)     Shame – Guilt (Google)     Important behave properly
                                  (1)             (2)             (3)           (4)            (5)            (6)
      Kinship tightness          0.37            0.69            2.04∗∗∗      2.01∗∗∗         0.62           0.63
                                (1.08)          (1.04)           (0.68)       (0.62)         (0.48)         (0.48)
      Log [GDP p/c]             0.058            -0.11            0.28          0.34∗       -0.35∗∗∗        -0.25∗
                                (0.25)          (0.23)           (0.17)        (0.17)        (0.12)         (0.14)
      Language FE                 No              No              Yes           Yes            No             No
      EA controls                 Yes             Yes             Yes           Yes            Yes            Yes
      Other controls              No              Yes              No           Yes            No             Yes




64
      Continent FE                Yes             Yes              No            No            Yes            Yes
      Colonizer FE                Yes             Yes              No            No            Yes            Yes
      Observations                35              35               58            58            74             73
      R2                         0.69            0.74             0.50          0.52          0.56           0.59
      Notes. Country-level OLS estimates, robust standard errors in parentheses. In columns (1)–(2), the dependent
     variable is the relative importance of shame versus guilt in ISEAR self-reports. In columns (3)–(4), it is the differ-
     ence in Google searches for shame and guilt, see Table 9. In columns (5)–(6), it is the importance respondents
     in the WVS attach to behaving properly, compare Table 12. All dependent variables are expressed as z-scores.
     EA controls include dependence on agriculture, number of levels of jurisdictional hierarchies above the local
     level, and year of observation (all computed as pertaining to contemporary populations). Other controls include
     distance from the equator, log land suitability for agriculture, and ancestry-adjusted log population density in
     1500. Additional geography include longitude, average temperature, average elevation, and the fraction of the
     population at risk of malaria. ∗ p < 0.10, ∗∗ p < 0.05, ∗∗∗ p < 0.01.
                                                   Table 29: ESS analyses: Controlling for income p/c

                                                                                  European Social Survey
                                                                                    Dependent variable:
                                                                                                  Important to:
                                           Trust            Help people around self    Behave properly         Follow rules         Not draw attention
                                     (1)           (2)        (3)         (4)            (5)        (6)       (7)       (8)           (9)        (10)
                                        ∗∗∗           ∗∗∗       ∗∗∗          ∗∗             ∗∗∗        ∗∗∗        ∗∗          ∗∗∗
      Kinship tightness            -0.18      -0.17         0.14         0.10          0.23       0.21       0.15      0.17          0.080      0.073
                                    (0.05)     (0.05)       (0.04)       (0.04)        (0.05)     (0.06)     (0.07)    (0.07)        (0.06)     (0.06)
      Log [GDP p/c]                0.0066     -0.0086       -0.012      0.0022        -0.031∗∗     -0.037    -0.012    -0.021       -0.043∗∗∗   -0.023
                                   (0.02)      (0.02)       (0.01)      (0.02)         (0.02)      (0.02)    (0.01)    (0.02)        (0.01)     (0.02)
      Country FE                     Yes           Yes        Yes         Yes            Yes        Yes       Yes       Yes           Yes        Yes




65
      Wave FE                        Yes           Yes        Yes         Yes            Yes        Yes       Yes       Yes           Yes        Yes
      Individual-level controls      Yes           Yes        Yes         Yes            Yes        Yes       Yes       Yes           Yes        Yes
      Country of origin controls     No            Yes        No          Yes            No         Yes       No        Yes            No        Yes
      Observations                 278382     277051        268708      267419         267966     266688     267164    265890       268451      267168
      R2                            0.15       0.15          0.07        0.07           0.08       0.08       0.10      0.10         0.11        0.11
      Notes. Individual-level OLS estimates in the ESS, standard errors (clustered at the level of the country of birth of the father times the
     country of birth of the mother) in parentheses. The dependent variables are general trust (columns (1)–(2)) and the extent to which
     respondents deem helping people around the self ((3)–(4)), behaving properly ((5)–(6)), following rules ((7)–(8)), and not drawing
     attention ((9)–(10)) important. Individual level controls include gender, age, age squared, years of education, and a second-generation
     migrant dummy. Country of origin controls include dependence on agriculture, number of levels of jurisdictional hierarchies above the
     local level, and year of observation (all from the EA, but computed as pertaining to contemporary populations) as well as distance from the
     equator, log land suitability for agriculture, and ancestry-adjusted log population density in 1500. All dependent variables are expressed
     as z-scores. ∗ p < 0.10, ∗∗ p < 0.05, ∗∗∗ p < 0.01.
                                            Table 30: Country-level analyses: Controlling for education (1/2)

                                                                                      Dependent variable:
                               In-group favoritism     General trust       ∆ Trust [In-group – Out-group]   In-group loyalty       Rel. imp. tribalistic values
                                 (1)        (2)        (3)        (4)        (5)                (6)           (7)        (8)        (9)            (10)
                                    ∗∗∗        ∗∗∗        ∗∗∗        ∗∗∗        ∗∗∗                ∗∗               ∗          ∗        ∗∗
      Kinship tightness        1.50       1.27       -1.55      -1.09      0.37                0.28          0.80        0.76      0.80           0.74∗∗
                               (0.30)     (0.28)      (0.50)     (0.39)    (0.11)              (0.12)       (0.48)      (0.44)     (0.38)         (0.36)
      Avg. yrs. schooling      -0.23∗∗∗   -0.21∗∗∗    -0.084     -0.11     -0.036∗∗          -0.055∗∗∗      -0.15∗      -0.085     -0.045         0.0083
                                (0.05)     (0.05)     (0.07)    (0.08)      (0.02)            (0.02)        (0.08)      (0.08)     (0.06)         (0.07)
      EA controls                Yes        Yes        Yes        Yes        Yes                Yes           Yes        Yes        Yes             Yes
      Other controls             No         Yes        No         Yes        No                 Yes           No         Yes        No              Yes




66
      Continent FE               Yes        Yes        Yes        Yes        Yes                Yes           Yes        Yes        Yes             Yes
      Colonizer FE               Yes        Yes        Yes        Yes        Yes                Yes           Yes        Yes        Yes             Yes
      Observations              105         104         82        82         65                  65           89         87          89             87
      R2                        0.57        0.61       0.50      0.64       0.54                0.62         0.28       0.39        0.41           0.50
      Notes. Country-level OLS estimates, robust standard errors in parentheses. In columns (1)–(2), the dependent variable is the fraction of jobs that
     is assigned based on kinship (Van de Vliert, 2011). In columns (3)–(4), it is general trust and in (5)–(6), the difference between in- and out-group
     trust, see Table 2. In columns (7)–(8) and (9)–(10), the dependent variables are in-group loyalty and the relative importance of tribalistic moral
     values in the MFQ, compare Table 7. All dependent variables are expressed as z-scores. EA controls include dependence on agriculture, number of
     levels of jurisdictional hierarchies above the local level, and year of observation (all computed as pertaining to contemporary populations). Other
     controls include distance from the equator, log land suitability for agriculture, and ancestry-adjusted log population density in 1500. ∗ p < 0.10, ∗∗
     p < 0.05, ∗∗∗ p < 0.01.
                            Table 31: Country-level analyses: Controlling for education (2/2)

                                                                  Dependent variable:
                                 Shame – Guilt (Self-reports)    Shame – Guilt (Google)     Important behave properly
                                  (1)             (2)             (3)           (4)           (5)            (6)
      Kinship tightness           -0.23          0.16            1.70∗∗∗      1.66∗∗∗       1.18∗∗           0.77∗
                                 (1.12)         (1.18)           (0.58)       (0.58)        (0.49)          (0.42)
      Avg. yrs. schooling        -0.012         -0.012           0.054         0.068        0.013           0.041
                                 (0.11)         (0.12)           (0.07)        (0.08)       (0.08)          (0.08)
      Language FE                 No              No              Yes           Yes           No              No
      EA controls                 Yes             Yes             Yes           Yes           Yes            Yes
      Other controls              No              Yes              No           Yes           No             Yes




67
      Continent FE                Yes             Yes              No            No           Yes            Yes
      Colonizer FE                Yes             Yes              No            No           Yes            Yes
      Observations                 33             33               55            55           66              66
      R2                          0.70           0.74             0.45          0.46         0.48            0.59
      Notes. Country-level OLS estimates, robust standard errors in parentheses. In columns (1)–(2), the dependent
     variable is the relative importance of shame versus guilt in ISEAR self-reports. In columns (3)–(4), it is the differ-
     ence in Google searches for shame and guilt, see Table 9. In columns (5)–(6), it is the importance respondents
     in the WVS attach to behaving properly, compare Table 12. All dependent variables are expressed as z-scores.
     EA controls include dependence on agriculture, number of levels of jurisdictional hierarchies above the local
     level, and year of observation (all computed as pertaining to contemporary populations). Other controls include
     distance from the equator, log land suitability for agriculture, and ancestry-adjusted log population density in
     1500. Additional geography include longitude, average temperature, average elevation, and the fraction of the
     population at risk of malaria. ∗ p < 0.10, ∗∗ p < 0.05, ∗∗∗ p < 0.01.
                                                     Table 32: ESS analyses: Controlling for education

                                                                                      European Social Survey
                                                                                        Dependent variable:
                                                                                                     Important to:
                                            Trust           Help people around self        Behave properly           Follow rules         Not draw attention
                                      (1)           (2)       (3)          (4)              (5)        (6)         (7)        (8)           (9)        (10)
                                         ∗∗∗          ∗∗∗        ∗∗∗             ∗∗           ∗∗∗         ∗∗∗         ∗∗            ∗∗∗           ∗
      Kinship tightness            -0.14       -0.14        0.13         0.087            0.23        0.22       0.15       0.19            0.10      0.096
                                    (0.05)      (0.05)      (0.04)       (0.04)           (0.05)      (0.06)     (0.06)     (0.06)         (0.06)     (0.07)
      Avg. yrs. schooling           0.012       0.014       -0.011∗∗    -0.014∗∗         -0.021∗∗∗   -0.028∗∗∗   -0.011∗   -0.017∗∗∗      -0.020∗∗∗   -0.016∗
                                    (0.01)      (0.01)       (0.01)      (0.01)           (0.01)      (0.01)      (0.01)    (0.01)         (0.01)      (0.01)
      Country FE                      Yes           Yes       Yes          Yes              Yes        Yes        Yes         Yes           Yes         Yes




68
      Wave FE                         Yes           Yes       Yes          Yes              Yes        Yes        Yes         Yes           Yes         Yes
      Individual-level controls       Yes           Yes       Yes          Yes              Yes        Yes        Yes         Yes           Yes         Yes
      Country of origin controls      No            Yes       No           Yes              No         Yes         No         Yes            No         Yes
      Observations                 277117      275888       267460      266269           266727      265547      265926     264749        267211      266025
      R2                            0.15        0.15         0.07        0.07             0.08        0.08        0.10       0.10          0.11        0.11
      Notes. Individual-level OLS estimates in the ESS, standard errors (clustered at the level of the country of birth of the father times the country
     of birth of the mother) in parentheses. The dependent variables are general trust (columns (1)–(2)) and the extent to which respondents
     deem helping people around the self ((3)–(4)), behaving properly ((5)–(6)), following rules ((7)–(8)), and not drawing attention ((9)–(10))
     important. Individual level controls include gender, age, age squared, years of education, and a second-generation migrant dummy. Country of
     origin controls include dependence on agriculture, number of levels of jurisdictional hierarchies above the local level, and year of observation
     (all from the EA, but computed as pertaining to contemporary populations) as well as distance from the equator, log land suitability for
     agriculture, and ancestry-adjusted log population density in 1500. All dependent variables are expressed as z-scores. ∗ p < 0.10, ∗∗ p < 0.05,
     ∗∗∗
         p < 0.01.
                                                            Table 33: Country-level analyses: Separate kinship tightness proxies

                                                                                                     Dependent variable:
                                      Cooperation                         Trust               Moral values            Shame vs. guilt        Altruistic punishm.           Social norms
                             PGG      Cheating   Nepotism       General    ∆ [In – Out]   Loyalty    Trib. values   Self-reports   Google    PGG        GPS        Conformity    Behave prop.
                             (1)        (2)           (3)         (4)             (5)       (6)          (7)            (8)         (9)      (10)       (11)          (12)           (13)
      Nuclear family         0.47       -0.64        -0.33        0.30       -0.17∗∗∗      -0.27        -0.56∗∗       -0.82∗∗      -0.79∗∗    0.77     0.72∗∗∗        -0.82         -0.48∗
                            (0.58)     (0.47)       (0.21)       (0.24)       (0.07)      (0.23)        (0.22)        (0.36)       (0.33)    (0.47)    (0.24)        (0.61)         (0.26)
      Neolocal residence    1.28∗∗∗    -1.15∗∗      -0.63∗∗∗     0.55∗∗      -0.23∗∗∗     -0.41∗       -0.65∗∗∗       -0.67∗       -0.73∗∗    0.78     0.80∗∗∗       -1.00∗         -0.69∗∗
                            (0.41)     (0.41)        (0.21)      (0.25)       (0.06)      (0.22)        (0.21)        (0.36)       (0.32)    (0.45)    (0.27)        (0.52)         (0.26)
      Cousin marriage        0.14       0.58         -0.18        0.28         0.12        0.16          0.18         0.058         0.67      0.62      0.48          0.36          -0.030
                            (0.57)     (0.72)       (0.27)       (0.24)       (0.09)      (0.26)        (0.24)        (0.54)       (0.52)    (0.62)    (0.30)        (1.04)         (0.26)
      Polygamy              -1.11∗∗    1.38∗∗∗      0.45∗∗        -0.27       0.22∗∗∗     0.65∗∗∗       0.98∗∗∗       0.93∗∗       1.08∗∗∗   -0.98∗    -1.08∗∗∗      1.40∗∗         1.03∗∗∗




69
                            (0.39)     (0.44)       (0.19)       (0.23)       (0.07)      (0.21)        (0.21)        (0.37)       (0.34)    (0.46)     (0.22)       (0.47)         (0.23)
      Bilateral descent     1.20∗∗∗   -1.56∗∗∗      -0.63∗∗∗      0.37∗      -0.22∗∗∗     -0.64∗∗∗     -0.91∗∗∗       -1.01∗∗∗      -0.48     0.55     0.68∗∗∗      -1.55∗∗∗       -0.92∗∗∗
                            (0.38)     (0.39)        (0.18)      (0.22)       (0.07)       (0.19)       (0.21)         (0.35)      (0.36)    (0.45)    (0.23)        (0.41)         (0.22)
      Localized clans        -0.50     1.46∗∗∗      0.58∗∗∗      -0.49∗        0.18∗      0.72∗∗∗       0.78∗∗        1.60∗∗∗      0.86∗∗     -0.79     -0.35       2.14∗∗∗         0.94∗∗∗
                            (0.37)     (0.51)       (0.22)       (0.27)       (0.09)      (0.21)        (0.33)        (0.37)       (0.43)    (0.59)    (0.26)       (0.46)          (0.29)
      Language FE             No         No           No           No             No        No            No            No          Yes       No         No           No              No
      Observations            15         23           114          94             74        104          104               35        59       15         75           15              75
      Notes. Country-level OLS estimates, robust standard errors in parentheses. Each regression coefficient corresponds to a separate regression, i.e., a given column reports the results
     of six different regressions. The dependent variables are public goods game contributions (NOP) in column (1), experimental cheating (column (2)), nepotism in the business
     domain (column (3)), general trust (column (4)), the difference between in- and out-group trust (column (5)), MFQ in-group loyalty (column (6)), the relative importance of
     tribalistic MFQ moral values (column (7)), the importance of shame over guilt in ISEAR self-reports (column (8)) and Google searches (column (9)), the relative importance of
     altruistic punishment in public goods game and GPS, respectively (columns (10) and (11)), experimental conformity (column (12)), and the importance of behaving properly
     (column (13)). ∗ p < 0.10, ∗∗ p < 0.05, ∗∗∗ p < 0.01.
                      Table 34: EA analyses: Separate kinship tightness proxies

                                                          Dependent variable:
                                Beliefs & values                         Institutions
                        Trust    Moral. god    Loyalty        Global       Local    Local enf.     Obedience
                         (1)         (2)            (3)         (4)         (5)           (6)         (7)
 Nuclear family         0.27        0.18∗∗          -0.15     -0.097     -0.90∗∗∗       -0.77∗∗∗     -0.12
                       (0.20)       (0.08)         (0.26)     (0.07)      (0.06)         (0.25)     (0.18)
 Neolocal residence    -0.056        0.18∗     -0.79∗∗         0.14      -0.30∗∗∗       -0.45∗      -0.40∗∗
                       (0.26)       (0.10)     (0.35)         (0.10)      (0.09)        (0.27)      (0.20)
 Cousin marriage        -0.36       0.32∗∗∗        0.023      0.23∗∗∗      0.10          0.21       -0.0073
                       (0.22)       (0.10)         (0.29)     (0.08)      (0.08)        (0.23)       (0.20)
 Polygamy              -0.093      -0.49∗∗∗         0.47      -0.34∗∗∗    0.081          -0.38       0.15
                       (0.22)       (0.12)         (0.34)      (0.11)     (0.09)        (0.28)      (0.22)
 Bilateral descent     0.53∗∗       0.21∗∗          -0.22     0.050      -0.68∗∗∗       -0.69∗∗∗    -0.37∗∗
                       (0.22)       (0.10)         (0.30)     (0.09)      (0.08)         (0.25)     (0.18)
 Localized clans       -0.040      -0.37∗∗∗         0.36      -0.27∗∗∗    0.43∗∗∗        0.35       0.017
                       (0.23)       (0.08)         (0.25)      (0.07)     (0.07)        (0.23)      (0.18)
 Continent FE            Yes         Yes            Yes         Yes         Yes           Yes         Yes
 Observations           129          656            82          919        928            88         157
 Notes. Historical ethnicity-level OLS estimates, robust standard errors in parentheses. Each regres-
sion coefficient corresponds to a separate regression, i.e., a given column reports the results of six
different regressions. The dependent variables are trust (column (1)), the presence of a moralizing
god (column (2)), loyalty to the local community (column (3)), the number of jurisdictional hierar-
chies above the village level (column (4)) and at the village level (column (5)), the strength of local
enforcement (column (6)), and the extent to which obedience is instilled into children (column (7)).
∗
  p < 0.10, ∗∗ p < 0.05, ∗∗∗ p < 0.01.




                                                     70
 Table 35: Within-country WVS analyses: Separate kinship tightness proxies

                                              Dependent variable:
                                         Trust                Important to
                             General       ∆ [In – Out]   help people behave
                                (1)            (2)            (3)         (4)
 Nuclear family               0.035           -0.15∗        -0.056      -0.015
                              (0.03)          (0.08)        (0.06)      (0.05)
 Neolocal residence           0.051           -0.18∗       -0.13∗∗∗     -0.088∗
                              (0.03)          (0.09)        (0.04)       (0.05)
 Cousin marriage              0.018            -0.15        0.029       -0.16∗∗∗
                              (0.06)          (0.17)        (0.14)       (0.06)
 Polygamy                     -0.020          0.22∗∗        0.13∗∗∗     0.065
                              (0.04)          (0.11)        (0.04)      (0.05)
 Bilateral descent            -0.072          -0.24∗       -0.0059      -0.073
                              (0.05)          (0.13)        (0.08)      (0.05)
 Localized clans             -0.094∗∗∗        0.44∗∗∗       0.034       0.11∗∗
                              (0.03)          (0.10)        (0.03)      (0.05)
 Country FE                     Yes            Yes            Yes         Yes
 Wave FE                        Yes            Yes            Yes         Yes
 Individual level controls      Yes            Yes            Yes         Yes
 Observations                 42038           21104         14755       24575
 Notes. Individual-level OLS estimates, robust standard errors (clustered at eth-
nicity level) in parentheses. Each regression coefficient corresponds to a sepa-
rate regression, i.e., a given column reports the results of six different regres-
sions. The dependent variables are general trust (column (1)), the difference
between in- and out-group trust (column (2)), and the importance people at-
tach to helping people nearby (column (3)) and behaving properly (column
(4)). ∗ p < 0.10, ∗∗ p < 0.05, ∗∗∗ p < 0.01.




                                         71
              Table 36: Within-country ESS analyses: Separate kinship tightness proxies

                                                              Dependent variable:
                                                                         Important to:
                               Trust    Help people        Behave properly     Follow rules   Not draw attention
                                (1)          (2)                 (3)               (4)               (5)
 Nuclear family               0.038       -0.067∗∗∗           -0.13∗∗∗          -0.072∗∗∗          -0.066∗∗
                              (0.03)       (0.02)              (0.03)            (0.03)             (0.03)
 Neolocal residence          0.096∗∗∗     -0.095∗∗∗           -0.15∗∗∗           -0.070∗           -0.086∗∗
                              (0.03)       (0.02)              (0.03)             (0.04)            (0.04)
 Cousin marriage              -0.022      0.072∗∗∗             0.012             -0.0010           0.0095
                              (0.02)       (0.03)              (0.04)             (0.03)           (0.04)
 Polygamy                    -0.21∗∗∗      0.12∗∗∗             0.25∗∗∗           0.16∗∗∗           0.19∗∗∗
                              (0.03)       (0.03)              (0.03)            (0.04)            (0.04)
 Bilateral descent            0.18∗∗∗      -0.12∗∗∗           -0.25∗∗∗           -0.17∗∗∗          -0.19∗∗∗
                              (0.03)        (0.02)             (0.03)             (0.03)            (0.04)
 Localized clans              -0.051       0.14∗∗∗             0.16∗∗∗            0.069            0.15∗∗∗
                              (0.05)       (0.03)              (0.06)             (0.05)           (0.06)
 Country FE                     Yes          Yes                 Yes               Yes               Yes
 Wave FE                        Yes          Yes                 Yes               Yes               Yes
 Individual-level controls      Yes          Yes                 Yes               Yes               Yes
 Observations                288519        278775             278021             277190            278493
 Notes. Individual-level OLS estimates, robust standard errors (clustered at the level of the country of birth of
the father times the country of birth of the mother) in parentheses. Each regression coefficient corresponds
to a separate regression, i.e., a given column reports the results of six different regressions. The dependent
variables are general trust (column (1)) as well as the importance people attach to helping people around
oneself (column (2)), behaving properly (column (3)), following rules (column (4)), and not drawing
attention (column (5)). ∗ p < 0.10, ∗∗ p < 0.05, ∗∗∗ p < 0.01.




                                                      72
Table 37: Within-country MFQ analyses: Separate kinship tightness proxies

                                         Dependent variable:
                                  In-group loyalty Tribalistic values
                                         (1)               (2)
                                           ∗∗∗
      Nuclear family                  -0.37              -0.24∗∗∗
                                       (0.06)             (0.04)
      Neolocal residence              -0.37∗∗∗           -0.23∗∗∗
                                       (0.05)             (0.04)
      Cousin marriage                  -0.10              -0.046
                                      (0.11)              (0.06)
      Polygamy                        0.40∗∗∗            0.24∗∗∗
                                      (0.06)             (0.04)
      Bilateral descent               -0.43∗∗∗           -0.29∗∗∗
                                       (0.06)             (0.04)
      Localized clans                 0.50∗∗∗            0.36∗∗∗
                                      (0.13)             (0.10)
      Country FE                         Yes               Yes
      Individual level controls          Yes               Yes
      Observations                    279142             263819
      R2                               0.07               0.03
     Notes. Individual-level OLS estimates, robust standard errors
    (clustered at country of birth) in parentheses. Each regression
    coefficient corresponds to a separate regression, i.e., a given col-
    umn reports the results of six different regressions. The depen-
    dent variables are in-group loyalty (column (1)) and the relative
    importance of tribalistic moral values (column (2)). ∗ p < 0.10,
    ∗∗
       p < 0.05, ∗∗∗ p < 0.01.




                                    73
             Table 38: Within-country GPS analyses: Separate kinship tightness proxies

                                                            Dependent variable:
                                               ∆ Punishment [Altruistic – Second-party]
                                                 (1)                      (2)
                                                   ∗∗∗
                Nuclear family                 0.13                     0.13∗∗∗
                                               (0.04)                   (0.04)
                Neolocal residence             0.080∗∗                  0.062
                                               (0.04)                   (0.05)
                Polygamy                        -0.042                  -0.034
                                                (0.05)                  (0.06)
                Bilateral descent               0.026                   0.017
                                                (0.05)                  (0.05)
                Localized clans                 -0.080                   -0.10
                                                (0.07)                  (0.07)
                Country FE                       Yes                      Yes
                Individual level controls        No                       Yes
                Observations                    65199                   64217
               Notes. Individual-level OLS estimates, robust standard errors (clustered
              at country of birth) in parentheses. Each regression coefficient corre-
              sponds to a separate regression, i.e., a given column reports the results
              of six different regressions. The dependent variables are in-group loy-
              alty (column (1)) and the relative importance of tribalistic moral values
              (column (2)). ∗ p < 0.10, ∗∗ p < 0.05, ∗∗∗ p < 0.01.




                Table 39: Kinship tightness and historical population density over time

                                                         Dependent variable:
                                                  Log [Population density] in:
                      1000     1500     1600       1700      1750     1800         1850       1900       1950
                       (1)       (2)     (3)        (4)       (5)      (6)          (7)        (8)        (9)
                                                                             ∗∗        ∗∗∗        ∗∗∗
 Kinship tightness     -0.23    -0.46    -0.38     -0.47      -0.47   -0.84       -1.13      -1.33      -1.25∗∗∗
                      (0.25)   (0.29)   (0.32)    (0.32)     (0.32)   (0.34)       (0.34)     (0.34)     (0.35)
 Observations         127       127      127       127        127      127         127        127        127
 R2                   0.01      0.02     0.01      0.02       0.02     0.05        0.09       0.12       0.10
 Notes. Country-level OLS estimates in the EA, robust standard errors in parentheses. The sample is
restricted to countries in which at least 50% of the population in 2010 are native to their current location.
∗
  p < 0.10, ∗∗ p < 0.05, ∗∗∗ p < 0.01.




                                                       74
                       Table 40: Contemporary development and kinship tightness

                                                                 Dependent variable:
                                                                     Log [GDP p/c]
                                                (1)          (2)             (3)             (4)            (5)
                                                   ∗∗∗           ∗∗∗            ∗∗∗             ∗∗∗
                Kinship tightness            -2.32         -2.01           -1.15           -2.36          -1.36∗∗∗
                                              (0.27)        (0.30)          (0.40)          (0.28)         (0.42)
                Intensity of agriculture                                                   -0.025         -0.022
                                                                                           (0.07)         (0.07)
                EA controls                     No           Yes             Yes             No             No
                Other controls                  No              No           Yes             No             No
                Continent FE                    No              No           Yes             No             Yes
                Colonizer FE                    No              No           Yes             No             Yes
                Observations                   189          187             157             189            189
                R2                             0.30         0.31            0.67            0.30           0.56
               Notes. Country-level OLS estimates, robust standard errors in parentheses.
              The dependent variable is per capita income. EA controls include dependence
              on agriculture, number of levels of jurisdictional hierarchies above the local
              level, and year of observation (all computed as pertaining to contemporary
              populations). Other controls include distance from the equator, log land suit-
              ability for agriculture, and ancestry-adjusted log population density in 1500.
              ∗
                p < 0.10, ∗∗ p < 0.05, ∗∗∗ p < 0.01.




              Table 41: Kinship tightness and agricultural intensity: Evidence from the EA

                                                         Dependent variable: Kinship tightness
                                             Full sample                     No vs. ext. agric.              Ext. vs. int. agric.
                                    (1)         (2)             (3)            (4)            (5)             (6)            (7)
                                      ∗∗∗             ∗∗              ∗∗             ∗∗∗            ∗∗∗              ∗∗∗
 Intensity of agriculture         0.22        0.063          0.076          0.048           0.064          -0.030          -0.033∗∗∗
                                  (0.02)      (0.03)         (0.03)          (0.02)          (0.02)         (0.01)          (0.01)
 Intensity of agriculture sqr.   -0.031∗∗∗    -0.011∗∗∗     -0.012∗∗∗
                                  (0.00)       (0.00)        (0.00)
 Continent FE                       No          Yes             Yes            Yes            Yes             Yes            Yes
 Historical controls                No           No             Yes            No             Yes             No             Yes
 Observations                       937         937             926           582             580            694             683
 R2                                 0.10        0.36            0.36          0.40            0.42           0.39            0.38
 Notes. Ethnicity-level OLS and IV estimates in the EA, robust standard errors in parentheses. The dependent
variable is kinship tightness in the EA. In columns (4)–(5), the sample is restricted to levels of agricultural in-
tensity of 1–3. In columns (6)–(7), the sample is restricted to levels of agricultural intensity of 3–6. Historical
controls include year of observation, distance from the equator, longitude, and average elevation. ∗ p < 0.10,
∗∗
   p < 0.05, ∗∗∗ p < 0.01.




                                                           75
   B                 Additional Figures




                 Kinship Tightness



                                                                                                                                                        Ü
                       Score < 0.75
                       Score > 0.75


                                                                                                       0   1,150 2,300        4,600        6,900        9,200
                                                                                                                                                           Miles




                                            Figure 7: Distribution of kinship tightness index in the EA




                     Distribution of kinship tightness at country-level                         Distribution of kinship tightness at ethnicity-level (EA)
           .15




                                                                                          .15
           .1




                                                                                          .1
Fraction




                                                                               Fraction
           .05




                                                                                          .05
           0




                                                                                          0




                 0           .2        .4           .6        .8          1                     0          .2            .4           .6           .8          1
                                      Kinship tightness                                                              Kinship tightness



    Figure 8: Distribution of kinship tightness at country level (left panel) and ethnicity level (right panel).




                                                                              76
Kinship Tightness
    NoData
    0-0.05
    0.05-0.25
    0.25-0.5
    0.5-0.75
    0.75-0.85




                                                                                                   Ü
    0.85-0.95
    0.95-1

                                                                0   1,000 2,000   4,000   6,000   8,000
                                                                                                     Miles




Figure 9: Distribution of kinship tightness across countries. In this map, a country is set to missing if
some of the variables underlying the kinship tightness index are based on a relatively small fraction of
the population.




                                                  77
C     Data Description

C.1     Ethnographic Atlas
C.1.1   Construction of Kinship Tightness Index

Extended vs. nuclear family.     Q8. Binary variable that takes on value of zero if do-
mestic organization is around nuclear families (1 and 2), and one otherwise.


Post-wedding residence. Q11. Binary variable coded as 1 if couples can live with
either the husband’s or the wife’s family or have neolocal residence (3) or no common
residence (8), and zero otherwise.


Kin terminology. Q27. Binary variable coded as zero if the kin terminology (q27) is
“Eskimo’ (3) or “Hawaiian’ (4), and one otherwise.


Cousin marriage. Q24. Three-step variable that takes on value of zero if no first or
second cousins can be married (8), 0.5 if second cousins can be married (5-7), and one
otherwise. Whenever Q24 is missing, the cousin marriage variable is imputed from the
kin terminology variable. For this purpose, I first compute the average cousin marriage
variable for each of the eight possible values of Q27, and then assign this average value
to an ethnicity based on its kin terminology if Q24 is missing.


Polgamy.     Q9. Binary variable that takes on value of zero if monogamous (1) and zero
otherwise.


Lineages. Q43. Binary variable that takes on the value zero if descent is bilateral and
one otherwise.


Segmented communities and localized clans.         Q15. Binary variable that takes value
of one in the presence of segmented communities or localized clans (2, 5 and 6) and
zero otherwise.


Kinship tightness. First principal component of extended vs. nuclear family, post-
wedding residence, cousin marriage, polygamy, lineages, and segmented communities
and clans.




                                           78
C.1.2   Dependent Variables

Moralizing god.        Q34. Binary variable coded as one if a High Gods is present and
supportive of human morality, and zero otherwise.


Number of levels of jurisdictional hierarchy above local level. Q33. Five-step cat-
egorical variable that describes the number of levels of jurisdictional hierarchies above
the local level (0-4 levels).


Number of levels of jurisdictional hierarchy at local level.         Q32. Three-step cate-
gorical variable that describes the number of levels of jurisdictional hierarchies at the
local level (2-4 levels).


C.1.3   Covariates

Dependence on agriculture.         Q5. Ranges from 2.5% to 92.5% by taking midpoint of
respective interval.


Dependence on animal husbandry. Q4. Ranges from 2.5% to 92.5% by taking mid-
point of respective interval.


Agricultural intensity. Q28. Categorical variable that characterizes the intensity of
agriculture production modes, ranging from 1 to 6. The categories are: 1 for no agricul-
ture, 2 for casual agriculture, incidental to other subsistence modes, 3 for extensive or
shifting agriculture, long fallow, and new fields cleared annually, 4 for horticulture, veg-
etal gardens or groves of fruit trees, 5 for intensive agriculture, using fertilization, crop
rotation, or other techniques to shorten or eliminate fallow period, and 6 for intensive
irrigated agriculture.


Year of observation.        Q101 and Q102. Year of observation in EA.


Settlement complexity.        Q30. Eight-step categorical variable that describes settlement
patterns as: 1 for nomadic or fully migratory, 2 for seminomadic, 3 for semisedentary,
4 for compact but impermanent settlements, 5 for neighborhoods of dispersed geamily
homesteads, 6 for separated hamlets that form a single community, 7 for compact and
relatively permanent settlements, and 8 for complex settlements.


Distance from equator, longitude.         Q103, Q104.



                                             79
Average elevation.    Calculated based on Global 30 Arc-Second Elevation provided by
USGS. For ethnicities, elevations aggregated across grid cells within a 200km radius
centered at the coordinates specified in the EA.


C.2     Standard Cross-Cultural Sample
Trust in children. Q335. Describes the extent to which societies inculcate trust in
their children. Categorical variable ranging from 0 to 9, with 0 representing “no incul-
cation or opposite trait” and 9 “extremely strong inculcation”.


Obedience in children. Q322-Q325. Describes the extent to which societies inculcate
obedience into young boys, old boys, young girls, and old girls, respectively. Categori-
cal variables ranging from 0 to 9, with 0 representing “no inculcation or opposite trait”
and 9 “extremely strong inculcation”. The final score of obedience is computed as un-
weighted average of the z-scores of the four separate obedience variables.


Loyalty to community. Describes the extent to which members of society feel loyal
to their local community. Categorical variable ranging from 0 to 3 (“especially high”,
“high”, “moderate”, and “low”).


Strength of local enforcement.      Q776 and Q777. Q776 describes the extent to which
societies made use of formal sanctions and enforcement for community decisions (2:
“great sanctioning power available”, 1: “some”, 0: “little or none”). Q777 encodes the
presence of enforcement specialists (1: “present” or “not specialized but done by leaders
who do other things as well”, 0: “absent, or carried out by social pressure of wider com-
munity”). The final score of strength of local enforcement is computed as first principal
component of these two variables.


C.3     Cross-Country Data
C.3.1   Construction of Country-Level Kinship Tightness Index

Giuliano and Nunn (2017) develop a method to match ancestral ethnicity-level charac-
teristics in the EA to contemporary populations. They do so by matching each of 7,000
contemporary language groups in the 16th edition of the Ethnologue manually to one
of the ethnicities in the EA (through the language spoken by the historical ethnicities).
The Ethnologue maps the current geographic distribution of languages, so that after
matching historical ethnicities to language groups, average ancestral traits based on
the EA can be computed at various different levels of aggregation. The analysis in this

                                           80
paper only relies on a country-level summary statistic. Thus, the country-level kinship
tightness indexis computed by first constructing kinship tightness at the ethnicity level
as described above, and then applying Giuliano and Nunn’s 2017 matching procedure.


C.3.2     Dependent Variables

Public goods game contribution: Initial NOP.       Average initial contribution levels in
treatment without availability of punishment in the cross-cultural public goods experi-
ments of Herrmann et al. (2008).


Public goods game contribution: Initial P. Average initial contribution levels in
treatment with availability of punishment in the cross-cultural public goods experi-
ments of Herrmann et al. (2008).


Public goods game contribution: Average.        Average contribution levels across treat-
ments and rounds in the cross-cultural public goods experiments of Herrmann et al.
(2008).


Cheating: Lying game      Average monetary payout reported in the lying game of Gächter
and Schulz (2016).


In-group favoritism: Management jobs based on kin. Index reported in Van de
Vliert (2011), summarizing the results of a cross-cultural survey by the World Economic
Forum that asks top executives to what extent senior management positions in their
country are held by relatives.


General trust.     Answers to WVS question: do you agree that most people can be
trusted (A165). Country level results calculated as means of all individual level re-
sponses across waves.


Out-group trust.     Based on answers to three WVS questions on how much one trusts
people that one meets for the first time (G007_34), people of another nationality
(G007_01) and people of another religion (G007_35). Country level variable constructed
as average across individuals and waves, averaged across the three different trust vari-
ables.




                                           81
In-group trust    Based on answers to three WVS questions on how much one trusts
one’s family (D001), neighbors (G007_18) and people known personally (G007_33).
Country level variable constructed as average across individuals and waves, averaged
across the three different trust variables.


Trust [In-group – Out-group].       Difference between in-group and out-group trust.


Google searches for shame and guilt.           First, I restricted the set of languages to
those that are an official language in at least two countries (since otherwise no within-
language variation can be exploited) and that are included in Jaffe et al. (2014) so I
have access to the most apt translations for shame and guilt. This is the case for En-
glish, Arabic, French, German, Portuguese, Russian, Spanish, Persian, and Slovakian.
Second, for each remaining language, access the relative search frequency of “shame”
and “guilt”, respectively, on Google Trends, restricting attention to countries in which
the respective language is an official language. Note that this procedure implies that
those countries with multiple official languages appear multiple times in the resulting
dataset. Second, rescale the Google Trends output such that the maximum in the consid-
eration set of countries is always 100 (Google Trends sclaes their data to be between 0
and 100. I need to adjust these data in cases in which the maximum of 100 is a country
outside of the consideration set, e.g., a country in which the respective language is not
an official language.) Finally, for each country-language-pair, compute the difference
between the search frequency index for shame and guilt.


ISEAR self-reports of shame and guilt. The ISEAR is a multi-national psychological
study led by Klaus Scherer and Harald Wallbott. In 36 countries, researchers distributed
questionnaires among university students. These questionnaires contained questions on
seven emotions (joy, fear, anger, sadness, disgust, shame, and guilt). Respondents were
first asked to describe a situation in which they experienced an emotion. Then, for each
emotion, they were asked to describe how long-lasting (1=minutes, 2=an hour, 3=sev-
eral hours, 4=a day or more) and how intense (1=not very, 2=moderately, 3=intense,
4=very) the feeling was. For each of these categories, I compute the difference be-
tween shame and guilt, and then average these two differences to arrive at a summary
statistic of the relative strength of shame. For details and data access see http://www.
affective-sciences.org/en/home/research/materials-and-online-research/
research-material/.


Altruistic punishment in PGG. Relative prevalence of altruistic over antisocial pun-
ishment in the public goods game of Herrmann et al. (2008). This variable is com-

                                              82
puted based on the data presented in Figure 1 in Herrmann et al. (2008). Specifically,
I compute average altruistic punishment as average punishment in cases in which the
punisher contributed weakly more than the punished participant. Average antisocial
punishment is analogously computed as average punishment in cases in which the pun-
isher contributed strictly more than the punished subject. The dependent variable of
interest is then the difference between altruistic and antisocial punishment.


Altruistic punishment in GPS.      Relative prevalence of altruistic over second-party
punishment, based on data in the GPS Falk et al. (2016). To construct this variable, I
first combine two survey items that were intended to measure second-party punishment.
These questions asked respondents to assess themselves regarding the statement “If I
am treated very unjustly, I will take revenge at the first occasion, even if there is a
cost to do so.” and to indicate “How willing are you to punish someone who treats
you unfairly, even if there may be costs for you?”. I aggregate these two variables by
computing the average of their z-scores. Altruistic punishment, on the other hand, is
the z-score of responses to the question “How willing are you to punish someone who
treats others unfairly, even if there may be costs for you?”. The dependent variable is
then the difference between the measures of altruistic and second-party punishment.


Tightness of social norms.    Index measuring the strength of social norms developed
by Uz (2015). The index computes the standard deviation in responses for various
morally disputable behaviors in the WVS. The underlying reasoning is that the presence
of strong social norms should induce people to give similar responses, irrespective of
what that response may be. Data taken rom Uz (2015).


Conformity.    Measure of conformity based on a meta-analysis of Asch’s conformity
game by Bond and Smith (1996) that covers 133 studies across 17 countries. The vari-
able is the average fraction of errors people make in the conformity game, i.e., the
fraction of times respondents give the same (wrong) response as the experimental con-
federates, across experimental studies within a given country.


Importance of behaving properly. Based on answers to WVS question: It is impor-
tant to this person to always behave properly (A196). Aggregate to country level based
on country where the interview was conducted.


In-group loyalty.   Based on data in the online version of the Moral Foundations Ques-
tionnaire, www.yourmorals.org. The in-group loyalty index is based on answers to
six questions. First, people are asked to assess to which extent the following behaviors

                                          83
are morally relevant: Whether or not someone cared for someone weak or vulnerable
(q3), Whether or not someone did something to betray his or her group (q9), Whether
or not someone did something disgusting (q14). Second, respondents are asked to in-
dicate their agreement or disagreement with the following statements: It is more im-
portant to be a team player than to express oneself (q19), I am proud of my countryś
history (q25) and People should be loyal to their family members, even when they
have done something wrong (q30). All of these questions have response options be-
tween zero and five. The in-group loyalty score is then computed as sum of responses
across the six questions. The country score is obtained as average in-group loyalty of
all respondents in the MFQ in a given country of residence.


Relative importance of tribalistic moral values. Based on data in the online version
of the Moral Foundations Questionnaire, www.yourmorals.org. This composite index
measures the relative importance of the moral dimensions of “fairness / reciprocity”
and “harm / care” (which constitute universally applicable moral principles) over “in-
group / loyalty” and “authority / respect”, which are relationship-specific obligations,
i.e., “groupish” or “tribalistic” values. The full Moral Foundations Questionnaire can be
accessed here: http://www.moralfoundations.org/questionnaires. The score
of the relative importance of universal moral values is computed through the following
procedure: First, at the individual level, normalize each moral foundation by dividing
it through the sum of all four dimensions to express the importance of values relative
to each other rather than in absolute terms. Second, conduct a principal component
analysis. Here, the resulting weights in the index of the relative importance of universal
moral values are -0.60 for harm / care, -0.33 for fairness / reciprocity, 0.53 for ingroup
/ loyalty and 0.50 for authority / respect. Finally, compute the average of this index by
country of residence.


Individualism.    Variable generated by Hofstede (1984) and taken from https://
geert-hofstede.com/countries.html. The data are available at the country level
and are based on qualitative questionnaires conducted with IBM employees. According
to Hofstede, this measure is meant to capture the following: “The high side of this di-
mension, called individualism, can be defined as a preference for a loosely-knit social
framework in which individuals are expected to take care of only themselves and their
immediate families. Its opposite, collectivism, represents a preference for a tightly-knit
framework in society in which individuals can expect their relatives or members of a
particular in-group to look after them in exchange for unquestioning loyalty. A soci-
ety’s position on this dimension is reflected in whether people’s self-image is defined in
terms of “I” or “we”.”

                                           84
Family ties. Following Alesina and Giuliano (2013), defined as first principal compo-
nent of answers to three World Value Survey questions: how important is family in life
(A001), one should respect and love parents (A025) and parents have responsibilities
towards their children (A026). Larger values correspond to stronger agreement to the
statement. Country level results calculated as means of all individual level responses
across waves.


Pronoun drop. Following Tabellini (2008a), this variable measures whether a given
language allows to drop the pronoun. The argument is that languages that forbid drop-
ping the first-person pronoun give more emphasis to the individual as opposed to the
group. The score is computed by applying the classification in the World Atlas of Lan-
guages, supplemented by Kashima and Kashima (1998). To arrive at a country-level
score, I compute a weighted average across languages, weighted by the fraction of
speakers according to Ethnologue. The analysis is restricted to countries in which I
could classify at least 75% of the population.


C.3.3   Development Indicators

Log population density from 1000-1900.           Computed based on grid cell level popu-
lation density from the History Database of Global Environment (HYDE) data. Country
average calculated as average population within contemporary boundaries of the coun-
try.


Ancestry-adjusted log population density from 1000-1900. Computed as above,
but ancestry-adjusted using Migration matrix of Putterman and Weil (2010).


Urbanization rate from 1000 to 1900.        Computed based on grid cell level urban
and total population from the History Database of Global Environment (HYDE) data.
Country average calculated as average population within contemporary boundaries of
the country.


Log GDP per capita. GDP per capita in current US dollar in 2010, reported by the
World Bank’s World Development Indicators.


C.3.4   Covariates

Log population density in 1500 AD, ancestry adjusted.         Population density (in per-
sons per square km) for a 1500 AD is calculated as population in that year, as reported
by McEvedy and Jones (1978), divided by total land area, as reported by the World

                                          85
Bank’s World Development Indicators. Ancestry adjusted with World Migration Matrix
by Putterman and Weil (2010).


Average Temperature.      For countries, average of annual mean temperature from 1961
to 1990 based on FAO’s GAEZ dataset. Mean temperature first calculated at grid cell
level and then aggregated with current country boundaries.


Average elevation.    Calculated based on Global 30 Arc-Second Elevation provided by
USGS. For countries, elevations aggregated across grid cells within countries’ current
boundaries.


Fraction of population of European descent.       Percentage of population of European
descent, taken from Ashraf and Galor (2013).


Log land suitability for agriculture. Composite agriculture suitability index com-
puted using FAO GAEZ dataset. Suitability measured for post-Columbian Exchange
(1500) where all crops are assumed to be available. For each grid cell, we compute the
average overall potential yields of all crops in the GAEZ data (unit measured in T/ha).
For country level measure, aggregate across all cells within country’s boundary.


Fraction of population at risk of contracting malaria.     The percentage of a country’s
population in 1994 residing in regions of high malaria risk, multiplied by the proportion
of national cases involving the fatal species of the malaria pathogen (as opposed to other
largely non-fatal species). Taken from Ashraf and Galor (2013).


C.4    World Values Survey
Important help people nearby, Based on agreement with statement “It is important
to this person to help the people nearby; to care for their well-being.”
Other variables coded as in cross-country analyses.


C.5    European Social Survey
Important help people around self. Based on agreement with statement “It’s very
important to her/him to help the people around her/him. She/he wants to care for
their well-being”.




                                           86
Important to behave properly. Based on agreement with statement “It is important
to her/him always to behave properly. She/he wants to avoid doing anything people
would say is wrong”.


Important to follow rules. Based on agreement with statement “She/he believes
that people should do what they’re told. She/he thinks people should follow rules at all
times, even when no-one is watching”.


Important to not draw attention. Based on agreement with statement “It is impor-
tant to her/him to be humble and modest. She/he tries not to draw attention to her-
self/himself”.


C.6    Global Preference Survey
Coded as in cross-country case.


C.7    Moral Foundations Questionnaire
Coded as in cross-country case.




                                          87
