NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

CORPORATE LIQUIDITY, ACQUISITIONS, AND MACROECONOMIC CONDITIONS
Isil Erel
Yeejin Jang
Bernadette A. Minton
Michael S. Weisbach
Working Paper 23493
http://www.nber.org/papers/w23493

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
June 2017

The authors are Fellows of the National Center for the Middle Market at the Fisher College of
Business, Ohio State University, and acknowledge the Center’s support for this research. Some of
this research was completed when Michael Weisbach was a visiting scholar at the University of
Hong Kong. We thank Greg Allen, Dongxu Li, and Sam Osea for excellent research assistance
and Murillo Campello, Shan Ge, Charlie Hadlock, Peter Iliev, and participants at 2017 Midwest
Finance Association conference for helpful discussions. The views expressed herein are those of
the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic
Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.
© 2017 by Isil Erel, Yeejin Jang, Bernadette A. Minton, and Michael S. Weisbach. All rights
reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit
permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Corporate Liquidity, Acquisitions, and Macroeconomic Conditions
Isil Erel, Yeejin Jang, Bernadette A. Minton, and Michael S. Weisbach
NBER Working Paper No. 23493
June 2017
JEL No. G31,G34
ABSTRACT
Firms hold liquid assets to enhance their ability to invest efficiently when external financing costs
are high, especially during poor macroeconomic conditions. Using a sample of 47,378
acquisitions from 36 countries between 1997 and 2014, we study how the relation between firms’
cash holdings and their acquisition decisions changes over macroeconomic cycles. We find that
higher cash holdings increase the likelihood a firm will make an acquisition. Better
macroeconomic conditions, which lower the cost of external finance, also increase the likelihood
of an acquisition. However, larger cash holdings decrease the sensitivity of acquisitions to
macroeconomic factors, suggesting that cash holdings lower financing constraints during times
when the cost of external finance is high. Announcement day abnormal returns for acquirers
follow a consistent pattern: they decrease with acquirer cash holdings and with better
macroeconomic conditions. The results are consistent with the view that firms choose liquidity
levels to insure against poor macroeconomic conditions.
Isil Erel
Department of Finance
Ohio State University
832 Fisher Hall
2100 Neil Avenue
Columbus, OH 43210
erel@fisher.osu.edu

Bernadette A. Minton
Finance Department
Fisher College of Business
700 Fisher Hall
2100 Neil Avenue
Columbus, OH 43210-1144
minton.15@fisher.osu.edu

Yeejin Jang
Purdue University
Krannert School of Management
Kran 423
403 W. State St.
W. Lafayette, IN 47907
jang67@purdue.edu

Michael S. Weisbach
Department of Finance
Fisher College of Business
Ohio State University
2100 Neil Ave.
Columbus, OH 43210
and NBER
weisbach.2@osu.edu

1. Introduction
One of the most important decisions a financial manager must make is to determine how
liquid his firm’s balance sheet should be. More liquidity means that a firm can make investment
decisions without having to raise external capital.1 Consequently, liquidity on the balance sheet
is most valuable to a firm when the cost of external finance is relatively high. One such time
occurs during poor macroeconomic conditions, since both practitioners’ viewpoints and the
academic literature suggest that most firms’ external financing costs are strongly pro-cyclical.2
Therefore, liquidity should be particularly important in facilitating firms’ abilities to invest
efficiently during poor macroeconomic conditions.
Liquidity, however, comes at a cost. In addition to being inefficient from a tax
perspective, too much liquidity can exacerbate agency problems, since managers are less likely
to face capital market discipline for their investments. In other words, if firms hold sufficient
liquidity to ensure optimal investments even in bad times, then they will have too much liquidity
in normal times, when cash flows tend to be larger and financial markets have fewer frictions. A
cost of having too much liquidity is that firms potentially will use this excess liquidity to make
value-reducing investments.
This paper provides evidence on the nature of this tradeoff. It considers the way that
macroeconomic conditions and firms’ liquidity affect firms’ acquisition decisions, one of the
most important investment decisions that firms face. The idea is that a firm chooses its liquidity
with these factors (and possibly others) in mind. Once the choice is made, however, it is sunk,
and will affect a firm’s future investment decisions in predictable ways. A more liquid balance
1

The idea that liquidity can mitigate the cost of external financing was introduced in Keynes (1936) and developed
by many others, most notably by Myers and Majluf (1984). The seminal paper about the way in which agency
problems can occur when firms have too much liquidity is Jensen (1986), and many authors have provided related
evidence.
2
See Passov (2003) and Graham and Harvey (2001) for practitioners’ viewpoints, and Erel et al. (2012) for
empirical evidence on how firms’ capital-raising varies over the business cycle.

1

sheet should provide insurance against unreliable capital markets in bad times at the potential
cost of exacerbating the firm’s free cash flow problem and leading to value-reducing investments
in good times.
We study the effect of liquidity on the interaction of macroeconomic conditions and
investment decisions using a sample of 47,378 acquisitions by public and private acquirers from
36 countries between 1997 and 2014. We focus on acquisitions because they are large,
observable investments, over which firms have substantial discretion. Therefore, if liquidity
affects investment, it is more likely to be observed doing so for acquisitions than for capital
investments. We estimate the likelihood that a firm makes an acquisition as a function of both its
own financial position and overall macroeconomic conditions. The international sample provides
us with variation in economic conditions that allows us to identify the way that firms’ liquidity
affects their investment decisions in differing economic conditions.
Similar to Harford (1999), we find that firms with higher cash holdings are more likely to
make acquisitions in our much larger and non-overlapping sample. This finding could mean that
cash relieves financial constraints and allows firms to invest efficiently, or it could mean that
cash leads firms to overinvest and to make value-reducing acquisitions. In fact, if firms are
choosing liquidity to trade off the costs and benefits of incremental liquidity, this positive
relation between cash holdings and acquisitions could reflect both effects. During bad times, we
expect higher liquidity to lessen the impact of credit rationing and consequently lower the impact
of poor economic conditions in firms’ investments, while in normal times, we expect higher
liquidity to lead to overinvestment.
We analyze the relation between cash holdings and the propensity to make acquisitions
over different macroeconomic conditions. Since down cycles cannot be perfectly predicted and

2

have a large impact on the firm’s ability to raise capital, they are an exogenous factor that
identifies the impact of liquidity. We estimate the extent to which macroeconomic conditions
affect the likelihood of making an acquisition, as well as the extent to which the impact of
macroeconomic conditions on acquisitions is affected by firms’ cash positions. If the purpose of
holding cash is to provide liquidity in times when the cost of external finance is high, then we
would expect that firms with large cash holdings would be less affected by macroeconomic
shocks than firms with less liquid balance sheets.
The results suggest that macroeconomic conditions positively affect the likelihood of
making an acquisition. This finding is consistent with the common observation that merger
waves tend to be pro-cyclical (Harford (2005)). However, the results also suggest that impact of
macroeconomic conditions on firms’ acquisition behavior is smaller when firms have larger cash
positions. The fact that cash holdings reduce cyclicality suggests that part of the explanation for
the cyclicality of merger waves comes from a financing channel. Since it is harder to raise
external sources of capital when the market is not doing well, firms neglect some potential valueincreasing acquisitions (and other investments) during bear markets. Holding cash mitigates this
effect and enables firms to make valuable investments during poor times. However, incremental
cash comes at the cost of potentially making financing too easy during bull markets, which can
lead to poor quality acquisitions.
The view that firms choose liquidity to trade off the agency costs coming from excess
liquidity with the benefit of ensuring the ability to invest even in bad times also has predictions
about the quality of investments over the business cycle. It suggests when firms make
acquisitions at times when they have excess liquidity, they will be more prone to overinvest, and
more cash will lead to lower quality acquisitions, especially during bull markets. In addition, if

3

firms are credit-rationed during poor financial times, incremental cash will help to alleviate these
constraints. If manager would undertake only the most valuable investments in the absence of
cash, then additional cash would allow them to take some positive NPV investments that the firm
could not finance otherwise. These additional investments, while creating value, are nonetheless
worse than the investments that the firm would have taken without the cash on hand. Thus, the
incremental effect of cash on investment quality is negative despite the fact that the cash enables
firms to finance positive NPV investments.
To evaluate this idea, we rely on the market reaction to the announcement of the
acquisition, which measures the market’s expectation of the value added to the acquiring firm
from the deal. For our sample, market reactions tend to be slightly positive, with a mean of
0.78% and a median of 0.29%. In the cross-section, we find that acquirers’ announcement returns
are, on average, negatively related to the acquirer’s cash holdings. Consistent with these
arguments, when acquirers have more cash, the acquisitions they make tend to be worse.
In addition, acquisition announcement returns are negatively related to macroeconomic
conditions. Combined with the result that there is a lower probability of a firm of making an
acquisition in worse macroeconomic conditions, this pattern suggests that financing constraints
force firms to be relatively selective during bad economic times, undertaking fewer but higher
quality deals. During normal times, firms undertake relatively more deals, but potentially lower
quality ones, since they are able to raise capital to finance the deals more easily. Overall, the
results support the idea that firms view incremental liquidity as insurance against poor states of
the world. Higher liquidity allows them to make better investments in bad states but the cost is
that they will make worse ones in good states, on average.

4

The paper combines the ideas in several disparate literatures in corporate finance,
including work on the precautionary demand for corporate liquidity, on the effect of free cash
flow on firms’ investments, on the impact of macroeconomic conditions on the cost of raising
external financing, and on the reasons why mergers and acquisitions tend to vary pro-cyclically
over the business cycle. The literature on the precautionary demand for cash dates to Keynes
(1936), who originally proposed that firms can hold cash as a hedge against potential future
financial constraints. Opler, Pinkowitz, Stulz, and Williamson (1999) was the first to examine
this idea empirically, and started a literature that generally concludes that the precautionary
motive is an important determinant of firms’ liquidity management decisions. 3 This paper
contributes to this literature by documenting directly that cash helps enable firms finance
investments during poor macroeconomic times when liquidity is likely to be scarce. While most
of the literature on liquidity examines it from an ex ante sense by studying the factors that affect
firms’ choices of liquidity, our paper extends the analysis by looking ex post at the way that
firms’ liquidity choices actually affect their investment decisions at times when it is needed.
Jensen (1986) introduced the notion that liquidity can have a dark side, and that too much
liquidity can lead firms to take value-reducing investments. A number of papers have
documented that empirically, firms with unusually large cash holdings take a number of poor
investments, especially acquisitions.4 This paper supports the notion that cash can contribute to
poor acquisitions in good economic times when it is relatively easy to raise capital. When
economic conditions are strong, firm can more easily raise capital than when economic

3

See Almeida, Campello, and Weisbach (2004), Bates, Kahle, and Stulz (2009), Lins, Servaes, and Tufano (2010),
Campello, Giambona, Graham, and Harvey (2011), Hoberg, Phillips, and Prabhala (2014), Morellec, Nikolov and
Zucchi (2014), and Lin, Schmid, and Weisbach (2017). Almeida, Campello, Cunha, and Weisbach (2014) provide a
survey of this literature.
4
See Lehn and Poulsen (1989), Lang, Stulz and Walkling (1991), Blanchard, Lopez de Silanes and Shleifer (1994),
Harford (1999), Richardson (2006), and Cunha (2015).

5

conditions are weak, so the cash firms have saved historically becomes superfluous, and can be
used for value-reducing investments such as poor acquisitions.
An emerging literature has documented that firms’ capital raising decisions differ
substantially over the business cycle (see Koraczyk and Levy (2003), Erel, Julio, Kim, and
Weisbach (2012), Kahle and Stulz (2013), and Covas and Den Haan (2013)). This literature finds
that during booms, even poorly rated firms are able to raise capital through equity or debt issues.
However, during poor macroeconomic times, raising capital appears to be much more expensive.
During downturns, equity issues are rare and bond issues are restricted to the highest quality
issuers. Our paper suggests that because of the high costs of external finance during poor times,
firms hold cash to be able to make investments during these poor times without having to raise
external financing.
Finally, one of the major unsolved problems in finance concerns the reasons why mergers
tend to follow pro-cyclical waves (see Brealey, Myers and Allen (2015)). Our results suggest that
differential financing costs over the business cycle could be part of the reason why mergers
follow this pattern. In the context of private equity, Axelson, Strömberg and Weisbach (2009)
present a model in which during boom times, capital is “too loose” and firms make all of the
positive NPV acquisitions they can, but make some negative NPV ones as well. In contrast, in
poor times, capital is “too tight” and even profitable deals do not get financed. The empirical
evidence on acquisitions by private equity firms suggests that they tend to follow this pattern
(see Axelson, Jenkinson, Strömberg, and Weisbach (2013)). The results presented in this study
imply that acquisitions by corporations follow a similar pattern to that of private equity firms;
acquirers tend to be unconstrained during boom times and make too many acquisitions, but are
constrained during poor times so they underinvest and ignore value-increasing acquisitions.

6

Holding liquidity helps solve the problem of underinvestment in poor times but comes at the cost
of exacerbating the problem of overinvestment during boom times.

2. Sample
2.1. Data Sources
Our sample of firms is taken from the OSIRIS database that provides financial
information on publicly traded and major unlisted companies.5 We require firms to report at least
one year of financial information during the fiscal year of 1997 and 2014. We exclude financial
firms (US SIC code 6000-6999), as well as firm-years for which the firm has less than 10
employees or total asset less than $1 million USD. OSIRIS’s coverage of firm-level financial
information varies widely by country. We restrict our sample to countries with at least 20 firms
in every fiscal year to ensure a comprehensive set of firms in each country in our analysis. These
sample selection criteria limit our sample to 36 countries.
To identify acquisitions made by the sample firms, we rely on the Zephyr database on
worldwide mergers and acquisition transactions. 6 We include all mergers and acquisitions
announced between January 1, 1997 and December 31, 2014 and completed as of December 31,
2014. We focus on acquisitions of majority interests in which the acquirer owns less than 50% of
the target shares prior to the deal, but more than 50% subsequent to the deal. We additionally
exclude buyouts, privatizations, reverse mergers, restructurings, and exits from private equity

5

The OSIRIS database mainly includes public companies over the world, but major private companies are included
in the database if they are subsidiaries of public companies, they have issued a public bond, or they keep reporting
financial information after delisting. 34% of firms in our sample are private firms with the average total assets of
$1,230 million USD. Our main results are not qualitatively different when we exclude private firms in our sample.
6
We rely on Zephyr instead of SDC because our two databases – OSIRIS and Zephyr- are provided by the same data
provider, Bureau Van Dyck, reducing any errors that could potentially come from data merging process.

7

deals. Finally, we merge the acquisition transactions information in Zephyr to the firm-year panel
data of OSIRIS.
To evaluate the impact of liquidity on firms’ decisions to make acquisitions, we wish to
estimate the likelihood that a given firm makes an acquisition in a particular year. Our goal is to
construct as large a sample of potential acquirers as possible, but only to include firms that
realistically could make an acquisition. For this reason, we include all firms into our sample that,
according to the Zephyr database, make at least one acquisition in our sample period.7
One limitation of the Zephyr database is that, for about 45% of deals, deal values are not
reported. We neither drop these deals nor impose a size criterion for our acquisitions to avoid
oversampling larger deals (see the discussion by Netter, Stegemoller, and Wintoki (2011)). We
rather focus our filters on firms’ decisions on whether to make at least one acquisition in a
particular year, regardless of the acquisition’s size.8 When we pool firms across countries and
years, the final sample contains 129,874 firm years, in which 47,378 acquisitions are made.
We organize the sample in two ways, depending on the type of the analysis for which it
will be used. First, when estimating the likelihood of acquisitions, we use the firm-year panel
data that include 129,874 observations of 12,583 firms in 36 countries from 1997 to 2014.
Second, in the analysis of acquirers’ cumulative abnormal returns around announcement dates,
we organize the sample at the individual deal level. For this second test, we use stock return data
from Datastream and estimate the acquiring firm’s CAR from day -1 to day +1 (CAR[-1,+1])
relative to the acquisition announcement date. Abnormal returns are calculated from the market
model estimated from day –260 to day –100 relative to the announcement date with at least 60
days of returns available. When a firm makes multiple acquisition announcements in a short
7

33% of firms are dropped from the sample because they do not make any acquisitions during our sample period.
We repeat our main tests using only acquisitions for which we know the valuation, imposing minimum size criteria
of $1 million and $10 million. The results are similar to those we report.

8

8

period, we take the first acquisition transaction and drop any other transactions that are
announced within 30 days. We additionally include the acquiring firm’s return from day -210 to 10 in the regression as a control, losing 837 deals from our sample. We end up with using a
sample of 33,410 acquisition transactions in 36 countries with cumulative abnormal
announcement returns available.
We use annual GDP growth in constant 2015 US dollars obtained from World Bank to
measure country-level macroeconomic conditions. We construct indicator variables for low GDP
growth years when we evaluate whether the effect of cash changes across macroeconomic cycles.
Because countries have different distributions of GDP growth, to identify abnormal levels of
GDP growth rates, we first normalize the GDP growth by subtracting the mean and scaling by
the standard deviation of each country. For an observation of GDP growth for a particular
country and year, the mean and standard deviation that are used for normalization are estimated
from time-series GDP growth rates over the previous 20 years ending two years before the event
time (i.e. from t-23 to year t-3). Low GDP Growth is defined as the years when normalized GDP
growth rate is below the bottom 20th percentile of the normalized GDP growth distribution of
648 country-year observations.9
Our main measure for corporate liquidity is cash, scaled by the book value of total assets,
which has been the literature’s standard measure of corporate liquidity since Opler, Pinkowitz,
Stulz, and Williamson (1999). The literature has likely focused on this measure of liquidity two
reasons. First, cash normalized by assets is straightforward to measure.10 Second, there are
theoretical reasons why cash is the preferred way of managing liquidity. Lines of credit and debt
9

In Appendix Table 1, we confirm our results with alternative definitions using different normalization methods.
The main results remain similar.
10
However, its name is somewhat misleading, since for most firms, their “cash” holdings actually are an
aggregation of a number of different securities, some of which are risky. See Duchin, Gilbert, Harford, and Hrdlicka
(2017) for more discussion and a characterization of the “cash” portfolios of typical public firms.

9

capacity can disappear during poor financial conditions when they are most needed, effectively
being used to fund overinvestments in good times rather than efficient investments in poor times
(see Acharya, Almeida, and Campello (2007) or Almeida, Campello, Cunha, and Weisbach
(2014)).
As firm-level control variables, we use firm size, profitability, and sales growth, all of
which are taken from OSIRIS. At the deal level, we construct indicator variables for public
targets, cross-border deals and related-industry deals from Zephyr. To minimize the effect of
outliers, we winsorize cash, profitability, and sales growth variables, and trim CARs.11 Detailed
definitions for all variables are provided in the Appendix.

2.2. Sample Description
Table 1 summarizes the distribution of our sample of firms and acquisition transactions.
Panel A presents the way in which the sample changes over the sample period. It begins in 1997
with 3,922 firms in 17 countries. The sample increases to 36 countries and more than 8,000 firms
for most of the sample period. The “Acquisition Rate”, which is the fraction of sample firms
making at least one acquisition, varies from 16.3% to 30.9%, with an average of 24% per year. In
addition, the last two columns show the mean and standard deviation for one-year lagged GDP
growth rates of 36 countries by fiscal year. There is a substantial year-to-year variation in
average GDP growth rates over time, from a high of 4.9% in 2008 to a low of -1.7% following
the financial crisis in 2010.
Panel B of Table 1 breaks down the sample by country. We categorize countries into high
GDP country and low GDP country. A country is defined as a high (low) GDP country when its
11

Cash is winsorized at the top and bottom 1% of the distribution. After examining the outliers, profitability is
winsorized at the top 1% and bottom 5%, and sales growth at the top 5% and bottom 1%. Because of the extreme
outliers, CARs are trimmed at the top and bottom 1% of the distribution.

10

mean real GDP per capita over the period of 1996 to 2013 is above (below) the median of mean
real GDP per capital of 36 countries. Countries range in size from Columbia, with an average of
7 firms per year, to the United States, with over 2,500 firms per year. The acquisition rate varies
substantially across countries as well, from a low of Hong Kong with an acquisition rate of
11.6%, to a high of Netherlands, in which firms make acquisitions in 35.2% of years. The large
difference in acquisition rates could reflect a number of factors, including legal or cultural
obstacles to acquisitions, or differences in reporting requirements, across countries that affect the
likelihood that we can observe a given acquisition, so that it makes it into our sample. Regardless
of the reason why they occur, these differences strongly suggest that it is important to control for
country specific factors in any equations of acquisition rates.
In addition, there is substantial variation in economic growth rates across countries.
China has the largest average growth rate, with an average of 9.6% while Italy has the smallest,
with a growth rate of 0.5%. Even within countries, GDP growth rates change over time at
different rates, with the standard deviation of GDP growth equal to 0.9% in Australia and 4.7%
in Greece.
Table 2 summarizes the characteristics of the acquirers in our sample. Since our focus is
on the factors that lead to acquisitions, we compare the characteristics of firms in acquisition
years to those in non-acquisition years. These comparisons between acquisition years and nonacquisition years include both cross-sectional differences in the likelihoods that different firms
will make acquisitions, and differences over time in the likelihood of a particular firm doing an
acquisition.
Table 2 indicates that there are stark differences between acquirers and non-acquirers.
Acquirers have about 50% larger total book assets. In addition, acquirers tend to be more

11

profitable and have higher sales growth. However, the differences in cash holdings, while
statistically significant, are small. In addiion, there is no noticeable difference in GDP growth
rates between acquirers and non-acquirers’ countries. This pattern could reflect the fact that some
firms in developed countries like US and UK, which compose 45% of the sample firms, have
relatively low GDP growth rates but a large number of acquisitions. To account for the different
level and volatility of GDP growth rates by country, we compare the difference in normalized
GDP growth rates between acquirers and non-acquirers. We find that acquisitions tend to occur
when the GDP growth, normalized by the historical mean and standard deviation, is higher than
usual.

3. Estimating the Effects of Liquidity and Macroeconomic Conditions on Acquisition
Likelihoods
3.1. Specification
Using this sample of firms and acquisitions, we estimate the likelihood that a firm makes
an acquisition in a particular year. Because we include interaction terms in some specifications
and there are well-known problems interpreting interacted coefficients in probit or logit
specifications (Ai and Norton (2003)), we estimate the equation using a linear probability model.
As our independent variable, we use our measure of corporate liquidity, a firm’s cash holdings
normalized by its assets.
An important consideration in designing an empirical specification to understand
acquisition decisions are the substantial cross-firm differences in both firms’ propensities to hold
cash and their likelihood to make acquisitions. As documented in Panel B of Table 1, firms’ cash
holdings vary noticeably across countries, as do the fraction of firms that make acquisitions.
There are a number of reasons for why such cross-country variation could exist, including tax,

12

regulatory and cultural factors. In addition to cross-country factors, there are firm-specific factors
that affect firms’ cash holdings (see Opler, Pinkowitz, Stulz, and Williamson (1999)). Because of
the importance of firm and country specific factors that affect both cash holdings and
acquisitiveness, we include firm-specific fixed effects into the specification. Consequently, our
results should be interpreted as estimates of the effect of additional cash on a particular firm’s
acquisition decisions, rather than on cross-firm differences.12
We also wish to control for other factors that potentially affect the likelihood that firms
make acquisitions. Larger firms generally have better access to capital and more synergies with
potential targets, both of which make it more likely to make acquisitions. For this reason, we
include Ln(Assets) and Ln(Assets)2 into the specification. In addition, more profitable firms and
ones that have been growing recently are more likely to make deals, so we also include
Profitability and Sales Growth in the equation. Finally, in a number of specifications, we include
measures of one-year lagged macroeconomic conditions in the acquirer’s home country; when
these variables are not included, we add year fixed effects to the equation to control for any
potential unmodeled factors that vary over time.

3.2. Acquirer Firms’ Liquidity and Acquisitions
We present estimates of this equation in Column 1 of Table 3. The statistically significant
coefficient of 0.272 on Cash means that the likelihood of an acquisition increases with additional
cash. Since the standard deviation of cash holdings is 0.14 (see Table 2), this equation implies
that a one standard deviation increase in cash holdings leads to about a 3.8 percentage point

12

Our main results hold when we use alternative specifications that include country and industry fixed effects rather
than firm fixed effects.

13

increase in the likelihood of an acquisition. Given the average acquisition rate of 24%, this
increase corresponds to about a 15.9% increase in the acquisition rate.
This finding replicates a well-known result from Harford (1999), who estimates similar
equations on large US corporations between 1977 and 1993. Our sample period begins in 1997,
after Harford’s ends, is from 36 countries and contains smaller as well as private acquirers. Our
sample, therefore, is both non-overlapping and very different in makeup from Harford’s. The fact
that cash holdings predict acquisition likelihoods in such different samples suggests that the
pattern is robust, and reflects the way that additional cash is associated with higher acquisition
rates for all types of firms.
The causal interpretation of this finding is that having more cash allows firms to make
more acquisitions. If financial conditions are strong, this effect could lead to a free cash flow
problem, and provide capital for managers to undertake acquisitions that shareholders would
prefer them not to take. If financial markets are weak and it is costly for firms to raise capital,
managers can use cash on the balance sheet to finance valuable investments at times when
accessing external capital markets would be difficult.
Alternatively, it could be that the observed relation between cash and acquisitions reflects
firms accumulating cash when their managers think it likely that future acquisitions will occur.
In other words, acquisitions could occur following cash accumulation not because the cash
affects financing policy, but because the cash is accumulated to pay for acquisitions that are
known to be occurring in the near future. The natural way to distinguish between these views is
to consider acquisition behavior following exogenous inflows of cash, which sometimes do
occur (for example, see Blanchard, Lopez de Silanes, and Shleifer (1994)). However, these

14

circumstances are rare, and for most firms, their cash holdings are determined endogenously as a
function of many factors, including the likelihood of future acquisitions.

3.3. The Impact of Macroeconomic Conditions
A potential approach to identifying the effect of cash on acquisitions comes from the
insight that while the quantity of cash that firms hold is under their control, the value of their
cash holdings is not. As Keynes (1936) originally noted, if financial markets allowed firms to
transact costlessly at assets’ fundamental values, then there would be no reason for firms to hold
cash. When macroeconomic conditions are strong, financial markets tend to work well. In good
times, therefore, cash becomes less important since financial markets approach Keynes’
benchmark in which transactions costs are negligible. However, when the economy is weak, it
becomes harder to raise capital externally through financial markets, and transactions costs tend
to be higher (see Erel, Julio, Kim, and Weisbach (2012) for evidence). Consequently, cash
becomes more valuable in bad economic times than in good times. We use this idea to identify
the effect of firms’ cash holdings on their acquisition decisions.
We first estimate the direct impact of macroeconomic conditions on acquisition activity
by adding the GDP growth in the acquirer’s country to the equation. Because of the international
nature of the sample, there is substantially more variation in this variable than there would be if
the data were only from one county, since macroeconomic conditions are not perfectly correlated
across countries. The results from this specification are presented in Column 2 of Table 3. They
indicate that GDP growth positively affects the likelihood that a firm makes an acquisition in a
particular year even after controlling for a firm’s cash holdings. The coefficient on GDP growth
of 0.343 implies that a one standard deviation increase in GDP growth (0.027) leads to about a

15

one percentage point increase in the likelihood a potential acquirer makes an acquisition. This
finding is consistent with the prior literature documenting the pro-cyclicality of acquisitions
(Harford (2005), Netter, Stegemoller, and Wintoki (2011)).
As an alternative specification, we replace GDP growth with our Low GDP Growth
indicator variable in Column 3 of Table 3. The results suggest that in unusually bad periods of
growth, it is 2.6 percentage points less likely that a firm makes an acquisition in a particular year.
This result also is consistent with the notion that acquisitions follow a pro-cyclical pattern.

3.4. Interactions of Cash and Macroeconomic Conditions
We next analyze the interaction of macroeconomic conditions with the effect of cash
holdings on acquisitions. Under the causal interpretation of the results in Table 3, we expect cash
holdings to have a larger effect on acquisition likelihoods during poor times than during normal
times, since cash holdings will serve to mitigate the impact of financial constraints.
Econometrically, in the equation of acquisition likelihoods, we expect to observe a negative
effect on the interaction between macroeconomic conditions and cash holdings. If cash causally
affects firms’ acquisition decisions, the extent to which it does should vary counter-cyclically.
In Column 1 of Table 4, we present estimates in which we add GDP growth interacted
with firms’ cash holdings to the prior specification. The estimated coefficient on this variable is 1.651, which is statistically significantly different from zero. This negative coefficient suggests
that the effect of cash on acquisitions is countercyclical. Cash holdings appear to affect
acquisition likelihoods more when the economy is doing poorly, consistent with the notion that

16

its value is higher when the economy is doing poorly and the cost of accessing external capital
markets is high.13
In Column 2 of Table 4, we measure macroeconomic conditions using the indicator
variable that indicates whether the GDP is substantially lower than its historical average and the
interaction of this indicator variable with firms’ cash holdings. Similar to the results in Column 1
using GDP growth, cash appears to affect acquisitions more during periods of extreme low
growth. While these periods contain fewer acquisitions, the effect of cash holdings mitigates this
effect, presumably by allowing firms to make acquisitions that they could not have financed if
they had to access external capital markets.

4. Factors Affecting the Impact of Corporate Liquidity over the Business Cycle
4.1. Firms’ Access to Capital and the Importance of Cash for Acquisitions
The argument that the value of cash varies over the business cycle depends on the idea
that macroeconomic conditions affect firms’ abilities to access capital markets. However, the
impact of macroeconomic conditions on firms’ access to capital varies substantially across firms.
For example, Erel, Julio, Kim, and Weisbach (2012) find that poorly rated firms decrease capital
raising substantially during market downturns, but highly rated firms actually increase capital
raising during these periods. Therefore, we expect cash to have a larger impact on the acquisition
decisions of lower-rated or non-rated firms during market downturns than on those of highly
rated firms.
In the remaining columns of Table 4, we re-estimate the equations from Columns 1 and 2
on the subsamples of investment grade firms and on firms with either a speculative rating or no

13

This result also holds when we restrict our sample to non-equity deals (i.e. deals financed at least partially by
cash). See Appendix Table 2.

17

rating. 14 Columns 3 and 5 present the results using GDP growth as the measure of
macroeconomic conditions, while the equations in Columns 4 and 6 use the indicator variable
indicating whether macroeconomic conditions are unusually bad.
The results in Columns 3 and 5 suggest that while more cash affects all firms’ acquisition
likelihoods similarly, the impact of macroeconomic conditions is very different between the two
groups. In the estimates in Column 3 using investment grade firms, there is no effect of GDP
growth on the likelihood of making an acquisition. In addition, the interaction of GDP growth
and cash affect does not affect acquisition likelihoods either. In contrast, in the estimates in
Column 5 using the subsample of speculative and unrated firms, GDP growth is strongly
positively related to the likelihood of an acquisition. For these firms, which are likely to be
relatively financially constrained, the effect of GDP growth on the likelihood of an acquisition is
mitigated to some extent if the firm has more cash. The coefficient on the interaction term
between GDP growth and cash holdings is negative and statistically significant at the 1% level.
The clear interpretation of this finding is that when the economic conditions are poor, firms
without an investment grade rating have a difficult time raising capital so are unlikely to make
acquisitions. However, if these firms have more cash, then their acquisition decisions become
less sensitive to macroeconomic conditions since they can finance acquisitions through their cash
holdings during downturns.
In Columns 4 and 6 we present estimates of the specification using the indicator variable
to indicate particularly low growth rates for the subsamples of firms with investment grade or
speculative/no rating. As with the specification using GDP growth rates, there are stark
differences between the estimates for the two sets of firms. The speculative and unrated firms

14

Ratings are taken from S&P Issuer Ratings as of the time of the potential acquisition. We obtain these ratings
from Capital IQ.

18

have strongly pro-cyclical acquisition behavior (Column 6), with the estimated likelihood of an
acquisition lower is when Low GDP Growth equals one. Higher cash lowers the macroeconomic
effect since the coefficient on the interaction of cash with Low GDP Growth is positive and
statistically significant. In contrast, there is no effect of Low GDP Growth for the investment
grade firms (Column 4).
These findings support the causal interpretation of our results, in which firms with limited
access to capital markets are less likely to make acquisitions during poor macroeconomic
conditions because of a lack of access to external financial markets. However, holding more cash
can mitigate this effect and provide financing for firms to make potentially valuable acquisitions
regardless of the financial conditions they face.

4.2. Diversifying and Related Acquisitions
We have focused our analysis on the likelihood that a firm makes an acquisition, without
controlling for the characteristics of the acquisition. Unfortunately, a downside of a large sample
such as the one we use is that it is difficult to know much detail about the acquirers and targets.
However, we do know if the acquirer and target are in the same industry as one another, so we
can classify each acquisition as either related or diversifying.15 The distinction between related
and diversifying acquisitions is likely to be relevant because substantial literature has
documented that diversifying acquisitions are more likely to be agency-motivated than
acquisitions of related companies (e.g. Graham, Lemmon, and Wolf (2002)) In addition,
diversifying acquisitions are more likely to be discretionary, while related ones are more likely to
be part of a long-term corporate strategy. Consequently, the extent to which cash affects the
15

We classify an acquisition as related if the target and acquiring firms have the same first two digits of the primary
U.S. SIC industry codes according to Zehpyr. Using this classification scheme, 13.6% firm-year observations are
defined as related acquisition years and 10.4% as diversifying acquisition years in our sample.

19

likelihood of related and diversifying acquisitions potentially provides insights into its role. In
particular, if cash holdings lead related acquisition deals to be less pro-cyclical, then it likely to
be mitigating financial constraints.
We estimate equations similar to those reported above that distinguish between related or
diversifying acquisitions. The distinction between related and diversifying acquisitions leads to
an empirical specification in which there are three possible outcomes: in any given year, a firm
can make a related acquisition, a firm can make a diversifying acquisition, or a firm does not
make any acquisitions.16 We estimate a multinomial logit model because we want to estimate
the way the firm chooses among these three options. We report estimates of this model in Table
5, with the base case being that the firm does not make any acquisitions. Each estimated
equation is presented in two columns in the table. Coefficients in the odd numbered columns
represent the impact of the dependent variable on the likelihood of a related acquisition relative
to the likelihood of no acquisition. In even numbered columns, they represent the likelihood of a
diversifying acquisition relative to no acquisition.
The estimates in Table 5 indicate that the likelihood of a related acquisition is less
sensitive to both cash holdings and to macroeconomic conditions than the likelihood of a
diversifying acquisition. As noted above, related acquisitions are more likely to be part of an
overall corporate strategy to invest in a particular area, while diversifying acquisitions are more
likely to be discretionary, in that they can be undertaken without affecting the firm’s other
businesses. The results presented in Table 3 suggest that better macroeconomic conditions and
higher cash holdings both increase the probability that a firm can finance a potential acquisition.
Therefore, the higher sensitivity of diversifying acquisitions to both cash holdings and

16

If an acquirer makes both a diversifying and a related acquisition in the same year, we consider that firm as
making a diversifying acquisition for the purposes of our statistical tests.

20

macroeconomic conditions suggest that being able to finance a deal more easily leads firms to
undertake more discretionary acquisitions. In addition, these higher sensitivities are consistent
with the notion that diversifying acquisitions are more likely be a consequence of agency
problems, since they are more likely to occur when financing is plentiful, in good
macroeconomic conditions and when the acquiring firm has more cash.

4.3. International Comparisons
In Table 6, we evaluate the extent to which the results are robust across different
countries. We first consider U.S. firms separately, since the U.S. is the largest country and the
subject of the most other studies. The results for the U.S., presented in Columns 1 and 2, are
similar to the full sample: cash increases the likelihood of acquisitions, GDP growth increases
the likelihood of acquisitions, and cash holdings mitigate the extent to which acquisitions are
pro-cyclical.
In Columns 3 and 4, we pool firms from all countries other than the U.S. and re-estimate
the equations on this sample. The estimates using this sample are also similar to those from the
full sample as well as those from U.S. firms. The pattern of coefficient signs and statistical
significance is the same, and the coefficients are close in magnitude to those using the full
sample and the U.S. firms.
In Columns 5, 6, 7 and 8, we split the sample by the GDP of the country where the firms
are located. Estimates for firms in High GDP Countries are presented in Columns 5 and 6, while
estimates for firms from Low GDP Countries, are presented in Columns 7 and 8.17 Again the
pattern is similar to the results for the full sample, and other subsamples. For the wealthier

17

The countries are classified based on the country’s GDP per capita relative to the median across countries. See
Table 2, Panel B, for the identities of the countries in each group.

21

countries, the signs and significance levels are the same as for the full sample. For the poorer
countries, higher cash holdings increase the likelihood a firm makes an acquisition, as does better
macroeconomic conditions. Unlike the other subsamples, the coefficient on the interaction
between cash and macroeconomic conditions is not statistically significantly different from zero.
However, the positive coefficient on the interaction term between Low GDP Growth and Cash
implies that high cash holdings mitigate the effect of negative impact of low GDP growth on
acquisition decisions. Overall, it appears that the pattern between liquidity, macroeconomic
conditions, and the likelihood of making an acquisition is robust across countries.

5. Quality of Acquisitions
The causal interpretation of the results presented above is that additional cash eases
financing constraints and allows firms to make value-increasing investments. The ability to make
value-increasing investments is particularly important when macroeconomic conditions are poor
and financial markets are relatively costly to access. However, when times are good and firms
can raise capital easily in the financial markets, excess cash becomes superfluous and could even
be harmful by exacerbating free cash flow problems.
The results we have presented so far concern the way in which the quantity of
acquisitions varies with firms’ cash holdings and business cycles. The view that cash holdings
can affect firms’ investments by relaxing financing constraints also has predictions for the
quality of acquisitions we observe. If firms are capital-rationed during poor macroeconomic
conditions, then we expect them to take only the highest quality acquisitions and ignore some
positive NPV ones. Therefore, during poor macroeconomic conditions, while we expect there to
be fewer deals, the ones that do occur should be of higher quality than those observed in better

22

economic times. Additional cash allows firms to undertake some of the deals that would have
been otherwise forsaken, which are likely to be positive NPV but less valuable than the ones that
would be taken with the capital constraints. Consequently, we expect to observe that during poor
macroeconomic conditions, higher cash holdings should be associated with lower quality
acquisitions.
Similarly, in normal times, we expect that firms should be able to finance relatively more,
if not all, valuable acquisitions. However, the increased access to finance in good times
potentially will lead firms to overinvest and to undertake poor quality acquisitions in addition to
good ones. Therefore, we expect acquisitions made during normal economic times to be lower
quality than average. More cash potentially exacerbates this problem, since it allows firms to
make acquisitions without having to raise external capital.

5.1. Announcement Day Cumulative Abnormal Returns
Measuring the success of acquisitions is difficult to do ex post, since target firms are
integrated in to acquirers, and one cannot separately identify the change in the performance of
the acquired firm. For this reason, it has become standard at least since Jensen and Ruback
(1983) to measure an acquisition’s performance by the acquirer’s abnormal stock movements
around the time of the announcement of the deal. We present these abnormal returns, as well as
other statistics about the sample of acquisitions, in Panel A of Table 7.
This panel indicates that the average cumulative abnormal return (CAR) around the time
of the acquisition is about 0.77%, regardless of whether we measure the returns in the 3 days
around the announcement or the 5 days around the announcement. This small positive
announcement return is similar to that reported by other studies that use samples similar to

23

ours.18 The positive acquirer’s CAR reflects the fact that the majority of our CAR sample is the
acquisition of private targets (93%) and acquirer CARs for acquisitions of private targets is tend
to be positive (see Fuller, Netter, and Stegemoller (2002)).
In Panel B of Table 7, we present univariate comparison of CARs by macroeconomic
conditions. Acquisitions that occur in low GDP growth times have lower CARs on overage, but
higher median CARs than those in normal times. However, these differences are not statistically
significant. In next section, we examine the difference in CARs by macroeconomic conditions in
multivariate setting.

5.2. Announcement Return Variation Across Cash Holdings and Macroeconomic Conditions
To evaluate the extent to which cash holdings and macroeconomic factors affect
announcement day abnormal returns, we estimate equations of these returns. In addition to
Acquirer Cash and the variables indicating the macroeconomic conditions, we include a number
of variables that also potentially affect announcement returns. In particular, our equation
contains: Acquirer Ln(Assets), Acquirer Ln(Assets)2, Acquirer Profitability, Acquirer Sales
Growth, the indicator variables indicating whether the deal was for public target, cross border or
related industry, as well as the return for the period prior to the deal (from trading says -210 to 10 relative to the announcement day). In addition, we include country, year and industry fixed
effects into the equation.19

18

See Table 6 of Betton, Eckbo, and Thorburn (2008) for a summary of the announcement day abnormal returns
found by a number of merger studies.
19
Previous studies document that the relative size of the target firms would affect the acquisition announcements
effects (e.g. Asquith, Bruner, and Mullins (1983), Travlos (1987), and Moeller, Schlingemann, and Stulz. (2004)). In
Appendix Table 3, we additionally control for the relative transaction value to acquirer’s total assets in the
regressions, and find the consistent results. Since in these equations, we have to drop about 45% of the deals because
of the missing transaction values, we do not include the relative target size as a control in our main regressions.

24

In Column 1 of Table 8, we estimate the way that acquirer CARs vary with the acquiring
firm’s cash holdings (but exclude macroeconomic variables from this specification). The
estimated coefficient on cash holdings is negative and statistically significantly different from
zero. Like the earlier finding on the relation between cash holdings and the likelihood of an
acquisition, this finding replicates a similar finding in Harford (1999) on a much larger and nonoverlapping sample. In Column 2, we include GDP growth into the specification. The estimated
coefficient on GDP growth is also negative and statistically significantly different from zero. In
Column 3, we replace GDP growth with the indicator variable indicating a low GDP; the
coefficient on this variable is not statistically significantly different from zero.
The finding on cash is consistent with both effects of liquidity. During normal times, cash
lowers returns by facilitating negative NPV acquisitions and making the free cash flow problem
worse. However, in bad times, it lowers the financing constraints firms face, enabling them to
take more positive NPV but less valuable acquisitions. Results on GDP growth are consistent
with this interpretation, which suggests that regardless of the incremental effect of cash, the level
of abnormal returns tends to be higher in worse markets.

6. Summary and Discussion
When financial managers make decisions about the liquidity of their balance sheets, an
important factor they consider is the possibility of shocks to their firms’ cost of raising external
capital that could affect future investment decisions. Higher liquidity, which usually comes in the
form of cash holdings, increases the ability of firms to invest without having to raise capital from
the external capital markets. However, it comes at the cost of exacerbating agency problems,
potentially leading to overinvestment. Since an important source of shocks to financial markets

25

are changes in macroeconomic conditions, an important role of corporate liquidity is to enable
firms to invest efficiently at different parts of the business cycle. This paper provides evidence
on the impact of liquidity management decisions by measuring the way that firms’ investments
respond to macroeconomic shocks as a function of the quantity of cash that they have on their
balance sheets.
Using a sample of 12,583 firms from 36 countries between 1997 and 2014, we estimate
the likelihood that our sample firms make at least one acquisition in a particular year. Consistent
with the notion that mergers tend to follow pro-cyclical waves, we find that the likelihood of an
acquisition increases with the GDP growth in the country where a firm is located. However, as
firms’ cash holdings increase, this effect becomes smaller, suggesting that higher cash holdings
mitigate the effect of business cycles on firms’ acquisitiveness. Larger cash holdings appear to
enable firms to make valuable acquisitions when they are available, even if there is a recession
that increases the cost of external finance. This effect holds for U.S. firms and for firms from
other countries. Moreover, it is largest in firms with speculative or no rating, for which capital
market downturns have the largest impact on the cost of external financing.
We also consider the way that the abnormal returns on the announcements of these
acquisitions vary with both cash holdings and macroeconomic conditions. Our estimates indicate
that abnormal returns are negatively related to the country’s GDP growth, so they are higher
during market downturns than when the economy is doing well. This result is consistent with the
view that when times are good, firms can raise capital and potentially overinvest. However,
when times are bad, capital is rationed so the only deals that get done are the most profitable
ones. In addition, more cash is associated with lower abnormal returns, suggesting that a more
liquid balance sheet eases capital rationing during bad times but worsens free cash flow problems

26

during good times. Overall, the abnormal return results are consistent with the estimates of the
equations predicting acquisition likelihoods; they suggest that cash holdings provide valuable
liquidity that enables firms to make acquisitions during poor macroeconomic conditions but do
so at the cost of providing too much liquidity during good conditions.
The results in this paper have implications for our understanding of both corporate
liquidity and the determinants of mergers and acquisitions. Much of the prior literature on
liquidity focuses on the level of cash holdings, which serve as a hedge against potential financial
shocks. This literature generally takes an ex ante perspective on liquidity management in that it
considers the way firms choose their liquidity prior to any potential shocks. We extend this
literature by using an ex post approach in which we examine the way in which liquidity affects
firms once the shocks have occurred. Subsequent to shocks to firms’ financial conditions,
differences in cash positions have a meaningful impact on firms’ abilities to invest.
In addition, the paper adds to our understanding of merger waves, which according to
Brealey, Myers, and Allen (2015), is one of the most important unsolved questions in finance.
The two leading (non-mutually exclusive) explanations for pro-cyclical merger waves are that
opportunities for profitable acquisitions vary over the business cycle, and that acquirers’
financial resources vary over the business cycle. Our results provide evidence suggesting that the
second explanation is at least part of the story: since having more cash can lessen the procyclicality of acquisition decisions, it must be that part of the underlying reason why mergers are
pro-cyclical is the inability of firms to finance deals during poor times. As such, our results
suggest that the argument in the private equity literature that the cyclicality of private equity
backed deals is a function of financing constraints and agency costs is more general, and applies
to non-private equity backed deals as well.

27

Firms decide to hold cash to ensure that they can invest efficiently, even at times when
the cost of accessing external financial markets is extremely high. We provide evidence
suggesting that liquidity does have this effect, as firms with higher liquidity appear to be less
affected by market downturns in their investment decision. The cost of doing so is that cash can
facilitate unprofitable acquisitions during other times. Yet, a number of questions remain. While
we focus our analysis on acquisitions, it is not clear whether cash holdings affect other types of
investments during market downturns? Do other forms of liquidity such as lines of credit affect
investments over the business cycle in the same manner as cash holdings? Can we identify if
firms on average have the optimal level of cash, or if it is too high or too low in most firms?
Finally, for a typical firm, does incremental cash add or destroy value? The answers to these and
other related questions would be excellent topics for future research.

28

References

Acharya, Viral V., Heitor Almeida and Murillo Campello (2007) “Is Cash Negative Debt? A Hedging
Perspective on Corporate Financial Policies,” Journal of Financial Intermediation, 16, 515-554.
Ai, Chunrong, and Edward C. Norton (2003), “Interaction Terms in Logit and Probit Models,” Economics
Letters, 80, 123-129.
Almeida, Heitor, Murillo Campello, Igor Cunha, and Michael S. Weisbach (2014) “Corporate Liquidity
Management: A Conceptual Framework and Survey,” Annual Review of Financial Economics, 6, 135-162.
Almeida, Heitor, Murillo Campello, and Michael S. Weisbach (2004) “The Cash Flow Sensitivity of
Cash,” The Journal of Finance, 59, 1777-1804.
Asquith, Paul, Robert F. Bruner, and David W. Mullins (1983) “The Gains to Bidding Firms from
Mergers,” Journal of Financial Economics, 11, 121-139.
Axelson, Ulf, Tim Jenkinson, Per Strömberg, and Michael S. Weisbach (2013) “Borrow Cheap, Buy
High? The Determinants of Leverage and Pricing in Buyouts,” The Journal of Finance, 68, 2223-2267.
Axelson, Ulf, Per Strömberg, and Michael S. Weisbach (2009) “Why are Buyouts Levered? The Financial
Structure of Private Equity Firms,” The Journal of Finance, 64, 1549-1582.
Bates, Thomas W., Kathleen M. Kahle, and René M. Stulz (2009) “Why do U.S. firms hold so much
more cash than they used to?” The Journal of Finance 64, 1985–2021.
Betton, Sandra, B. Espen Eckbo, and Karin Thorburn (2008) “Corporate Takeovers,” in Handbook of
Corporate Finance: Empirical Corporate Finance, Volume 2.
Blanchard, Olivier Jean, Florencio Lopez-di-Silanes, and Andrei Shleifer (1994) “What Do Firms Do
with Cash Windfalls?” Journal of Financial Economics 36, 337-360.
Brealey, Richard, Stewart Myers and Franklin Allen (2015) Principles of Corporate Finance, McGraw
Hill.
Campello, Murillo, Erasmo Giambona, John R. Graham, and Campbell R. Harvey (2011) “Liquidity
management and corporate investment during a financial crisis,” Review of Financial Studies 24, 1944–
1979.
Covas, Francisco and Wouter J. Den Haan (2013) “The Cyclical Behavior of Debt and Equity Finance,”
American Economic Review.
Cunha, Igor (2015) “Internal vs. External Cash: Evidence on M&As and Share Repurchases,” Working
Paper, University of Kentucky.
Duchin, Ran, Thomas Gilbert, Jarrad Harford and Christopher Hrdlicka (2017) “Precautionary Savings
with Risky Assets: When Cash is not Cash,” The Journal of Finance, forthcoming.
Erel, Isil, Brandon Julio, Woojin Kim and Michael S. Weisbach (2012) “Macroeconomic Conditions and
Capital Raising,” Review of Financial Studies, 25, 341-376.

29

Fuller, Kathleen, Jeffry Netter, and Mike Stegemoller, (2002) “What do returns to acquiring firms tell us?
Evidence from firms that make many acquisitions,” The Journal of Finance, 57(4), 1763-1793.
Graham, John R. and Campbell R. Harvey (2001) “The Theory and Practice of Corporate Finance:
Evidence from the Field,” Journal of Financial Economics, 60, 187-243.
Graham, John R., Lemmon, Michael L., and Wolf, Jack G. (2002) “Does corporate diversification destroy
value?” The Journal of Finance, 57(2), 695-720.
Harford, Jarrad (1999) “Corporate Cash Reserves and Acquisitions,” The Journal of Finance, 54, 19691997.
Harford, Jarrad (2005) “What Drives Merger Waves?” Journal of Financial Economics, 77, 529-560.
Hoberg, Gerard, Gordon Phillips, and Nagpurnanand Prabhala (2014) “Product market threats, payouts,
and financial flexibility,” The Journal of Finance, 69, 293–324.
Jensen, Michael C. (1986) “Agency Costs of Free Cash Flow, Corporate Finance, and Takeovers,”
American Economic Review, 76, 323-329.
Jensen, Michael C. and Richard Ruback (1983) “The Market for Corporate Control: The Scientific
Evidence,” Journal of Financial Economics.
Kahle, Kathleen M. and René M. Stulz (2013) “Access to Capital, Investment, and the Financial Crisis,"
Journal of Financial Economics 110, 280-299.
Keynes, John Maynard (1936), The General Theory of Employment, Interest and Money, (McMillan,
London).
Korajczyk, R. A., and Amnon Levy (2003) “Capital Structure Choice: Macroeconomic Conditions and
Financial Constraints,” Journal of Financial Economics, 68, 75–109.
Lang, L. H. P., René M. Stulz, and Ralph A. Walkling (1991) “A Test of the Free Cash Flow Hypothesis:
The Case of Bidder Returns,” Journal of Financial Economics 29, 315–335
Lehn, Kenneth, and Annette Poulsen (1989) “Free Cash Flow and Stockholder Gains in Going Private
Transactions,” The Journal of Finance 44, 771-787.
Lin, Chen, Thomas Schmid, and Michael S. Weisbach (2017) “How Production Risk and Flexibility
Affect Liquidity Management: Evidence from Electricity Generating Firms,” Working Paper.
Lins, Karl V., Henri Servaes, and Peter Tufano (2010) What drives corporate liquidity? An international
survey of cash holdings and lines of credit, The Journal of Financial Economics 98, 160–176.
Morellec, Erwan, Boris Nikolov, and Francesca Zucchi (2014) Competition, cash holdings, and financing
decisions, Working Paper, Swiss Finance Institute.
Moeller, Sara B., Frederik P. Schlingemann, and René M. Stulz, (2004) “Firm size and the gains from
acquisitions,” Journal of Financial Economics, 73(2), 201-228.

30

Myers, Stewart C. and Nicholas Majluf (1984) “Corporate Financing and Investment Decisions When
Firms Have Information that Investors Do Not Have,” Journal of Financial Economics, 13, 187-221.
Netter, Jeffry, Mike Stegemoller and Jide Wintoki (2011) “Implications of Data Screens on Merger and
Acquisition Analysis: A Large Sample Study of Mergers and Acquisitions from 1992 to 2009,” Review of
Financial Studies.
Opler, Tim, Lee Pinkowitz, René M. Stulz, and Rohan Williamson (1999), “The Determinants and
Implications of Corporate Cash Holdings,” Journal of Financial Economics, 52, 3-46.
Passov, Richard (2003) “How Much Cash Does Your Company Need?” Harvard Business Review,
November, 1-8.
Richardson, Scott (2006) “Over-Investment of Free Cash Flow,” Review of Accounting Studies, 11, 159189.
Travlos, Nickolaos (1987) “Corporate Takeover Bids, Methods of Payment, and Bidding Firms' Stock
Returns,” The Journal of Finance, 42, 943-963.

31

Table 1: Sample of acquisitions in 36 countries during the period from 1997 to 2014
This table displays statistics on sample firms in 36 countries from 1997 to 2014, with at least one year of financial
data available in OSIRIS. The sample includes firms that make at least one acquisition during the fiscal year 1997
and 2014 reported by the Zephyr database. Financial firms and firms with total assets less than 1 million USD are
excluded. Panel A presents the distribution of sample firms tabulated by fiscal year. The acquisition rate is
calculated as the percentage of firms that make at least one acquisition during the fiscal year. We calculate mean and
standard deviation of GDP growth each year for 36 countries and GDP growth rate is lagged by one year. Panel B
presents the distribution of sample firms tabulated by acquirer country. A country is defined as high (low) GDP
country if its average real GDP per capita over the period of 1996 and 2013 is above (below) the median of average
GDP per capita of 36 countries. Average number of firms by year and average annual acquisition rate are calculated
as annual averages over the sample period by each country. For each country, we calculate mean and standard
deviation (Std) of GDP growth rates during 1996 and 2013.

Panel A. Sample of acquisitions by year

Year
1997
1998
1999
2000
2001
2002
2003
2004
2005
2006
2007
2008
2009
2010
2011
2012
2013
2014
Total

Total
Number of
Countries
17
22
23
29
31
33
35
36
36
36
36
36
36
36
36
35
35
33
36

Total
Number of
Firms
3922
4719
5254
6596
7169
7556
7971
8168
8303
8613
8722
8683
8568
8300
8065
7834
7658
3773
12583

Acquisition
Rate
16.3%
19.9%
21.1%
30.9%
26.2%
24.0%
22.9%
27.0%
27.3%
27.2%
27.8%
22.7%
18.9%
21.1%
22.4%
21.3%
22.6%
29.3%
24.0%

32

Mean GDP
Growth
4.2%
4.6%
1.8%
3.8%
5.1%
2.2%
2.8%
2.8%
4.6%
4.0%
4.8%
4.9%
1.9%
-1.7%
4.3%
3.0%
1.8%
2.3%
3.2%

Std GDP
Growth
2.7%
2.2%
4.4%
3.1%
2.2%
1.8%
2.2%
2.3%
2.1%
2.4%
2.3%
2.7%
2.7%
3.8%
3.7%
3.0%
3.0%
2.6%
3.2%

Panel B. Sample of acquisitions by country

Sample
Period

Average
Number of
Firms by
Year

Average
Annual
Acquisition
Rate

Total
Number of
Acquisitions

Mean GDP
Growth
1996-2013

Std GDP
Growth
1996-2013

Mean GDP
per capita
1996-2013

High GDP Country
Australia
Austria
Belgium
Canada
Denmark
Finland
France
Germany
Ireland
Japan
Luxembourg
Netherlands
Norway
Singapore
Sweden
Switzerland
United Kingdom
USA

1998-2014
1997-2014
1997-2014
1998-2014
1997-2014
1997-2014
1997-2014
1997-2014
1997-2014
2000-2014
1998-2014
1997-2014
1997-2014
1998-2014
1997-2014
1997-2014
1997-2014
1997-2014

303.7
40.6
67.9
442.8
60.5
81.2
313.7
285.9
44.2
553.9
13.0
108.0
72.6
147.8
164.5
116.8
717.6
2563.6

23.9%
22.0%
26.8%
23.6%
22.0%
32.2%
28.3%
22.1%
33.9%
13.7%
22.1%
35.2%
25.8%
12.2%
29.9%
25.2%
32.0%
25.8%

1939
227
536
2573
321
914
2407
1621
553
1262
67
1306
456
429
1474
823
6809
18856

3.3%
1.9%
1.8%
2.6%
1.2%
2.4%
1.7%
1.3%
4.7%
0.8%
3.6%
1.9%
2.1%
5.7%
2.4%
1.9%
2.1%
2.5%

0.9%
1.8%
1.6%
1.8%
2.2%
3.4%
1.6%
2.2%
4.6%
2.2%
3.6%
2.3%
1.7%
4.4%
2.6%
1.6%
1.8%
1.9%

47529
43919
41801
45293
56682
43088
39354
39576
45909
41642
94878
47437
84975
38835
47838
69770
37283
46555

Low GDP Country
Brazil
Chile
China
Colombia
Greece
Hong Kong
India
Indonesia
Israel
Italy
Malaysia
Mexico
New Zealand
Peru
Philippines
Republic of Korea
South Africa
Spain

2002-2014
2003-2013
2003-2014
2002-2014
1997-2011
2000-2014
2000-2014
2001-2013
1998-2014
1997-2014
2000-2014
2000-2014
2000-2014
2004-2014
1999-2014
2001-2014
1997-2014
1997-2014

82.3
33.1
283.5
7.0
43.5
31.3
251.5
17.4
66.0
81.1
308.8
37.9
40.6
12.0
16.4
104.4
67.9
64.2

20.2%
14.8%
12.2%
18.4%
14.7%
11.6%
15.9%
15.8%
15.3%
21.2%
16.8%
17.9%
23.3%
17.7%
13.3%
13.2%
16.6%
23.3%

310
67
532
21
140
63
729
35
202
380
1082
157
162
25
46
228
263
363

3.2%
4.2%
9.6%
3.5%
0.9%
3.6%
6.9%
4.2%
3.9%
0.5%
4.8%
3.0%
2.6%
4.9%
4.6%
4.4%
3.1%
2.1%

2.1%
2.3%
1.8%
2.6%
4.7%
3.7%
2.2%
4.5%
2.3%
2.1%
4.0%
2.8%
1.8%
2.9%
2.1%
3.5%
1.7%
2.7%

9722
11321
3015
5524
25230
27361
1017
2637
27935
35940
7955
8624
32065
4081
1857
18225
6758
29439

Total

1997-2014

7215.2

23.8%

47378

3.2%

3.2%

32530

Country

33

Table 2: Summary Statistics on Acquirer Characteristics
This table presents summary statistics for the accounting variables of the acquirers in the sample. The sample includes firm-year observations from OSIRIS of
the firms that make at least one acquisition between 1997 and 2014. Firm-year observations are categorized into non-acquisition years and acquisition years.
Total Assets are in USD million. We normalize the GDP growth by subtracting the mean and scaling by the standard deviation calculated from previous 20 years
of GDP Growth data of each country. Low GDP growth is an indicator variable for the years when the normalized GDP growth is in bottom 20% of the countryyear distribution. Firm-level variables and GDP growth variables are lagged by one year. Variable definitions are provided in the Appendix A. We assess the
differences in means using the mean difference test and medians using the Wilcoxon rank-sum test. The symbols ***, **, and * denote statistical significance at
the 1%, 5%, and 10% levels. + denotes cases where two sample have the same medians.
Total

Non-acquisition Year

Acquisition Year

Mean

Median

Std

Mean

Median

Mean

Median

Total Assets
Cash
Profitability
Sales Growth
Investment Grade
Speculative Grade
Unrated
GDP Growth
Normalized GDP Growth
Low GDP Growth

3,409.58
0.1235
0.0951
0.1582
0.0925
0.0716
0.8359
0.0279
-0.3462
0.2095

297.14
0.0745
0.1046
0.0896
0.0000
0.0000
1.0000
0.0267
-0.1784
0.0000

16,198.81
0.1396
0.1244
0.3524
0.2898
0.2578
0.3704
0.0271
1.2040
0.4070

2997.17
0.1229
0.0898
0.1451
0.0791
0.0685
0.8524
0.0283
-0.3583
0.2169

263.56
0.0742
0.1000
0.0815
0.0000
0.0000
1.0000
0.0267
-0.1784
0.0000

4,716.98***
0.1256**
0.1117***
0.1996***
0.1353***
0.0814***
0.7833***
0.0268***
-0.3078***
0.1861***

428.17***
0.0756***
0.1187***
0.1159***
0.0000+
0.0000+
1.0000+
0.0267+
-0.1553***
0.0000+

Observations

129,874

98,730

34

31,144

Table 3: The effect of cash on the probability that a firm acquires during the fiscal year
This table presents estimates from equations of the likelihood that a firm acquires during the fiscal year. The
estimation is from the OLS regression, where the dependent variable is the indicator of the fiscal year of making at
least one acquisition. All firm-level controls and macroeconomic variables are lagged by one year. GDP growth is
included in column (2), and Low GDP Growth is included in column (3). Low GDP growth is an indicator variable
for the years when the normalized GDP growth is in bottom 20% of the country-year distribution. We normalize the
GDP growth by subtracting the mean and scaling by the standard deviation calculated from previous 20 years of
GDP Growth data of each country. Definitions and sources of other variables are provided in Appendix A. Country,
year, and industry fixed effects are included in column (1). All regressions include firm fixed effects. Year fixed
effect is included in column (1). Standard errors are corrected for clustering of observations at the firm level and
associated t-statistics are in parentheses. The symbols ***, **, and * denote statistical significance at the 1%, 5%,
and 10% levels.
(1)

(2)
D(Acquire)
Full Sample

(3)

0.272***
(18.47)

0.276***
(18.57)
0.343***
(5.75)

0.275***
(18.50)

Dependent Variable:
Sample:
Cash
GDP Growth
Low GDP Growth
Ln(Asset)
Ln(Asset)2
Profitability
Sales Growth

Year FE
Firm FE
Observations
Adj-R2

0.029***
(4.94)
-0.002***
(-3.67)
0.310***
(18.89)
0.034***
(8.10)

0.034***
(5.71)
-0.002***
(-3.11)
0.288***
(17.44)
0.031***
(7.40)

-0.026***
(-8.62)
0.034***
(5.85)
-0.002***
(-3.27)
0.287***
(17.41)
0.031***
(7.44)

Y
Y

N
Y

N
Y

129,874
0.115

129,874
0.105

129,874
0.105

35

Table 4: The effect of cash on the probability that a firm acquires during the fiscal year by
macroeconomic conditions
This table presents estimates from equations of the probability that a firm acquires during the fiscal year. The
estimation is from the OLS regression, where the dependent variable is the indicator of the fiscal year of making at
least one acquisition. All firm-level controls and macroeconomic variables are lagged by one year. GDP growth is
included in columns (1), (3), (5), and Low GDP Growth is included in columns (2), (4), (6). Low GDP growth is an
indicator variable for the years when the normalized GDP growth is in bottom 20% of the country-year distribution.
We normalize the GDP growth by subtracting the mean and scaling by the standard deviation calculated from
previous 20 years of GDP Growth data of each country. The sample is divided into investment grade firms in
columns (3) and (4) and speculative grade and unrated firms in columns (5) and (6). Definitions and sources of other
variables are provided in Appendix A. All regressions include firm fixed effects. Standard errors are corrected for
clustering of observations at the firm level and associated t-statistics are in parentheses. The symbols ***, **, and *
denote statistical significance at the 1%, 5%, and 10% levels.
(1)
Dependent Variable:
Sample:

Cash
GDP Growth
Cash x GDP Growth

0.326***
(17.24)
0.559***
(7.23)
-1.651***
(-4.30)

Profitability
Sales Growth

Observations
Adj-R2

(4)
D(Acquire)
Investment Grade

0.257***
(16.63)

0.033***
(5.61)
-0.002***
(-2.95)
0.287***
(17.39)
0.031***
(7.48)

-0.038***
(-9.52)
0.102***
(4.46)
0.033***
(5.71)
-0.002***
(-3.12)
0.287***
(17.41)
0.031***
(7.48)

129,874
0.105

129,874
0.106

Cash x Low GDP Growth

Ln(Asset)2

(3)

Full Sample

Low GDP Growth

Ln(Asset)

(2)

0.319**
(2.48)
0.157
(0.46)
0.541
(0.17)

36

0.373***
(2.93)

(5)

(6)

Speculative Grade &
Unrated
0.331***
(17.21)
0.591***
(7.39)
-1.743***
(-4.45)

0.257***
(16.43)

0.156*
(1.65)
-0.009*
(-1.82)
0.560***
(5.07)
0.042*
(1.74)

0.001
(0.09)
-0.227
(-1.54)
0.155
(1.64)
-0.010*
(-1.83)
0.558***
(5.04)
0.042*
(1.75)

0.029***
(4.43)
-0.001*
(-1.73)
0.277***
(16.56)
0.029***
(7.00)

-0.042***
(-9.89)
0.115***
(4.94)
0.029***
(4.48)
-0.001*
(-1.83)
0.278***
(16.59)
0.029***
(6.98)

12,019
0.179

12,019
0.180

117,855
0.0926

117,855
0.0930

Table 5: The effect of cash on the probability that a firm makes related-industry or diversifying acquisitions during the fiscal year by macroeconomic
conditions – Multinomial logit
This table presents estimates from equations of the probability that a firm makes different types of acquisitions during the fiscal year. The estimation is from the multinomial logit
regression, in which the dependent variable includes the indicator of making related-industry acquisitions, diversifying acquisition, or no acquisitions (base outcome) during the
fiscal year. An acquisition is defined as a related-industry acquisition if the first 2-digit of the primary U.S. SIC code of a target is the same as that of the acquiring firm, and as a
diversifying acquisition, otherwise. Definitions and sources of other variables are provided in Appendix A. All regressions include country fixed effects. Standard errors are
corrected for clustering of observations at the firm level and associated t-statistics are in parentheses. The symbols ***, **, and * denote statistical significance at the 1%, 5%, and
10% levels.

Dependent Variable:
Cash
GDP Growth

(1)
Related
0.454***
(6.64)
-0.623
(-1.50)

(2)
Diversifying
1.431***
(16.80)
4.676***
(9.17)

Cash x GDP Growth

(3)
Related
0.487***
(4.97)
-0.474
(-0.92)
-1.153
(-0.50)

(4)
Diversifying
1.527***
(12.67)
5.123***
(8.06)
-3.463
(-1.16)

(5)
Related
0.460***
(6.74)

(6)
Diversifying
1.419***
(16.62)

(7)
Related
0.368***
(4.97)

(8)
Diversifying
1.357***
(15.12)

-0.057***
(-2.71)

-0.288***
(-11.78)

-0.331***
(-10.40)
0.350**
(2.08)
0.297***
(9.59)
-0.005*
(-1.88)
1.481***
(14.49)
0.475***
(15.98)

Ln(Asset)

0.000
(0.01)

0.298***
(9.63)

0.000
(0.01)

0.298***
(9.62)

0.002
(0.08)

0.298***
(9.63)

-0.118***
(-4.22)
0.477***
(3.30)
0.000
(0.00)

Ln(Asset)2

0.002
(1.20)
0.940***
(12.47)
0.450***
(18.55)

-0.005*
(-1.87)
1.475***
(14.45)
0.465***
(15.53)

0.002
(1.21)
0.940***
(12.47)
0.450***
(18.55)

-0.005*
(-1.86)
1.474***
(14.44)
0.465***
(15.55)

0.002
(1.18)
0.927***
(12.31)
0.440***
(18.24)

-0.005*
(-1.91)
1.482***
(14.49)
0.474***
(15.96)

0.002
(1.25)
0.928***
(12.32)
0.441***
(18.27)

Low GDP Growth
Cash x Low GDP Growth

Profitability
Sales Growth

Observations
2
Pseudo R
Chi-square
Differences in Coefficients
Cash
GDP Growth
Cash x GDP Growth
Low GDP Growth
Cash x Low GDP Growth

129,874

129,874

129,874

129,874

0.0511
5357
(1)-(2)
-0.977***
-5.299***

0.0511
5364
(3)-(4)
-1.040***
-5.597***
2.311

0.0513
5418
(5)-(6)
-0.959***

0.0513
5442
(7)-(8)
-0.989***

0.231***

0.213***
0.128

37

Table 6: The effect of cash on the probability that a firm acquires during the fiscal year by macroeconomic conditions by country
This table presents estimates from equations of the probability that a firm acquires during the fiscal year. The estimation is from the OLS regression, where the dependent variable
is the indicator of the fiscal year of making at least one acquisition. All firm-level controls and macroeconomic variables are lagged by one year. GDP growth is included in
columns (1), (3), (5), (7), and Low GDP Growth is included in columns (2), (4), (6), (8). Low GDP growth is an indicator variable for the years when the normalized GDP growth
is in bottom 20% of the country-year distribution. We normalize the GDP growth by subtracting the mean and scaling by the standard deviation calculated from previous 20 years
of GDP Growth data of each country. The sample is divided into U.S. firms in columns (1) and (2), non-U.S. firms in columns (3) and (4), firms in high GDP countries in (5) and
(6) and those in low GDP countries in columns (7) and (8). A country is defined as high (low) GDP country if its average real GDP per capita over the period of 1996 and 2013 is
above (below) the median of average GDP per capita of 36 countries. Definitions and sources of other variables are provided in Appendix A. All regressions include firm fixed
effects. Standard errors are corrected for clustering of observations at the firm level and associated t-statistics are in parentheses. The symbols ***, **, and * denote statistical
significance at the 1%, 5%, and 10% levels.
(1)
Dependent Variable:
Sample:
Cash
GDP Growth
Cash x GDP Growth

(2)
U.S.

0.301***
(9.64)
0.344**
(2.07)
-1.871**
(-2.33)

Low GDP Growth

(3)

(4)
Non-U.S.

0.231***
(9.58)

0.345***
(14.14)
0.663***
(7.58)
-1.523***
(-3.45)

(5)

(6)

D(Acquire)
High GDP Country

0.279***
(13.95)

Low GDP Country
0.340***
(5.05)
0.532***
(3.72)
-0.648
(-0.74)

0.285***
(7.01)

Ln(Asset)

0.060***
(6.14)

Ln(Asset)2

-0.001
(-1.00)
0.265***
(10.32)
0.025***
(3.66)

-0.001
(-1.13)
0.265***
(10.33)
0.025***
(3.62)

-0.002***
(-3.30)
0.282***
(13.22)
0.038***
(7.48)

-0.002***
(-3.35)
0.283***
(13.28)
0.038***
(7.38)

-0.001
(-1.38)
0.296***
(16.60)
0.033***
(7.23)

-0.001*
(-1.70)
0.296***
(16.57)
0.033***
(7.10)

-0.004***
(-3.38)
0.204***
(4.81)
0.022**
(2.38)

-0.004***
(-3.36)
0.214***
(5.06)
0.024***
(2.68)

Observations

46,145

46,145

83,729

83,729

107,202

107,202

22,672

22,672

2

0.118

0.118

0.0996

0.100

0.115

0.115

0.00287

0.00242

Profitability
Sales Growth

Adj-R

0.018**
(2.40)

0.254***
(15.23)

(8)

-0.022***
(-3.34)
0.094***
(2.76)
0.061***
(6.27)

Cash x Low GDP Growth

-0.048***
(-9.61)
0.099***
(3.25)
0.018**
(2.42)

0.334***
(16.79)
0.633***
(6.73)
-2.310***
(-4.97)

(7)

38

0.027***
(4.28)

-0.041***
(-9.27)
0.102***
(4.21)
0.029***
(4.57)

0.050***
(3.37)

-0.026***
(-2.63)
0.122*
(1.87)
0.048***
(3.25)

Table 7: Summary Statistics on Cumulative Abnormal Returns around Acquisition
Announcements
The table presents the summary statistics on deal-level information including the acquirer firms’ cumulative
abnormal returns around acquisition announcements. The sample includes completed deals, where acquirers owned
less than 50% shares prior to the announcement and acquired more than 50% shares. Transactions by the financial
firms and those by the acquirers with total assets less than 1 million USD are excluded. Panel A includes summary
statistics of the sample of acquisitions reported in the Zephyr database in 36 countries announced from 1997 to
2014. All firm-level controls and macroeconomic variables are from the fiscal year end prior to the announcement
date. CAR[-1, +1] and CAR[-2, +2] are in percentage points. We assess whether the mean of CAR is different from
zero using t-test and the median using the sign rank test. In Panel B, we present the mean and median cumulative
abnormal returns of subsample firms divided based on acquirer cash and macroeconomic conditions. Low GDP
growth is an indicator variable for the years when the normalized GDP growth is in bottom 20% of the country-year
distribution. We normalize the GDP growth by subtracting the mean and scaling by the standard deviation calculated
from previous 20 years of GDP growth data of each country. Low (High) Cash is defined as the acquirer firms with
the cash to total asset ratio is below (above) the median of the distribution every year by country. We assess the
differences in means using the mean difference test and medians using the Wilcoxon-Mann-Whitney test. The
symbols ***, **, and * denote statistical significance at the 1%, 5%, and 10% levels.

Panel A. Summary statistics on deal-level characteristics
Count

Mean

Median

Std

Acquirer CAR[-1, +1]

33410

0.779***

0.293***

5.518

Acquirer CAR[-2, +2]

33257

0.769***

0.315***

6.517

Acquirer Cash

33410

0.120

0.074

0.131

33410

6.416

6.390

2.207

33410

46.030

40.832

29.250

Acquirer Profitability

33410

0.117

0.124

0.117

Acquirer Sales Growth

33410

0.197

0.117

0.330

Public Target

33410

0.069

0.000

0.254

Cross Border

33410

0.382

0.000

0.486

Related Industry

33410

0.516

1.000

0.500

Return[-210, -10]

33410

0.203

0.163

0.424

Deal Value (USD Million)

18773

327.760

22.285

2592.843

Relative Deal Value

18773

0.215

0.057

0.516

Acquirer Ln(Asset)
Acquirer Ln(Asset)

2

39

Panel B. Univariate CAR by macroeconomic conditions
Low GDP growth (A)

Normal Time (B)

Diff. (A-B)

N

Mean

Median

N

Mean

Median

Mean

Median

CAR[-1, +1]

6181

0.720***

0.356***

27229

0.793***

0.280***

-0.073

0.076

Acquirer Cash

6181

0.129

0.085

27229

0.118

0.072

0.011***

0.013***

40

Table 8: The effect of cash on 3-day CAR around the acquisition announcement date
This table presents estimates from equations of the acquirer firm’s announcement returns. The estimation is from the
OLS regression, where the dependent variable is the acquiring firm’s cumulative abnormal returns from day -1 to
day +1 relative to the acquisition announcement date. Abnormal returns are calculated from the market model
estimated from day –260 to day –100 relative to the announcement date (no less than 60 days). All firm-level
controls and macroeconomic variables are from the fiscal year end prior to the announcement date. GDP growth is
included in column (2), and Low GDP Growth is included in column (3). Low GDP growth is an indicator variable
for the years when the normalized GDP growth is in bottom 20% of the country-year distribution. We normalize the
GDP growth by subtracting the mean and scaling by the standard deviation calculated from previous 20 years of
GDP growth data of each country. Definitions and sources of other variables are provided in Appendix A. Country,
year, and industry fixed effects are included in column (1). Country and industry fixed effects are included in
columns (2) and (3). Standard errors are corrected for clustering of observations at the acquirer firm level and
associated t-statistics are in parentheses. The symbols ***, **, and * denote statistical significance at the 1%, 5%,
and 10% levels.
(1)
Dependent Variable:
Acquirer Cash

(2)
Acquirer CAR[-1,+1]

-0.793**
(-2.47)

GDP Growth

-0.781**
(-2.44)
-2.996*
(-1.92)

Low GDP Growth

(3)

-0.762**
(-2.38)

Acquirer Ln(Asset)

-0.658***
(-7.61)

-0.658***
(-7.61)

0.044
(0.56)
-0.656***
(-7.58)

Acquirer Ln(Asset)2

0.026***
(4.45)
0.584
(1.49)
-0.020
(-0.16)
-0.719***
(-4.86)
0.126*
(1.85)
0.174***
(2.72)
-0.673***
(-6.39)

0.026***
(4.50)
0.528
(1.35)
-0.052
(-0.43)
-0.709***
(-4.79)
0.117*
(1.73)
0.170***
(2.65)
-0.615***
(-5.99)

0.026***
(4.49)
0.508
(1.30)
-0.079
(-0.66)
-0.706***
(-4.77)
0.115*
(1.69)
0.170***
(2.65)
-0.610***
(-5.95)

Country FE
Year FE
Industry FE

Y
Y
Y

Y
N
Y

Y
N
Y

Observations

33,410

33,410

33,410

2

0.0189

0.0174

0.0173

Acquirer Profitability
Acquirer Sales Growth
Public Target
Cross Border
Related Industry
Return[-210, -10]

Adj-R

41

Appendix A. Variable Definition
Variable
Firm-level variables
D(Acquire)
Cash
Ln(Asset)
Profitability
Sales Growth
Investment Grade
Speculative Grade
Unrated

Description
Indicator variable equal to one if a firm announces at least one acquisition during the
fiscal year
Cash and cash equivalent/Total Assets (OSIRIS item 13050/13077)
Log of total assets in USD (OSIRIS item 13077)
EBITDA/Total Assets (OSIRIS item 13018/13077)
[Net sales(t)-Net sales(t-1)]/Net sales(t-1) (OSIRIS item 13002)
A firm that has a S&P investment grade issuer rating (AAA, AA+, AA, or AA-)
(Capital IQ)
A firm that has a S&P speculative grade issuer rating (A+, A, A-, BBB+, BBB, BBB) (Capital IQ)
A firm that does not have any public bond rating

Macroeconomic variables (Source: World Bank)
GDP Growth
Annual percentage growth rate of GDP in constant 2015 US dollars
Normalized GDP Growth GDP growth rate normalized by subtracting the mean and scaling by the standard
deviation. For each GDP growth rate of year t, the mean and standard deviation are
estimated from time-series GDP growth rates of the country over the previous 20 years
with 2-year gap (i.e. from year t-23 to year t-3)
Low GDP Growth

High GDP Country
Low GDP Country

Deal-level variables
CAR[-1,+1]

Indicator variable equal to one for the years when normalized GDP growth is below
the bottom 20% of the normalized GDP growth distribution of country-year
observations.
Countries with the mean real GDP per capita over the period of 1996 to 2013 above
the median of mean GDP per capital of 36 countries.
Countries with the mean real GDP per capita over the period of 1996 to 2013 below
the median of mean GDP per capital of 36 countries.

Cumulative abnormal return from day -1 to day +1 relative to the acquisition
announcement date. Abnormal returns are calculated from the market model estimated
from day –260 to day –100 relative to the announcement date with at least 60 days of
returns available. (Datastream, Zephyr)

CAR[-2,+2]

Cumulative abnormal return from day -2 to day +2 relative to the acquisition
announcement date. Abnormal returns are calculated from the market model estimated
from day –260 to day –100 relative to the announcement date with at least 60 days of
returns available. (Datastream, Zephyr)

Public Target
Cross Border

Indicator variable denoting the acquisition of public target. (Zephyr)
Indicator variable equal to one if the the target and acquiring firms are from the
different nation. (Zephyr)
Indicator variable equal to one if the target is in the same industry as the acquiring
firm, based on the first two digits of the primary U.S. SIC codes. (Zephyr)
Cumulative returns from day -210 to day -10 of acquiring firm relative to the
acquisition announcement date. (Datastream)
Transaction value in USD (Zephyr)
Deal value/Acquirer total assets (Zephyr, OSIRIS)

Related Industry
Return[-210,-10]
Deal Value
Relative Deal Value

42

Appendix Table 1. Robustness on the definitions of Low GDP Growth and High GDP Growth
variables
This table presents estimates of our basic regressions but with different definitions for Low GDP Growth variable.
In columns (1) and (2), we normalize the GDP growth by subtracting the mean and scaling by the standard
deviation, where the mean and standard deviations are calculated from GDP growth rates between 1975 and 1994
for each country. Low GDP growth is an indicator variable for the years when the normalized GDP growth is in
bottom 20% of the country-year distribution. In columns (3) and (4), we normalize the GDP growth by subtracting
the mean and scaling by the standard deviation, where the mean and standard deviations are calculated from
previous 20 year GDP growth rates for each country. Low GDP growth is an indicator variable for the years with
the normalized GDP growth below -1. In Panel A, we estimate equations predicting the probability that a firm
acquires during the fiscal year. All regressions include firm fixed effects. In Panel B, we estimate equations
predicting the acquirer firm’s announcement returns. All regressions include country, year, and industry fixed
effects. Standard errors are corrected for clustering of observations at the firm level and associated t-statistics are in
parentheses. The symbols ***, **, and * denote statistical significance at the 1%, 5%, and 10% levels.

Panel A. The effect of cash on the probability that a firm acquires during the fiscal year

Dependent Variable:
Normalization Method:
Cutoff for normalized GDP growth
Cash

(1)

(2)

(3)
(4)
D(Acquire)
Using 1975-1994
Using previous 20 years
Top and bottom 20%
> 1, < -1
0.277***
(18.66)
-0.038***
(-10.77)

0.275***
(18.51)
-0.023***
(-7.58)

0.034***
(5.81)

0.258***
(16.80)
-0.036***
(-8.71)
0.104***
(4.45)
0.033***
(5.67)

Ln(Asset)

0.033***
(5.71)

0.267***
(17.34)
-0.048***
(-10.07)
0.081***
(3.13)
0.033***
(5.62)

Ln(Asset)2

-0.002***
(-3.03)
0.287***
(17.45)
0.030***
(7.29)

-0.002***
(-2.93)
0.287***
(17.40)
0.030***
(7.31)

-0.002***
(-3.27)
0.288***
(17.46)
0.031***
(7.55)

-0.002***
(-3.12)
0.288***
(17.46)
0.031***
(7.59)

Observations

129,874

129,874

129,874

129,874

2

0.106

0.106

0.105

0.106

Low GDP Growth
Cash x Low GDP Growth

Profitability
Sales Growth

Adj-R

43

Panel B. The effect of cash on 3-day CAR around the acquisition announcement date
(1)

Dependent Variable:
Normalization Method:
Cutoff for normalized GDP growth
Acquirer Cash

(2)
(3)
(4)
Acquirer CAR[-1,+1]
Using 1975-1994
Using previous 20 years
Top and bottom 20%
> 1, < -1

Acquirer Ln(Asset)

-0.655***
(-7.57)

-0.647*
(-1.90)
0.115
(0.90)
-0.897
(-1.10)
-0.654***
(-7.56)

Acquirer Ln(Asset)2

0.026***
(4.49)
0.502
(1.29)
-0.086
(-0.71)
-0.705***
(-4.76)
0.114*
(1.67)
0.170***
(2.65)
-0.610***
(-5.95)

0.026***
(4.46)
0.515
(1.32)
-0.088
(-0.73)
-0.706***
(-4.77)
0.113*
(1.66)
0.170***
(2.64)
-0.610***
(-5.95)

0.026***
(4.49)
0.506
(1.30)
-0.081
(-0.67)
-0.706***
(-4.76)
0.114*
(1.68)
0.170***
(2.65)
-0.610***
(-5.95)

0.026***
(4.45)
0.498
(1.28)
-0.083
(-0.69)
-0.705***
(-4.76)
0.114*
(1.68)
0.169***
(2.64)
-0.611***
(-5.96)

Observations

33,410

33,410

33,410

33,410

2

0.0173

0.0173

0.0173

0.0174

Low GDP Growth

-0.757**
(-2.37)
-0.002
(-0.02)

Acquirer Cash x Low GDP Growth

Acquirer Profitability
Acquirer Sales Growth
Public Target
Cross Border
Related Industry
Return[-210, -10]

Adj-R

44

-0.761**
(-2.38)
0.034
(0.42)

-0.656***
(-7.58)

-0.590*
(-1.68)
0.158
(1.42)
-0.966
(-1.32)
-0.653***
(-7.55)

Appendix Table 2. The effect of cash on the probability of acquisitions – Cash acquisitions only
This table presents estimates of our basic regressions in Table 3 and Table 4 with considering cash acquisitions only.
We estimate OLS regressions, predicting the probability of a firm acquires during the fiscal year, where the
dependent variable, D(Cash Acquisition), is the indicator of the fiscal year of making at least one cash acquisition.
All firm-level controls and macroeconomic variables are lagged by one year. GDP growth is included in columns
(2) and (3), and Low GDP Growth is included in columns (4) and (5). Low GDP growth is an indicator variable for
the years when the normalized GDP growth is in bottom 20% of the country-year distribution. We normalize the
GDP growth by subtracting the mean and scaling by the standard deviation calculated from previous 20 years of
GDP Growth data of each country. Definitions and sources of other variables are provided in Appendix A. All
regressions include firm fixed effects and in column (1) year fixed effects is included. Standard errors are corrected
for clustering of observations at the firm level and associated t-statistics are in parentheses. The symbols ***, **,
and * denote statistical significance at the 1%, 5%, and 10% levels.
(1)

(2)

Dependent Variable:
Cash

(3)

(4)

(5)

D(Cash Acquisition)
0.249***

0.253***

0.303***

0.252***

0.234***

(18.19)

(18.31)

(17.25)

(18.24)

(16.26)

0.332***

0.548***

-0.026***

-0.039***

GDP Growth

(5.78)
Cash x GDP Growth

(7.38)
-1.649***
(-4.60)

Low GDP Growth

(-9.25)
Cash x Low GDP Growth

(-10.10)
0.101***
(4.78)

Ln(Asset)

0.035***

0.039***

0.038***

0.039***

0.039***

(6.29)

(6.99)

(6.87)

(7.13)

(6.99)

-0.002***

-0.002***

-0.002***

-0.002***

-0.002***

(-3.81)

(-3.40)

(-3.24)

(-3.56)

(-3.41)

0.296***

0.277***

0.275***

0.276***

0.276***

(19.33)

(18.00)

(17.93)

(17.95)

(17.95)

0.028***

0.026***

0.026***

0.025***

0.026***

(7.23)

(6.65)

(6.74)

(6.64)

(6.69)

Year FE

Y

N

N

N

N

Firm FE

Y

Y

Y

Y

Y

Observations

129,874

129,874

129,874

129,874

129,874

2

0.130

0.121

0.121

0.121

0.121

Ln(Asset)

2

Profitability
Sales Growth

Adj-R

45

Appendix Table 3. The effect of cash on 3-day CAR around the acquisition announcement date
with control for relative size
This table presents estimates from equations on the acquirer firm’s announcement returns, including the relative deal
value as an additional control variable. The estimation is from the OLS regression, where the dependent variable is
the acquiring firm’s cumulative abnormal returns from day -1 to day +1 relative to the acquisition announcement
date. Relative Deal Value is defined as the total transaction value divided by the acquirer’s total assets in USD. All
firm-level controls and macroeconomic variables are from the fiscal year end prior to the announcement date.
Definitions and sources of other variables are provided in Appendix A. Acquiring firms’ country, industry, and
announcement year fixed effects are included in column (1). Acquiring firms’ country and industry fixed effects are
included in columns (2) to (5). Standard errors are corrected for clustering of observations at the acquirer firm level
and associated t-statistics are in parentheses. The symbols ***, **, and * denote statistical significance at the 1%,
5%, and 10% levels.
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
Dependent Variable:
Acquirer CAR[-1,+1]
Acquirer Cash

-1.149***
(-2.77)

GDP Growth

-1.121***
(-2.70)
-6.540***
(-2.72)

Acquirer Cash x GDP Growth

-0.985*
(-1.67)
-5.891**
(-2.00)
-4.791
(-0.33)

Low GDP Growth

-1.083***
(-2.61)

-0.854*
(-1.88)

-0.004
(-0.03)

Acquirer Ln(Asset)

-0.497***
(-4.14)

-0.500***
(-4.16)

-0.499***
(-4.15)

-0.495***
(-4.12)

0.169
(1.02)
-1.232
(-1.32)
-0.492***
(-4.09)

Acquirer Ln(Asset)2

0.013
(1.59)
0.915*
(1.92)
-0.147
(-0.94)
-1.197***
(-7.30)
0.162
(1.58)
0.245***
(2.63)
-0.650***
(-4.53)
0.658***
(4.42)

0.014*
(1.69)
0.812*
(1.71)
-0.204
(-1.31)
-1.178***
(-7.15)
0.143
(1.39)
0.243***
(2.61)
-0.596***
(-4.24)
0.651***
(4.38)

0.014*
(1.68)
0.813*
(1.71)
-0.203
(-1.30)
-1.179***
(-7.16)
0.143
(1.39)
0.243***
(2.61)
-0.597***
(-4.24)
0.651***
(4.38)

0.014*
(1.66)
0.761
(1.61)
-0.265*
(-1.71)
-1.162***
(-7.05)
0.138
(1.34)
0.243***
(2.61)
-0.590***
(-4.20)
0.640***
(4.31)

0.013
(1.63)
0.754
(1.59)
-0.267*
(-1.73)
-1.161***
(-7.05)
0.136
(1.32)
0.241***
(2.59)
-0.592***
(-4.21)
0.637***
(4.30)

Y
Y
Y

Y
N
Y

Y
N
Y

Y
N
Y

Y
N
Y

Observations

18,773

18,773

18,773

18,773

18,773

2

0.0264

0.0229

0.0229

0.0225

0.0226

Acquirer Cash x Low GDP Growth

Acquirer Profitability
Acquirer Sales Growth
Public Target
Cross Border
Related Industry
Return[-210, -10]
Relative Deal Value

Acquirer Country FE
Announced Year FE
Acquirer Industry FE

Adj-R

46

47

