NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

THE ECONOMIC AND SOCIAL OUTCOMES OF REFUGEES IN THE UNITED STATES:
EVIDENCE FROM THE ACS
William N. Evans
Daniel Fitzgerald
Working Paper 23498
http://www.nber.org/papers/w23498

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
June 2017

This work was supported by the Wilson Sheehan Lab for Economic Opportunities. We wish to
thank representatives at the U.S. Conference of Catholic Bishops and Catholic Charities USA for
a number of helpful comments about our work. The views expressed herein are those of the
authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.
© 2017 by William N. Evans and Daniel Fitzgerald. All rights reserved. Short sections of text,
not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

The Economic and Social Outcomes of Refugees in the United States: Evidence from the
ACS
William N. Evans and Daniel Fitzgerald
NBER Working Paper No. 23498
June 2017
JEL No. J1,J15,J61
ABSTRACT
Using data from the 2010-2014 American Community Survey, we use a procedure suggested by
Capps et al. (2015) to identify refugees from the larger group of immigrants to examine the
outcomes of refugees relocated to the U.S. Among young adults, we show that refugees that
enter the U.S. before age 14 graduate high school and enter college at the same rate as natives.
Refugees that enter as older teenagers have lower attainment with much of the difference
attributable to language barriers and because many in this group are not accompanied by a parent
to the U.S. Among refugees that entered the U.S. at ages 18-45, we follow respondents’ outcomes
over a 20-year period in a synthetic cohort. Refugees have much lower levels of education and
poorer language skills than natives and outcomes are initially poor with low employment, high
welfare use and low earnings. Outcomes improve considerably as refugees age. After 6 years in
the country, these refugees work at higher rates than natives but they never attain the earning
levels of U.S.-born respondents. Using the NBER TAXSIM program, we estimate that refugees
pay $21,000 more in taxes than they receive in benefits over their first 20 years in the U.S.

William N. Evans
Keough-Hesburgh Professor of Economics
Department of Economics
University of Notre Dame
3111 Jenkins Nanovic Halls
Notre Dame, IN 46556-7000
and NBER
wevans1@nd.edu
Daniel Fitzgerald
Department of Economics
University of Notre Dame
Notre Dame, IN 46556
dannyfitz77@gmail.com

I. Introduction
The United States Department of State defines a refugee as a person who had fled their
homeland and cannot return because they have a well-founded fear of persecution in their home
country due to race, religion, nationality, political opinion, or membership in a social group.1 The
United Nations estimates that currently there are 21 million refugees in the world and another 41
million that have been displaced from their homes but are living within their own country.2 Every
year, thousands of refugees are admitted to the United States under the United States Refugee
Admission Program.3 Since 1975, when the current program was started, over 3 million refugees
have been resettled in the U.S.4 It is estimated that fewer than one percent of refugees are actively
resettled to a third country and about two-thirds of this group are resettled in the United States.5
In recent years, the Syrian refugee crisis has brought renewed attention to the U.S. refugee
resettlement program. The civil war in Syria has produced an estimated 4.8 million refugees since
2011, the bulk of whom have fled to the nearby countries of Turkey, Lebanon, Jordan, Iran and
Egypt.6 In response to this crisis, President Obama committed to accepting 110,000 refugees in
Fiscal Year 2017, a 57 percent increase over the number accepted in 2015, with the bulk of the new
refugees expected to come from Syria.7 The change in the number and identity of the refugees
entering the U.S. has led to concerns on two fronts. First, there is a fear that terrorists from the
Islamic State of Iraq and Syria (ISIS) are hidden among the refugees. This sentiment has been

https://www.uscis.gov/humanitarian/refugees-asylum/refugees
http://www.unhcr.org/en-us/news/latest/2016/6/5763b65a4/global-forced-displacement-hits-record-high.html
3 http://www.state.gov/j/prm/ra/admissions/
4 http://www.state.gov/j/prm/ra/
5 https://www.state.gov/j/prm/ra/
6 http://data.unhcr.org/syrianrefugees/regional.php
7 https://www.washingtonpost.com/news/post-politics/wp/2016/09/14/white-house-plans-to-accept-at-least-110000refugees-in-2017/?utm_term=.900d9965986b
1
2

1

expressed by a number of commentators8 as well as the current U.S. President, Donald Trump.9
Second, there is anxiety over the fiscal costs of the U.S. Refugee Admissions Program. Not only
does the Federal government bear the direct costs incurred during resettlement, but, as refugees
become eligible for most Federal government transfer programs once resettled, it also bears any
indirect costs associated refugee enrollment in these programs. As a result, some have suggested the
fiscal cost of resettlement is too high.10,11,12
Despite the size of the U.S. refugee resettlement program, there is surprisingly little research
about how well refugees do economically and socially in the U.S. after they are resettled. A large
literature examines the social and economic outcomes of immigrants to the United States. Works by
Borjas (1985 and 1995), Chiswick (1978 and 1991), LaLonde and Topel (1992), Trejo (1997), Card
(2005), Antecol and Bedard (2006), and Borjas and Katz (2007) use large, nationally-representative
samples and consider a variety of outcomes. The literature on refugees, however, tends to be much
smaller. This is due to three major constraints. First, major Federal data sets such as the Current
Population Survey, the Census Public Use Micro Samples or the American Community Survey
(ACS) do not identify the refugee status of immigrants in the data. Second, the majority of data
collected about refugees tends to not include long-term follow-ups and/or is not available to
researchers. The U.S. government collects some data on the economic status of refugees in two data
sets. The Department of State has cooperative agreements with nine domestic agencies that resettle
refugees. Under their contract with the Department of State, resettlement agencies receive a lump
sum per refugee to provide three months of service to help the refugees acclimate to life in the U.S.

http://www.aei.org/publication/how-the-islamic-state-used-syrian-refugee-flows-to-attack-europe/,
https://www.washingtonpost.com/world/national-security/how-europes-migrant-crisis-became-an-opportunity-forisis/2016/04/21/ec8a7231-062d-4185-bb27-cc7295d35415_story.html?utm_term=.8aad9d72ce1e,
9 http://www.cnn.com/2015/11/16/politics/donald-trump-syrian-refugees/
10 http://cis.org/High-Cost-of-Resettling-Middle-Eastern-Refugees
11 https://www.washingtonpost.com/news/the-fix/wp/2015/11/30/heres-how-much-the-united-states-spends-onrefugees/?utm_term=.b1a3e8f683a7
12 https://www.numbersusa.com/news/additional-syrian-refugees-would-cost-taxpayers-65-billion
8

2

As part of the contract, the supporting agencies are required to identify the employment status of
refugees 180 days after arrival in the U.S. Therefore, there is data on employment status at 180 days.
As part of its annual report to congress about the refugee program, the Department of Health and
Human Services conducts the Annual Survey of Refugees (ASR), a survey of roughly 2500 refugees
that entered the country over the past eight months to five years. The ASR does contain detailed
data about employment and use of Federal income transfer programs but the ASR data is not
available for research purposes.13 Third, the limited amount of data on refugees that includes both
long-term outcomes and is available to researchers tends to be from longitudinal surveys where
there are small numbers of refugees. For example, the New Immigrant Survey (NIS), a longitudinal
survey of 8,573 immigrants to the U.S. that received permanent residency in the U.S. in 2003, has
less than 400 refugees in the data set.14
Given these constraints, what refugee literature does exists tends to concern very specific
populations, uses very small samples, relies on data from a small number of countries with high
refugee totals, or focuses on very short-term outcomes. For example, Takeda (2000) looked
exclusively at Iraqi refugees that settled in two Southeastern states and his analysis included data
from only 105 refugees. Similarly, Chiswick (1993) examined the economic adjustment of
specifically Jewish refugees from the Soviet Union to life in the U.S., and Rumbaut’s work (1989a
and 1989b) focused on outcomes for 500 refugees from Southeast Asia. Potocky-Tripodi (2004)
relied on a larger sample in examining the outcomes of 2,400 Asian and Hispanic refugees, but all of
these refugees were from just two communities (San Diego and South Florida). Connor (2010)
compared outcomes of refuges and other immigrants with data on 394 refugees from the NIS
dataset. Finally, Beaman (2012) examined the 180-day employment outcomes for 1,700 male

13
14

https://www.acf.hhs.gov/sites/default/files/orr/arc_15_final_508.pdf
http://nis.princeton.edu/

3

refugees resettled by one voluntary resettlement agency between 2001 and 2005 and explored the
importance of social networks in job placement rates.
The results from the studies listed above suggest that refugees tend to have poor educational
levels and language skills upon arrival (Connor, 2010; Potocky-Tripodi, 2004) and economic
outcomes such as earnings and poverty rates tend to be worse for refugees than the typical
immigrant (Connor, 2010). There is conflicting evidence on the importance of social networks.
Beaman (2012) found refugee employment rates are better when they are resettled in areas with
larger refugee communities, but results in Potocky-Tripodi (2004) showed little benefit of resettling
refugees in areas with a high fraction of other refugees. Beaman (2012) noted that employment
outcomes of new refugees tend to be worse if there are higher numbers of more recent refugees.
In this paper, we outline a procedure that identifies groups of individuals in the 2010-2014
ACS that have a high likelihood of being refugees. We rely on data from the Department of State
(DOS) on refugee admissions and data from the ACS on total immigration. The Department of
State identifies the annual counts of refugees from specific countries. Within the ACS, we can
identify the total number of people that migrated from a particular country in a particular year,
including both refugees and non-refugee immigrants. In general, we would expect the number of
total migrants to be larger than the total number of refugees for a unique country/year pair.
However, for some country/year pairs, particularly places and times of political unrest, we would
expect the majority of migrants to the U.S. to be refugees. Thus, when we identify country/year
pairs where weighted immigrant totals in the ACS are close to refugee totals as reported by the
DOS, we can be reasonably confident that the respondents in the ACS are in fact refugees. With
this group, we can then use the extensive economic data collected in the ACS to examine the longterm economic outcomes of refugees in this country by constructing synthetic cohorts. This
procedure was initially suggested by Capps et al. (2015) in a report for the Migration Policy Institute
4

and is similar in spirit to how Schoellman (2016) identified that immigrants from Southeast Asia that
entered the U.S. in the 1970s were mostly refugees. In a similar vein, (Potocky-Tripodi, 2001)
examined outcomes from the 1990 1-Percent Census Public Use Micro Samples for immigrants
from the Soviet Union, Eastern Europe, Southeast Asia and Cuba, arguing that a high fraction of
immigrants from these countries were refugees. We demonstrate that this procedure identifies the
county/year pairs where roughly 33 percent of refugees that entered the country over the 25-year
period from 1990-2014 emigrated, and when our sample of refugees is compared to the population
of refugees that entered the U.S. over that time, the two look very similar. Our analysis sample
includes 19,298 refugees aged 0-65 that entered the country between the ages of 0 and 45. This is
the largest sample of refugees analyzed to date.
With this data, we generate a synthetic panel of refugees and ask: What are refugees’
economic and social outcomes as they age in the U.S.? Initially, we examine the outcomes of
refugees that enter as children. Our results indicate that, at ages 19-24 and 23-28, refugees who
enter the U.S. before the age of 14 graduate high school and college, respectively, at the same rates
as U.S.-born survey respondents, consistent with Schoellman’s 2016 analysis of refugees that arrived
in the U.S. from Indochina before the age of six. On the other hand, at ages 19-24 and 23-28, the
high school and college completion rates, respectively, for refugees that enter after age 14 decline
monotonically by age at entry to the U.S. Supplementary analyses suggest that the poor outcomes
for older teens may largely be due to language difficulties and/or the fact that many children in this
age range enter the country as unaccompanied minors. However, we also find that refugees who
arrived as children of any age have much higher school enrollment rates than U.S.-born respondents
of the same age. As a result, observed differences in high school graduation between refugees and
natives observed at ages 19-24 disappear when we examine them 10 years later. Likewise, the
observed differences in college completion rates between the two groups are halved as the
5

respondents age 10 years. Lastly, when we hold educational attainment constant, we show there is
no difference in economic outcomes between refugees who arrive as children and U.S.-born survey
respondents.
Next, we construct a synthetic cohort of refugees that entered the country between ages 18
to 45 and examine their economic progress over a 20-year period as compared to a similarly-aged
group of U.S.-born respondents to the ACS. Adult refugees have substantially lower levels of
educational attainment and much weaker English language skills than the comparison sample.
Unsurprisingly, they also have much lower earnings and higher welfare use than U.S.-born
respondents. However, most economic outcomes such as employment and earnings improve as
refugees age in the country, while enrollment in government transfer programs tends to decline
considerably over the same period. These results are similar to the trends found in Capps et al.
(2015). The improvements in earnings tend to be correlated with noticeable improvements in
language skill, but we find this explains only a minor component of the changes. Controlling for
age, gender and educational status, refugees eventually have higher labor force participation and
employment rates than U.S.-born respondents of similar ages after about 10 years in the country.
Controlling for education, refugees never obtain the levels of income of U.S.-born respondents but
once we control for these factors and after about 10 years in the U.S., refugees have similar higher
levels of welfare and food stamp use than the comparison group.
In the final section of the paper, we use the detailed data about household composition,
geographic location and earnings from the ACS and estimate with the NBER TAXSIM model the
taxes paid by refugees over a 20-year period. We compare this to the direct costs of resettlement
and the fiscal costs of refugees’ participation in social safety net programs. Our results suggest that
on an annual basis, for the first eight years in the U.S., refugees receive more in benefits than they
pay in taxes. After the eighth year, taxes paid tend to be greater than benefits received. Summing
6

revenues and expenditures over time and properly discounting, we calculate that those that enter the
country from ages 18-45 pay on average $21,000 more in taxes to all levels of government than they
receive in benefits over a 20 year period.
In the next section, we review the refugee resettlement process as well as some of the related
literature on refugees. In section III, we outline our procedure to identify refugees in the ACS and
examine how well our sample mirrors the entire population of refugees in the U.S. In section IV,
we outline the assimilation of refugees that enter as children and in section V we consider the results
for refugees that enter at ages 18-45. In section VI we estimate the net fiscal costs of this adult
refugee group. We make some concluding remarks in section VII.

II. An Overview of the Refugees Resettlement Process in the U.S.
In this section we provide a brief outline of the refugee resettlement process in the U.S. The
following description borrows heavily from a variety of sources including Beaman (2012), Capps et
al. (2015), and the Refugee Council.15
The United States Refugee Admissions Program (USRAP) is one of the largest and oldest
resettlement programs in the world. It is administered by three different federal agencies: the
Bureau of Population, Refugees and Migration (PRM) at the DOS; the Office of Refugee
Resettlement (ORR) at the Department of Health and Human Services (HHS); and the Asylum
Division of the U.S. Citizenship and Immigration Service (USCIS) of the Department of Homeland
Security (DHS). Potential candidates for resettlement are brought to the attention of the Federal
government primarily through referrals from the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees
(UNHCR), but some are brought to the attention of U.S Embassies through non-governmental
organizations (NGOs). Candidates for resettlement fall into one of three priority areas. “Priority 1”
15

http://www.rcusa.org/resettlement-process/

7

cases include refugees of any nationality that have evidence of past persecution or a credible fear of
persecution. Cases that qualify as “Priority 2” include refugees who belong to certain religious
groups from the former Soviet Union, members of certain groups inside Iraq and Cuba, children
from Honduras, El Salvador, and Guatemala, as well as ethnic minorities from counties such as the
Congo, Burma, Bhutan, Iran and Iraq. Cases are considered “Priority 3” if the refugee is a family
member of previously-resettled refugees from a list of 21 countries.
Once a candidate has been identified for possible resettlement, they are instructed to gather
documentation to justify their refugee status, such as arrest warrants, affidavits, prison records, etc.
If no documentation is available, third-party interviews can be conducted to verify their claims.
During this stage, applicants are usually assisted by sponsoring NGOs or the UNHCR. Candidates
must also be interviewed by DHS, which has the sole authority to grant refugee status. Applicants
are typically not accepted for resettlement if they have certain health-related problems, a history of
criminal activity or are considered security risks.
Refugee Support Centers (RSC) run by NGOs and the International Organization for
Migration (IOM) provide refugees with travel assistance and orientation materials about life in the
U.S. ahead of their arrival. The IOM makes the travel arrangements, but the plane fare is typically
paid for by the refugees and financed through interest-free loans that refugees are expected to start
paying down about 6 months after arrival. It usually takes 6 to 12 months for the DHS to accept a
candidate into the resettlement programs and another 6 to 12 months for the refugee to arrive in the
U.S.
After the DHS has referred a candidate for resettlement, they are assigned to one of nine
voluntary agencies16 or VOLAGs that are under contract with the ORR and the DOS to implement

These agencies are Church World Service, Ethiopian Community Development Council, Episcopal Migration
Ministries, HIAS, The International Rescue Committee, Lutheran Immigration and Refugee Service, U.S. Committee for
16

8

the refugee resettlement process.

The goal of the resettlement process is assist refugees in

becoming economically self-sufficient as soon as possible. The VOLAGs receive roughly $2000 per
refugee for resettlement services but many of the organizations supplement these costs with their
own resources. During the first 30 days after arrival, the VOLAGs are expected to provide for
refugees’ basic needs, such as housing, clothing, furniture, English as a second language instruction,
medical care, and job training. The VOLAGs also assist eligible families with enrollment into
Federal assistance programs such as Temporary Assistance for Needy Families (TANF) or the
Supplemental Nutrition Assistance Program (SNAP). About 30 days after arrival, DHS provides
individuals with an Employment Authorization Document, allowing them to work legally within the
United States. VOLAGs can receive matching grants that provide an additional 120 days of
support, so long as the refugee agrees to accept their first job offer.
III. Identifying Refugees in the ACS
The primary dataset used in our analysis is the Public Use Microdata Samples from the
American Community Survey (ACS). The ACS replaced the long form of the decennial census, and
surveys roughly one percent of the U.S. population each year. The survey is designed to be pooled
over a five-year period, allowing the Census to construct moving averages of aggregate economic,
social, and demographic information in small geographic areas. The Census Bureau randomly
selects addresses to be surveyed, rather than households, in order to have a geographicallyrepresentative sample.
Our data comes from the 2014 five-year ACS, which pools the surveys from 2010 through
2014 to provide data on five percent of the U.S. population. We use the IPUMS.org ACS samples
(Ruggles et al., 2015). While the ACS is not representative of the U.S. population due to variation in

Refugees and Immigrants, United States Conference of Catholic Bishops/Migration and Refugee Services, and World
Relief.

9

response and coverage rates among subpopulations, the Census Bureau uses sample weights to
account for this issue. A respondent’s sample weight in the census is an estimate of how many
people in the population the respondent represents.17
As discussed in the introduction, a major problem researchers face in attempting to study the
long-term outcomes of refugees in the U.S. is the inability to identify them in standard surveys. The
ACS does identify immigrants, which has aided the development of an extensive literature on their
outcomes, but does not record the reason for immigration. Thus, it is not clear which immigrants
are refugees. In order to circumvent this issue, we identified country/year pairings in which the
majority of immigrants were refugees, as suggested by Capps et al. (2015).
The ACS contains two variables that we use to identify refugees: the year of migration to the
U.S. and country of birth. With these variables and the sample weights, we can obtain an estimate
of Ict, the number of immigrants to the U.S. from country c in year t. The Yearbook of Immigration
Statistics, compiled by the Department of Homeland Security, contains the number of refugees
entering the U.S. from every country for every year between 1990 and 2014.18 Using this data, we
obtain Rct, the number of refugees arriving in the U.S. from country c in year t. We define the
refugee concentration ratio for a country/year pairing as RCRct = Rct / Ict. This variable estimates the
fraction of immigrants from a country/year pair that are refugees. Figure 1 graphs the number of
refugees (vertical axis) versus the number of immigrants (horizontal axis) in a county/year pair from
all countries that had at least 1 refugee between 1990 and 2014, but fewer than 20,000 immigrants
per year as measured by Ict.19 Points along the 45 degree line are country/year pairs where the RCR
is equal to 1 and hence we are confident the vast majority of immigrants in that country/year pair

http://www.census.gov/programs-surveys/sipp/methodology/weighting.html
https://www.dhs.gov/immigration-statistics/yearbook
19 We truncated the X axis in this graph for readability of the graph -- countries with the largest immigrant counts had
virtually no refugees.
17
18

10

are refugees. A small number of data points fall above the 45o line, which is most likely due to our
use of ACS weights. In our analysis below, we limited our attention to country-year pairs which had
an RCR greater than 0.7. Immigrants from country/year pairs that fall in this range are likely to be
refugees.
Table 1 shows the 137 country-year pairs that have an RCRct > 0.7 and are included in our
sample. This sample includes 22,350 individual survey respondents. With an average person-weight
of 26.29, the observations in our dataset represent around 588,000 refugees. The U.S. admitted
around 1.80 million refugees between 1990 and 2014, so our sample represents approximately 33
percent of the total refugees that entered the U.S. during the past 25 years.
The sample of refugees in our analysis come from select country/year combinations: those
in which almost all people entering the U.S. are doing so as refugees. These countries are more likely
to be in the midst of a civil war, have an unstable political regime, or otherwise be in a state of
unrest. The sample of refugees in our analysis may oversample from countries with the worst
violence and human rights abuse. While it is not possible to directly test if our sample is
representative of the refugee population at whole, we have some baseline demographics for which
we can check if our sample of refugees is similar to the general population of refugees. The Office
of Refugee Resettlement (ORR) and the Department of Homeland Security publish the age, gender,
country of origin, and state of resettlement for the entire refugee population at their time of arrival.20
Figure 2a shows the age distribution of refugees identified in our sample as compared to the age
distribution of all refugees entering the U.S. over the same period. Figure 2b shows the continent of
origin of refugees used in this analysis compared to the continent of origin of all refugees entering
the U.S. between 1990 and 2014. Figure 2c shows the gender breakdown of refugees in our sample
versus all refugees in the U.S. Finally, Figure 2d shows the state the refugees in our analysis were
20

https://www.acf.hhs.gov/orr/resource/annual-orr-reports-to-congress

11

resettled in versus the original state of residence for all U.S. refugees. In this final graph, we include
the 45 degree line and point along this line mean the counts on the two axis are the same. Gender,
age, and state of residence in our dataset were representative of the total population of refugees,
with some small exceptions. The demographic with the most significant difference is the continent
of origin. Europe is underrepresented and Africa and Asia are overrepresented in our sample.

IV. Outcomes of Refugees Resettled as Children and Young Adults
We initially consider the economic outcomes of refugees resettled before the age of 20. We
will examine two sets of outcomes: educational attainment and labor market outcome measures.
For each outcome we will consider a separate subset of data from our ACS sample outlined above.
Students in the U.S. normally complete high school by age 18 so to measure high school
graduation rates we will examine a sample of refugees that entered the U.S. before 17 but were at
least 19 years of age when they were surveyed in the 2010-2014 ACS. Similarly, U.S. students
routinely complete college by age 22, so we measure college graduation rates by examining a sample
of refugees that entered the U.S. before age 20 but who were at least 23 years of age when they
responded to the ACS. We compare these sub-samples of refugees to similarly-aged groups of U.S.
born residents as a frame of reference.
We constructed our sub-samples for the high school completion analysis to be balanced
along two dimensions: age at entry to the U.S. (4-16) and age at the time the survey was completed
(19-24). By fixing an age range that we observe people and taking data over a five-year range in the
ACS, there are fewer observations in the younger ages so we deleted people that arrived ages 0-3.
For example, someone that arrived at age 0 and was age 24 could have only been observed in the
2014 ACS. Someone that arrived as age 1 and is 24 could only be observed in the 2013 or 2014 ACS,
etc. For each age of entry 4-16, we could have observed the person at five different ages and at in
12

five difference ACS samples. The results in Schoellman (2016) indicate that the education outcomes
for refugees that arrive 0-6 are similar to outcomes for natives so our results should not differ much
by excluding the youngest ages at arrival. Similarly, the college graduation analysis includes
respondents aged 23 to 28 at the time of the survey, who arrived between the ages of 8 and 19. In
these two sample, there are 1,366 and 1,432 refugees in our data sets, respectively.
In Table 2, we report some simple descriptive statistics (means and standard deviations) for
two samples. Both contain respondents aged 19-24 from the 2010-2014 ACS. The first column
presents statistics for 19- to 24-year old refugee respondents to the 2010-2014 ACS that entered the
U.S. between the ages of 4 and 16; the second presents the same results for U.S.-born respondents
in the same age group. The average ages are similar across the two groups, but a higher fraction of
refugee respondents are female. The ACS asks respondents aged 5 and above to self-report their
English language ability. The possible responses are “Does not speak English,” “Speaks English but
not well,” “Speaks English well,” “Speaks English very well,” or “Only speaks English.” We
combine the last three groups and define these as “Speaks English well or above.” Note that there
is not much difference in this fraction between refugees and natives.
Overall, high school graduate rates are only two percentage points lower for refugees than
U.S.-born respondents. There is, however, tremendous heterogeneity in this number based on the
age when the refugee migrated to the U.S. In Figure 3a, we report with the solid line the high school
graduation rate for refugees aged 19 to 24 that entered the country between the ages of 4 and 16 in
our ACS sample. The straight dotted line is the high school graduation rate for U.S.-born
respondents to the ACS aged 19-24. Notice that for refugees that entered the U.S. by age 13, there
is little difference in the high school graduation rate between refugees and U.S. born respondents.
After age 13, graduation rates drop off sharply. We discuss a possible explanation for this drop-off
later in this paper.
13

The basic graph in Figure 3a presents raw totals. To generate some notion of the precision
of the differences, we next run a simple regression. We combine our sample of likely refugees
respondents aged 19-24 that arrived between ages 4-16 with the data on all U.S.-born respondents
aged 19-24. We regress a dummy for whether the person graduated high school on dummies for
sex, age at the time of the survey, and age at entry to the U.S (where the reference group is those
respondents born in the U.S.). This regression includes 1,037,840 observations and the sample
mean high school graduation rate for U.S.-born respondents is 90.4 percent. We report the
coefficients and 95 percent confidence intervals for the age at entry dummy variables in Figure 3b.
Note that through entry age 13 there is no statistical difference in the high school graduation rates of
refugees and native born respondents. For those refugees that arrived in the U.S. aged 14-16, high
school graduation rates decline precipitously, and the differences in graduation rates between this
group and native born respondents are statistically significant.
In Table 3, we report the means for the slightly older sample that we will use to examine
college attainment and other economic outcomes. In this table, we use data from the ACS for those
aged 23-28. In the first column of results we have data for refugees that entered the U.S. at ages 819 and the second column for U.S. born residents of a similar age. The average ages and fraction
female are very similar across the two groups. The fraction with a college degree is only two
percentage points lower for refugees. Labor force participation is the same across the two groups,
employment rates are slightly lower for refugees, and refugees make about 8 percent less at these
ages than U.S.-born respondents.21
In Figure 4a, we report the fraction of refugees with a college degree among those aged 2328 who entered the U.S. at ages 8-19. The dotted line is the college graduation rate for U.S.-born

21

In the remainder of the paper, all dollar values are converted to constant January 2014 dollars.

14

adults aged 23-38 in the ACS. In Figure 4b, we pool the refugees and U.S.-born from Figure 4a and
regress a college graduation dummy on sex and age dummies, as well as dummies for refugees’ age at
entry. Note that the patterns in these two figures are quite similar to those for high school
completion. Among those that entered as refugees aged 8-13, we see little difference in college
graduation rates between them and similarly-aged U.S.-born respondents. However, for those that
entered at ages 14-19, we observe negative coefficients on the age of entry in Figure 4b, with the
differences between graduation rates statistically different from zero for those that entered at ages
17-19.
Why are the results so different for refugees that arrive in the U.S. as older teens? There are
two obvious potential explanations. The first is the language barrier: A large fraction of refugees
enter the U.S. with poor English language skills. In Figure 5a, we take a sample of our refugees
from our ACS sample that entered the U.S. within the last 3 years and graph the fraction that does
not speak English or does not speak English well, by age at arrival. There is no obvious trend in the
data by age of entry, but 29.7 percent of all refugees that enter as children have significant language
difficulties in the first three years after arrival. The means in Tables 2 and 3, however, suggest this
difficulty has been mostly overcome by the time refugees are surveyed in the ACS. This might be
less of an issue for those that arrive at younger ages as they have more time to make up any language
background before they have to graduate high school.
A second potential problem for refugees who arrive as older teens is that many arrive
unaccompanied by an adult, a scenario that occurs less often for younger children. Hence older teen
refugees are more likely than younger children to be resettled as foster children in the U.S. The lack
of a parent in the household may be detrimental to their outcomes. We can verify the more
frequent foster status of refugees that arrived as older teens in the ACS. The IPUMS version of the
ACS is a rectangular data set where each row is a different person. For each child in the data set,
15

IPUMS has added a variable that identifies the line number of their best guess as to who in the
household is the biological mother of the child. In Figure 5b, we take the sample of refugees that
have arrived in the past three years at ages 0-17 and graph the fraction of refugees where the
biological mother cannot be identified in the household. Note that there is a strong upward trend in
this figure with age. Only 5 to 10 percent of children ages 0-14 are without a mother in the
household. This number increases to 20 to 30 percent for those entering at ages 15-16, and tops 40
percent for those entering at age 17.
We cannot directly test the role of language or the lack of parents because we only have
information for respondents at the time of the ACS and not at the time of arrival. The best we can
do is make a guess as to the respondent’s English ability and parental accompaniment at the time of
their arrival. We do this by first restricting the sample to respondents that arrived in the past three
years by age of arrival and continent of arrival. We assume that the distribution of unaccompanied
minors and poor English language skills of 8 year olds from Africa in the 2010-2014 ACS is similar
to that of 19-24 year old ACS refugee respondents that arrived as an 8 year old from Africa, at the
time of their own arrival to the U.S. We merge in two variables: the fraction of children in the
cohort that do not have a biological mother in the household and the fraction that speak English
only, well or very well. We then add these variables to the basic regressions.
In Figure 3c, we report the coefficients and 95 percent confidence intervals for the age of
entry dummies for the same regression we ran in Figure 3b with these two additional variables
included. Note that the negative coefficients for the older teens are essentially cut in half when we
add these variables. In Figure 4c we report the coefficients on age of entry in the college graduation
model with these two additional variables. Again, the large negative coefficients for older teens are
essentially cut in half by this exercise. Note that the confidence intervals widen considerably on the
age of entry dummies in Figures 3c and 4c. This is due to the fact we have very little variation in the
16

two variables we have added to the model. This is a very imprecise way to obtain controls for these
two covariates but is the best method available given the data constraints. Even with these limited
variables, we are able to eliminate half of the difference in graduation rates, suggesting these two
explanations should be further explored in future analyses.
The estimates above indicate that for most refugees, educational outcomes are similar to
U.S.-born respondents in the ACS. In this section, we consider whether, conditional on education,
outcomes are different between refugees and natives. In this case, we use the sample of native-born
adults aged 23-28 and add to that a sample, adult refugees of the same age that entered the U.S. at
ages 8-19. We examine a series of outcomes such as dummies for labor for participation and
whether they are currently employed, labor market earnings and the natural log of earnings for those
with positive earnings. These outcomes are regressed on dummies for age and sex as well as a set of
dummies for each educational categorical response in the ACS. To capture the role of age at entry
for refugees but boost power for individual coefficients, we pool age at entry groups and estimate
four dummies for refugees that entered at ages 8-10, 11-13, 14-16, and 17-19, with U.S. born the
reference category.
In Figures 6a through 6d, we report the coefficients and 95 percent confidence intervals for
the four age at entry dummy variables for regressions where the outcomes are a) a dummy for labor
force participation; b) a dummy for whether they are employed; c) labor earnings and; d) the natural
log of earnings for those with positive earnings, respectively. In Figure 6a, the three oldest age at
entry groups have higher labor force participation rates than natives, with a statistically significant 5
percentage point higher rate of participation for those that entered at 14-16. On the other hand,
those that entered at ages 8-10 have a statistically significant lower rate of participation of about the
same amount. In Figure 6b, the three oldest age of entry groups have no statistically different
employment rates than natives, but again, those that entered aged 8-10 have a statistically significant
17

6 percentage point lower employment rate than natives. In Figure 6c, we see that those who entered
at ages 8-10 and 17-19 earn about $2,100 less than natives on an annual basis. The result for the 8-10
entry group is statistically significant at the p=0.1 level. In Figure 6d, we examine the natural log of
earnings for those with positive earnings. We see some difference for refugees that arrived at ages
17-19 but this difference it is not statistically significant.
The interpretation of these results is dramatically changed when we consider Figure 6e,
which reports results when the outcome is a dummy variable that identifies whether the person is
currently enrolled in school. Refugees in all four arrival age groups are much more likely to be in
school at the time of the survey than U.S.-born respondents. The youngest and oldest arrival age
groups are a statistically significant 10 and 15 percentage points, respectively, more likely to be in
school than their U.S. counterparts. This suggests that the lower labor force participation,
employment and earnings we see in the earlier figures may simply capture the fact that these groups
are still enrolled in school. This is verified in Figure 6f, where we re-run the regression from Figure
6c, where labor earnings are used as the outcome of interest, and we add as a control a dummy for
whether the respondent is currently enrolled in school. The large and marginally statistically
significant coefficient on the refugee dummy for those that entered at ages 17-19 disappears, while
the coefficient for those that entered at ages 8-10 is cut and half and is no longer marginally
significant.
The results in Figure 6e suggest that refugees who enter the U.S. as teens, regardless of age
at entry, have higher school enrollment rates than natives. This suggests that the snapshots of high
school graduation rates for respondents aged 19-24 at the time of the ACS presented in Figure 3,
and college graduation rates for respondents aged 23-28 from Figure 4 might change over time. To
consider this possibility, in Figure 7a, we report high school graduation rates for refugee respondents
to the ACS that arrived at ages 14-16 from three different age groups: 19-23, 24-28 and 29-33. The
18

steep decline in high school graduation rates by age of entry we found in Figure 3a is reflected in the
first set of numbers. However, as the refugees age in our synthetic cohort, high school graduation
rates rise dramatically. By the time refugees that entered at ages 14-16 are 24-28 years of age, their
high school graduation rates are now 92.9, 93.1, and 88.1 percent, respectively, compared to 91.5
percent for the U.S.-born respondents. The high school graduation numbers slip some when we age
this group another five years, illustrating the problems inherent in using synthetic cohorts, but still
remain at least 10-15 percentage points above graduation rates for the 19-24 cohort.
In Figure 7b, we repeat this exercise for college graduation for teens that entered the U.S. at
ages 17-19. We calculate college graduation rates for ACS respondents in three different age groups:
23-27, 38-32 and 33-37. As these refugees age in a synthetic cohort, the college completion rates
rise dramatically. Among refugees that entered at ages 17-19, college graduation rates were 21, 13
and 10 percent, respectively, at ages 23-27. Aging this cohort by five years increases these numbers
to 28, 21 and 28 percent, respectively. Aging the cohort by five years again, these numbers increase
to 31, 39 and 28 percent. These graduation rates are still below the college graduation rates for the
U.S.-born respondents, but aging the cohorts by 10 years halves the difference in graduation rates
present at earlier ages.
In summary, refugees that arrive to the U.S. as children under the age of 15 do as well as
natives on measures of educational attainment. These results are very similar to those found by
Schoellman (2016), who performed a similar exercise for refugees that arrived as children aged 0-5
from Indochina. Refugees that arrive as older teens do much poorer on measures of educational
attainment but much of this is explained by language barriers and the fact they are more likely to
arrive in the U.S. without parents. These poor outcome are also very temporal in that refugees that
arrive as children, regardless of their age at arrival, attend school at much higher rates than natives
during their 20s. Their high school and college graduation rates increase dramatically through their
19

early 30s, dissipating much of the early differences in educational outcomes observed between
refugees and natives.

V. The Outcomes of Refugees Resettled as Adults
In this section we consider the time-path of economic outcomes of refugees as they age in
the United States. The ACS provides data from only one point in time, a snapshot of the refugee’s
current life. Ideally, we would follow one cohort of refugees over time. Since this is not possible, we
construct a synthetic cohort. A refugee who has been in the U.S. for 1 year is thought of as the
synthetic cohort’s first year in the U.S. A refugee who has been in the U.S. for 2 years represents
that cohort’s second year in the U.S. A refugee who has lived in the U.S. for 20 years forms a part of
that cohort’s twentieth year in the U.S. In this way, we can study the path of an average refugee
during their time in the U.S. Comparing the outcomes of refugees who have been in the U.S. for 1
year versus those who have been here for 20 years can provide insight into the long term economic
adaptation of refugees.
In this case, we examine adults that entered the country as refugees at ages 18-45 and were
aged 18-65 at the time of the survey in the 2010-2014 ACS.22 Given these sample rules, we have
people that have been in the country for up to 20 years.23 In Table 4 we present some simple
descriptive statistics (means and standard deviations) for refugees and U.S.-born adults aged 18-65.
There are 12,309 refugees in this sample and 8.2 million U.S.-born adult respondents.

The lower age in the group does not change because in the 2014 ACS there refugees that just entered the country at
age 18.
23 With DHS data on refugee admissions dating back to 1990 and survey data from 2010 to 2014, this analysis could
have included refugees who have been in the country for up to 24 years. We ultimately exclude refugees who have been
in the country 21 – 24 years, as their samples are increasingly small. While a refugee who has been in the U.S. for 20
years could have been surveyed in any of the 2010 to 2014 ACS, a refugee in the U.S. for 24 years could only be a
respondent to the 2014 survey who entered the U.S. in 1990. They could not possibly appear in the 2010 – 2013 surveys,
reducing their sample by 80%.
22

20

In Table 4, refugees that arrived in the U.S. as adults are on average slightly younger and just
as likely to be female as the U.S-born respondents. Refugees do, however, have much lower
educational attainment than U.S.-born respondents. Their high school and college graduation rates
are 23.7 and 13.2 percentage points lower, respectively, that the corresponding values for U.S.-born
respondents. The fraction of people with a high level of English ability is also lower in the refugee
sample. Note that for this sample of refugees who entered the U.S. as adults, English language skills
are much lower than for the refugees who entered the U.S. as children. Despite lower levels of
human capital, refugees have higher labor force participation and employment rates that U.S.-born
respondents. Given their lower human capital, however, it is not surprising that refugees also have
lower labor earnings and higher use of welfare and Supplemental Nutritional Assistance Program
(SNAP) use than U.S.-born respondents.24
The simple difference in outcomes presented in Table 4 between the two groups masks the
fact that outcomes change considerably as refugees age in place. The more years refugees spend in
the country, the better their economics outcomes are. This is graphically illustrated in Figures 8a-8i.
In each of these graphs, we take the cross-sectional data on refugees from the 2010-2014 ACS and
place people into bins that measure the number of years since their arrival in the U.S. This is
measured on the X axis. On the Y axis we report the mean outcome for each cohort. When
appropriate, the gray line is the sample mean for U.S.-born respondents aged 18-65.
In Figure 8a, we show the number of observations for refugees in each cohort by the
number of years spent in the U.S. This value ranges from 366 to 788 with an average of 586. Figure
8b show the average age across years spent in the U.S. For each year of arrival cohort, the mean age

The variables welfare and SNAP use measure whether the respondent is in a household that receives welfare or
SNAP. These are not measured at the individual level.
24

21

increases by about a year. The average age in the refugee population equals the mean for U.S.-born
respondents for the refugee population that has lived in the U.S. for 12-13 years.
In Figures 8c and 8d, we report labor force participation and employment rates, respectively,
for the refugees. Both lines are positively sloped in the early years and cross the average value for
U.S.-born respondents after 4 years for labor force participation and after 7 years for employment.
After a relatively short period of time in the U.S., refugees are working at higher rates than natives of
similar age.
In Figure 8e, we report average earnings. The graph is steeply sloped throughout most of
the years in the analysis. In no year do these earnings surpass the values for natives. This is not
surprising given the much lower educational attainment and English language ability of refugees that
arrive in the U.S. as adults.
In Figures 8f and 8g, we report the fraction of respondents that live in households that
receive SNAP and public assistance (welfare), respectively. SNAP receipt is in excess of 70 percent
in the first year of refugees’ residence in the U.S., but this number falls to 20 percent about 12 years
after arrival. SNAP use among refugees never falls to that of U.S.-born respondents in this age
range (roughly 13 percent).
Part of the pattern for these results could be improvement in language skills. In Figure 8h
we graph the fraction of refugees who self-reported poor English language skills. This number is
essentially zero percent for U.S.-born respondents. Note that this fraction falls from 50 to 15
percent by the 12th year in the U.S. We investigate this further in a few paragraphs.
Next, we consider how much of the difference in educational and economic outcomes
between refugees and U.S.-born respondents is explained by observed characteristics such as
education and language. We run a regression with both groups in the sample, controlling for a cubic

22

in age, sex, and educational levels. We then add a set of dummies for years spent in the U.S. (0-20),
where U.S.-born respondents are the reference group.
In Figure 9a, we report the coefficients and the 95 percent confidence intervals on the years
since arrival dummies for the equation where employment is the outcome of interest. We only
report the numbers for employment – the results for labor force participation are the same in
general terms. The numbers in this graph correspond to the numbers in Figure 8d. In that figure,
2-3 years after arrival, refugees are working 10 percentage points less than U.S.-born respondents.
Controlling for observed characteristics, in Figure 9a this shrinks to a 0-2 percentage point
difference and is statistically insignificant. In Figure 8d, refugees that have spent 17-20 years in the
U.S. are 7 percentage points more likely to be working than their U.S.-born counterparts.
Controlling for observed characteristics, this increases to about a 10 percentage point difference in
Figure 9a, which is statistically significant. Controlling for age, education and gender, the
employment rate difference between refugees and U.S.-born residents falls by an average of about 3
percentage points across all 21 coefficients.
In Figure 9b, we control for language ability by adding in controls for the four categories of
self-reported English language ability. The slope of the graph does not change at all and the
coefficients increase by about 1.4 percentage points on average across all of the 21 coefficients. In
general, language ability cannot explain the slope of the results or much of the explained difference
between the two groups.
In Figures 9c and 9d, we repeat the same exercise with earnings as the outcome of interest.
These numbers correspond to the raw differences observed in Figure 8e. In the first six years after
arrival, controlling for age, sex and education explains about 40 percent of the raw difference
observed in Figure 8e. As refugees age in place, that fraction drops. For refugees that have spent
16-20 years in the U.S., the addition of controls only explains 20-25 percent of the observed
23

difference. Adding controls for English language ability shifts the curve up vertically by about
$2,000. This means that about 60 percent of the difference between refugees and U.S.-born
respondents observed in Figure 8e for the first five (0-4) and last five (16-20) years spent in the U.S.
can be explained by differences in language and education.
In Figures 9e and 9e, we repeat this exercise using a dummy for whether the respondent is
on welfare as the outcome of interest. After about eight years in the U.S., in most years, there is no
statistically significant difference in welfare usage between refugees and U.S.-born respondents once
we control for education and language. The exceptions are at 10, 12 and 20 years after arrival,
although at 11 and 18 years after arrival the coefficient is of marginal statistical significance. The
additional of language controls changes these results very little.
In Figures 9g and 9h we consider outcomes for regressions where the dummy variable for
whether a family is enrolled in SNAP is the outcome of interest. The results of these regressions are
comparable to the raw results from Figure 8f. Note that the raw difference is reduced by about 20
percent by controlling for education for people new to the country (0-4 years after arrival), but
education explains roughly 60 percent of the difference for those who have resided in the country
for 16-20 years. By adding controls for language ability, we explain a further 25 percent of the raw
difference for the first 5 years in the country and 85 to 100 percent of the difference for those who
have spent 16-20 years in the country. For those in the country between 13 and 20 years, the only
statistically significant coefficient in Figure 9h is for groups that have resided in the country for 18
years.
Overall, the outcomes of refugees change dramatically as they age in place. Employment
and earnings increase with the number of years in the country, while use of support programs
declines. After only a few years in the U.S., refugees work at statistically significant higher rates than
their U.S.-born counterparts. Refugees always earn less on average than their U.S born counterparts,
24

but controlling for education and language ability removes about 60 percent of the earnings
differences. Controlling for education and language, after about a decade in the country, there is
little statistical difference in welfare and SNAP use between refugees and natives.

VI. Measuring the Fiscal Costs and Benefits of Refugees
There has been significant debate of late about the fiscal costs associated with the refugee
resettlement program. These costs include not only the direct costs of resettlement, but, as the
numbers in the previous section indicate, there are also indirect costs of resettlement in that refugees
are eligible for government transfer programs. A number of groups have estimated these indirect
costs and found them to be large. The Heritage Foundation estimated that Obama’s proposal to
admit 10,000 additional Syrian refugees would cost U.S. taxpayers $6.5 billion during the refugees’
lifetimes.25 These estimates assume that all Syrian refugees are low-skilled workers, would pay taxes
and receive assistance at the same level of low-skilled immigrant workers, and would live another 50
years. The Center for Immigration Studies estimated the cost of resettling a family of 4 from the
Middle East to be about $258,000 during the first 5 years after resettlement.26 This estimate, using
ORR survey data, assumes refugees contribute nothing whatsoever in taxes and assigns public
education costs for refugee children to the parents.
In this section, we consider this question in more detail and ask: What are the fiscal costs of
resettling adult refugees? To answer this question we need to focus on a few key facts. First, it is
important to consider the temporal nature of this question. There are large upfront costs to
resettlement, and refugees start their U.S. residence with high public assistance use, but the results in
the previous section indicate that outcomes for refugees change considerably over their life course.

25
26

https://www.numbersusa.com/news/additional-syrian-refugees-would-cost-taxpayers-65-billion
http://cis.org/High-Cost-of-Resettling-Middle-Eastern-Refugees

25

Employment rates and earnings increase rapidly over time for refugees, despite their educational and
language ability deficits when compared to native-born adults. Second, although there are costs to
running a refugee resettlement program, there may be benefits as well. These benefits can have
many dimensions, but in this context we look specifically at the taxes paid by refuges to all levels of
government.

a. Methodology
Refugees’ costs to the government come in two main forms: the direct cost of resettlement
and the indirect costs through participation in social safety net programs. The direct costs of
resettling refugees are generated by the Administration for Children and Families (ACF) and the
Bureau of Population, Refugees, and Migration (PRM). The ACF provides medical and social
assistance to refugees, asylees, special visa holders, and Cuban and Haitian entrants. They also serve
unaccompanied minors, trafficking victims, and victims of torture. Since the budgets for these three
groups are separate, those costs were removed when considering the ACF budget. Over the past five
years, the ACF has annually served, on average, 120,000 refugees, asylees, special visa holders, and
Cuban and Haitian entrants with a budget of around $600 million. The average cost per person
receiving services over the past five years is $4,870. Additionally, the Bureau of Population,
Refugees, and Migration (PRM) incurs costs while helping to resettle refugees. They operate
overseas and bear many of the administrative and relocation costs associated with resettlement.
Their budget for refugee resettlement has been around $300 million to serve around 60,000 refugees
per year. Their average annual cost per refugee is $5,324. We combine these two totals to estimate a
direct cost to the U.S. of $10,194 per refugee. Our derived total estimate is slightly higher than that
used by the Institute for Immigration Studies.

26

There are six social insurance programs that account for the majority of government
payments to U.S. citizens: welfare, Supplemental Security Income (SSI), Social Security, food stamps,
Medicare, and Medicaid. The ACS reports the dollar amounts of welfare, SSI, and Social Security
payments received by a respondent. Food stamps, Medicare, and Medicaid are dummy variables in
the ACS, indicating whether or not the respondent is enrolled in the program. We imputed the
dollar amount of food stamps received using Food and Nutrition Service guidelines, which are based
on family size and income.27 The Centers for Medicare & Medicaid Services track the per capita cost
of Medicare, by state and year.28 We assumed a respondent who is on Medicare costs the average
amount per enrollee in the state they lived in. Finally, the annual Actuarial Report on the Financial
Outlook for Medicaid tracks average Medicaid costs of those enrolled in the program.29 The report
breaks down average costs into four types of enrollees: adults, children, the disabled, and the elderly.
A respondent on Medicaid was assumed to cost the average of adult enrollees if their SSI spending
was 0. If their SSI receipt was greater than 0, we assumed they cost the average amount of a disabled
enrollee. In 2014, the Medicaid report broke out costs by newly eligible adults and non-newly eligible
adults. Newly eligible adults made up 4.3 out of the 19.3 million adults enrolled in Medicaid in 2014.
We assume that refugees followed the enrollment patterns of the general population and cost the
weighted average of newly eligible and non-newly eligible adults.
One cost that is excluded from this analysis is the cost of public education for refugee
children. The fiscal analysis is limited to refugees entering as adults. Functionally, we can treat
refugee children as a separate economic entity. Society spends money on their behalf to educate
them during their K-12 years. The previous section suggests that refugees entering as children have

https://www.fns.usda.gov/snap/how-much-could-i-receive
https://www.cms.gov/Research-Statistics-Data-and-Systems/Statistics-Trends-and-Reports/Medicare-GeographicVariation/GV_PUF.html
29 https://www.medicaid.gov/medicaid/financing-and-reimbursement/actuarial-report/index.html
27
28

27

educational outcomes similar to those born in the U.S. and have similar employment rates and
earnings as well. If we treat children as their own economic entity, then the expected return for
paying K-12 education for refugee children should be comparable to the return to educating a U.S.
child. If the investment in the education of U.S.-born children results in an economic benefit to
society in this calculation, then we would expect that the investment in the education of refugee
children to result in a similar benefit.
The next step in this analysis is to examine refugees’ tax contributions. We used TAXSIM, a
program developed by the National Bureau of Economic Research (NBER), to estimate the tax
payments of refugees.30 TAXSIM considers 22 inputs per person, including year, state of residence,
dependents, filing status, income, and payments that could affect deductions. Based on this
information, TAXSIM returns an estimate of federal, state, and FICA tax liabilities. In addition to
these three taxes, ACS records the amount of property taxes paid by the respondent.
We made several assumptions for TAXSIM. We estimated that 60 percent of money paid on
a mortgage was interest. Anyone under the age of 18 was assumed to be a dependent and anyone
over the age of 22 was assumed to be independent. For respondents between 18 and 22, if they were
attending school, they were classified as a dependent; otherwise they were assumed to be
independent. Finally, we assumed that the share of taxes a person is responsible for is the share of
income they bring in to the family. For example, consider a couple composed of one refugee and
one non-refugee who file their taxes together. If the refugee brings in 70% of the income, and the
couple pays $10,000 in taxes, we attributed $7,000 of the taxes paid to the refugee. We count the
amount of FICA taxes payed by both the employee and the employer. In this instance, we are not
interested in tax incidence but rather taxes collected.

30

For more information about the program, please see http://users.nber.org/~taxsim/.

28

Finally, we assumed that refugees paid the same amount in sales taxes as they did in state
income tax. Data from the Quarterly Summary of State and Local Tax Revenues, between quarter 1
of 2010 and quarter 4 of 2014, indicates that revenues from state income tax and sales tax have been
essentially the same over this period, with only a 2% aggregate difference.31 This most likely
understates the amount of sales tax paid by refugees, as it is a regressive tax. Summing state income,
federal income, FICA, sales, and property taxes, we estimated the amount of taxes paid by a refugee.
Combining the estimate of taxes paid with the relocation and social insurance costs, we
generate an estimate of the net fiscal costs of refugees to the U.S. government. While the ORR
conducts a survey tracking refugees’ economic outcomes after up to 5 years in the U.S., no study to
date has tracked refugees over a longer period of time.
We also need to adjust for the time value of money. We use a two percent discount rate. The
20th year spent in the U.S. is considered the base year. Year 19 net fiscal costs are multiplied by 1.02,
year 18 costs are multiplied by (1.02)2, and so on. Direct resettlement costs are assumed to have been
incurred in the first year a refugee enters the U.S. which in the synthetic cohort was 10 years ago, so
we multiplied these costs by (1.02)20. Summing discounted government costs and tax payments from
year 0 through year 20 yields the net fiscal cost to the government of refugees during their first 20
years in the U.S.
In order to analyze only working-age refugees, we limited the dataset to those who entered
the U.S. between the ages of 18 and 45. Thus, the upper age limit for a refugee in our analysis is
someone who entered the U.S. at age 45, has been in the country for 20 years, and was 65 years old
at the time of the ACS.

b. Results for Refugees that Entered as Adults Aged 18-45
31

http://www.census.gov/govs/qtax/

29

In Figure 9, we report the time path of the present value of fiscal costs (transfers to refugees),
fiscal benefits (taxes) and the net benefits for our refugee cohort that entered the U.S. from ages 1845 during their first 20 years in the country. The light gray line represents the social insurance costs
while the dotted line represents taxes paid. Values are discounted using the two percent discount
rate. Note that social insurance costs decline considerably over time while taxes paid increase. The
black line represents the net transfers and the large negative value in the first period includes the
relocation costs incurred during the refugees’ first year in the U.S. Note that fiscal costs are larger
than benefits for the first eight years in the U.S. Starting in year 9, refugees contribute more in taxes
than they cost to the government in social insurance costs.
In Table 5, we aggregate these totals over the refugees first twenty years in the U.S. The
results indicate that when properly discounted, the U.S. spends on average $15,148 in relocation
costs and $92,217 in benefits from social programs over a refugee’s first 20 years in the U.S., but
refugees pay a total of $128,689 in taxes over this time period. Over their first 20 years in the U.S.,
refugees that arrived in the U.S. aged 18-45 pay about $21,324 more in taxes than then they take
home in benefits.
We made several assumptions in our analysis about the discount rate, the Refugee
Concentration Ratio cutoff, and the age range of refugees. Table 6 shows the results of this analysis
with different parameters. In row 1 we replicate the results from Table 5 with the key assumptions
we made for this analysis (the 0.7 concentration ratio, 2% discount rate and people that arrived aged
18-45). In rows 2 and 3 of the table, we increase and decrease the discount rate, respectively. It is
no surprise that as we increase the discount rate, we bring into the present larger up-front costs and
hence the average net present value (NPV) of the fiscal benefits of resettling refugees declines. In
rows 4 and 5, we break the results up into two different age groups: 18-29 and 30-45. Since more
time in the U.S. tends to produce better outcomes, and younger workers have more time to make up
30

for poor initial conditions, it is also no surprise that we find much large fiscal benefits from
resettling younger refugees than older ones. However, we still find a net fiscal benefit of $4,619 of
resettling refugees who are 30-45 when they enter the U.S. In rows 6 and 7, we lower and raise the
refugee concentration ratio (RCR) cutoffs by 0.1, respectively. The numbers increase slightly when
we use a smaller cutoff and they go down when we use a larger cutoff. While the amount of money
refugees bring in to the government varies with the parameters chosen, all results are positive,
indicating the estimates are not overly sensitive to the parameter selections.
There are some costs that are not included in this analysis. One is the cost that refugees
might generate as a result of interaction with the criminal justice system. The average annual cost of
incarceration during the period we consider is around $32,000/year.32 Even a modest fraction of
refugees are incarcerated this could generate a large fiscal cost to all levels of government. We do
not believe this is an important cost in this case. The ACS is address-based survey, and much like
the Census Long Form Public Use Micro Samples, it surveys people in group quarters, including
prisons. Upon examination, we find only 0.5 percent of our refugees sample residing in groups
quarters such as prisons (compared to 2.34 percent for the U.S.-born population) at the time the
survey was taken, suggesting this cost is not a large value.
We also would like to extend this analysis to include a longer term follow-up. This is
important because as the refugee population ages into their post-65 years, they become eligible for
Medicare and Social Security. The problem we face with our data sample is that past the age of 65,
mortality rates start to increase dramatically. A post-65 person that has died has zero Medicare
costs, so any accurate estimate of Medicare and Social Security costs must build mortality into the
model. With the synthetic cohorts, we only observe people in the analysis that are alive at the time of

32

http://archive.vera.org/sites/default/files/resources/downloads/price-of-prisons-updated-version-021914.pdf.

31

the survey. Without estimates of mortality patterns of refugees, it is difficult to build in expenditures
after 65.

VII. Conclusion
The growth of the refugee program under the Obama administration and its subsequent
retrenchment under the early stages of the Trump administration have focused attention on the U.S.
Refugee Admissions Program. For a variety of reasons, despite the size of the program, we know
little about how refugees fare long term in the U.S. In this paper, we develop a way to identify
refugees in the ACS 2010-2014 sample. We demonstrate that our sample represents about one-third
of refugees resettled to the U.S. over the last 25 years and is broadly consistent with the
demographic characteristics of all refugees to the U.S. over that time period.
Looking at how well refugees do after arrival to the U.S., the results differ based on the age
of arrival. When refugees arrive as children, they do as well as U.S.-born residents on measures of
educational attainment. The exception is that refugees who arrive as older teens, who do
substantially worse than their U.S.-born counterparts. This is primarily because of language barriers
as well as the fact they are much more likely to arrive as unaccompanied minors and hence enter the
foster care program upon arrival. Given the success of younger arrivals, the disparity in results
between arrivals of younger and older refugee children suggests that any increased expenditures
might be more effective if targeted to older teen arrivals.
Refugees that arrive as adults have much poorer human capital measures than U.S.-born
residents of similar ages. For example, they have fewer years of education and much weaker English
language skills. Subsequently, early on in their time in the U.S., adult refugees have lower levels of
employment and earnings and higher welfare participation than their U.S.-born peers. These
outcomes change dramatically over time, with earnings and employment increasingly rapidly and
32

welfare use declining as refugees age in place. After about six years in the U.S., refugees have higher
labor force participation and employment rates compared to similarly-aged U.S.-born residents.
After about 10 years, they have statistically indistinguishable use of welfare and SNAP. Despite
these successes, they never earn as much on average as similarly-aged natives.
A number of commentators have argued that the refugee program is too expensive given the
direct costs of resettlement and the high costs of participation in social service programs by
refugees. Our results above indicate that the intertemporal dimension of this problem is key in
examining how one views this program. At the start of their U.S. residency, refugees do extract high
costs because of the direct costs of relocation and high welfare use. However, over time these costs
decrease quickly, and our estimates show that over a twenty-year period, refugees pay $21,000 more
in taxes than they receive in benefits.

33

References
Antecol, Heather, and Kelly Bedard. 2006. “Unhealthy Assimilation: Why do Immigrants Converge
to American Health Status Levels.” Demography 43(2): 337-360.
Capps, Randy, Kathleen Newland, Susan Fratzke, Susanna Groves, Gregory Auclair, Michael Fix,
and Margie McHugh. 2015. The Integration Outcomes of U.S. Washington, DC: Migration Policy
Institute.
Chiswick, Barry R. 1978. “The Effect of Americanization on the Earnings if Foreign-born Men.”
Journal of Political Economy 86(5): 897-921.
Chiswick, Barry R. 1991. “Speaking, Reading, and Earnings among Low-Skilled Immigrants.”
Journal of Labor Economics 9(2): 149-170.
Chiswick, Barry R. 1993. “Soviet Jews in the United States: An Analysis of the Linguistic and
Economic Adjustment.” The International Migration Review 27(2): 260-285.
Beaman, Lori A. 2012. “Social Networks and the Dynamics of Labour Market Outcomes: Evidence
from Refugees Resettled in the U.S..” Review of Economic Studies 79(1): 128-161.
Borjas, George J. 1985. “Assimilation Changes in Cohort Quality, and the Earnings of Immigrants.”
Journal of Labor Economics 3(4): 463-89.
Borjas, George J. 1995. “Assimilation and Changes in Cohort Quality Revisited: What Happened to
Immigrant Earnings in the 1980s?” Journal of Labor Economics 13(2):201-45.
Borjas, George J. 2003. “The Labor Demand Curve is Downward Sloping: Reexamining the Impact
of Immigrants on the Labor Market.” Quarterly Journal of Economics 118(4): 1335-74.
Borjas, George J., and Lawrence F. Katz. 2007. “The Evolution of the Mexican-Born Workforce in
the United States.” In Mexican Immigration to the United States, ed. George J. Borjas, 13-55. Chicago:
University of Chicago Press.
Borjas, G.J. and S. Trejo. 1991. “Immigration Participation in the Welfare System.” Industrial and
Labor Relations Review 44:195–211.
Connor, Phillip. 2010. “Explaining the Refugg Gap: Economic Outcomes of Refugees versus Other
Immigrants.” Journal of Refugee Studies 23(3):377-397.
Card, David. 2001. “Immigrant Inflows, Native Outflows, and the Local Labor Market Impacts of
Higher Immigration.” Journal of Labor Economics 19:22–64.
Connor, Phillip. 2010. “Explaining rhe Refugee Gap: Economic Outcomes of Refugees versus
Other Immigrants.” Journal of Refugee Studies 23(2): 377-397.
Feenberg, Daniel, and Elisabeth Coutts. 1993. “An Introduction to the TAXSIM Model.” Journal of
Policy Analysis and Management 12(1): 189-194.
34

LaLonde, Robert J., and Robert H. Topel. 1992. “The assimilation of immigrants in the U.S. labor
market”. In Immigration and the work force: Economic consequences for the United States and source areas, ed.
George J. Borjas and Richard B. Freeman, 67–92. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
Potocky-Tripodi, Miriam. 2003. “Refugee Economic Adaptation: Theory, Evidence, and
Implications for Policy and Practice.” Journal of Social Service Research 30(1) 63-91.
Potocky-Tripodi, Miriam. 2004. “The Role of Social Capital in Immigrant and Refugee Economic
Adaptation.” Journal of Social Service Research 31(1): 59-91.
Ruggles, Steven, Katie Genadek, Ronald Goeken, Josiah Grover, and Matthew Sobek.
2015. Integrated Public Use Microdata Series: Version 6.0 [dataset]. Minneapolis: University of Minnesota.
http://doi.org/10.18128/D010.V6.0.
Rumbaut, Ruben G. (1989a) “Portraits, Patterns and Predictors of the Refugee Adaptation Process:
Results and Reflections from the IHARP Panel Study” . In Haines, David W. (ed.) Refugees as
Immigrants. Totowa, NJ: Rowan and Allenheld.
Rumbaut, Ruben G. (1989b) “The Structure of Refuge: Southeast Asian Refugees in the U.S. 1975–
85.” International Review of Comparative Public Policy 1: 97–129.
Schoellman, Todd. 2016. “Early Childhood Human Capital and Development.” American Economic
Journal: Macroeconomics 8(3): 145-174.
Takeda, Joe. 2000. “Psychological and Economic Adaptation of Iraqi Adult Male Refugees.” Journal
of Social Service Research 26(3): 1-21.
Trejo, Stephen J. 1997. “Why do Mexican-Americans earn low wages?” Journal of Political Economy
105(6):1235–68.

35

Figure 1
Plot of Refugees by Country and Year of Entry from ORR versus
Immigrants by Country/Year of Entry from ACS

Refugee Counts by Country/Year from ORR

20,000

15,000

10,000

5,000

0
0

5,000
10,000
15,000
Immigrant Counts by Country/Year from ACS

36

20,000

Figure 2:
Comparison of Refugees Identified in the 2010-2014 ACS that Entered 1990-2014 with
Numbers from the Office of Refugee Resettlement over the Same Period
A: By Age

B: By Continent of Origin

40%
35%
30%

60%
53.5%

35.0%
50%

42.5%

28.6%
40%
19.7%

20%

Percent

25%

Percent

36.3%

23.6%
19.2%

16.8%
14.1%
12.8%

15%

10%

30%

26.9%
19.6%

20%
7.8% 8.1%

10%

4.6% 3.9%

5%

15.8%

3.9%
2.0%

5.2%
0.0%

0%

0%

Africa
0-17

18-24

25-34

35-44
Age Group
ORR

45-54

55-64

Europe

North
America
Continent

65+

ACS

DHS

0.1% 0.0%

0.1% 0.0%

South
America

Unknown

ACS

D: By State of Resettlement

C: By Gender
16%

60%

50%

Asia

48.9%

51.1%

50.1%

14%

49.9%

45 degree
line

12%
40%

ACS

Percent

10%
30%

20%

8%

6%
4%

10%

2%
0%
Female

Male
Gender
ORR

0%
0%

2%

ACS

37

4%

6%

8%
DHS

10%

12%

14%

16%

Figure 3
High School Graduation Rates for Refugees Aged 19-24 in 2010-2014 ACS
By Age at Entry to the U.S.
A: High School Graduation Rates
100%

% High School Graduate

95%
Average for
US born 19-24
year olds

90%

85%

80%

75%

70%
4

5

6

7

8

9

10
11
Age at entry

12

13

14

15

16

B: Regression Coefficients (95% CI) for HS Graduation Model
0.30

Regression Coefficients

0.20

0.10
Average for
US born 19-24
year olds

0.00

-0.10

-0.20

-0.30
4

5

6

7

8

9

10
11
Age at entry

12

13

14

15

16

C: Regression Coefficients (95% CI) for HS Graduation Model,
Controlling for Mother's Prescence and Language
0.30

Regression Coefficients

0.20

0.10

Average for
US born 19-24
year olds

0.00

-0.10

-0.20

-0.30
4

5

6

7

8

9

10
11
Age at entry

38

12

13

14

15

16

Figure 4
High School Graduation Rates for Refugees Aged 23-28 in 2010-2014 ACS
By Age at Entry to the U.S.
A: College Graduation Rates
60%

50%

% College Graduate

Average for
US born 23-28
year olds

40%

30%

20%

10%

0%
8

9

10

11

12

13
14
Age at entry

15

16

17

18

19

B: Regression Coefficients (95% CI) for
College Graduation Model
0.30

Regression Coefficients

0.20
0.10

Average for
US born 23-28
year olds

0.00
-0.10
-0.20
-0.30
-0.40
8

9

10

11

12

13
14
Age at entry

15

16

17

18

19

C: Regression Coefficients (95% CI) for College Graduation
Model, Controlling for Mother's Prescence and Language
0.30

Average for
US born 23-28
year olds

Regression Coefficients

0.20
0.10
0.00
-0.10
-0.20
-0.30
-0.40
8

9

10

11

12

13
14
Age at entry

39

15

16

17

18

19

Figure 5
Characteristics of Refugees from 2010-2014 ACS that Arrived within 3 Years of the Survey,
By Age at Entry to the U.S.
A: Percent of Refugees Entering With Poor English Ability
versus Age at Entry to the US
40%
35%
30%

Percent

25%
20%
15%
10%
5%
0%
5

6

7

8

9

10
11
12
Age at entry

13

14

15

16

17

B: Percent of Refugees not Attached to a
Birth Mother in the IPUMS, by Age of Entry
45%
40%
35%

Percent

30%
25%
20%
15%
10%
5%
0%
0

1

2

3

4

5

6

7

8
9 10
Age at entry

40

11

12

13

14

15

16

17

Figure 6
Impact of Age at Entry to the U.S. on Economic Outcomes (95% Confidence Interval)
For Refugees Aged 23-28, 2010-2014 ACS

A: Labor Force Participation
(US born mean=0.806)

B: Employment
(US born mean=0.717)

0.15

0.08
0.06

0.10

0.04

Coefficient

Coefficient

0.02
0.05

0.00

0.00
-0.02
-0.04
-0.06

-0.05

-0.08

-0.10
-0.10

-0.12
8-10

11-13

14-16

17-19

8-10

11-13

Age at entry

C: Earnings
(US born mean=$22,453)

17-19

D: ln(Earnings | Earnings > 0)
(US born mean=$31,462)

$4,000

0.15

$3,000

0.10

$2,000

0.05

$1,000

0.00
Coefficient

Coefficient

14-16

Age at entry

$0

-$1,000
-$2,000

-0.05
-0.10

-0.15

-$3,000

-0.20

-$4,000
-$5,000

-0.25
8-10

11-13

14-16

17-19

8-10

11-13

Age at entry

14-16

17-19

Age at entry

E: School Enrollment
(US born mean=0.210)

F: Earnings Controlling for School Enrollment
(US born mean=$22,453)

0.25

$4,000
$3,000

0.20

$2,000
$1,000

Coefficient

Coefficient

0.15

0.10

0.05

$0

-$1,000
-$2,000
-$3,000

0.00

-$4,000
-0.05

-$5,000
8-10

11-13

14-16

17-19

8-10

Age at entry

11-13

14-16

Age at entry

41

17-19

Figure 7
High School and College Graduation Rates for Refugees from 2010-2014 ACS,
By Age of Entry into U.S. and Age at Time of Survey
A: High School Graduation
100%
90.3%

90%
80%
70%

92.9%

88.5%

93.1%
91.5%
88.1%

91.6%
86.5%

84.5%

68.9%
75.0%
69.8%

Percent

60%
50%
40%
30%

20%
10%
0%
19-23

24-28
Age when surveyed

Entered age 14

Entered age 15

29-33

Entered age 16

US Born

B: College Graduation
50%

39.3%

40%

38.5%

35%

31.1%

Percent

30%
25%

45.0%

44.5%

45%

27.7%

28.0%

27.6%

21.4%

20.8%

20%
15%

10%

13.3%
10.1%

5%
0%
23-27
Entered age 17

28-32
Age when surveyed
Entered age 18

42

Entered age 19

33-37
US Born

Figure 8
Outcomes of Refugees that Entered the U.S. at Ages 18-45 as a Function of Years in the U.S.,
Compared to U.S. Born Adults, 18-65

B: Age
60

1,000

50

800

40

Age

Observations

A: Number of Observations
1,200

600

Average US born

30

400

20

200

10

0

0
0

1

2

3

4

5

6

7

0

8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20
Years since arrival

1

2

3

4

5

6

7

8

C: Labor Force Participation

10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20

D: Employed

100%

100%

90%

90%

80%

80%

Average US born

70%

70%

60%

Average US born

60%

Percent

Percent

9

Years since arrival

50%

50%

40%

40%

30%

30%

20%

20%

10%

10%

0%
0

1

2

3

4

5

6

7

8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20
Years since arrival

0%
0

43

1

2

3

4

5

6

7

8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20
Years since arrival

Figure 8 (Continued)
Outcomes of Refugees that Entered the U.S. at Ages 18-45 as a Function of Years in the U.S.,
Compared to U.S. Born Adults, Aged 18-65

E: Labor Earnings

F: On Welfare

$40,000

30%

Average US born

$35,000

25%

$30,000
20%

Percent

Earnings

$25,000
$20,000

15%

$15,000
10%

$10,000
5%

$5,000
$0
0

1

2

3

4

5

6

7

8

9

Average US born

0%

10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20

0

Years since arrival

1

2

3

G: On SNAP

4

5

6

7

8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20
Years since arrival

H: Poor English Language Ability

80%

60%

70%

50%

60%
40%

Percent

Percent

50%
40%

30%

30%

20%

20%

Average US born

10%

10%
0%

0%
0

1

2

3

4

5

6

7

8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20
Years since arrival

0

44

1

2

3

4

5

6

7

8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20
Years since arrival

Figure 9
Impact of Years since Arrival for Refugees that Entered the U.S. at Ages 18-45
Compared to U.S. Born Adults, Aged 18-65
B: Employment, with Controls for Language Ability
(US born mean = 0.672)

0.20

0.20

0.10

0.10

0.00

0.00

Coefficient

Coefficient

A: Employment
(US born mean = 0.672)

-0.10

-0.10

-0.20

-0.20

-0.30

-0.30

-0.40
0

1

2

3

4

5

6

7

-0.40

8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20
Years since arrival

0

1

$5,000

$5,000

$0

$0

-$5,000

-$5,000

-$10,000

-$15,000

3

4

5

6

7

8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20
Years since arrival

D: Earnings, with Controls for Language Ability
(US born mean=$34,657)

Coefficient

Coefficient

C: Earnings
(US born mean=$34,657)

2

-$10,000

-$15,000

-$20,000

-$20,000
0

1

2

3

4

5

6

7

8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20
Years since arrival

0

45

1

2

3

4

5

6

7

8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20
Years since arrival

Figure 9 (Continued)
Impact of Years since Arrival for Refugees that Entered the U.S. at Ages 18-45
Compared to U.S. Born Adults, Aged 18-65
F: On Welfare with Language Ability Controls
(US born mean = .131)

0.25

0.25

0.20

0.20

0.15

0.15

Coefficient

Coefficient

E: On Welfare
(US born mean = .131)

0.10

0.10

0.05

0.05

0.00

0.00

-0.05

-0.05
0

1

2

3

4

5

6

7

8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20
Years since arrival

0

1

2

0.50

0.40

0.40

0.30

0.30

6

7

8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20
Years since arrival

0.20

0.10

0.10

0.00

0.00

-0.10

5

(US born mean = .131)

0.50

0.20

4

H: On SNAP with Language Ability Controls

Coefficient

Coefficient

G: On SNAP
(US born mean = .131)

3

-0.10
0

1

2

3

4

5

6

7

8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20
Years since arrival

0

46

1

2

3

4

5

6

7

8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20
Years since arrival

Figure 10
Estimated New Fiscal Costs of Refugees Aged 18-45 at Arrival by the Years Since Arrival
Net Costs per Year
$15,000

Annual costs in constant dollars

$10,000
$5,000
$0
0

1

2

3

4

5

6

7

8

9

10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20

-$5,000

-$10,000
-$15,000
-$20,000

-$25,000

Years since arrival

Social insurance costs

Tax revenues

47

Net annual costs

Table 1
Refugees Represented in 2010-2014 ACS with
Refugee Concentration Ratio ≥0.7
C OUNTRY (Y EARS )
A FGHANISTAN (1991-92, 2001-03)
A LBANIA (1991)
A ZERBAIJAN (2003-04)
B HUTAN (2008-14)
B OSNIA (1993-02)
B URMA (2007-14)
C AMBODIA (1990)
C ROATIA (2000-01)
C ZECHOSLOVAKIA (1990-91)
E RITREA (2007, 2009-10, 2013-14)
E STONIA (2004)
E THIOPIA (1990-93)
I RAQ (1992-95, 2001, 2008-11, 2013-14)
L AOS (1990-97, 2004-05)
L IBERIA (1993, 1999, 2001, 2004-06)
L IBYA (1991)
M OLDAVIA (2001, 2004)
S ERBIA (1999, 2002-03)
S IERRA L EONE (2001, 2003-04)
S OMALIA (1992-98, 2000-01, 2003-14)
S UDAN (1994-95, 1998-06, 2012-14)
T OGO (1995, 2000)
V IETNAM (1994-95)
D EM . R EP . OF THE C ONGO (1993-94, 2000, 2004-14)
Table 2
Descriptive Statistics, 2010-2014 ACS
Means (Standard deviations)
Refugees, aged 4-16 at
Variable
arrival, aged 19-24 at time U.S.-born adults aged 19-24 at
of the survey
time of the survey
Age
21.6 (1.7)
21.3 (1.7)
% female
50.5 (50.0)
48.8 (50.0)
% with a high school degree
87.5 (33.1)
90.4 (29.4)
% with ≥ good English language
96.7(17.9)
99.6(6.3)
skills
Sample size
Standard deviation in parentheses

1,366

48

1,036,474

Table 3
Descriptive Statistics, 2010-2014 ACS

Variable
Age
% female
% with a high school degree
% with a college degree
% w/ ≥ good English language skills
% in labor force
% employed
Labor earnings

Means (Standard deviations)
Refugees, aged 8-19 at
arrival, aged 23-28 at
U.S.-born adults aged 23-28 at
time of the survey
time of the survey
25.4 (1.7)
25.5 (1.7)
49.7 (50.0)
49.6 (50.0)
87.6 (33.0)
91.4 (28.1)
38.3 (48.6)
40.0 (49.0)
93.9(23.9)
99.6(6.0)
80.7 (39.5)
80.6 (39.6)
69.3 (46.2)
71.7 (45.1)
$20,664 ($24,052)
$22,546 ($24,955)

Sample size
Standard deviation in parentheses

1,432

914,752

Table 4
Descriptive Statistics, 2010-2014 ACS
Means (Standard deviations)
Refugees, aged 18-45 at
Variable
arrival, aged 18-65 at
U.S.-born adults aged 18-65 at
time of the survey
time of the survey
Age
40.1 (10.0)
42.3 (14.1)
% female
50.8 (50.0)
50.7 (50.0)
% with a high school degree
67.1 (47.0)
90.8 (28.9)
% with some college
37.3(48.4)
62.6(48.4)
% with a college degree
23.5(42.4)
36.7(48.2)
% with ≥ good English language skills
62.3(48.5)
99.7(5.3)
% in labor force
76.6 (42.4)
73.5 (44.1)
% employed
68.5 (46.5)
67.2 (46.9)
Labor earnings
$22,862 ($32,326)
$34,657 ($52,245)
% on welfare
9.3 (29.0)
3.0 (17.2)
% on SNAP
38.7 (48.7)
4.8 (33.8)
Sample size
Standard deviation in parentheses

12,309

49

8,166,161

Table 5
Summary of Fiscal Costs for Adult Refugees Aged 18-45 at the Time of Entry in the 2010-2014
ACS over Their First 20 Years in the U.S.
Relocation
costs
-$15,148

Social
insurance
costs
-$92,217

Taxes
Paid
$128,689

Net
Payment
$21,324

Table 6
Sensitivity Analysis, Fiscal Costs of Resettling Adult Refugees

Row
1
2
3
4
5
6
7

Refugee
ratio
0.7
0.7
0.7
0.7
0.7
0.6
0.8

Age
range
18-45
18-45
18-45
18-29
30-45
18-45
18-45

Discount
rate
2%
4%
0%
2%
2%
2%
2%

50

# country/year
pairs
137
137
137
137
137
153
113

# of obs.
From ACS
12,309
12,309
12,309
6,708
5,601
14,005
8,985

Average
NPV
$21,324
$10,004
$28,065
$33,241
$4,619
$27,929
$14,891

