                            NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




   WILLINGNESS TO PAY FOR LOW WATER FOOTPRINT FOOD CHOICES DURING
                              DROUGHT

                                     Hannah Krovetz
                                      Rebecca Taylor
                                     Sofia Villas-Boas

                                    Working Paper 23495
                            http://www.nber.org/papers/w23495


                    NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                             1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                               Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    June 2017




We thank the College of Natural Resources at UC Berkeley for financial support in the survey
implementation. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily
reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2017 by Hannah Krovetz, Rebecca Taylor, and Sofia Villas-Boas. All rights reserved. Short
sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission
provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Willingness to Pay for Low Water Footprint Food Choices During Drought
Hannah Krovetz, Rebecca Taylor, and Sofia Villas-Boas
NBER Working Paper No. 23495
June 2017
JEL No. Q18,Q25,Q54,Q51,Q21,M30

                                          ABSTRACT

In the context of recent California drought years, we investigate empirically whether consumers
are willing to pay for more efficient water usage in the production of four California agricultural
products. We implement an internet survey choice experiment for avocados, almonds, lettuce,
and tomatoes to elicit consumer valuation for water efficiency via revealed choices. We estimate
a model of consumer choices where a product is defined as a bundle of three attributes: price,
production method (conventional or organic), and water usage (average or efficient). Varying the
attribute space presented to consumers in the experimental choice design gives us the data
variation to estimate a discrete choice model—both conditional logit specifications and random
coefficient mixed logit specifications. We find that on average consumers have a significant
positive marginal utility towards water-efficiency and estimate that there is an implied positive
willingness to pay (WTP) of about 12 cents per gallon of water saved on average. Moreover,
informing consumers about the drought severity increases the WTP for low water footprint
options, but not significantly. We find that there is heterogeneity in the WTP along respondents'
education, race, and also with respect to stated environmental concern. Our findings have policy
implications in that they suggest there to be a market based potential to nudge consumers who
want to decrease their water footprint and follow a more sustainable diet, namely, by revealing
information on the product's water footprint in a form of a label. Simulations of removing low
water footprint labels from the choice set attributes imply significant consumer surplus losses,
especially for the more educated, white, and more environmentally concerned respondents.

Hannah Krovetz                                   Sofia Villas-Boas
Department of Agricultural                       Department of Agricultural
 & Resource Economics                             & Resource Economics
University of California, Berkeley               University of California, Berkeley
hannah@krovetz.net                               310 Giannini Hall
                                                 CA 94720-3310
Rebecca Taylor                                   sberto@berkeley.edu
Department of Agricultural
 & Resource Economics
University of California, Berkeley
207 Giannini Hall
Berkeley, CA 94720-3310
becca.taylor@berkeley.edu
                        Willingness to Pay for Low Water Footprint Food Choices During Drought


    1   Introduction


    In January 2014, the Governor of California declared a Drought State of Emergency, ask-

    ing all Californians to reduce water consumption by 20 percent.1 While droughts are a

    recurring feature of California’s climate, the drought beginning in late 2011 was the driest

    and warmest drought on record, putting California agriculture under stress (Hanak et al.,

    2015).2 California—a major producer of dairy, tree nuts, fruits, and vegetables—relies heav-

    ily on irrigation, much of which is supplied by the state’s extensive system of water supply

    infrastructure—reservoirs, managed groundwater basins, and inter-regional conveyance fa-

    cilities.3 Farmers have taken measures to adapt to drought conditions, such as by shifting

    towards less water-intensive crop varietals and by adopting more water-efficient irrigation

    methods (Hanak et al., 2015).4 Given the region may increasingly experience high tempera-

    tures and low precipitation flows (Mann and Gleick, 2015), is there a market for consumers

    to compensate farmers for adopting more water efficient production practices?

        The rise of eco-labels has created a market for sustainable food options, however, cur-

    rently a “low water footprint” label is not available to guide consumers who want to de-

    crease the water footprint of their food consumption. Virtual water of an item—defined as

    the amount of water used during the enire production process, from planting to processing

1
    Source: “Governor’s Drought Declaration,” California Department of Water Resources, Online, accessed
    Apr. 28, 2017.
2
    In 2015, the drought caused crop revenue losses of up to 902 million dollars, with losses of 250 million dollars
    in the dairy industry and 100 million dollars in the feedlot industry (Howitt et al., 2015). There is also an
    increased fallowing of cropland due to lack of water, which is leading to rising food prices (Howitt et al.,
    2015).
3
    “Drought in California,” California Department of Water Resources, Online, accessed Apr. 28, 2017.
4
    Climate change and the resulting drought are leading to a new, lower baseline to which the agricultural
    sector is already adapting.




                                                                                                                  2
                       Willingness to Pay for Low Water Footprint Food Choices During Drought


    to distribution—varies greatly across and within California’s top grossing agricultural com-

    modities (Mekonnen and Hoekstra, 2011).5 Changing consumer dietary habits may have a

    significant impact on the sustainability of agriculture with regard to water constraints, if

    consumers choose to purchase more water-efficient options. This paper empirically assesses

    whether consumers respond to information on the water footprint of the food they choose

    and tests whether providing additional information on drought severeness sways consumers

    to choose low water footprint (LWF) food options.

        We investigate whether consumers are willing to pay for LWF agricultural products by

    designing and implementing a choice experiment via an online distributed survey of California

    consumers. Before the choice experiment, we collect data on respondents’ demographic

    characteristics and stated environmental concern. For the choice experiment, we present the

    respondents with four food products: avocados, almonds, lettuce, and tomatoes. Within

    each food product, survey respondents are asked their purchase choice among options that

    vary by production methods (conventional or organic), water footprint (average or LWF),

    and price. In addition, we implement an information treatment in the survey design. Half of

    the respondents are randomly assigned into a treatment group, where they are briefed before

    the choice experiment about the drought severity in California. The control group is instead

    taken directly to the choice experiment, without additional information on the drought.

        Using the survey data, we estimate a discrete choice model for consumer preferences,

    where a choice is defined as a bundle of attributes: product type, price, an organic indicator,

    and a LWF indicator. From the structural demand model parameters, we obtain estimates

5
    There is also considerable variation between produce, with nuts and tree fruit being more water intensive
    than lettuce, for instance. Milk, eggs, beef, and other animal products also use more water on the whole
    (Mekonnen and Hoekstra, 2011). Thus, it is not surprising that a diet high in animal products (mainly in
    Europe and the United States) uses 5 m3 , or about 1, 321 gallons, of water per capita per day, while diets
    low in animal products require about half (Renault, 2002).




                                                                                                             3
                 Willingness to Pay for Low Water Footprint Food Choices During Drought


of the willingness to pay (WTP) for the various specified product attributes. In addition,

we test whether revealing information on the drought matters for the WTP estimates. We

are able to present novel findings in terms of heterogeneity of WTP along the respondents’

demographics and their environmental scores and the role of drought information on WTP.

Finally, by simulating a variety of changes in the choice set facing consumers, we obtain esti-

mates of counterfactual choices under alternative policy scenarios and calculate the resulting

welfare changes, measured as changes in the distribution of consumer surplus. We also relate

the individual level changes in consumer surplus to the demographic characteristics of the

respondents.

   We find that, on average, consumers have a significant positive marginal utility towards

water-efficiency and estimate that there is an implied positive willingness to pay for water

efficiency of about 11 dollars. This positive WTP means that respondents are on average

willing to pay 12 cents for each gallon of water saved, and 9 cents per gallons of water

saved in the production of almonds, for example. Moreover, informing consumers about the

drought severity increases consumers’ WTP for the LWF options, albeit not significantly. We

additionally explore heterogeneity in WTP based on consumer characteristics. We find dif-

ferences in the WTP along respondents’ stated environmental concern, which is measured by

level of agreement with statements pertaining the environmental issues and policies. There is

also significant heterogeneity with respect to education and race. Using counterfactual simu-

lations of removing low water labels and drought information from the choice set attributes,

we estimate changes in choices that imply significant consumer surplus losses, especially for

the subgroup of respondents that are white, attained higher levels of education, and have

higher environmental scores.

   The contribution of our paper is twofold: (1) to estimate stated preferences and corre-

sponding WTP for water efficiency in the production of crops, and (2) to investigate whether

consumers respond to information about drought severity and the water footprints of prod-

                                                                                             4
                 Willingness to Pay for Low Water Footprint Food Choices During Drought


ucts in their choice sets. The availability of information about a product’s attribute, such as

water footprint, does not necessarily mean consumers will incorporate it into their decisions

and alter their behavior. Our study provides a distribution of WTP estimates for LWF

food options during drought years and an empirical test of whether consumers directly in-

corporate available information. In so doing, we equip resource managers and policymakers

with important information on the efficacy of LWF labels as well as a barometer reading on

consumer stated preferences.

   Related literature investigates avenues and market mechanisms to nudge consumers to-

ward sustainable food products via “eco-labeling,” targeting consumers who are willing to

pay a premium for a sustainable product (Hallstein and Villas-Boas, 2013). Macdiarmid

(2012) found that fewer than 20% of respondents believed they would know how to make

the necessary changes to create a sustainable diet. Smith (2008) discusses how consumers

often lack the knowledge or ability to discriminate between what is sustainable and what

is not. Tait et al. (2011) found, when evaluating consumer attitudes toward sustainability

attributes, that water efficiency is among the most important attribute of a food item, be-

hind price and carbon footprint. Studies have shown that food labeling impacts consumer

choices in other settings, such as the USDA organic seal (Kiesel and Villas-Boas, 2007) and

expert-opinion wine labels (Hilger et al., 2011).

   We follow closely and expand the existing research approaches on consumer-focused mech-

anisms (such as eco-labels) which use attitudinal and knowledge surveys, consumer choice

experiments, and experimental auctions (see e.g., Alfnes et al. 2006; Batte et al. 2003; John-

ston et al. 2001). In the revealed and stated preference literature, a variety of reduced form

and structural approaches have been used to infer the value consumers place on product

attributes that are not observable or tasteable by consumers at the point of purchase (such

as organic, vitamin fortified, dolphin-safe, free-range, rBGH-free). In the reduced form con-

text, hedonic price model approaches have been used to estimate relative values for food

                                                                                             5
                 Willingness to Pay for Low Water Footprint Food Choices During Drought


product attributes in a variety of markets (Asche and Guillen, 2012; Roheim, Gardiner,

and Asche, Roheim et al.; Roheim et al., 2011; Jaffry et al., 2004; McConnell and Strand,

2000). Structurally, demand system approaches are estimated to place a willingness to pay

for product attributes (Teisl et al., 2002). Our work is more closely related to this second

literature stream and is the first to use these methods to place a value on water efficiency in

the production of the food that consumers choose.

   While there are several means of adaptation of agriculture in the context of water con-

straints and droughts, such as the observed increase in fallowing of irrigated acres, re-

gional crop shifting, and groundwater depletion (Howitt et al., 2015), this paper investi-

gates whether there is willingness to pay for less gallons of water used within crop types.

Changing food habits through information and labeling may have a significant impact on the

water requirements of agriculture, if consumer react to signals in the marketplace. A higher

WTP supports an increase in price for a specific attribute, such as decreased virtual water

footprint, because of the additional benefit to the consumer (Abidoye et al., 2011). To our

knowledge, there is no empirical evidence on consumer reactions to information on water-use

in food production, and this paper fills this gap in the literature. Being able to distinguish

food products in the market will enable consumers to act on their values when presented

with a choice between a conventional and a sustainable good. Such changes in demand and

consumer awareness could spark a major production shift, just as organic agriculture did in

the 2000s (Dimitri and Greene, 2002).

   The rest of the paper proceeds as follows. Section 2 describes the empirical setting, the

research design (i.e. the choice experiment and identification strategies) and summarizes

the data. Section 3 outlines the model to estimate consumer choices and willingness to

pay for product attributes. Section 4 presents the results of the choice model and discusses

the findings in terms of the average and the distribution of WTP in the sample. Section 5

derives the method to perform simulations, and discusses the choice and welfare changes due

                                                                                             6
                       Willingness to Pay for Low Water Footprint Food Choices During Drought


    to a counterfactual policy scenario in terms of removing the information on water footprint

    presented to the respondents. Finally, section 6 concludes and presents avenues of future

    research.


    2   Empirical Setting, Experimental Design, and Data


    We design and implement a choice experiment, with an information treatment, via an on-

    line survey of California consumers.6 We collected survey responses from 193 California

    residents. For each of the respondents, we first asked for information on their demographic

    characteristics (i.e., gender, age, education, and race). Second, we asked respondents to

    answer whether they agreed or disagreed with ten environmentally related statements in

    order to construct a measure of each respondent’s environmental score. Finally, we collect

    data on the respondents’ choices among options to purchase four food products: avocados,

    almonds, lettuce, and tomatoes. These four crops are highly ranked in terms of California’s

    agricultural value and represent approximately 5 percent of California’s 25.5 million oper-

    ated farm acres.7 In 2015, California produced over a third of the country’s vegetables and

    two-thirds of the country’s fruits and nuts.8 Moreover, in 2015, almonds were California’s

    second most valued commodity ($5.33 billion), lettuce was fifth ($2.25 billion), and tomatoes

    were seventh (1.71 billion).8

        In addition, we implement an information treatment in the survey design. Half of re-

    spondents are randomly assigned into a treatment group, where they are briefed about the

6
    The survey company ensured that there is no monetary prize to cause its audience to rush through to
    complete a survey. Rather, respondents decide which charity they want the survey company to donate for
    their response.
7
    Source: “2015 State Agriculture Overview,” National Agricultural Statistics Service, United States Depart-
    ment of Agricultural, Online, accessed Dec. 21, 2016.
8
    Source: “California Agricultural Production Statistics—2015 Crop Year Report,” California Department of
    Food and Agriculture, Online, accessed Apr. 28, 2017.


                                                                                                            7
                      Willingness to Pay for Low Water Footprint Food Choices During Drought


    drought severity in California before the choice experiment. The remaining half in the control

    group gets taken directly to the choice experiment, without information on the drought.

       To base the choice experiment on realistic numbers, we collect industry estimates on the

    virtual water used in avocado, almonds, lettuce, and tomatoes. Recall that the virtual water

    is defined as the amount of water used per unit of food during its production (Renault,

    2002). The average water footprint displayed to survey respondents in our study—in terms

    of gallons per pound of product produced—is 157 gallons per pound for avocados, 1,715

    gallons per pound of almonds, 14.8 gallons per pound for lettuce, and 16.9 gallons per

    pound of tomatoes.


    2.1 Choices Specification and Experimental Choice Design

    This study uses a discrete choice experiment to evaluate consumer preferences for water

    footprint as an attribute of food choices and to calculate the difference in WTP between a

    group treated with additional drought severity information and a control group.9 Discrete

    choice experiments are among the most common methods for gathering stated preference,

    and are rooted in Random Utility Models (Lu et. al 2013). The first step is to define a

    product as being made up of a set of attributes. Then respondents are asked to choose

    a single option, simulating the context that consumers are normally presented with in the

    marketplace (Tait et al., 2011). There is also a “I would not purchase any of these” option

    to allow for identification and counterfactual simulations (Gao and Schroeder, 2009; Alfnes

9
    See Figures A.1 and A.2 in the Appendix for the survey instrument. The information concerning the drought
    acts as the treatment, preceding the questions concerning preferences towards water footprint and organic
    production in food choices (i.e., the treatment information about the drought preceded the avocado first
    choice question for the treatment group in Figure A.2). The control group performed the choice experiment
    in Figure A.2 without any additional information.




                                                                                                           8
                        Willingness to Pay for Low Water Footprint Food Choices During Drought


     et al., 2006).10

         We asked survey respondents to reveal their preferences for five different options within

     each of four food items—haas avocado, almonds, head lettuce, and tomatoes—as can be seen

     in Table 1. These items were chosen because avocados and almonds are high-value tree crops

     that are less adaptable to yearly environmental factors. They require more water than many

     field crops because the trees need to be maintained and watered year-round. Tomatoes

     and lettuce represent less permanent, more adaptable crops with lower water footprints.

     Each food item has three attributes: water footprint, price, and production method (either

     conventional or organic). Water footprint has two levels, average and low (or “efficient”).

     Since the production method and water footprint attributes both have two levels, there are

     2 x 2 = 4 possible attribute-combinations per item, not counting price. Finally, we use the

     average price for conventional and organic versions of the products. In the choice options

     presented in the experiment we add an invented 20% price premium if the item has efficient

     water use.

         For a random subset of the respondents, additional information on the California drought

     and its impact on agriculture came before the choice experiment. This information was given

     to respondents in the form of a short summary statement and an info-graphic highlighting

     how much water goes into producing different foods. This is defined as the survey treatment.

     The information concerning the drought and the variation between water intensity of foods

     acts as a primer, or treatment, preceding the questions concerning preferences towards water

     efficient and organic product options in the choice experiment. The control group performed

     the choice experiment without any additional information. By comparing average responses

10
     If we do not include an outside option, simulations that increase attributes in a way that the relative ratio
     of such attributes remains unchanged (such as all prices doubling), will imply that the relative probabilities
     of choosing the options also remains unchanged, and this is not reasonable if, for example, consumers are
     budget constrained.



                                                                                                                 9
                       Willingness to Pay for Low Water Footprint Food Choices During Drought


     in the treated and control groups, we can test the role of information on the choices and on

     the estimates of WTP inferred later on via the structural choice model. This is done under

     the assumption that the control group is a good counterfactual to the treatment group.

     The next subsection analyzes the balance of treatment and control groups and presents the

     summary statistics of the data used in the analysis.


     2.2 Survey Data Summary Statistics

     The survey instrument was sent to a total of 208 respondents, where the sample size was

     determined by financial constraints. Summary statistics of our data set are presented in

     Table 2. This table is organized in two panels. In Panel A, the demographic makeup of

     survey respondents in the treatment and control groups is compared to the total California

     population. In Panel B, we present the share of respondents choosing the organic and low-

     water footprint attributes in the treatment and control groups.

        In Panel A of Table 2, ages “17 or younger” in the survey sample are underrepresented

     compared to the California population. Furthermore, the “50-59” and “60 or older” age

     groups were overrepresented in the survey sample, suggesting the sample data are skewed

     towards older populations. Similarly, the Panel A shows that education attainment levels of

     “Less than high school degree” and “High school degree or equivalent” are underrepresented

     in the survey sample and “Graduate degree” is overrepresented. Income levels in the sample

     overall are fairly representative of the California population, as is race and gender. When

     comparing the treatment and control groups, we have a balance across the demographic

     variables, with the makeup of the control and treatment groups similar for all rows in Panel

     A.11
11
     An illustration of the balance of demographics in the control and treated group is presented in Appendix
     Figures A.3 and A.4. We cannot reject that the average is similar between control and treated groups for
     any of the demographic variables. Moreover, we cannot reject the null in a Kolmogorov Smirnov test for



                                                                                                          10
                   Willingness to Pay for Low Water Footprint Food Choices During Drought


    Turning now to the bottom Panel B of Table 2, we present survey response summary

statistics for the share of respondents choosing organic and low water footprint (LWF) op-

tions, and the average price of the alternative chosen. The row titled “Organic (share)”

represents the fraction of events where a respondent chooses an organic option. A mean of

28 for Total means that survey respondents overall chose organic products 28% of the time.

“LWF (share)” is the fraction of events in which a respondent chooses the lower water foot-

print option. For the total survey population, a respondent chooses a water efficient option

64% of the time. Average price is the average of all prices of items chosen, which is $3.01.

If a respondent choose “I would not purchase any of these” the price is defined as zero. The

treatment group has a lower organic choice average than the control group (25% versus 30%)

and a higher efficient water footprint average choice (66% versus 63%). However, the treat-

ment group has a slightly lower average price paid for the chosen alternatives than control

group ($2.86 versus $3.14). The share of the outside option also differs by treatment (21%)

and control group (17%).

    Next we use the survey data to construct a measure of environmental concern of each

respondent based on the degree of agreement/disagreement with a series of ten statements

regarding environmental issues and policies. Table 3 lists each of ten statements and reports

average survey responses. For each statement, we assign a value of 5 if the response is equal

to “Strongly Agree”, and equal to 1 if the response is “Strongly Disagree”. The measure

of environmental concern of each respondent, henceforth called Environmental Score, is the

sum of assigned values for all statements. This way, the Environmental Score has a minimum

value of 10 if a respondent strongly disagrees with all ten of the environmental statements

and a maximum of 50 if the respondent strongly agrees with all of the same ten statements.

equality of distributions between treatment and control groups for Education (p-value 0.936) and Income
(p-value 0.481).




                                                                                                    11
                        Willingness to Pay for Low Water Footprint Food Choices During Drought


     Table 3 shows the average Environmental Score among all respondents is 38.01.12


     3     Empirical Strategy to Estimate Willingness to Pay for Product Attributes


     In our analysis on the impact of information on consumer choice, we define product-specific

     information provision via labels as an additional or differentiated product attribute. Recog-

     nizing that consumer products can be defined as a bundle of perceived product attributes

     provides the framework to compute consumers’ willingness to pay for product attributes in

     a straightforward way.


     3.1 Structural Demand

     The survey data, with respondent-specific choice information and respondents’ demograph-

     ics, enables us to consider and estimate a specification of heterogeneous preferences in an

     econometric discrete choice model. Starting from a random utility framework (as in Mc-

     Fadden 1974; McFadden and Train 2000; Train 2003 where both the product attributes as

     well as the random term are assumed to enter linearly, the utility from consuming a certain

     product can be described as


     (1)                                         Uji = Xj βi + ji .

12
     The bottom right panel of Appendix Figure A.3 shows that the average environmental score is balanced for
     the treatment and control groups, and, given the confidence intervals, we cannot reject that the averages are
     similar. Furthermore, when comparing the full distributions in the top left panel of Figure A.4, using kernel
     density estimates and in a Kolmogorov Smirnov equality of distributions test, a p-value of 0.943 implies that
     we cannot reject the null of equal distributions for the environmental score of respondents in the treatment
     and control groups.




                                                                                                               12
                    Willingness to Pay for Low Water Footprint Food Choices During Drought


The matrix Xj therefore indicates attributes of product j and the vector βi indicates the

marginal utility that individual i places on these attributes as


(2)                                       βi = β0 + β1 Di ,


meaning that the coefficients vary according to the respondent’s observed demographics Di .

This implies that we allow for the fact that different decision makers may have different

preferences. In this setting, a respondent i chooses the alternative j if it maximizes his

utility, that is, if


(3)            Pr(Choicej ) = Pr(Uji > Uhi ) = Pr(Xj βi + ji > Xh βi + hi ), ∀h 6= j.


       Note that ij has a distributional assumption and that assumption drives the econometric

model choice. We assume that it is distributed iid extreme value and this results in a

conditional logit choice model where we capture preference heterogeneity in that we allow

choices of consumer i to be affected by his observable demographics. This is incorporated

into the indirect utility formulation as allowing β to be a function of i observed demographics

Di .


3.2 Random Coefficient Logit Choice Model

If instead we allow that different decision makers may have different preferences—not just

due to observable demographics Di , which may not capture all the heterogeneity, but due

to a more general unobserved heterogeneity structure—then we define the coefficients βi to

vary according to


(4)                                        βi = β0 + β2 vi ,



                                                                                            13
                   Willingness to Pay for Low Water Footprint Food Choices During Drought


where vi is a normal random variable capturing any heterogeneity and the price parameter

is always a fixed parameter α = α0 . If there is no heterogeneity in individual preferences

relative to the average, then β2 will be zero. If, however, there is heterogeneity in preferences

relative to the average, then β2 is different from zero. If ji are assumed to be independently,

identically extreme value distributed (i.e., type I extreme value distributed), the following

closed form solution can be derived for the probability that a respondent’s product choice

corresponds to product j as:


(5)            Pr(Choicej ) = Pr(Uji > Uhi ) = Pr(Xj βi + ji > Xh βi + hi ), ∀h 6= j.


      These response probabilities constitute a random coefficient logit model if βi is specified

as (4). This offers flexibility in incorporating consumer heterogeneity with regard to food

characteristics such as organic and low water footprint. To recover how Di affects the

departure from mean valuations, we then project estimated βi on observed demographics Di

in a second step as described in the last subsections of this model section.

      In a third heterogeneity specification, we define the coefficients βi to be combination of

the two previous heterogeneity specifications, as


(6)                                    βi = β0 + β1 Di + β2 vi ,


where vi is a normal random variable capturing any random heterogeneity, Di are observed

respondents characteristics affecting heterogeneity, and the price parameter is always a fixed

parameter α = α0 . If there is no heterogeneity in individual preferences relative to the

average, then β1 and β2 will be zero. If, however, there is heterogeneity in preferences due to

demographics relative to the average, then β1 is different from zero, and if there is additional

random heterogeneity, then β2 is different from zero as well.



                                                                                              14
                   Willingness to Pay for Low Water Footprint Food Choices During Drought


      Assuming that consumers choose one unit of product j among all the possible products

available at a certain time that maximizes their indirect utility, then the probability that

good j is chosen is the probability that good j maximizes consumer i’s utility, as in equation

(5). If ji are assumed to be type I extreme value distributed, the following closed form

solution can be derived for the probability that a respondent’s product choice corresponds

to product j as:


                                              eXj βi +αPricej
(7)                               P robji = PN
                                                   Xk βi +αPricek
                                             k=0 e



where α = α0 is the marginal utility with respect to price, that is constant for all respondents,

and βi contains the marginal utilities relative to the remaining attributes X for respondent i.

The mean utility of the option “I would not purchase any of these” presented to a respondent

in the choice experiments is normalized to zero. The organic, LWF, and price variables for

that alternative in all the experimental choice cases is set equal to zero and this implies that

equation (7) becomes


                                                eXj βi +αPricej
(8)                             P robji =      PN X β +αPrice .
                                            1 + k=1 e k i       k




      These response probabilities constitute a random coefficients mixed logit model with de-

mographics as mixing parameters if βi is specified as (6). This choice model offers flexibility

in incorporating consumer heterogeneity with regard to food characteristics such as being

organic and LWF as a function of Di directly, as well as allowing for random determinants of

heterogeneity via vi . This modeling approach combined with the unique choice experimental

setting and resulting data variation for agricultural food choices allows us to estimate con-

sumers’ valuation for water efficiency on average and the complete distribution of valuation

of survey respondents (as in Revelt and Train 2000; Huber and Train 2001. To recover how



                                                                                              15
                   Willingness to Pay for Low Water Footprint Food Choices During Drought


Di affects the departure from mean valuations, as before, we project the estimated βi on

observed demographics Di in a second step as described in the last subsections of this model

section.

      Finally, given that each respondent makes decisions for the four different products, defin-

ing T = 4 and defining the distribution of the θ = (α, β) parameters in general form as

f (θ|α0 , β0 , β1 , β2 ), where β is specified in equation (4) or (6) and α = α0 for all respondents,

then the probability of individual i making a sequence of choices among the five alternatives

(j = 0, ...4) is given as

                          T Y
                            4
                              "                                          #Yijt
                                        eXijt βi +αPricejt
                        Z Y
(9)              Si =                                                            f (θ|α0, β0 , β1 , β2 )dθ
                                     1+ N
                                       P         Xikt βi +αPricekt
                         t=1 j=0         k=1 e



where Yijt = 1 if the respondent i chooses alternative j for situation t and 0 otherwise. Given

a total of I respondents, the parameters (α = α0 , β0 , β1 , β2 ) are estimated by maximizing

the simulated log-likelihood function


                                                          "                                          #Yijt 
                            I                R Y
                                               T Y
                                                 4                         [r]
                                                                     Xijt βi +αPricejt
                            X            1   X                      e
(10)              SLL =           ln                                               [r]
                                                                                                          
                                         R                     1+
                                                                    PN    Xikt βi         +αPricekt
                            i=1              r=1 t=1 j=0             k=1 e


           [r]
where βi is the r-th draw for respondent i from the distribution of β.


3.3 Estimating Average and Heterogeneous Marginal Utility and Willingness to Pay

Using the dataset of product choices, we estimate a random coefficients mixed logit choice

model given by equation (8), where each product is defined as a bundle of attributes (i.e.,

price, an organic dummy, and a LWF dummy) in order to estimate the parameters α, β0 , β1 ,

and β2 . Not only can we estimate average marginal utility for a certain attribute x, given by

β0 , we can also estimate heterogeneity βi in the marginal utility for each different respondent


                                                                                                                16
                 Willingness to Pay for Low Water Footprint Food Choices During Drought


i in the sample, as given by equation (4) or (6), depending on whether we do not add Di or

add Di as mixing parameters into the heterogeneity specification directly, respectively.

   To estimate βi we proceed as follows. Given that the expected value of β conditional on

a given response Yi of individual i and a set of alternatives characterized by Xi at occasion

t is given by

                           Q Q h           Xijt β+αPricejt
                                                               iYijt
                          β Tt=1 4j=0 1+PeN eXikt β+αPricekt
                           R
                                                                     f (β|β0 , β1 , β2 )dβ
                                          k=1
(11)      E[β|Yi , Xi] = R Q Q h                              iYijt                        ,
                            T    4      eXijt β+αPricejt
                            t=1  j=0 1+
                                       PN
                                             eXikt β+αPricekt
                                                                    f (β|β 0 , β1 , β2 )dβ
                                                   k=1




then equation (10) can be thought as the conditional average of the coefficient for the sub-

group of individuals who face the same alternatives and make the same choices. For each

individual i we estimate a certain attribute’s βi following Revelt and Train (2000) by simu-

lation according to the following:

                                                                [r]
                                                                                Yijt
                                      [r]               eXijt βi +αPricejt
                           1
                               PR           QT Q4
                           R     r=1 βi t=1   j=0                        [r]
                                                               Xikt β +αPricekt
                                                    1+ N
                                                      P
                                                        k=1 e
                                                                         i
(12)               β̂i =                                                    Yijt
                                                             [r]
                                                      eXijt βi +αPricejt
                               1
                                 PR QT Q4
                               R  r=1 t=1   j=0                      [r]
                                                            Xikt β +αPricekt
                                                  1+ N
                                                    P
                                                      k=1 e
                                                                     i




where β[r] is the r-th draw for individual i from the estimated i’s distribution of β. The

resulting estimates of each respondent’s WTP for a particular attribute x are obtained as

the ratio of βi relative and the marginal utility with respect to price α. We can therefore

recover not just the average WTP but also the distribution of the WTP in the sample of

respondents, and standard errors are obtained using the Delta Method. Finally we relate the

estimated willingness to pay (W T Pi ) to each respondents’ demographics and environmental

scores by estimating the equation


(13)                                    W T Pi = γ0 + γ1 Di + i




                                                                                               17
                  Willingness to Pay for Low Water Footprint Food Choices During Drought


where W T Pi is a vector of all the respondents’ individually estimated willingness to pay

for LWF alternatives, Di are the demographic characteristics (including the environmental

score) of respondent i, and γ0 , γ1 are parameters to be estimated.


4   Results


First we present the results from the choice estimates originating from a conditional logit

specification. In this first step, we investigate whether there is significant average stated

marginal utility for LWF options as well as stated heterogeneity in the marginal utility

as a function of observable characteristics of the respondents, in terms of demographics

and environmental score. Second, we explore a more flexible random coefficients choice

model allowing for the heterogeneity to vary from the average marginal utility in a random

fashion. Third, we include Di as mixing parameters directly and estimate the random

coefficients mixed logit model. Given that the conditional logit, as well as the random

coefficient logit and the random coefficient mixed logit models, are estimated by maximizing

the likelihood and simulated likelihood, respectively, we perform model comparisons using

the Akaike information criterion (AIC) among the estimated specifications and discuss the

best specification used moving forward.

    The average marginal utility as well as each respondents’ marginal utility are estimated

using simulated maximum likelihood Revelt and Train (2000). The intuition behind the

estimation of each respondent’s βi is that it is computed as a conditional average of βs of

respondents similar to them, in that they make similar sequences of choices when presented

with the same options in the experimental design and have similar Di . Each respondent’s

WTP for the LWF attribute is then obtained as the ratio between the βi and the marginal

utility of price α.

    The variation in estimated individual departures from the average WTP can be either



                                                                                          18
                 Willingness to Pay for Low Water Footprint Food Choices During Drought


purely random or they can be due to the fact that respondents have similar characteristics.

This is investigated by correlating the estimated W T Pi with respondents’ demographics and

environmental scores.


4.1 Conditional Logit Estimates

In Table 4 we present the estimates of the conditional logit choice model specification where

βi are given by equation (2). The dependent variable in all of the columns is an indicator

variable that is equal to one if an individual chose that alternative and equal to zero otherwise.

There are five alternatives to choose from in each of four product groups. All specifications

include individual fixed effects controlling for constant characteristics that may affect their

choice behavior on average as well as product fixed effects to control constant characteristics

of each agricultural product.

   In column (1), the right hand side variables are the price, an Organic dummy that is

equal to one if the alternative is organic and equal to zero otherwise, an indicator LW F

equal to one for if the alternative has a low water footprint and equal to zero otherwise,

and interactions Treat × Organic and Treat × LW F , where Treat is equal to one if the

respondent was in the information treatment group. From the estimates in column (1)

we see that the coefficient on price is negative and significant, meaning that a high price

lowers the marginal utility of purchasing an alternative. The marginal utility of the organic

attribute is negative but not significantly different from zero. The LWF attribute has an

average marginal utility of 1.272 which is positive and significant. Finally, while being in

the treatment group does not imply a higher marginal utility for the LWF attribute, given

the non-significant coefficient of the interaction Treat × LW F , being in the treatment group

implies a significantly lower marginal utility for the organic attribute, given the negative and

significant coefficient of the interaction Treat × Organic.

   In column (2), we further interact demographic characteristics such as age, income, edu-

                                                                                               19
                 Willingness to Pay for Low Water Footprint Food Choices During Drought


cation, gender, and Environmental Score with the variables in column (1). This specification

in column (2) allows us to estimate the average marginal utility for all variables in column

(1) as well as departures from those averages with respect to the observable characteristics of

the respondents. Even though all the lower order terms of triple interactions are included in

the specification in column (2), they are not all reported in Table 4 due to space limitations.

The number of observation drops in column (2) because not all respondents gave us complete

demographic information.

   First, we find that the log likelihood increases to −1075, relative to −1169 in column (1),

implying that we explain more of the variation in choices with this specification. Moreover,

when comparing models, the second specification is preferred given its lower AIC estimate.

Second, the marginal utility of price remains negative and significant. Third, there is hetero-

geneity for the LWF attribute in specification (2) that the averages in (1) mask, given that

several coefficients associated with the interaction of demographics and product attributes

are statistically different from zero. In particular, the marginal utility for the LWF attribute

increases significantly with the Environmental Score (given the positive and significant co-

efficient of 0.053), increases with Education (coefficient of 0.430), and increases for White

respondents (coefficient of 0.690). None of the other demographics significantly affect the

marginal utility with respect to the LWF attribute. Fourth, there is no organic marginal

utility heterogeneity. Finally, none of the triple interactions terms, such as Treat × LW F ×

Di , are significant for any Di . This implies that there is no differential heterogeneity in the

treatment group and in the control group in the way respondents value organic or low water

footprint options depending on their observable demographics and environmental score.

   We next turn to a mixed logit specification—a more flexible choice specification where

we allow the average taste parameters to vary randomly for the respondents and not just as

a function of a set of observable respondents’ characteristics. We also compare the log like-

lihood of these nested model specifications, and test whether conditioning on demographics,

                                                                                              20
                Willingness to Pay for Low Water Footprint Food Choices During Drought


or allowing for random heterogeneity, explains more of the observed variation in the choices

of different consumers when faced with the survey choice experiment design.


4.2 Random Coefficients Logit Choice Estimates

In the first two columns of Table 5, we present the estimates of the random coefficients logit

choice model specification where βi are given by equation (4). The dependent variable in

all of the columns is an indicator variable that is equal to one if an individual chose that

alternative and equal to zero otherwise. There are five alternatives to choose from in each

of four product groups. All specifications include respondent fixed effects controlling for

constant characteristics that may affect their choice behavior on average. In columns (1)

and (2), the right hand side variables are the same as in column (1) of Table 4, however, in

column (1) we allow for unobserved random heterogeneity in the two product attributes LWF

and Organic and in column (2) we additionally allow the information treatment parameters

to have random unobserved heterogeneity by estimating a random coefficient for Treat ×

LW F and Treat × Organic.

   The top half of Table 5, labeled “Mean”, reports the average estimated marginal utilities.

The price coefficient is negative and significant in columns (1) and (2) of Table 5 and in the

same magnitude of the marginal utility estimates of price for the conditional logit specifica-

tions in Table 4. From the estimates in column (1), we see that the coefficient of price is

negative and significant meaning that a high price lowers the marginal utility of purchasing

an alternative. The average marginal utility of the organic attribute is negative and signif-

icant. The LWF attribute has an average marginal utility of 1.272 which is positive and

significant. Finally, being in the treatment group does not imply a higher marginal utility

for the low water attribute as well as for the organic attribute, given the non-significant

coefficients of the interactions Treat × LW F and Treat × Organic.

   The bottom half of Table 5, labeled “SD”, reports the standard errors of estimated

                                                                                           21
                 Willingness to Pay for Low Water Footprint Food Choices During Drought


marginal utilities. There is significant heterogeneity in the marginal utility of the two at-

tributes given the significant and positive coefficients for the standard errors of the LWF

and organic marginal utilities. Table 4 also reports significant heterogeneity based on demo-

graphics.

   Next, we investigate whether a random coefficient mixed logit presents itself as the pre-

ferred specification to move forward in estimating the WTP and performing policy simula-

tions.


4.3 Random Coefficients Mixed Logit Choice Estimates

In the third column of Table 5, we present the estimates of the random coefficients mixed

logit choice model specification, where βi are given by equation (6). In addition to the

random coefficients in column (2), in column (3) we additionally allow the demographic

characteristics and environmental score to interact with the LWF, choosing the interactions

that yielded significant coefficients in the conditional logit specification in Table 4. For the

mean marginal utilities in column (3), the price coefficient is negative and significant and in

the same magnitude of the marginal utility estimates of price for the random coefficients logit

in columns (1) and (2), as well as in the same magnitude as the conditional logit specifications

in Table 4. As we would expect, this means that a higher price lowers the marginal utility of

purchasing an alternative. The mean marginal utility of the organic attribute is negative and

significant. The LWF attribute has an average marginal utility of −2.735, which is negative

and significant, and is different from the point estimates in column (1) and (2) since now

the LWF attribute is interacted with demographics. To get the average marginal utility for

the LWF attribute we need to add the mean coefficient of −2.735 to the coefficient of the

demographic interactions times the average demographics, which we do below.

   Finally, being in the treatment group does not imply a higher mean marginal utility for

the LWF attribute as well as for the organic attribute, given the non-significant coefficients

                                                                                             22
                        Willingness to Pay for Low Water Footprint Food Choices During Drought


     of the interactions Treat × LWF and Treat × Organic. One possible reason for why the

     information treatment about the drought was ineffective is that California residents were

     already aware of the severity of the highly-publicized drought. According to Google trends,

     web searches for the phrase “California drought” in California have been high since the

     beginning of 2014.13 Providing additional information that consumers already consider when

     faced with a low water footprint label would not lead to a behavioral response.

         Looking at the deviations from the mean marginal utilities, reported in the bottom of

     Table 5 under the label “SD”, there is significant heterogeneity in the marginal utility of

     the two attributes. This is evidenced by the positive and significant estimates of standard

     deviations of the LWF and organic marginal utilities.

         To interpret the point estimates for the attribute of interest, we obtain the mean marginal

     utility for the LWF attribute by adding up the mean marginal utility −2.735 with the

     heterogeneity marginal utility estimated interactions with demographics.14 The sum of the

     average marginal utility (-2.735) and of all the heterogeneity terms equals 1.78, an estimate

     that is larger but in the ballpark of the estimates in columns (1) and (2) of Table 5.

         Moving forward we choose the model that better predicts the choices made by respondents

     in our sample using the Akaike information criterion (AIC). The AIC is like a log likelihood

     ratio test with an extra adjustment in terms of number of regressors in the specifications for

     different models. When testing between models, we choose the model that has the lowest

     absolute value of the AIC. We compare all columns of Tables 4 and 5 using the reported

     AIC. We choose column (3) of Table 5 because it is the model that has the lowest AIC, equal

13
     Source: Google Trends, “California Drought” web searches, Online, accessed Apr. 28, 2017.
14
     The heterogeneity part is equal to the marginal utility with respect to environmental score and LWF inter-
     action (0.058) times the average environmental score (35.6), plus the marginal utility with respect to low
     water footprint and education (0.52) times the average education (3.5, recall that education is classified in
     increasing levels of school attained, from 1 to 4), plus the marginal utility for white and LWF (0.058) times
     the share of white respondents (77%).


                                                                                                               23
                Willingness to Pay for Low Water Footprint Food Choices During Drought


to 984. In the remainder of this paper, we will use this random coefficient mixed logit as the

specification to estimate respondents’ distribution of marginal utilities and the distribution

of WTP, and to perform counterfactual policy simulations.


4.4 Willingness to Pay for Low Water Footprint Attribute & Willingness to Pay for Gallons

     of Water Saved

Given the estimated model parameters in column (3) of Table 5, we start by estimating

the distribution of the respondents’ individual marginal utilities and resulting W T Pi with

respect to the attribute of interest. Each individual βi is estimated given equation (12) and

then divided by the marginal utility of price α to obtain each W T Pi . The top left panel of

Figure 1 displays the kernel density of the distribution of W T Pi for the LWF attribute and

the top right panel breaks up the average estimated WTP for the White subgroup in red

and the Non-white subgroup in blue. The two bottom panels relate estimated WTP to two

demographic characteristics of the respondents.

   We estimate that the average WTP is 11.02 dollars for the LWF attribute. Given that

this attribute is associated with an average saving of 90.4 gallons, then the average WTP
                      11.02
per gallon saved is   90.4
                              which is equal to 12 cents per gallon of water saved. In particular,

we estimate the WTP to be 5.4 cents per gallon in the production of avocados, 9.3 cents per

gallon saved in the production of almonds, 48 cents per gallon saved in the production of

tomatoes, and 1.3 cents for one gallon of water saved in the production of lettuce.

   Furthermore, the estimated distribution of WTP in the top left panel of Figure 1 is

not concentrated at the average WTP, suggesting there to be heterogeneity in the value

of the LWF attribute. Looking first into race, breaking up the WTP by White and Non-

white subgroups of respondents does render significant differences in WTP, as we can see

in the right panel of Figure 1, where the average for white is higher than for non white

respondents. Illustrative evidence in the two bottom panels of Figure 1 suggest that there

                                                                                               24
                Willingness to Pay for Low Water Footprint Food Choices During Drought


is a positive relationship between the respondents’ estimated WTP and the environmental

score of respondents, as well as a positive relationship between the estimated WTP and the

respondents’ increasing degree of education attained. When sorting individuals by increasing

environmental score on the horizontal axis, we fit an upwards sloping linear OLS model

estimate from regressing WTP and environmental score, as depicted by the fitted values in

the upwards sloping red line in the bottom left panel of Figure 1. The same happens for the

scatter plot of WTP and education levels as shown in the bottom right panel data scatter

plot and upwards sloping linear fitted values.

    Heterogeneity in the WTP is formally investigated by estimating equation (13), a linear

regression of the estimated individual WTP and the characteristics of the respondents. The

estimates are reported in Table 6. While income, age, and gender are not significantly

correlated with the WTP for the low water option, a respondents’ stated level of education

and environmental score both are positively correlated with WTP. The white subgroup of

the respondents also have a significantly higher WTP than their non-white counterparts.


5   Choice Changes and Welfare Changes in Counterfactual Policy Simulations


Finally, we ask the counterfactual question of what would happen to respondents’ choices

and to consumer welfare, ceteris paribus, were there to be no low water footprint information

revealed to consumers. To answer this question, we perform simulations and compute the

maximizing utility choices for each respondent in this counterfactual scenario. With that

we are able to simulate respondents new choices and estimate the distribution of changes in

respondent’s consumer surplus. To assess who loses and who wins, we project the changes in

consumer surplus on respondents’ demographics and environmental scores in the final step.




                                                                                          25
                 Willingness to Pay for Low Water Footprint Food Choices During Drought


5.1 Simulating Respondents Counterfactual Choices

For each counterfactual scenario we keep respondents’ preferences unchanged, which in prac-

tice means that the marginal utility parameters are not changing from the baseline model

pre-simulation. To estimate choices given the model parameters, we estimate the probabil-

ities of each alternative being chosen in each case (avocado, almonds, lettuce, and tomato)

by all respondents, given the data on the attributes pre-simulation as in equation (8). In

so doing, we obtain the predicted pre-simulation baseline choices for all respondents. Then,

we change the vector or vectors of attributes under the counterfactual scenario considered,

defined as X̃, and recompute the probabilities that each respondent would make under this

scenario for all cases, using the new attributes in equation (8). For example, simulating no

low water footprint labels means that all products are indistinguishable in this counterfactual

scenario along the LWF attribute, which means in practice that Xij,LW F = 0, ∀i, j, which

also implies that all interactions with that attribute are zero in the scenario.


5.2 Estimating Consumer Welfare Changes in Policy Simulations

Estimates of changes in consumer surplus (CS) are derived through simulation of consumer

choices under counterfactual compositions of their attribute choice sets. These correspond to

a respondent’s compensating variation for a change in product attributes (Small and Rosen,

1981). The expected consumer surplus, CSi , is defined as


                                         1     X
(14)                            CSi =       ln   eXj βij −αpricej ,
                                        |α|    j



where α denotes the marginal utility of price. We estimate the consumer surplus for the

choices as they are and for the best alternative when the LWF attribute is removed and

there is also no longer an information treatment on the respondents. Changes in consumer



                                                                                            26
                   Willingness to Pay for Low Water Footprint Food Choices During Drought


surplus are then obtained for each respondent. We estimate the average change in consumer

surplus as well as how changes in consumer surplus are related to respondents’ individual

demographic characteristics and environmental score by estimating the following equation


(15)                              ∆(CS)i = δ0 + δ1 Di + i


where ∆(CS)i is a vector of all the respondents’ individually estimated changes in CS for the

policy simulation of no experimental treatment and no LWF label, Di are the demographic

characteristics (including the environmental score) of respondent i, and δ0 , δ1 are parameters

to be estimated.


5.3 Policy Simulation of Removing Low Water Footprint and Drought Information

First we estimate the predicted average probabilities of the choices for each of the five

alternatives given the estimated parameters of column (3) in Table 5. These are depicted

in the left panel of Figure 2 with the confidence intervals for each alternative. Recall that

alternative 1 (A1) is the conventional and average water footprint option, alternative 2 (A2)

is conventional and low water footprint, alternative 3 (A3) is organic and average water

footprint, alternative 4 (A4) is organic and low water footprint, and alternative 5 (A5) is

none of the above.

   In the baseline, all the average predicted probabilities are statistically significantly dif-

ferent from each as given by the confidence intervals in Figure 2. The option most chosen,

as predicted by the model, is A2 (conventional and LWF). The next option is A4 (organic

and LWF). The third most chosen is the outside option, A5 (none of the above). The least

chosen option is the A3 (organic and average water footprint).

   When simulating the counterfactual choices of removing the treatment and LWF labels

from the information set of the respondents, the average predicted probabilities change


                                                                                             27
                 Willingness to Pay for Low Water Footprint Food Choices During Drought


significantly relative to the baseline, as given by the right panel of Figure 2. Now, the

most chosen option is not to select any of the four options, namely A5. A2 and A4 (the

LWF options) drop significantly relative to baseline. A3’s probability of being chosen is

now significantly different from zero as respondents switched from A4 towards A3. This is

because both A3 and A4 are organic, A3 is cheaper than A4, and now there is no reason to

buy A4 given that the LWF label is not available as differentiation. The same happens for

A1 and A2—A2 drops relative to baseline and A1 increases as A1 is cheaper than A2 and

both are conventional products. In terms of welfare, since the outside option increases so

much and its utility is normalized to zero, it is expected that those consumers that switch

to A5 have a lower utility than before. We investigate formally the changes in respondents’

consumer surplus by comparing the baseline and the counterfactual scenario’s compensated

variation for all respondents.

   Figure 3 presents the estimated changes in consumer surplus for the respondents when

they are faced with the same five options but A2 and A4 are no longer identified as low water

footprint and they are no longer given an information treatment on the drought. The top

left panel of this figure depicts the kernel density of the distribution of changes in consumer

surplus for all respondents. Most of the consumers lose, given that most of the mass is

below 0, some respondents stay the same, while a small proportion of the distribution covers

positive welfare changes. Overall, the visual evidence suggests that this policy experiment

has a net welfare loss.

   In the remaining panels of Figure 3, we relate the changes in simulated consumer surplus

to respondents’ characteristics. The top right panel shows an almost flat but slightly nega-

tive fitted linear regression of changes in consumer surplus with respondent’s environmental

scores. In the left bottom panel it appears that the average change in consumer surplus is

more negative for lower educated subgroups than for higher educated subgroups, although

those differences are not statistically different from each other. In the bottom right we also

                                                                                            28
                 Willingness to Pay for Low Water Footprint Food Choices During Drought


see a non-linear relationship between respondent’s income and respondent’s average change

in consumer surplus.

   We test whether there are significant heterogeneous changes in consumer surplus by

estimating equation (13). These estimates are reported in Table 7. On average respondents

lose 3.35 dollars in terms of surplus from this policy experiment. Given that the average price

of the chosen option is about 3 dollars, this is a large loss and corresponds to the most action

being driven by consumers who switch to the outside option of not consuming anything.

The findings in Table 7 are consistent with the graphical correlations in the top right and

bottom panels of Figure 3. Higher education and being white are negatively and significantly

correlated with consumer surplus losses. A higher environmental score is correlated with a

larger consumer surplus loss, although the negative point estimate is economically very small

and not significant. Respondents’ income is uncorrelated with consumer surplus losses given

the insignificant coefficient associated with increases in income.

   From the top left panel of Figure 3, we identify a large proportion of respondents who

lose and also a smaller proportion of respondents who do not lose in this policy experiment.

To understand this heterogeneity, Figure 4 breaks up the baseline choices (top panels) and

simulated predicted choices (bottom panels) for those who have a net loss (left panels) and

for those who do not (right panels). We can now see that the ones who have no welfare losses

(right panels) were those respondents whose preferred alternative was A5 (i.e., none of the

others), then A1 and A3, and lastly A2 and A4, which are the LWF options. It is therefore

not surprising that welfare does not drop for these consumers due to the policy. Welfare

actually increases slightly for these respondents due to random factors affecting utility. In

the left panels, the net losers were those consumers who preferred A2 and A4 and due to the

policy had the largest inconvenience and had to make significantly different choices from the

top left to the bottom left panel.

   Finally, we estimate that total welfare drops given that the sum of changes in consumer

                                                                                             29
                Willingness to Pay for Low Water Footprint Food Choices During Drought


surplus is −749.2 for the losers and 3.77 for the non-losers in the survey sample. Given that

the sample is more educated, has higher income, and is more white than the California aver-

age, and because we find greater consumer surplus losses for those that are white, educated,

and wealthier, we may be overestimating the welfare losses in California. We re-weight each

consumer surplus change estimate to reflect the California distribution of income, race, and

education and recompute the total change in the re-weighted change in consumer surplus.

The histogram of changes in consumer surplus for the survey sample (in red) and the his-

togram of changes in consumer surplus for the re-weighted California (in blue) are depicted

in Figure 5. We see that, most of the mass of the re-weighted histograms for income (top

left), education (top right), age (bottom left) and race (bottom right), shifts to the right,

meaning that the sample was indeed overstating the welfare losses relative to the CA popu-

lation. We obtain a total net loss of −237 dollars when re-weighting by income, −268 when

re-weighting by education, −323 when re-weighting by age, and −415 when re-weighting

to match the race distribution in California. While these are all lower estimates of welfare

losses than the sample estimate of −745, they are significantly different then zero.


6   Conclusion


In the context of recent California drought years, we investigate empirically whether con-

sumers are willing to pay for more efficient water usage in the production of four California

agricultural products. We implement an internet survey choice experiment for avocados,

almonds, lettuce, and tomatoes to elicit consumer valuation for water efficiency via revealed

choices. We estimate a model of consumer demand where a product is defined as a bundle

of three attributes: price, production method (conventional or organic), and water usage

(average or efficient). Varying the attribute space presented to consumers in the experimen-

tal choice design gives us the data variation to estimate a discrete choice model based on a



                                                                                          30
                        Willingness to Pay for Low Water Footprint Food Choices During Drought


     conditional logit specification and a random coefficient mixed logit specification. In so doing,

     this paper provides researchers and policymakers with the first estimates of the distribution

     of WTP for low water footprint food options during drought years. In addition, we test

     whether revealing information on the drought matters for the WTP.

         We find that, on average, there is an implied positive willingness to pay for water effi-

     ciency of about 11 dollars. In terms of gallons of water saved, this means that respondents

     are on average willing to pay 12 cents for each gallon of water saved in the production of

     food. Moreover, when informing consumers about the drought severity, this increases con-

     sumer’s WTP for the LWF options, albeit not significantly. Having additional information of

     consumer demographic characteristics, we find that there is heterogeneity in the WTP along

     respondents’ stated environmental concern. There is also significant heterogeneity with re-

     spect to education and race. Using counterfactual simulations of removing water footprint

     and drought information from the attribute choice set, we estimate changes in choices that

     imply significant consumer surplus losses, especially for respondents reporting higher levels

     of attained education and environmental score, and for white respondents.

         The consumer valuation estimates provide insights into the policy debate regarding how

     to label and present food products (Lee and Hatcher, 2001) in California and in a future of

     water scarcity. The WTP far exceeds the cost of one gallon of water sold to agriculture, which

     ranges from 0.5 cents to 0.3 cents in California during drought years, ten times as much as

     during non-drought years.15 While a comprehensive cost-benefit analysis also requires data

     on the cost (possibly involving technological changes) of saving one gallon of water used in

     production, our findings have policy implications in that they suggest there to be at least a

     demand-side, market-based potential to nudge consumers who want to decrease their water

15
     Estimates obtained by using the reported costs to farmers ranging from $1,000 to $1,800 per cubic acre, and
     given that one cubic acre corresponds to 325,851 gallons. Source: “California Water Prices Soar for Farmers
     as Drought Grows,” Bloomberg, Online, accessed Apr. 28, 2017.



                                                                                                             31
                 Willingness to Pay for Low Water Footprint Food Choices During Drought


footprint and follow a more sustainable diet.

   Our present paper offers valuable insights into the effectiveness of revealing information

on a product’s water footprint in a form of a label and on educating consumers about water

constraints in the production of the food they buy (i.e., drought severity). However, there

are three potential weaknesses: (1) we have captured consumers’ stated preferences and not

actual behaviors, (2) the small sample size, and (3) the non-representativeness of the sam-

ple for the California population. Following field studies and methodologies implemented

in our own previous work (Hilger et al., 2011), and given that there can be disparities be-

tween consumers’ stated preferences and their actual purchases (Hensher and Bradley, 1993;

Batte et al., 2007), future work should extend the experimental approach into a retail-level

consumer field study—using actual choices rather than survey choices to assess consumer

responses and valuations for water efficiency and based on a larger and more representative

sample. Furthermore, future work should repeat the survey during non-drought years, given

that the WTP estimates may be different if the analysis is performed in years when water

is perceived to be more plentiful.


References


Abidoye, B. O., H. Bulut, J. Lawrence, B. Mennecke, and A. M. Townsend (2011). US

  Consumers’ Valuation of Quality Attributes in Beef Products. Journal of Agricultural and

  Applied Economics 43 (1), 1–12.

Alfnes, F., A. Guttormensen, G. Steine, and K. Kolstad (2006). Consumer’s Willingness

  to Pay for the Color of Salmon: A Choice Experiment with Real Economic Incentives.

  American Journal of Agricultural Economics 88 (4), 1050–1061.

Asche, F. and J. Guillen (2012). The Importance of Fishing Method, Gear and Origin: The

  Spanish Hake Market. Marine Policy 36 (2), 365–369.

                                                                                          32
                Willingness to Pay for Low Water Footprint Food Choices During Drought


Batte, M., J. Beaverson, and N. Hooker (2003). Organic Food Labels: A Customer Intercept

  Survey of Central Ohio Food Shoppers.

Batte, M., N. Hooker, T. Haab, and J. Beaverson (2007). Putting Their Money Where Their

  Mouths Are: Consumer Willingness to Pay for Multi-ingredient, Processed Organic Food

  Products. Food Policy 32 (2), 145–149.

Dimitri, C. and C. Greene (2002). Recent Growth Patterns in the US Organic Foods Market.

  Agriculture Information Bulletin 777. Washington DC: US Department of Agriculture,

  Economic Research Service.

Gao, Z. and T. Schroeder (2009). Effects of Label Information on Consumer Willingness-to-

  Pay for Food Attributes. American Journal of Agricultural Economics 91 (3), 795–809.

Hallstein, E. and S. B. Villas-Boas (2013). Can Household Consumers Save the Wild Ffish?

  Lessons from a Sustainable Seafood Advisory. Journal of Environmental Economics and

  Management 66 (1), 52–71.

Hanak, E., J. Mount, C. Chappelle, J. Lund, J. Medellin-Azuara, P. Moyle, and N. Seavy

  (2015). What If California’s Drought Continues? Public Policy Institute of California.

  Aug. 2015. Online. Accessed Apr. 28, 2017.

Hensher, D. and M. Bradley (1993). Using Stated Response Data to Enrich Revealed Pref-

  erence Discrete Choice Models. Marketing Letters 4 (2), 139–152.

Hilger, J., G. Rafert, and S. Villas-Boas (2011). Expert Opinion and the Demand for Experi-

  ence Goods: An Experimental Approach in the Retail Wine Market. Review of Economics

  and Statistics 93 (4), 1289–1296.

Howitt, R., J. Medellı́n-Azuara, D. MacEwan, J. Lund, and D. Sumner (2015). Economic



                                                                                        33
                Willingness to Pay for Low Water Footprint Food Choices During Drought


  Analysis of the 2015 Drought for California Agriculture. UC Davis Center for Watershed

  Sciences.

Huber, J. and K. Train (2001). On the Similarity of Classical and Bayesian Estimates of

  Individual Mean Partworths. Marketing Letters 12 (3), 259–269.

Jaffry, S., H. Pickering, Y. Ghulam, D. Whitmarsh, and P. Wattage (2004). Consumer choices

  for quality and sustainability labelled seafood products in the uk. Food Policy 29 (3), 215–

  228.

Johnston, R. J., C. Wessells, H. Donath, and F. Asche (2001). Measuring Consumer Pref-

  erences for Eco-labeled Seafood: An International Comparisons. Journal of Agricultural

  and Resource Economics 26 (1), 20–39.

Kiesel, K. and S. B. Villas-Boas (2007). Got Organic Milk? Consumer Valuations of Milk

  Labels after the Implementation of the USDA Organic Seal. Journal of Agricultural and

  Food Industrial Organization 5 (1).

Lee, K. H. and C. B. Hatcher (2001). Willingness to Pay for Information: An Analyst’s

  Guide. The Journal of Consumer Affairs 35 (1), 120–139.

Macdiarmid, J. (2012). Is a Healthy Diet an Environmentally Sustainable Diet? Proceedings

  of the Nutrition Society 72 (1), 13–20.

Mann, M. and P. Gleick (2015). Climate Change and California Drought in the 21st Century.

  Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences 112 (3), 3858–3859.

McConnell, K. E. and I. E. Strand (2000). Hedonic Prices for Fish: Tuna Prices in Hawaii.

  American Journal of Agricultural Economics 82 (1), 133–144.

McFadden, D. (1974). The Measurement of Urban Travel Demand. Journal of Public Eco-

  nomics 3 (4), 303–328.

                                                                                           34
                Willingness to Pay for Low Water Footprint Food Choices During Drought


McFadden, D. and K. Train (2000). Mixed MNL Models for Discrete Response. Journal of

  Applied Econometrics 15 (5), 447–470.

Mekonnen, M. M. and A. Y. Hoekstra (2011). The Green, Blue and Grey Water Footprints

  of Crops and Derived Crop Products. Hydrology and Earth System Sciences 15 (5), 1577–

  1600.

Renault, D. (2002). Value of Virtual Water in Food: Principles and Virtues. Presented at the

  UNESCO-IHE Workshop on Virtual Water Trade, 12-13 Dec. 2002, Delft, the Netherlands.

Revelt, D. and K. Train (2000). Customer-specific Taste Parameters and Mixed Logit:

  Households’ Choice of Electricity Supplier. Working Paper No. E00-274, Department of

  Economics, UCB .

Roheim, C. A., F. Asche, and J. I. Santos (2011). The Elusive Price Premium for Eco-

  labelled Products: Evidence from Seafood in the UK Market. Journal of Agricultural

  Economics 62 (3), 655–668.

Roheim, C. A., L. Gardiner, and F. Asche. Value of Brands and Other Attributes: Hedonic

  Analysis of Retail Frozen Fish in the UK. Marine Resource Economicsv, volume=.

Small, K. and H. Rosen (1981). Applied Welfare Economics with Discrete Choice Models.

  Econometrica 49 (1), 105–130.

Smith, B. G. (2008). Developing Sustainable Food Supply Chains. Philosophical Transactions

  of the Royal Society: Biological Sciences 363 (1492), 849–861.

Tait, P., S. Miller, W. Abell, W. Kaye-Blake, M. Guenther, and C. Saunders (2011). Con-

  sumer Attitudes towards Sustainability Attributes on Food Labels. Presented at the 55th

  Annual AARES National Conference, Melbourne, Victoria.



                                                                                         35
                Willingness to Pay for Low Water Footprint Food Choices During Drought


Teisl, M., B. Roe, and R. Hicks (2002). Can Eco-labels Tune a Market? Evidence from

  Dolphin Safe Labeling. Journal of Environmental Economics and Management 43 (3),

  339–359.

Train, K. (2003). Discrete Choice Methods with Simulation. Cambridge university press.




                                                                                         36
                   Willingness to Pay for Low Water Footprint Food Choices During Drought


Table 1: Choice Set Design: Production Method, Water Footprint, and Price

  Product                  Production Method              Water footprint             Price ($/lb)
  Hass Avocado
                               Conventional            Average (157 gal/lb)                0.98
                                 Organic               Average (157 gal/lb)                2.00
                                 Organic               Efficient (80 gal/lb)               2.40
                               Conventional            Efficient (80 gal/lb)               1.18
  Almond
                               Conventional           Average (1,715 gal/lb)               5.99
                                 Organic              Average (1,715 gal/lb)              11.59
                                 Organic              Efficient (1,450 gal/lb)            13.90
                               Conventional           Efficient (1,450 gal/lb)             7.19
  Lettuce (Head)
                               Conventional            Average (14.8 gal/lb)               2.17
                                 Organic               Average (14.8 gal/lb)               5.00
                                 Organic               Efficient (5.9 gal/lb)              6.00
                               Conventional            Efficient (5.9 gal/lb)              2.60
  Tomatoes (Fresh)
                               Conventional            Average (16.9 gal/lb)               1.56
                                 Organic               Average (16.9 gal/lb)               1.99
                                 Organic               Efficient (6.5 gal/lb)              2.39
                               Conventional            Efficient (6.5 gal/lb)              1.87
 Note: For each item there are two levels of variety (conventional or organic), two levels of water
footprint (average and efficient), and four price levels to portray the four combinations of production
method and water footprint. For all products, an option “I would not purchase any of these” was also
given to respondents.




                                                                                                          37
     Table 2: Summary Statistics


                                               Panel A. Demographics
                                                            California Treated Group Control Group   Total




                                                                                                                Willingness to Pay for Low Water Footprint Food Choices During Drought
                                                                      ∗
                                                           Population   Respondents   Respondents Respondents
      Gender            Male                                   49.7        53.06         52.29       52.66
                        Female                                 50.3        46.94         47.71       47.34
      Age               17 or younger                          24.4         1.83          2.04        1.93
                        18-59                                  59.3        66.06         66.33       66.18
                        60 or older                            16.3        32.11         31.63       31.88
      Education         Less than some college                 60.4        27.78         37.76       32.52
                        Associate degree, Bachelor degree      27.8        31.48         29.59       30.58
                        Graduate degree or more                11.8        40.74         32.65       36.89
      HH Income         $49,000 or less                        41.5        26.42         31.25       28.71
                        $50,000-$99,999                        28.9        30.19         29.17       29.70
                        $100,000 or more                       29.4        43.40         39.58       41.58
      Race              White (including Hispanic)             57.6        83.64         76.53       80.29
                        Black, Asian, and other minorities     42.4        16.36         23.47       19.71
      Number of Observ.                                    38.8 million     110            98         208

                                     Panel B. Summary Statistics of Survey Responses
                                                                       Treated Group Control Group   Total
                                                                        Respondents   Respondents Respondents
                              Organic (share)                              25.26         30.45       28.00
                              LWF (share)                                  65.56         62.50       63.94
                              None of the options (share)                  20.92         17.05       18.87
                              Average price of chosen options               2.86          3.14        3.01
     Note* : Source for the California Data: 2014 CA Census Fact Finder Database.
38
     Table 3: Response Summary Statistics for Ten Statements underlying Environmental Score

      Statement                                                                                     Average (Standard Error)
     1. Climate change is a result of human activities and is already affecting people worldwide.         4.05 (0.089)
     2. Protecting the environment should be given utmost priority,                                       3.81 (0.084)
      even if it causes slower economic growth and some loss of jobs.




                                                                                                                               Willingness to Pay for Low Water Footprint Food Choices During Drought
     3. It is the government’s responsibility to impose high taxes on fossil fuels.                       3.45   (0.097)
     4. The U.S. government should impose stricter laws on pollution.                                     3.97   (0.087)
     5. People should pay higher prices to address climate change.                                        3.19   (0.096)
     6. There should be more investment using tax dollars in alternative fuels.                           3.80   (0.092)
     7. People should make lifestyle changes to reduce environmental damage.                              4.20   (0.074)
     8. It is important to purchase things that are more environmentally friendly,                        3.74   (0.083)
      even at a greater cost.
     9. The current generation has a responsibility to protect the environment                            3.83 (0.085)
      for future generations, even if it leaves themless well off.
     10. Personal food choices can affect the environmental impact of agriculture                         3.96 (0.081)

      Environmental Score                                                                                38.01 (0.720)
39
Willingness to Pay for Low Water Footprint Food Choices During Drought




   Table 4: Conditional Logit Choice Estimates

                                (1)                 (2)
                            Condit. Logit       Condit. Logit

    Price                      -0.139∗∗∗           -0.146∗∗∗
                                (0.019)             (0.020)

    Organic                      -0.164              -0.152
                                (0.120)             (0.123)

    LWF                        1.272∗∗∗            -2.382∗∗∗
                               (0.109)              (0.440)

    Treat × LWF                  0.179              0.297∗
                                (0.148)             (0.161)

    Treat × Organic             -0.297∗             -0.285∗
                                (0.160)             (0.164)

    Env × LWF                                       0.053∗∗∗
                                                    (0.008)

    Edu × LWF                                       0.430∗∗∗
                                                    (0.108)

    White × LWF                                     0.690∗∗∗
                                                     (0.188)
    Num of Obs.                 4160                  3960
    Log Likelihhod            -1168.959            -1074.598
    AIC                       2347.919              2165.195
    Product FE                   Yes                   Yes
    Respondent FE                Yes                   Yes
    Note: Robust standard errors in parentheses. ∗p < 0.10,
   ∗ ∗ p < 0.05, ∗ ∗ ∗p < 0.01. The table displays the estimates
   of conditional logit regressions where the dependent variable
   is equal to one if an alternative out of 5 is chosen and equal
   to zero otherwise. Organic = 1 for organic choices. LW F
   = 1 for low water footprint choices, that is, the more efficient
   characteristic. T reat = 1 if the respondent received the in-
   formation treatment. Specification (2) also includes the in-
   teraction of LW F and respondent characteristics. Only the
   significant coefficients are reported due to space in column
   (2). Respondents’ AIC reports the Akaike’s Information cri-
   terion for model specification testing.




                                                                      40
             Willingness to Pay for Low Water Footprint Food Choices During Drought


Table 5: Random Coefficient and Mixed Logit Choice Estimates

                               (1)                         (2)                      (3)
                        Random Coeff. Logit         Random Coeff. Logit         Mixed Logit
 Mean
 Price                         -0.191∗∗∗                    -0.191∗∗∗              -0.194∗∗∗
                                (0.023)                      (0.023)                (0.024)

 Organic                        -0.683∗∗                    -0.637∗∗               -0.685∗∗
                                (0.305)                     (0.301)                (0.317)

 LWF                            1.546∗∗∗                    1.516∗∗∗               -2.735∗∗∗
                                (0.191)                     (0.179)                 (0.674)

 Treat × Organic                 -0.518                       -0.646                 -0.665
                                (0.421)                      (0.492)                (0.505)

 Treat × LWF                     0.252                        0.325                  0.391
                                (0.267)                      (0.281)                (0.255)

 Env × LWF                                                                         0.058∗∗∗
                                                                                   (0.013)

 Edu × LWF                                                                         0.521∗∗∗
                                                                                   (0.169)

 White × LWF                                                                       0.822∗∗∗
                                                                                   (0.299)
 SD
 LWF                            1.427∗∗∗                    1.250∗∗∗               0.998∗∗∗
                                (0.174)                     (0.223)                (0.212)

 Organic                        2.409∗∗∗                    2.270∗∗∗               2.362∗∗∗
                                (0.279)                     (0.345)                (0.349)

 Treat × Organic                                              1.197                  1.316
                                                             (1.014)                (0.957)

 Treat × LWF                                                1.088∗∗                 0.841∗
                                                            (0.513)                 (0.465)
 Num of Obs.                      4160                       4160                    3960
 Log Likelihood                -1059.665                   -1058.920               -983.592
 AIC                            2133.329                   2135.841                1991.184
 Respondent FE                    Yes                         Yes
 Note: Robust standard errors in parentheses. ∗p < 0.10, ∗ ∗ p < 0.05, ∗ ∗ ∗p < 0.01. The table
displays the estimates of mixed logit regressions where the dependent variable is equal to one if
an alternative out of 5 is chosen and equal to zero otherwise. Organic = 1 for organic choices.
LW F = 1 for low water footprint choices. T reat = 1 if the respondent received the information
treatment. AIC reports the Akaike’s information criterion for model specification testing.          41
               Willingness to Pay for Low Water Footprint Food Choices During Drought




Table 6: Regression of Respondents’ Mixed Logit WTP Estimates on Demograph-
ics

                                                     (1)
                                         WTP for LWF Characteristic
        Env                                       0.304∗∗∗
                                                  (0.037)

        Income                                         0.195
                                                      (0.289)

        Educ                                         2.403∗∗∗
                                                     (0.465)

        Age                                            -0.078
                                                      (0.218)

        Female                                         0.709
                                                      (0.623)

        White                                        4.277∗∗∗
                                                     (0.739)

        Constant                                    -12.814∗∗∗
                                                      (1.610)
        Num of Obs.                                     193
        R squared                                      0.530
        Note: Robust standard errors in parentheses. ∗p < 0.10, ∗ ∗ p < 0.05, ∗ ∗ ∗p < 0.01




                                                                                              42
               Willingness to Pay for Low Water Footprint Food Choices During Drought




Table 7: Regression of Change in Consumer Surplus Estimates on Demographics


                                                     (1)
                                                Change in CS
         Env                                      -0.142∗∗∗
                                                   (0.005)

         Income                                      -0.012
                                                    (0.032)

         Educ                                      -1.057∗∗∗
                                                    (0.091)

         Age                                         -0.042
                                                    (0.034)

         Female                                      -0.036
                                                    (0.097)

         White                                     -1.933∗∗∗
                                                    (0.128)

         Constant                                  7.045∗∗∗
                                                   (0.470)
         Num of Obs.                                 193
         R squared                                  0.929
         Note: Change in consumer estimates from simulation of removing LWF option.
         Robust standard errors in parentheses. ∗p < 0.10, ∗ ∗ p < 0.05, ∗ ∗ ∗p < 0.01




                                                                                         43
                                    Willingness to Pay for Low Water Footprint Food Choices During Drought


Figure 1: Estimated WTP for Low Water Attribute, for Entire Sample and by
Respondent Characteristics


                                   Estimated WTP Density                                                               Estimated WTP and Race
             .08




                                                                                                  14
                                                                                        Mean of WTP Low Water
               .06




                                                                                                         12
       Density
        .04




                                                                                                 10
             .02




                                                                                         8
             0




                                                                                                  6
                       -10             0          10               20              30
                                             WTP Low Water
                       kernel = epanechnikov, bandwidth = 1.7068                                                             Non-white            White




                             Estimated WTP and Env Score                                                            Estimated WTP and Education
             20




                                                                                                    20
       WTP Low Water




                                                                                        WTP Low Water
               10




                                                                                                10
         0




                                                                                          0
             -10




                                                                                                    -10




                       10             20           30          40                  50                           0            1               2                   3
                                           Environmental Score                                                                Education Group

                              WTP Low Water                        Fitted values                                    WTP Low Water                Fitted values




Note: The figure displays the kernel density of the distribution of estimated WTP for the LWF attribute and then relates the
estimated WTP for respondents to the respondents’ demographics. Estimates based on mixed logit choice specification with
demographics and random coefficients. Education is considered into four ranges: Education=1 if “Less than high school
degree,” Education=2 if “High school degree or equivalent (e.g., GED),” Education=3 if “Some college but no degree or
Associate degree,” and finally, Education=4 if “Bachelor degree or Graduate degree.”




                                                                                                                                                                     44
                                      Willingness to Pay for Low Water Footprint Food Choices During Drought




Figure 2: Estimated Probability of Choosing an Alternative, With and Without
Low Water Footprint Attribute


                         With Low Water Footprint Attribute                                       No Low Water Footprint Attribute
                 .5




                                                                               .4
                                .4
        Mean of Choice Probability




                                                                     Mean of Choice Probability
                                                                                       .3
                    .3




                                                                       .2
         .2      .1




                                                                               .1




                                     A1: Conventional & Avg. Water                                        A2: Conventional & LWF
                                     A3: Organic & Avg. Water                                             A4: Organic & LWF
                                     A5: None of them



Note: The figure displays the average estimated probabilities, and confidence intervals, of choosing the 5 alternatives with and
without LWF attribute. Estimates are based on the random coefficients mixed logit choice specification with demographics
and random coefficients. The five alternatives are: (1) conventional and average water; (2) conventional and low water; (3)
organic and average water; (4) organic and low water; (5) none of them.




                                                                                                                                     45
                                             Willingness to Pay for Low Water Footprint Food Choices During Drought




Figure 3: Estimated Change in Consumer Surplus With and Without Low Water
Attribute


                             Change in CS of Removing Low Water Option                                                       Estimated Change in CS and Env Score
                 .2




                                                                                                             20
                 .15




                                                                                                 Change in CS
                                                                                                         -2
      Density
        .1




                                                                                                   -4        -6
                 .05




                                                                                                             -8

                                                                                                                        10          20              30               40           50
                 0




                             -8            -6              -4         -2            0        2                                              Environmental Score
                                                           Change in CS
                                                                                                                                 Change in CS                     Fitted values
                             kernel = epanechnikov, bandwidth = 0.6351




                                   Estimated Change in CS and Education                                                        Estimated Change in CS and Income
                                                                                                          -1
               0




                                                                                                 Mean of Change in CS
                                                                                                                   -2
      Mean of Change in CS
                  -2




                                                                                                 -4       -3
      -4




                                                                                                          -5
               -6




                                                                                                                                         < $25K                    $25K-$50K
                                                < High School              High School/GED                                               $50K-$100K                100K-150K
                                                Some College               BA or higher                                                  >$150K




Note: The figure displays the kernel density of the distribution of changes in consumer surplus (CS) with and without the
LWF attribute. Estimates based on mixed logit choice specification. Education is considered into four ranges: Less than high
school degree; High school degree or equivalent (e.g., GED); Some college or Associate degree; and Bachelor degree or
Graduate degree. Income is classified into 5 ranges: Less than $25,000; $25,000–49,999; $50,000–$99,999, $100,000–149,999,
and $150,000 or more.




                                                                                                                                                                                       46
                                       Willingness to Pay for Low Water Footprint Food Choices During Drought




Figure 4: Estimated Probability of Choosing Alternatives, With and Without
Low Water Attribute and for Net Welfare Losers and Non-losers


                                  Baseline Choices for Net Welfare Losers                                 Baseline Choices for Net Welfare Non-Losers
                  .5




                                                                                         .5
       mean of Estimated Choice




                                                                               mean of Estimated Choice
                                                                                                     .4
                           .4




                                                                                             .3
                   .3




                                                                                    .2
         .2




                                                                             .1
                  .1




                                                                                         0




                                  Simulated Choices for Net Welfare Losers                                Simulated Choices for Net Welfare Non-Losers
                  .4




                                                                                         .4
       mean of Estimated Choice




                                                                             mean of Estimated Choice
                        .3




                                                                                             .3
          .2




                                                                               .2        .1
                  .1




                                             A1: Conventional & Avg. Water                                      A2: Conventional & LWF
                                             A3: Organic & Avg. Water                                           A4: Organic & LWF
                                             A5: None of them




Note: The figure displays the average estimated probabilities, and confidence intervals, of choosing the 5 alternatives with the
LWF attribute (baseline top panels) and without LWF attribute (simulated bottom panels). Estimates based on the random
coefficients mixed logit choice specification for net welfare losers (left panels) and non-losers (right panels). The five
alternatives are: (1) conventional and average water; (2) conventional and low water; (3) organic and average water; (4)
organic and low water; (5) none of them.




                                                                                                                                                         47
                            Willingness to Pay for Low Water Footprint Food Choices During Drought




Figure 5: Histograms of Changes in Consumer Surplus, for the Survey Sample
(red) and for the Survey Sample Re-Weighted to the California Distribution of
Demographics (blue)


                          Reweighted for CA Income                                Reweighted for CA Education




                                                                    .8
            .6




                                                                        .6
                .4
         Density




                                                                Density
                                                                  .4
       .2




                                                                    .2
            0




                                                                    0


                     -8     -6    -4      -2    0       2                    -8      -6    -4      -2    0        2
                                 Change in CS                                             Change in CS



                           Reweighted for CA Age                                    Reweighted for CA Race
            .6




                                                                    .4  .3
                .4
         Density




                                                                Density
                                                                  .2
       .2




                                                                    .1
            0




                                                                    0




                     -8     -6    -4      -2    0       2                    -8      -6    -4      -2    0        2
                                 Change in CS                                             Change in CS




Note: The figure displays the sample histogram of the respondents’ changes in consumer surplus due to the counterfactual
simulation of removing the LWF option, depicted in red. In blue, we overlap the histogram of the estimated changes in
consumer surplus where we re-weight the sample to match the California distribution of Income (top left), Education (top
right), Age (bottom left), and Race (bottom right), based on the random coefficients mixed logit choice specification.
Estimates based on mixed logit choice specification.




                                                                                                                           48
                       Appendix


A   Appendix Figures




                             49
     Figure A.1: Survey Instrument Page 1




                                            Appendix
50
     Figure A.2: Survey Instrument Page 2




                                            Appendix
51
                                                                                                                                                     Appendix


Figure A.3: Average Respondent Characteristics for Treatment and Control
Groups


                                       Female                                           Age > 40                                      Bachelor's Degree
                           1                                                 1                                                   1



                         .75                                                .75                                                 .75
       Share of Sample




                                                          Share of Sample




                                                                                                          Share of Sample
                          .5                                                 .5                                                  .5



                         .25                                                .25                                                 .25



                           0                                                 0                                                   0




                               Household Income > $100K                                  White                                           Env Score
                          1                                                  1                                                  50




                                                                                                          Environmental Score
                         .75                                                .75                                                 45
       Share of Sample




                                                          Share of Sample




                          .5                                                 .5                                                 40



                         .25                                                .25                                                 35



                          0                                                  0                                                  30




                                                                              Control              Treatment




Note: The figure displays the average demographic characteristics of respondents, for the control and for the treatment groups
separately. Environmental Score has a minimum value of 10 if a respondent strongly disagreed with all ten of the
environmental statements and a maximum of 50 if the respondent strongly agreed with all of the same ten statements.
Source: Survey. N=208 observations.




                                                                                                                                                           52
                                                                                                                                                       Appendix




Figure A.4: Kernel Density Estimates and Test of Distribution Equality


                                            Environmental Score                                                          Education Group
       .01 .02 .03 .04 .05




                                                                                              1
                                                                                              .8
            Density




                                                                                          Density
                                                                                          .4 .6
                                                                                              .2
                0




                                10           20            30            40      50           0            0              1               2        3       4

                             kernel = epanechnikov, bandwidth = 3.6459                                 kernel = epanechnikov, bandwidth = 0.2667




                                                                                                                    Household Income Group
                                                                                              .3
                                                                                          .15 .2 .25
                                                                                             Density
                                                                                              .1




                                                                                                               0                      2                4

                                                                                                       kernel = epanechnikov, bandwidth = 0.4559




                                                                              Treatment                            Control




Note: The figure displays the kernel density estimates of characteristics of respondents for the control and for the treatment
groups separately and tests for equality using the Kolmogorov-Smirnov test.
Kolmogorov-Smirnov test for equal distribution (p-values in parentheses): Environmental Score = 0.075 (0.943); Education =
0.0748 (0.936); Income = 0.1183 (0.481). Source: Survey. N=208 observations.




                                                                                                                                                               53
